Boris Johnson’s battered credibility was thrown further into question after new Foreign Office emails appeared to contradict his insistence he did not authorise the rescue of cats and dogs from a British charity in Afghanistan during the fall of Kabul. The release of two emails by the cross-party foreign affairs select committee prompted claims the prime minister had lied, as he faces separate accusations about misleading parliament over the Downing Street parties scandal and awaits the emergence of Sue Gray’s inquiry. The first email, from a Foreign Office official working in the private office of peer Zac Goldsmith, is dated 12.20pm, 25 August, and lobbies a colleague to help a second animal charity because the prime minister had recently agreed to the airlift of staff and animals from the Nowzad charity, run by the Briton Pen Farthing. “Equivalent charity Nowzad, run by an ex-Royal Marine, has received a lot of publicity and the PM has just authorised their staff and animals to be evacuated,” the official working for Lord Goldsmith wrote to another official responsible for collating exceptional cases for potential rescue after the Taliban takeover. A second email, sent between Foreign Office officials in the afternoon that day, repeats the point. “In light of the PM’s decision earlier today to evacuate the staff of the Nowzad animal charity, the [animal charity – name redacted] is asking for agreement to the entry of [details redacted] staff, all Afghan nationals.” Yet, despite the fresh disclosures, Downing Street said its position was unchanged. A statement read: “The PM had no role in authorising individual evacuations from Afghanistan during Op Pitting, including Nowzad staff and animals. At no point did the PM instruct staff to take any particular course of action on Nowzad.” Overnight on Wednesday the committee also released a further denial from Sir Philip Barton, the permanent secretary of the Foreign Office. Asked if he had “any reason to believe” Johnson was behind the rescue decision or that officials had attributed it to him, the civil servant said: “I am not aware of that beyond speculation in the public domain”. Claims that Johnson had intervened to allow the airlift of Farthing have been aired for months, after the previously hostile defence secretary, Ben Wallace, suddenly announced he had changed his mind, in a tweet put out at 1.33am on 25 August. But they have been denied by Johnson himself, Downing St and Wallace. In December, Johnson dismissed the suggestion that he had intervened as “complete nonsense” in a television interview. The same day Downing Street added: “At no point did the prime minister intervene. We have always prioritised people over animals.” Labour said the emails showed Johnson had not told the truth. John Healey, the shadow defence secretary, said: “Once again, the prime minister has been caught out lying about what he has been doing and deciding. He should never have given priority to flying animals out of Afghanistan while Afghans who worked for our armed forces were left behind.” A government source added the statements in the messages did not reflect the true position. “You have an email which says, here is an instruction from the PM. That doesn’t mean it’s true: it shows that was what those officials thought was happening.” Wallace also reiterated a denial he had given to MPs on the foreign affairs committee a day earlier. “At no point were he or I directed by the prime minister to evacuate Pen Farthing, his workforce or his pets,” the defence secretary said. “We were not going to put pets before people,” he added. The emails were supplied by whistleblower Raphael Marshall, a former civil servant who had lifted the lid on the Foreign Office’s chaotic handling of the crisis in stark written evidence to the committee in December. The second email, sent at 5.42pm on 25 August, was from a Foreign Office official working in the crisis rescue team. It makes clear that officials would not have considered “vets working for an animal charity” as “extremely vulnerable”, and hence a priority for evacuation, until the prime minister got involved. Thousands were stranded at or near Kabul airport as the western evacuation was entering its final days but allies of Farthing, led by campaigner Dominic Dyer, had been lobbying key figures, including the prime minister’s wife, Carrie Johnson, Goldsmith and Boris Johnson’s parliamentary aide Trudy Harrison for help. In a case that divided public opinion in the UK, supporters of Farthing had raised money for a private plane but needed permission to land. Dyer said he felt vindicated and believes Johnson should acknowledge he helped. “I find it difficult to understand why the prime minister has refused to admit any involvement in this humanitarian rescue mission that had huge public support,” he said. Farthing and more than 150 cats and dogs were eventually rescued in one of the last flights out of Kabul on a charter plane, but last-minute delays at the airport meant more than 60 staff at the Nowzad charity and dependants had to cross the border to Pakistan before they could come to the UK. In his evidence to the committee, Farthing said that no UK military capacity was used. “Our good name should not be used for cheap political point-scoring or to detract from the horrific failings of consecutive British governments to look after those Afghans who worked as interpreters or aided the military whilst we operated in Afghanistan,” the former marine wrote. Since the end of the evacuation, human rights groups and journalists have documented dozens of targeted killings in Afghanistan. Many victims had asked for help to leave the country, or were in hiding hoping for rescue, including a women’s rights activist, female police officers plus dozens linked to the former security forces. But in the same period one Kabul-based animal shelter, which had been seeking to evacuate staff and animals at the same time as Nowzad, has been able to continue operations.Unemployed workers will be forced to take up a job in any sector or face swift financial sanctions under a crackdown designed to fill hundreds of thousands of vacancies in sectors from social care to construction, ministers have announced. Claimants will be given just four weeks – down from three months – to find a job within their preferred sector. After that point, if they fail to make “reasonable efforts” to secure a job or turn down any offer, they will have part of their universal credit payment withdrawn under a tightening of existing Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) policy. The move, which is part of an initiative to get 500,000 people into work by June and fill 1.2m job vacancies nationally, comes as Boris Johnson seeks to reassert control over the political agenda amid the “partygate” crisis. The Way to Work campaign was flagged up by an embattled Johnson at prime minister’s questions on Wednesday as evidence that the government was focused on the Covid recovery – leading to opposition claims that it was an attempt to distract from his political woes. Labour’s Alison McGovern, the shadow employment minister, said: “This announcement has more to do with trying to save the prime minister’s job than supporting people into work. It’s just tinkering at the edges – long-term unemployment is 60% higher than before the pandemic.” Cracking down on the unemployed has long been regarded as popular with many voters, although welfare experts said that any rise in levels of benefit sanctions could backfire as low-income families struggle with the cost of living crisis. Currently work-ready unemployment benefit claimants have three months to find a job in their preferred sector – typically their area of expertise – before sanctions are threatened. The new rules mean sanctions could be imposed four weeks after they make their initial claim for universal credit – in theory, even before they receive their first benefit payment. The move is the most eye-catching part of a newly launched employment campaign. This also promises more tailored support from, and face-to-face time with, job coaches to help claimants find work. “Helping people get any job now means they can get a better job and progress into a career,” the work and pensions secretary, Thérèse Coffey, said. “Way to Work is a step-change in our offer to claimants and employers, making sure our jobcentre network and excellent work coaches can deliver opportunities, jobs and prosperity to all areas of the country. “As we emerge from Covid, we are going to tackle supply challenges and support the continued economic recovery by getting people into work. Our new approach will help claimants get back into the world of work quickly, while helping ensure that employers get the people they and the economy need.” However, welfare experts said the tightening of benefit sanctions would be counterproductive and could force people into worse jobs and damage careers. They said ministers were out of touch with the realities of life on a low income and ignored the evidence about how best to get people into secure, decently paid work. “Pushing people to apply for any job regardless of its suitability, underpinned by the very real threat of benefit sanctions, is corrosive to relationships between claimants and advisers, and risks pushing people into insecure and unsuitable employment,” said Ruth Patrick, a senior lecturer in social policy at the University of York. “This is not a way to work, it is a way to policy failure. The government is right that people need and deserve good jobs, but these will not be delivered by compelling people to seek any work, and against a context of continuing in-work poverty.” The UK’s foremost academic expert on benefit sanctions, David Webster, said that governments often tightened punishments for jobseekers when they were worried about apparently slow uptake of jobs after a recession. But there was no serious evidence that sanctions had ever got more people into work. “It is simply wasteful to force people quickly into roles that can lead to bad job matches, and push people into worse jobs, often with lasting ill-effects for their career and earning prospects. You can’t force square pegs into round holes,” the University of Glasgow research fellow said. The government’s spending watchdog, the National Audit Office, found no evidence that benefit sanctions work, and concluded that they were as likely to force people to stop claiming benefits without getting a job as they were to get them into employment. The last big sanctions drive occurred between 2010 and 2016 when, at its height, 1 million people a year were sanctioned, leading to widespread poverty and hardship. This was subsequently eased, and sanctions were temporarily suspended under the first lockdown, but in recent months sanctions levels have crept up again.The lowest number of cars rolled out of British factories last year since 1956, as the industry warned that rising energy costs and further shortages of computer chips will plague its recovery. Car production slumped across the UK and the world in 2020 as the coronavirus pandemic swept across the globe, but many in the industry had expected a rapid improvement. Instead, the disruption triggered a global shortage of semiconductor chips, leading to an even worse 2021. Total UK car production fell by 6.7% to just under 860,000, according to the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders (SMMT), the industry lobby group. Its chief executive, Mike Hawes, described it as “a dismal year”, with output down by more than a third on 2019. Jaguar Land Rover’s output for the year fell by a 10th compared with the year before, but the carmaker managed to regain its title as the UK’s largest manufacturer, after briefly losing out to Nissan in 2020. Hawes said the industry had managed to cope with the extra costs of Brexit, although he added that executives were watching recent delays at the Dover Channel crossing. However, Hawes warned that energy price increases that have also hit households were set to add further to UK carmakers’ difficulties. He said the industry urgently needed “measures to mitigate the escalating energy costs which are threatening viability,” and warned that higher costs could feed through to higher prices. Factories are braced for price increases of up to 70% when old contracts expire. Energy is generally carmakers’ third-highest cost, after materials and labour, but the sector is lobbying to be designated as an energy-intensive industry in order to qualify for extra government support. Nevertheless, Hawes said the industry was approaching 2022 with “a lot more optimism”, particularly as the supply of semiconductors rises to meet demand after earlier investments by chip manufacturers. He said he expected the industry to return to 1m cars produced annually on a consistent basis – although he added that a return to the more than 1.7m cars built in 2016, the year of the Brexit referendum, was unlikely without new manufacturers choosing the UK. The SMMT did highlight £4.9bn in investment announced during the year by the automotive industry – although that included the speculative announcement of £2.5bn by Coventry council in a battery factory project that is yet to attract a lead investor. The number of battery electric cars with zero exhaust carbon emissions produced in the UK rose by 72% during 2021, but it remains only a 12th of overall UK output. The UK’s van industry performed considerably better than passenger car makers, with production up 24% on 2020 and up 3% compared with 2019. Hawes said the online shopping delivery boom had contributed to “extraordinarily high demand” for vans.Global oil prices have climbed to $90 a barrel, which could tempt investors to pile more cash into long-term fossil fuel projects, dashing the world’s hopes to limit carbon emissions in line with climate targets and wasting billions in investment, according to a report. Recent price rises could mean more potential projects appear to be lucrative investments in the short-term, the report by the financial thinktank Carbon Tracker says. But the analysis suggests demand for fossil fuels could begin to dwindle by the time these projects begin, creating “a nightmare scenario” for investors and climate campaigners. Demand for oil and gas has rebounded strongly as the global economy bounces back from the economic slowdown triggered by the Covid-19 pandemic in 2020, leading to a global gas supply crunch and rocketing energy market prices. The international oil price climbed from lows of about $20 a barrel in April 2020 to seven-year highs of $90 a barrel on Wednesday, and may reach $100 by the end of the year. Meanwhile gas prices have reached all-time highs in markets across Europe and Asia, fuelling a cost of living crisis. But the increase was unlikely to last over the lifetime of a long-term fossil fuel investment, Carbon Tracker said, because government climate commitments combined with the rapid switch to electric vehicles and renewable energy would drive down demand for oil sharply from the late 2020s to 2040. “You can see the same over-investment story for gas,” said Mike Coffin, the head of oil and gas at Carbon Tracker and a co-author of the report. He advised oil and gas companies and their investors to “resist the temptation” to make long-term investments in new fossil fuel projects based on current market prices. Axel Dalman, a Carbon Tracker analyst and the lead author of the report, said: “Companies may see high prices as a huge neon sign pointing towards investment in more supply. However, this could become a nightmare scenario if they go ahead with projects which deliver oil around the time that demand stars to decline.” A failure to acknowledge “the sea change risks” facing fossil fuel developers from the global transition to low-carbon energy risked locking in carbon emissions, which would dash the Paris climate goals as well as investor returns, Coffin added. The warning follows a call this week from Fatih Birol, the executive director of the International Energy Agency, for governments to triple their investment in low-carbon energy sources over the next decade to cut their reliance on gas as a safeguard against a future energy market crisis. “The world has not been investing enough to meet its future energy needs – and that remains the case today. Clean energy investment is gradually picking up but remains far short of what is required to meet rising demand for energy services in a sustainable way,” he added.MPs have expressed “deep concern” over the leaking of price-sensitive information before Rishi Sunak’s budget last year and warned the chancellor his package of measures risked adding to Britain’s already surging inflation rate. The influential all-party Treasury committee called for Sunak to investigate how details of a planned increase in the national living wage to £9.50 an hour were disclosed in the runup to the budget in late October. “We are deeply concerned that the rate of the national living wage was disclosed to ITV in an unauthorised fashion prior to the budget, and we agree with the Treasury that this could have caused confusion in the market as to whether the information was accurate,” the MPs said. “Given the potential opportunity for disruption that this unauthorised leak could have caused, the government should investigate how this policy came to be leaked prior to the budget and should publicise its findings.” Tom Scholar, the permanent secretary to the Treasury, wrote to the committee saying he did not believe the wage hike announcement for workers aged over 25 constituted market-sensitive information because it was an “economy-wide measure”. However, the committee said it believed the announcement could be seen as market sensitive because it affected certain companies with high numbers of low-paid workers compared with other businesses. Publishing its report on Sunak’s combined budget and spending review, the MPs said the chancellor’s decisions – including the planned increase in national insurance contributions – would add to inflationary pressure and make it harder to cut taxes before the next election. Mel Stride, the committee’s chairman, said: “With inflation rising significantly, concerns about pressure on the cost of living are growing. While the prime minister’s ambition to promote high wage growth is worthy, focusing on increasing wages without improving productivity is likely to be inflationary, and risks contributing to a wage price spiral.” Increases in NI and corporation tax, together with the freezing of income tax personal allowances, will leave taxes as a share of national income at their highest in 70 years, but Stride said the scope for reducing them might be limited. “The chancellor has stated his ambition to cut taxes before the end of the parliament. In October, there was little room for manoeuvre, but there has been positive news from the public finances since then. While further good news may help him achieve this ambition, significant risks remain, most notably from the impact of inflation.” The MPs also questioned Sunak’s decision to offer less generous post-Brexit support to the UK’s struggling regions than had been provided by the EU. Noting the government’s shared prosperity fund would provide 60% of the funding from EU structural investment funds, the report said: “If the new fund is intended to be one of “the centrepieces” of the government’s ambition, it is surprising that the size of the fund is being reduced to such an extent. The government will need to demonstrate how these reduced funds will achieve their defined metrics for levelling up.” A Treasury spokesperson said:“The budget and spending review set out a plan to create a stronger economy for the British people. “It balanced delivering on the people’s priorities with keeping the public finances on a sustainable path, ensuring future generations aren’t burdened by even higher debt.”A sum of £100m is peanuts in the expensive world of nuclear power stations, so regard the business secretary Kwasi Kwarteng’s funding for a round of development work on Sizewell C as a form of advertising. The cash is intended to send a message that the government is serious about getting the plant built in Suffolk. And it is an appeal for outside investors to volunteer to sit alongside developer EDF, the French state-backed group. There was also a definition of a desirable investor: “British pension funds, insurers and other institutional investors from like-minded countries”. Note the nationality test. It is the closest we have come to official confirmation that China General Nuclear (CGN), originally slated for a 20% stake in Sizewell, will be kicked off the project. It remains to be seen how, legally, the government will rip up the 2015 deal with CGN signed by David Cameron’s government, but the intention is clear. So, too, is the intended funding mechanism. It will be a regulated asset base (RAB) model, a version of the formula used at Heathrow Terminal 5 and the Thames Tideway giant sewer. The key point for investors is that they will see some income before Sizewell is built, unlike at Hinkley Point C where EDF and CGN earn their princely cashflows only when the electricity starts to flow. The switch will lower Sizewell’s lifetime costs by “more than £30bn” versus Hinkley’s contracts-for-difference model, says the government, being economical with the economics. What it doesn’t mention is that any cost overrun (a real risk given nuclear’s reliable record of never hitting its construction budgets) will be shoved on to consumers, who will in any case see £10 a year added to household energy bills during the build phase. But, yes, Kwarteng is correct that the RAB model is the only one with a chance of attracting new investors. What, though, if those British and like-minded institutions still refuse to play? Nuclear represents unknown territory for most of them. What if competition to invest, which is meant to be the other way in which RAB lowers financing costs, doesn’t materialise? What’s the government’s plan B? The only possible solution is for the state to invest directly. If that is so, wouldn’t it be better to run an upfront benchmarking exercise at the outset to compare the numbers? Sizewell, unfortunately, is probably inevitable given the current panic over high gas prices and long-term energy security. But taxpayers, on the hook anyway via household bills, deserve to know that the odd billion or three isn’t being diverted unnecessarily to intermediaries. By the time Sizewell’s sums become enormous, transparency will be essential. The government has just thrown £1.7bn at Bulb, the failed energy supplier, to keep it on life support and it will be a miracle if all the cash comes back in full. In that context, using public money to invest in a productive energy asset doesn’t seem such an awful prospect. Agnew resignation turns spotlight on UK counter-fraud strategy Theodore Agnew’s dramatic resignation as counter-fraud minister this week has stung Rishi Sunak. So it should. “A combination of arrogance, indolence and ignorance freezes the government machine” in dealing with Covid fraud, said the outgoing minster, which is a heavy charge. Cue a series of tweets from the chancellor on Wednesday about how he is not ignoring or “writing off” the problem. In one respect, one can sympathise with Sunak. In the early stage of the pandemic, it was indeed important to get money out of the door quickly to small businesses. Some level of fraud was inevitable. Perfection was impossible. The question posed by Lord Agnew, though, is different. Is the government chasing the fraudsters as hard as it could? It was also the challenge set by the National Audit Office last month when it reviewed the £47bn bounceback loan scheme, which is estimated by the business department to have generated £4.9bn of fraudulent loans. The NAO’s advice was clear: the government should produce a formal strategy for managing bounceback loan fraud; it should set targets for success; it should report on the performance of each counter-fraud measure; it should assess resources regularly. In short, inject professionalism and accountability into the process. Is the £100m that Sunak said has been invested into the taxpayer protection taskforce enough? It is hard to tell until the government sets public targets for how much could be recouped. Until then, the suspicion will remain that fraud levels are, as Agnew put it, “a multiple of what should be happening”.Private rents in Britain are rising at their fastest rate on record, piling more pressure on households feeling the strain of the cost of living crisis. The average advertised rent outside London is 9.9% higher than a year ago as tenants making plans for a post-pandemic life jostle for properties, according to the website Rightmove. Meanwhile, London rents have hit a new record and are higher now than before the start of the pandemic after a bounceback in demand fuelled by the gradual return to the workplace and more overseas students looking for a place to live. The average advertised asking rent outside London is £1,068 a calendar month, said Rightmove. In London it is £2,142. The increases have been attributed to a mismatch between the number of tenants looking for a place and the stock of available properties. Tenant demand is 32% higher than this time last year, but the number of available properties is 51% lower, said the website. “The imbalance between high tenant demand and low rental stock is supporting asking rent rises, and has led to competition between tenants for the rental properties available nearly doubling compared to the same period last year,” said a spokesperson. During the pandemic some tenants have quit London and other big cities after re-evaluating their lifestyle and deciding they want to live in the suburbs or the countryside, or somewhere with more open space. Rightmove named a number of “rental hotspots” that had seen typical rents increase by between 14% and 20% in a year. They include three Kent coastal towns – Ramsgate, Chatham and Folkestone – and locations such as Ascot in Berkshire and Bridgwater in Somerset. The website is predicting a further 5% increase in average asking rents this year. Separate research found that some landlords were increasing rents “to cover the increased tax burden” they faced. During the last few years many amateur landlords who were attracted by the buy-to-let boom have quit the market owing to regulatory and tax changes that have in some cases hit profits. One in four landlords have raised rents in response to tax changes that were phased in between 2017 and 2020, according to research from the Landlord Works, a platform run by the Nationwide building society.Ministers have thrown further support behind EDF Energy’s £20bn Sizewell C nuclear power station in Suffolk with a £100m investment to help develop the project while the company courts private investors. The government’s cash injection is designed to “maximise investor confidence” in the project while French state-owned EDF works towards setting out a funding plan which satisfies investors and UK ministers. In return the government will have rights to an equity stake in the development company behind the project and over the land on which EDF plans to build it. If EDF is able to secure enough investor backing to make a final investment decision on Sizewell it would reimburse the government with a stake in the project or in cash. The UK government reignited talks with EDF over the nuclear project in late 2020, focusing on whether the company could prove it had learned lessons from its Hinkley Point nuclear project in Somerset, and that a successor plant would offer the public value for money. EDF has since embarked on a hunt for investors to help to drive down the cost for bill-payers. It is understood that EDF and the UK government also hope to secure enough new investment to replace Chinese state-controlled CGN, which has a 20% stake in the critical national infrastructure project. Sizewell, which is still going through planning and development, would power 6 million homes, but has been plagued by opposition from local campaigners, fears over its price tag and China’s involvement. Kwasi Kwarteng, the business and energy secretary, said the government’s funding would add support to the development of Sizewell C “during this important phase of negotiations as we seek to maximise investor confidence in this nationally significant project”. “In light of high global gas prices, we need to ensure Britain’s future energy supply is bolstered by reliable, affordable, low carbon power that is generated in this country,” he said. “New nuclear is not only an important part of our plans to ensure greater energy independence, but to create high-quality jobs and drive economic growth.” The fresh support has emerged months after the government put forward legislation to create a new funding model to help the project attract investment at a lower cost than the Hinkley Point C project which could add between £10 and £15 a year to the average energy bill for 35 years, making it one of the most expensive energy projects undertaken. Tom Greatrex, the chief executive of the Nuclear Industry Association, described the funding as “another big step forward for Sizewell C and a big vote of confidence” which “sends a clear signal from government to investors that it sees projects like Sizewell C as essential to our clean energy transition”. Simone Rossi, the chief executive of EDF Energy, said the company is pleased that the government is “showing its confidence in Sizewell C” which would “allow us to continue to move the project towards a financial investment decision”. Rossi claimed that Sizewell C, if approved, would lower energy costs for consumers and help to insulate the UK from global gas prices while providing a “huge economic boost to east Suffolk” and “bring new opportunities for thousands of nuclear supply chain companies up and down the country”. Alison Downes, from Suffolk campaign group Stop Sizewell C, said: “We fail to understand why the UK is bailing out crisis-hit EDF, and why the government is so committed to poor value large scale nuclear when there are other, better options.” EDF’s share price has slumped by almost half in the last three years to about €8.28 a share as technical trouble within its global nuclear fleet has caused its costs to spiral. It warned investors earlier this month that its French nuclear reactors would produce 10% less electricity than expected this year. Separately, the French government expects the company to take an €8.4bn (£7bn) financial hit to protect households from rocketing energy costs by limiting bill hikes to 4% this year.Black and Asian students won places at prestigious UK universities at record levels in 2021, alongside increasing numbers of students from all backgrounds, and the chief executive of the Ucas admissions service has said there could be one million applications for places by 2026. The number of Black students who accepted places at selective institutions, such as those in the Russell Group of leading research universities, rose by 19% in a year, from 3,775 in 2020 to just under 4,500, according to figures released by Ucas. The record numbers of applications and acceptances were driven by the rise in higher A-levels awarded in 2021 after the government’s decision to cancel exams and replace them with teacher-assessed grades. Ucas said the number of applicants achieving the top A-level grades almost doubled compared with 2020 – up from 12,735 to 19,595 – and was nearly quadruple the pre-pandemic levels of 5,655 in 2019. “As a likely result, 103,010 UK young people were accepted at higher-tariff providers, up 11% from 92,650 in 2020,” it noted. The boost in results and rising numbers of 18-year-olds in the UK population saw more applicants awarded places across the board, with 492,005 students accepted on to a course. The proportion of school leavers seeking further study continued to rise, with 38% of 18-year-olds living in the UK going on to university – up by more than four percentage points compared with 2019’s figure. This suggests that the public’s appetite for higher education shows no sign of abating. Clare Marchant, the chief executive of Ucas, said: “This year sees the return to exams, and is the second year of what will be a decade of growth of 18-year-olds in the UK population. As we are set to hit one million applicants by 2026, it will be even more important that the higher education admissions system meets the needs of students in this increasingly competitive environment.” The data also showed that nearly 21% of students receiving free school meals were accepted on to a university or college course last year. Ucas said this was the highest rate on record. Kevin Gilmartin, the post-16 specialist at the Association of School and College Leaders, said: “We are delighted to see the increase in the numbers of students being accepted at university, including a welcome rise in those from disadvantaged backgrounds. “The increases have come despite the whole application cycle taking place during the pandemic, reflecting the tremendous efforts made by school and college leaders and their staff in guiding students through the process.” However, applicants from more privileged backgrounds continued to apply and gain places at even higher rates than in previous years. The number of applicants from the wealthiest backgrounds increased by 15%, while those from poorer areas rose more slowly, by 10%. The proportion of white students gaining places at higher-tariff universities also rose steeply, up by 12.5% to nearly 75,600. Partly as a result, the gap in participation rates between disadvantaged pupils and their peers continued to widen. In 2012, the difference between the number of acceptances for students on free school meals and those who weren’t stood at 14.5 percentage points. But last year this had risen to more than 20 percentage points. This year’s students could see further strike disruption on campus, after a proposal by the University and College Union to reevaluate the pension scheme at the heart of one dispute was rejected by employers. Universities UK dismissed the proposal, saying it “does not appear to be a serious attempt to reach agreement”.Tesla posted record fourth-quarter and full-year earnings in what it called a “breakthrough year”, despite supply chain struggles. The company made $5.5bn last year compared with the previous record of $3.47bn in net income posted in 2020. It was the electric vehicle and solar panel maker’s third straight profitable year. “In 2021, our accumulated profitability since the inception of the company became positive,” Elon Musk, Tesla’s chief executive, said in a call with investors on Wednesday evening. “Which I think makes us a real company at this point. This is a critical milestone.” Tesla – which relocated its headquarters from California to Texas last year – delivered a record 936,000 vehicles last year, nearly double the 2020 figure. Fourth-quarter vehicle sales hit 308,600, also a first. Those numbers surpassed Tesla’s stated goal of increasing deliveries by 50% each year, and came in the face of a global shortage of computer chips that has slowed the entire auto industry. “Its home-run quarter indicates [Tesla] executed flawlessly with Musk doing an outstanding job navigating through global supply shortages,” said Jesse Cohen, senior analyst at Investing.com. Musk said in a call with investors that the company would look to build new factories over the next year, announcing new locations by the end of 2022. He predicted Tesla vehicles would achieve “full self-driving” by the end of 2022. However, Musk frequently receives criticism for his self-driving timelines, having fallen short on those promises in the past. The company has also faced investigation by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration over safety concerns with its Autopilot features. That investigation focused on 12 crashes in which Tesla owners collided with stationary vehicles, resulting in 17 injuries and one fatality. Ahead of Tesla’s report, Musk tweeted that he had been driving a prototype of Tesla’s forthcoming electric pickup truck, Cybertruck, around the company’s factory in Austin, Texas, saying: “It’s awesome.” Musk did say releases of that vehicle as well as its other forthcoming model, the Roadster, would be delayed until “hopefully next year” to focus more on “scaling output” of existing models in 2022. “If we were to introduce new vehicles, our total vehicle output will decrease,” Musk said. “We will not be introducing new vehicle models this year.” He also addressed questions about the potential for a more affordable Tesla, a topic investors have focused on after Musk hinted at a $25,000 electric car. Musk said Tesla is “not currently working” on it. “At some point we will. We have enough on our plate right now,” Musk said. “Too much, frankly.” Musk also addressed a humanoid robot model that could help build cars, something he previously announced in August 2020, calling it “the most important product development we’re doing this year”. Tesla has weathered the global supply chain crisis better than other automakers, and analysts on average expect December-quarter revenue up 53% to $16.41bn and adjusted earnings per share of $2.32, according to Refinitiv. Analysts have said Tesla’s two new factories in Texas and Berlin eventually could double production capacity, but it is not clear whether Tesla has started production. “While production is not ready everywhere today, the fact that they are getting the facilities ready quickly and are building in flexible and new technologies, which will help them continue their rise,” said Alyssa Altman, analyst at consultancy Publicis Sapient. Caught up in a broad selloff of growth stocks, Tesla’s stock has fallen about 23% from its record high close in November, and it is down 10% so far in 2022. Stock fell in after-hours trading despite the positive report, perhaps owing to Musk’s admissions that supply chain issues could present headwinds for Tesla’s progress in 2022. • This article was amended on 3 February 2022. An earlier version said that Tesla’s delivery of 936,000 vehicles last year “fell short of the 1m vehicles previously promised by the company”. In fact Tesla’s stated goal was to increase deliveries by 50%, and against a base 2020 total of 499,550 car deliveries, it surpassed this target.A match that offered fabulous entertainment, three marvellous individual innings, 31 sixes and the two highest scores ever posted in Twenty20 internationals at Kensington Oval ended with England falling 20 runs short of West Indies’ formidable total of 224 and falling 2-1 behind in what is proving a memorable five-game series. On the pitch adjacent to the one on which both sides struggled to score in Saturday’s opening T20, neither was similarly inconvenienced. Tom Banton’s excellent 39-ball 73 kept England approximately on track to chase down their target, but unlike Nicholas Pooran and Rovman Powell, who had formed a formidable double act a little earlier, he did not find a teammate to help shoulder the burden. Banton and Phil Salt did spend eight balls in the middle together, but the opener departed before his partner, one of three England debutants, had faced a ball, picking out Jason Holder at long-on when trying to hit Kieron Pollard for successive sixes. With his departure England’s chances of victory seemed to dip as precipitously as had the ball, but Salt was superb in scoring 57 off 24 balls before he fell in the final over, having kept England’s score soaring at enough of a pace for success to remain a not completely outlandish possibility until very nearly the end. “With the scoreboard looking the way it was, it was very clear what I needed to do,” Salt said. “I was only thinking about winning. When you come into the group the mentality you need to have is clear: winning the game was the only thing on my mind at the time.” He fell short of that target, but well enough to ensure there will be more opportunities to come. After winning the toss and choosing, as they do, to bat second England hit upon a novel way to reduce attention on their recently leaky death bowling: to leak runs consistently throughout the innings. As a result, and thanks to some marvellous batting from Pooran and Powell – who each posted the highest T20i scores of their careers – West Indies were able to set a new all-time record third-wicket partnership, more than 200 runs were scored in Barbados for the first (but not the last) time in T20 internationals, and the umpires must have very nearly run out of the antiseptic wipes they use to cleanse the ball of potential viral scraps every time it is returned from the stands. Including leg byes (one) and wides (one), 30 boundaries were registered in the hosts’ innings; only five overs were entirely boundary-free and 13 contained at least one six. Powell was the one new face in the West Indies side, replacing Odean Smith – rested after the exertions of facing a total of three balls and bowling six in the two opening fixtures – to impressive effect. Meanwhile England’s gave debuts to Harry Brook and George Garton as well as Salt, had a different captain – Moeen Ali deputising after Eoin Morgan felt a muscle strain in the warm-up – and a new wicketkeeper, with Banton taking the gloves as Sam Billings returned to his traditional if unwanted drink-carrying role. The result of all this was that England fielded three left-arm seamers, but it was a left-handed batter who first caught the eye. After Garton dismissed Brandon King in his first over, Pooran came in and immediately took control, and by the time Shai Hope – West Indies’ other opener – was dismissed Hope had four and Pooran was already on 32. But by then Pooran’s period as the outstanding batter was over, as he was instantly overshadowed by Powell. The 28-year-old slog-swept his second ball of the night for six and kept going from there, his fluency such that Pooran was soon reduced to accepting singles just to get his teammate back on strike. There was one shot in particular that illustrated Powell’s timing, when he deflected a Reece Topley full toss way over the boundary for six while off balance and barely moving his bat at all. By the midway point of the 11th over both players had faced 27 balls, Pooran scoring 46 and Powell 45, and they continued to go stride for stride from there: Pooran took 34 balls to reach a half-century, Powell 31. Both were eventually caught in the deep by Livingstone, Pooran for a 43-ball 70 and Powell a superb and decisive 53-ball 107. As much as Banton and Salt peppered the stands thereafter, it was a standard England could not match.Kieron Pollard is wearing shorts and a big smile. “It was a complete performance,” he says. “The versatility in our team sometimes takes the ego out of it, so kudos to the players.” I suspect he’s referring to Pooran, who got off to a fast start but then pulled over into the slow lane to let Powell put his foot down, with spectacular results. And that is that. West Indies lead 2-1 with two to play. The underdogs are now the favourites, and the world’s No 1 team (allegedly) are in a hole. I’ll be back on Saturday to see if West Indies can wrap it up with a game to spare. Thanks for your company, your correspondence and your Swedish accents. It’s been a blast. Moeen is dignified in defeat. He calls the Pooran-Powell partnership “fantastic”, and he is blunt about the impact of England’s many changes. “We were done a little bit by Morgs’ injury and [having] the three debutants.” Then he adds: “But they played really well.” And he has some high praise for Salt and Banton. The player of the match is ... Rovman Powell. After dealing with everything England’s lefties hurled at him, he faces a quiz from Mark Butcher. “You’re the third man to make a T20 hundred for West Indies. Do you know who the other two are?” “I do!” Powell says. “The Universe Boss himself, Chris Gayle, and Evin Lewis.” Never mind the Universe Boss, put this man on University Challenge. And the cricket goes on. While all those sixes were raining down on Bridgetown (final score: West Indies 16, England 15), an Ashes Test was getting underway in Canberra. And England have started brightly – click here to follow our OBO with Geoff Lemon. “Sobering,” says the subject field of an email from Colum Fordham. “Was really struck by seeing Sir Garfield Sobers the other day, in a pale blue shirt, watching his side succumb by one run, all guns blazing. I hope the living legend appreciated Philip Salt’s fine knock with plenty of big six-hitting, a very positive note for England, albeit in an ultimately futile effort. Banton’s innings bodes well too.” For England, the consolation prize is that two young players batted extremely well. Tom Banton made a cultured 73 off 39 balls at the top of the order, and Phil Salt a phenomenal 57 off 24 at the death. England kept the crowd interested and played their part in the highest-scoring T20 international ever staged in the Caribbean. But the die was cast by the scintillating partnership between Nicholas Pooran and Rovman Powell. In a T20, you’re not supposed to put on 122. 20th over: England 204-9 (Mills 1, Topley 2) Shepherd holds his nerve, nails his yorkers, and sees West Indies to a famous victory. The match belongs to Rovman Powell. You know when you’ve been Rovmanned. And another six! England just need four more and they’re there... but Salt is bowled! Round his legs. Well bowled. He’s not giving up! Salt reaches his fifty in style, with a straight six. What a debut this is. 19th over: England 187-8 (Salt 45, Mills 0) So England need 38 off the last over. And they also need to be facing themselves. Rashid goes for a run, Salt doesn’t, and Cottrell has so much time to break the wicket that he coolly flicks the bail up and catches it. Harsh. Salt, a caption reveals, has faced 20 balls and only one of them has been a dot. But he’s on his own. Cottrell hurries one through Garton, unsettling him, and then he bowls him. No blame at all, for either Garton or Brook. 18th over: England 184-6 (Salt 44, Garton 1) Yet another debutant comes in, but Salt is at the wheel. He whips Holder for four, forcing him to go round the wicket, then hooks him for four more. Garton manages a drive for a single off his first ball in international cricket. England need 41 off 12 balls. It’s time to hit out or get out, and Brook perishes to a top-edged slog off a slower ball. 17th over: England 174-5 (Salt 35, Brook 10) Salt thinks he’s got another six, off the returning Cottrell, but the TV umpire rules that it’s a four, prompting boos from the England fans. Brook plays and misses, twice, before going for his first big hit – not middled, just a single. And then Salt nails it! Six more, cracked over midwicket, just eluding Fabian Allen. His 35 has come off just 15 balls. A star is born. 16th over: England 162-5 (Salt 24, Brook 9) Brook is hitting singles, handing the strike back to Salt, which would be the right thing to do if they needed ten an over. As it’s 15, they’ve both got to go hell for leather. But Salt, who did some of his growing up in Barbados, is very much at home. He lifts Shepherd back over his head for six. That’s the 12th six from England tonight, to go with 16 from West Indies. 15th over: England 151-5 (Salt 15, Brook 7) Time for Salt to go big. And he does! Facing Hosein, he slog-sweeps with quick hands and hits his first six in this format. The cameras find Eoin Morgan on the England balcony, radiating calm, half-sphinx, half-Brearley. England need 74 at just under 15 an over. “Not impossible,” says Ian Bishop. Is he sure? 14th over: England 140-5 (Salt 6, Brook 5) So Kieron Pollard finishes with 2-31 off his four overs, after bowling them straight through. Maybe captains should try that more often. Now Salt gets his chance, and takes it – mowing for two to open his T20i account, then hitting a straight drive so hard that Jason Holder, trying to catch it, may have a broken hand. That’s another two. And then Salt is dropped by Hosein at cover, a tough chance. At this stage, West Indies had 140 too – for two. It’s a measure of the carnage at the death that England need another 85 off six overs. “We are watching the game here in Sweden,” says Julian Menz, “with some Indian friends and a Swede (no tuber vegetable jokes please). We are doing our best to spread the cricket gospel, yet the Swedish gentleman’s most telling comment was that if you put a couple of dots above the ‘o’ in Rovman, it would mean ‘arseman’ in Swedish. I fear we have a way to go yet.” 13th over: England 132-5 (Salt 0, Brook 3) Two batters on 0, both debutants: I’m not sure England have got the batting order right. But Harry Brook shows some gumption, dabbing for two to get off the mark in international cricket, then tipping and running a single to keep the strike. England need 93 off seven overs at a rate of 13 or so. Got him! A slower ball lures Banton into a rare false shot. That’s the end of a fine defiant knock, and the game is surely up. 12th over: England 123-4 (Banton 67, Salt 0) England could do with an old salt here, but they’ve got a new one: Phil Salt, who has never come in below No 5 before in a T20. Whether he can handle it, we don’t yet know, as he hasn’t faced a ball. Banton, seeing the need to take charge, hist Shepherd for six! And six more. That’s 17 off the over, and it’s still mission implausible. Livingstone goes inside-out and gets a steepling top-edge, which is well held by Akeal Hosein on the edge of the circle. At least Livingstone can get some medical attention. 11th over: England 106-3 (Banton 52, Livingstone 11) Pollard gives himself a third successive over and almost defeats Livingstone, mistiming a hook. England need a huge over, and poor Livingstone doesn’t look well enough to deliver it, for all his gifts. 10th over: England 99-3 (Banton 50, Livingstone 7) He’s well enough to stay out there, but Livingstone looks decidedly peaky. He’s been suffering from oesophagitis. Rovman Powell is bowling, as if he hadn’t already grabbed the man-of-the-match award. Banton takes a single to reach a fine fifty off 29 balls. And Livingstone gathers himself to wallop a six over midwicket! At the halfway stage, England need 126. It’s perfectly possible on paper. There’s a delay. It looks as if Livingstone doesn’t feel well. Time for an email that halfway to an essay. “I wish I was called Rovman,” says Robert Wilson. “I think I’ve always felt like a Rovman. “Rashid, Rashid, my lost diamond Adil across the sea. More and more it’s a heartbreak that he doesn’t pan out in Tests. He has everything necessary. I wondered for a while if he wasn’t wily or clever enough, but if noted blockhead Shane Warne can be epochal at it, it’s not a question of intellect. Maybe it’s just the nowness of it all. After all, his main adversary tonight, Powell, has only played a dozen first class games in his career. “You guys need to stop whingeing about tax returns. There’s worse. I just got back from a meeting of anti-vax protestors and I am absolutely covered in stupid. You wanna hear about the 20 million secret Jews in Wuhan? There are 20 million of them. And they’re secret.” 9th over: England 90-3 (Banton 48, Livingstone 0) Banton is still going smoothly, cutting for four, brushing for two into the space on the leg side. This is already the highest score by an Englishman in the series – and it looks puny next to Rovman Powell’s hundred. Noooo!!! Mo!!!! He chases a wide slower ball and can only chip it to backward point. Game off, unless Liam Livingstone can go ballistic. 8th over: England 79-2 (Banton 38, Moeen 0) Banton isn’t bothered about the rate. He goes deep in the crease and swishes Hosein over midwicket for six with good fast hands. Vince sees that and raises him that upper cut for six more. “They might run out of sanitiser,” says Steve Harmison. But Vince, as so often, has only a cameo for us, and now Moeen has a hell of a job on his hands. What does a captain’s innings look like here? Six and out! Vince plays a stroke of genius, cutting over extra-cover, but then slaps a long hop in the same direction and hands Pollard a dolly. 7th over: England 65-1 (Banton 31, Vince 9) Pollard brings himself on for some military medium, which does the trick: just four singles. Banton goes for a reverse flick and misses. The required rate creeps above 12. 6th over: England 61-1 (Banton 29, Vince 7) Kieron Pollard tries some spin in the PowerPlay, in the form of Akeal Hosein’s slow left-arm. Banton’s eyes light up: the first ball goes for a straight four that almost takes Hosein’s head off, the second for six from an easy swing. The England supporters help themselves to a chorus of Sweet Caroline. Pollard holds a conference in mid-over, and whatever is said has some effect: dot, dot, dot... one. So the PowerPlay ends with England going great guns, and still only scraping a 16pc chance of a win on CricViz. As much as that? 5th over: England 50-1 (Banton 18, Vince 7) Holder, changing ends, replaces Cottrell. Banton spots a slower ball and plays a hockey shot for four, whipped past backward square. He’s got something. And England have fifty already, but the required run-rate has begun its ascent – it’s already 11.66. Two a ball! 4th over: England 41-1 (Banton 9, Vince 7) Hang on, says James Vince, what about me? He’s had a quiet series but he times his first ball beautifully through the covers – the cut that got the cream. At this stage, West Indies were 34-1, but it’s hard to see England staying ahead for long. Nooo!!! Roy groans as he realises the bat has spun in his hand, giving Holder a simple catch at long-on. Well bowled Romario Shepherd: he’s got rid of England’s best hope. 3rd over: England 27-0 (Roy 13, Banton 8) Cottrell is bowling off cutters, tucking Roy up – but still concedes a six as Roy gets hold of the first ball of this over. The good news for England fans is that they have chased a target like this before – 230 against South Africa at Centurion in 2016. The bad news is that the highest successful chase on this ground, by anyone, is 155. 2nd over: England 19-0 (Roy 6, Banton 8) England need a bit of help and they get it as Jason Holder starts with a wide that goes for five. He recovers to beat Roy with a superb slow bouncer, a leg-cutter at 105kmph, and then beats him again for good measure. But then Tom Banton comes to the party, picking a slower ball and dumping it over long-on for England’s first six of other night. Game on? “This is going about as well as my self-assessment tax return,” said Guy Hornsby on Twitter, half an hour ago. “In that it’s much more painful than I thought it’d be, and I could spend much of the evening with my brain melted by big numbers.” Join the club! 1st over: England 5-0 (Roy 4, Banton 1) It’s Sheldon Cottrell to open the bowling – yet another left-armer. And Roy is missed in the deep! By Rovman Powell! Roy pulled, hard, and Powell was a touch slow out of the blocks at deep square, presumably because he was resting on his laurels. 20th over: West Indies 224-5 (Shepherd 11, Pollard 9) Kieron Pollard finally gives himself a go and races to nine off four balls. And that is that. What a performance from the West Indians. Nicholas Pooran set the tone: Rovman Powell called the tune. It’s as if the batters were inspired by the way the bowlers batted the other night. The total is West Indies’ third highest in 155 T20 internationals, and their very highest against England. Of the bowlers, Topley and Rashid were cool under fire, but Mills, Moeen, Livingstone and Garton all went for 13-14 an over. There are probably only two ways England can make a game of it: if Jason Roy or Liam Livingstone goes bananas. See you shortly! A slower ball from Tymal Mills baffles Fabian Allen, who gives a simple catch off the top edge. The collapse is on. 19th over: West Indies 210-4 (Shepherd 10) Reece Topley had returned bearing dots – two of them, as he rapped Powell on the hand. But then Powell found a two and a single to reach his ton. He just had to celebrate with a six, but fancied another and lofted a mis-hit to long-off, where Liam Livingstone took a phenomenal diving catch. It’s ALL happening. Only two West Indians have ever made a T20 century... make that three! A clip to leg off Topley, and Powell goes to 101 off 51 balls with four fours and NINE sixes. He’s been immense. Lucky they didn’t pick him for the first two games. 18th over: West Indies 199-3 (R Powell 97, Shepherd 10) Will Powell now play second fiddle? He will not. Facing Garton, he upper-cuts for four, belts a pull for six and drives a full toss inside-out for six more! West Indies are having a party, and England are just there to make the cocktails. 17th over: West Indies 180-3 (R Powell 78, Shepherd 10) Kieron Pollard decides to promote Romario Shepherd, the last-gasp master blaster from the other night. And he takes up where he left off, tucking his first ball for two and lofting his second for six. Eleven off the over, so Rash finishes with figures of 4-0-25-1. He’s so classy. It was going to take something special to separate these two, and Liam Livingstone provides it? By somehow holding on to a bullet at long-on. Well bowled Adil Rashid, and very well batted Nicholas Pooran. 16th over: West Indies 169-2 (Pooran 70, R Powell 77) And now here we are at the death, which is England’s Achilles heel. A caption shows that of the big 12 nations, they have been the worst death-bowling team since January last year, conceding 12 an over. West Indies are second (to India) on something beginning with 8. Tymal Mills rather proves the point by returning and going for six, six, four. Where’s Rash? 15th over: West Indies 153-2 (Pooran 59, R Powell 72) Only one of England’s three left-arm seamers has gone for less than two runs per ball – Topley – so Moeen summons him to restore order. Phil Salt helps him out with a fine stop in the deep, giving Ian Bishop the chance to point out that Salt spent part of his childhood and learnt some of his cricket in Barbados. There’s another good stop from Garton, but in between Powell thumps another six. And somewhere in there the hundred partnership came up. Off nine overs! Epic stuff. “I like the musical terms there,” says John Starbuck, “but is there anyone ready to pound out a symphony?” Ha. 14th over: West Indies 140-2 (Pooran 55, R Powell 63) Back comes Livingstone, to be greeted by a reverse sweep from Pooran, who’s suddenly making some noise again. Livingstone then bowls a leg-break to the right-handed Powell which lands wide, goes wider, is called wide and goes for five wides. You have to laugh, so Livingstone does. The free hit goes for an inside-out six, bringing up Rovman Powell’s fifty off 31 balls. He celebrates with another six, over mid-on, and a four, dabbed past third man. That’s 26 off the over and all Rashid’s good work its undone. 13th over: West Indies 114-2 (Pooran 50, R Powell 47) Pooran, facing Rashid, finally reaches his fifty with a clip to long-on. It’s been a knock of two halves, first a heavy-metal guitar solo, then a wily second fiddle. And that’s another fine over from Rashid, costing only three. 12th over: West Indies 111-2 (Pooran 48, R Powell 46) Moeen, who’s quite prepared to take off the armbands and chuck his debutants in at the deep end, brings back George Garton. Pooran – remember him? – sees something short and swivels for six. But Garton repays Mo’s faith with a dot, of all things, and three singles. He now has 3-0-38-1. 11th over: West Indies 101-2 (Pooran 40, R Powell 44) As Adil Rashid returns, Powell puts away his bludgeon and picks up a delicate paddle. He gets three to bring up the fifty partnership – 51 off just 30 balls, match-winning stuff – but this over is a tiny triumph for Rash, with only five off it. Against the spinners, Powell hasn’t made a single run on the off side, so Mo may as well shift all his fielders to the leg. “Just got back from therapy,” says Peter Gibbs, “and it seems I needed more cuddles as a kid.” Ha. “What else have I missed. This hour? This year? It’s been a bloody awful 12 months but I’m so happy to be back. Pass the Pina Colada, I haven’t been to a match in Bridgetown since the 4th Test in April 1994 so I expect more of the same in this format.” Is that the one England went and won, straight after being bowled out for 46? 10th over: West Indies 96-2 (Pooran 39, R Powell 40) Back comes Mills and this doesn’t go well either. He starts with a beamer, which brings a no-ball, a warning and a free hit. Powell is not a man you want to hand a freebie to: Mills tries a length ball and gets not so much pulled as pummelled for a straight six. “That one, I’m told,” says Butcher, “went 108 metres.” Mills keeps calm and goes round the wicket, bringing a defensive shot out of Powell, possibly his first. At the halfway stage, West Indies are enjoying themselves a lot more than England. 9th over: West Indies 84-2 (Pooran 36, R Powell 32) Moeen brings himself on and possibly regrets it. Powell thwacks him down the ground for six and then pulls for four, despite overbalancing in the process. Maybe it’s empathetic leadership from Mo: he now has an economy rate of 14, the same as Garton and Mills. This, Butcher mentions, is the first time England have ever fielded three left-arm seamers in the same XI – in T20, presumably. “Just saw Sky’s graphics for the WI team,” says Brendan Large on Twitter. “They have Hosein as ‘just’ a bowler. Surely after Sunday he should get a little bat next to his name.” Yes! 8th over: West Indies 70-2 (Pooran 35, R Powell 19) Powell survives an appeal for caught behind and an over-excited review, and celebrates by drop-kicking Livingstone for six. He then miscues a slog-sweep but gets away with it as the ball drops short of the cover sweeper. Powell is doing to Pooran what Pooran did to Hope: barely letting him get a stroke in edgeways. “Enjoying the coverage as always,” says Charlie Jeffery, generously. “I’d love to see Moeen captain more often. I reckon a few years ago an enlightened choice for Test captain would have been mighty Mo.” Maybe he could still be persuaded. 7th over: West Indies 60-2 (Pooran 33, R Powell 11) As the fielders scatter, Mo brings on his main man and great mate, Adil Rashid. It’s a good contest with Powell, who thinks about a hop, a skip and a jump but settles for a ramp, a lap and a sweep, taking two, two and one. “I know speed isn’t everything,” says Tom van der Gucht, “but I’m intrigued to know what sort of pace the England bowlers are generating on the tour. I heard Garton was once rumoured to be quick, but now is classed as slippery / waspish in the same bracket as Mahmood - high 80’s. Mills seemed to generate more heat during the WC, but mixes it up a lot bringing his average speed down. Whilst I saw Topley as a mid to low 80’s merchant.” My inexpert impression is that Topley has been quicker than that. 6th over: West Indies 54-2 (Pooran 32, R Powell 6) Rovman Powell takes one ball to play himself in, then slog-sweeps Livingstone into the crowd. But that’s a mainly good over from England’s Mr Allsorts, and a highly successful ploy from Moeen, who went for the least obvious of the three spin options on his plate. The PowerPlay ends with honours even and plenty happening. Mo switches to spin and it pays off! Liam Livingstone’s second ball is a leg-break that pops up to short point as Hope edges a sweepThere’s no fielder there, but Tom Banton nips round from behind the stumps to take a smart catch. 5th over: West Indies 48-1 (Hope 4, Pooran 32) Moeen Ali makes his first bowling change, replacing Topley with England’s third leftie, Tymal Mills. Pooran doesn’t care who the bowler is: he cracks a square drive for four and swings a pull for six. If you’re wondering what Shai Hope is up to, he’s faced four balls and hit them all for a single. Pooran has hogged the strike and helped himself to 32 off 17 balls. 4th over: West Indies 34-1 (Hope 2, Pooran 21) Garton blots his copybook with a no-ball, but then emulates Topley by beating Pooran. And Pooran retorts with a six! Garton bowls something resembling a long hop and Pooran smokes it over midwicket. Then Garton tries for a yorker and Pooran drives for four. And another six! As Pooran lofts a leg-stump freebie into the stand. Garton bounces back again, beating the bat with a slower ball, but his second over has gone for 19 and his figures are 2-0-28-1. Ebb and flow! More team news, sorry: Liam Livingstone is playing, in place of Liam Dawson. Which is tough on Dawson but good news for the spectators. As Livingstone has just observed in an interview, “there are more English than locals”. 3rd over: West Indies 15-1 (Hope 2, Pooran 3) Moeen sticks with Topley, who beats Pooran twice, first by finding some spectacular bounce, then by the more orthodox method of passing the outside edge. There’s another sharp bit of fielding in the ring from Phil Salt – who is not, as some idiot suggested, keeping wicket. That’s Tom Banton’s job. 2nd over: West Indies 12-1 (Hope 1, Pooran 1) Nicholas Pooran takes a single first ball, with a push back past the bowler, so Garton’s first over in international cricket ends up with a little bit of everything: a single, two fours and, most importantly, a wicket. Bowled him! Top of off, as King steps away to late-cut. A great riposte from England’s newest fast bowler. “Beautiful ball there,” says Steve Harmison. Mid-2nd over: West Indies 7-0 (King 6, Hope 1) And now it’s George Garton, so Moeen opens with two left-armers. Garton goes full with his first ball, and swings it, but Brandon King is waiting with a warm welcome – a straight push for four. Another four follows, off a cut, but then... 1st over: West Indies 3-0 (King 2, Hope 1) It’s Reece Topley, who suddenly finds himself the senior new-ball bowler. He keeps it tight, conceding just three singles, and Harry Brook manages to distinguish himself with his first touches of the ball in international cricket, swooping from cover and hitting the stumps with an under-arm shy. Nerves, shmerves. The players are out there and both sides are taking a knee. Harry Brook, the Yorkshire batter, takes Morgan’s place in the middle order. Phil Salt, the Sussex dasher, takes the wicketkeeping gloves as Sam Billings’ globetrotting seems to have caught up with him. And George Garton, the left-arm quick, also from Sussex, comes in for Chris Jordan. That could be the end of an era – or just a case of giving a beleaguered bowler a break. Moeen seemed to be in a hurry and didn’t leave us 100pc the wiser, so I’m just waiting for confirmation of the England team. Kieron Pollard is crystal-clear about his XI. He’s bringing in Rovman Powell, with his clean hitting, to replace Odean Smith. Moeen says Morgan felt something in the warm-up. And he reveals that England are fielding not one debutant, not two, but three. Morgan is rested, so Moeen captains England. Another good line from Topley. “Someone said to me, ‘The best bowlers in T20 are the ones with the shortest memories.’ ” “Reece The Goldfish Topley,” says Butcher with a chuckle. Reece Topley is on the screen, being interviewed by Butcher. “Red-ball ambitions?” Butcher says, tentatively. “I played a lot of Championship games for Surrey last year,” Topley replies, “because I really want to play Test cricket. Obviously it’s the pinnacle still for me.” Interesting. One of the correspondents in Bridgetown, Richard Gibson of the Mail, has tweeted some unconfirmed news. “Sounds like no Eoin Morgan for England today,” he says. “Moeen Ali captain. Morgan was doing some fitness drills with Rob Ahmun on the edge of the square just before the huddle.” The rain has shown up, though it seems to be clearing already. The OBO’s favourite commentator, Mark Butcher, has been studying the pitch. “It’s not a belter,” he reports, “but it’s not a shocker.” He reckons a par score tonight will be 150-155. Evening everyone and welcome to the third set in this five-setter. It’s perfectly poised at 1-1, but West Indies have been the better team, winning the first set 6-0 and only losing the second 7-6, after being 5-0 down. That’s enough of that analogy – anyone for cricket? It’s been absorbing stuff, with West Indies shaping up suspiciously well for the world’s tenth-ranked team and England struggling with their death bowling, just as they did in the World Cup semi-final against New Zealand. In fact England have a wider problem: their right-arm seam bowling as a whole. Over the past year in T20 internationals, England’s spinners have averaged 17 runs per wicket and their left-arm seamers 19, while the right-arm seamers have only managed 31. It’s much the same story with economy rates: spinners 6.64 runs per over, lefties 6.78, righties 8.23. (With thanks, as so often, to Stats Guru.) The individual figures suggest that England are missing Jofra Archer, as you’d expect, but they’re also missing Sam Curran, whose average, economy and strike rate over the past year are all better than Archer’s. The seamer struggling the most is the one Eoin Morgan uses the most – Chris Jordan. A pillar of this team, he’s suddenly doing better as a batter than a bowler. Morgan’s dilemma tonight is whether to persist with Jordan, hoping he finds his mojo and his yorker, or to send for another leftie to team up with Reece Topley, whose comeback on Sunday night, after a long and winding lay-off, was a triumph. Morgan has three other lefties up his sleeve – Tymal Mills, the master of the slower ball, who played in the first match of this series; George Garton, who is quick and can bat as well; and David Payne, who would be a seasoned novice in the Scott Boland mould. Morgan doesn’t tend to make many changes, though, and he may have a different one in mind – one Liam in lieu of another. Liam Livingstone, who has been out with oesophagitis (a pain in the throat), is thought to be fit again and could replace Liam Dawson as the third spinner, as well as sparking up England’s big-hitting. West Indies, meanwhile, are expected to stick with an almost-winning team. The venue, as for the whole series, is Bridgetown, Barbados. There’s some rain forecast but only for the first hour, which shouldn’t mess things up. Play starts at 8pm GMT (3pm local time), so do drop back around 7.35pm for news of the toss, the teams and the tally of lefties.The supreme court justice Stephen Breyer plans to announce his retirement, according to multiple reports. Breyer’s retirement would give Joe Biden his first supreme court seat to fill, and the president has promised to select a Black woman for the role, which would mark a historic first for the US. The White House said Biden “certainly stands by” his campaign pledge to nominate a Black woman to the supreme court. While not confirming news of Breyer’s retirement, White House press secretary Jen Psaki said, “The president has stated and reiterated his commitment to nominating a Black woman to the supreme court and certainly stands by that.” Biden deflected questions about the potential supreme court vacancy, saying he would wait to comment until Breyer made the news official. “Every justice has the right and opportunity to decide what he or she is going to do and announce it on their own. There has been no announcement from Justice Breyer,” Biden said as he met with a group of CEOs today to discuss his economic agenda. “Let him make whatever statement he’s going to make, and I’ll be happy to talk about it later.” Senate Democrats are expected to move quickly to confirm Biden’s supreme court nominee if Breyer does announce his retirement. The party controls the upper chamber and should be able to advance the nomination quickly, although a confirmation would not alter conservatives’ advantage on the bench. Even with Breyer’s replacement confirmed, the six conservative supreme court justices would still outnumber their three liberal colleagues. Meanwhile, officials from France, Germany, Russia and Ukraine met in Paris today, in the latest effort to de-escalate tensions along Ukraine’s border. The talks came two days before French president Emmanuel Macron is scheduled to speak to Russian President Vladimir Putin, as the west seeks to avoid a Russian invasion of Ukraine. – Joan E Greve Andrew Witherspoon and Sam Levine in New York: Republican lawmakers in Tennessee gave final approval on Monday to an aggressive plan to split Nashville, a Democratic bastion, in a deeply Republican state, into several congressional districts as part of an effort to tilt the state’s congressional map in their favor. The plan is now waiting for approval from Governor Bill Lee, who is likely to sign it. Nashville currently sits in the state’s fifth congressional district, represented by Jim Cooper, a Democrat who has held the seat for nearly 20 years. It’s a solid Democratic district – Joe Biden carried it by nearly 24 points in 2020 – but on Tuesday, Cooper announced he was retiring from Congress. “Despite my strength at the polls, I could not stop the general assembly from dismembering Nashville. No one tried harder to keep our city whole,” he said in a statement. “I explored every possible way, including lawsuits, to stop the gerrymandering and to win one of the three new congressional districts that now divide Nashville. There’s no way, at least for me in this election cycle, but there may be a path for other worthy candidates.” The new districts crack the concentration of Democratic voters in Nashville and cram them into three districts that stretch across the state and are filled with reliable Republican voters. Donald Trump would have easily carried all three of the proposed districts in 2020. The plan is one of the clearest, and most brazen, efforts to dismantle a Democratic district to benefit Republicans. Take a look: Federal prosecutors have launched an investigation into the attempt by Republicans in seven presidential battleground states won by Joe Biden in 2020 to subvert the election result by sending bogus slates of Donald Trump electors to Congress. The ploy was one of the central tactics used by Trump loyalists as part of the “big lie” that he had defeated his Democratic challenger. The fake slates of electors were forwarded to congressional leaders, who then came under pressure to delay certification of Biden’s victory on 6 January 2021, the day of the Capitol insurrection. In an interview on CNN, the deputy attorney general, Lisa Monaco, revealed that the justice department has begun an investigation into what she called the “fraudulent elector certifications”. She said the department had received referrals on the matter and “our prosecutors are looking at those”. Monaco added: “We are going to follow the facts and the law wherever they lead to address conduct of any kind and at any level that is part of an assault on our democracy.” Fake slates of Trump electors were sent to Congress from seven states in fact won by Biden – Arizona, Georgia, Michigan, New Mexico, Nevada, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin. Of those, two – New Mexico and Pennsylvania – added the caveat that the Trump electors should only be counted in the event of a disputed election. The other five states sent signed statements to Washington giving the appearance that Trump had won despite clear and verified counts placing Biden on top. Read more: Joe Biden signed an executive order making sexual harassment an offense under the Uniform Code of Military Justice, a move that Congress had mandated that he do as part of the latest defense bill. Lawmakers moved to change how military sexual assault and sexual harassment are prosecuted in the aftermath of the death of Vanessa Guillén, a 20-year-old Army private first class stationed at Fort Hood, in Texas. Guillén had twice reported being harassed by a supervisor before her disappearance and death, but leadership failed to do anything. Prior to the passage of the I Am Vanessa Guillén Act in the 2022 National Defense Authorization Act, sexual assault and harassment were prosecuted under various articles of the Uniform Code of Military Justice but were not specifically named an offense of their own. Mayra Guillén, Vanessa’s older sister, said at a news conference last week described the passage of the new rules as “history being made” in her sister’s honor. That’s it from me after another newsy day in Washington. My west coast colleague, Maanvi Singh, will take over the blog for the next few hours. Here’s where the day stands so far: Supreme court justice Stephen Breyer plans to announce his retirement, according to multiple reports. Breyer’s retirement would give Joe Biden his first supreme court seat to fill, and the president has promised to select a Black woman for the role, which would mark a historic first for the US. The White House said Biden “certainly stands by” his campaign pledge to nominate a Black woman to the supreme court. While not confirming news of Breyer’s retirement, White House press secretary Jen Psaki said, “The president has stated and reiterated his commitment to nominating a Black woman to the supreme court and certainly stands by that.” Biden deflected questions about the potential supreme court vacancy, saying he would wait to comment until Breyer made the news official. “Every justice has the right and opportunity to decide what he or she is going to do and announce it on their own. There has been no announcement from Justice Breyer,” Biden said as he met with a group of CEOs today to discuss his economic agenda. “Let him make whatever statement he’s going to make, and I’ll be happy to talk about it later.” Senate Democrats are expected to move quickly to confirm Biden’s supreme court nominee if Breyer does announce his retirement. The party controls the upper chamber and should be able to advance the nomination quickly, although a confirmation would not alter conservatives’ advantage on the bench. Even with Breyer’s replacement confirmed, the six conservative supreme court justices would still outnumber their three liberal colleagues. Meanwhile, officials from France, Germany, Russia and Ukraine met in Paris today, in the latest effort to de-escalate tensions along Ukraine’s border. The talks came two days before French President Emmanuel Macron is scheduled to speak to Russian President Vladimir Putin, as the west seeks to avoid a Russian invasion of Ukraine. Maanvi will have more coming up, so stay tuned. For recent supreme court vacancies, it has taken an average of 70 days to nominate someone to fill an open seat and an average of 68 days to get that person confirmed, per Axios. So, if Stephen Breyer formally announced his retirement tomorrow and the nomination process played out as expected, Joe Biden may have his supreme court nominee confirmed by mid-June. That means that Senate Democrats should have plenty of time to confirm Biden’s nominee before the midterm elections in November, when Republicans may regain control of the upper chamber. Stephen Breyer’s expected retirement is a perfectly timed political gift for Joe Biden, aware that choosing a supreme court justice is one of the most consequential decisions that any president can make. After a year in the White House, Biden was limping with a stalled legislative agenda, a tenacious pandemic and Vladimir Putin threatening Ukraine. He was a tired brand in desperate need of a relaunch, a tough ask at the age of 79. Breyer has provided it, instantly changing the conversation. “This has to feel like a political elixir right now,” observed Chuck Todd, host of MSNBC’s Meet the Press Daily show. A vacancy on the highest court enables Biden to rally the Democratic base and begin to cement a legacy that, despite early ambitions, had recently looked to be in jeopardy. Although the ideological balance of the court will not change, Biden could choose a young liberal who will serve for decades. Senator Joe Manchin applauded Stephen Breyer for his decades of supreme court service, and he said he looks forward to meeting with Joe Biden’s nominee to fill the liberal justice’s seat. “Justice Breyer has dedicated much of his life to upholding the rule of law and we are grateful for his service. I wish him a happy and fulfilling retirement,” Manchin said. He added, “I take my Constitutional responsibility to advise and consent on a nominee to the Supreme Court very seriously. I look forward to meeting with and evaluating the qualifications of President Biden’s nominee to fill this Supreme Court vacancy.” After news broke of Breyer’s expected retirement, some Democrats expressed concern that Manchin and/or Kyrsten Sinema may oppose Biden’s eventual nominee, as they have helped to block key components of the president’s legislative agenda. However, both Manchin and Sinema have generally deferred to the president when it comes to judicial nominees, and it seems likely they will support Biden’s choice. Some of the Black women who serve in Congress are also urging Joe Biden to nominate a Black woman to the supreme court, as the president has indicated he intends to do. “It is past time for a Black woman to be named to the Supreme Court,” progressive Congresswoman Cori Bush said on Twitter. One of Bush’s colleagues, Congresswoman Ayanna Pressley of Massachusetts, echoed that message, saying, “It’s time for a Black woman on the Supreme Court.” Both Bush and Pressley serve in the House, while the Senate will be the chamber confirming Biden’s supreme court nominee if Stephen Breyer does indeed announce his retirement. That means that no Black woman will have a say in confirming Biden’s nominee, as there are no Black women serving in the Senate right now. Kamala Harris had previously been the only Black woman in the Senate, but she left the chamber to serve as Biden’s vice-president. One reporter asked Jen Psaki whether the White House is concerned that a hypothetical supreme court nomination may distract from Joe Biden’s efforts to get the Build Back Better Act passed. While not confirming anything about Stephen Breyer’s expected retirement, Psaki said, “We have to walk and chew gum at the same time here in the White House.” The press secretary noted the administration has been busy for the past year working to fulfill commitments on multiple fronts, including the distribution of coronavirus vaccines, the protection of Ukraine’s sovereignty and the implementation of Biden’s economic agenda. “We are entirely capable of doing more than one thing at once,” Psaki said. White House press secretary Jen Psaki has dodged multiple questions about Joe Biden’s potential supreme court nominees and the handling of a theoretical confirmation process. Two reporters pressed Psaki on whether Kamala Harris would be considered for an open supreme court seat, and while not going into any detail, the press secretary seemed to downplay that possibility. “The president has every intention, as he said before, of running for reelection and for running for reelection with Vice President Harris on the ticket as his partner,” Psaki said. The White House press secretary, Jen Psaki, is now holding her daily briefing and taking questions about reports of Stephen Breyer’s plans to retire from the supreme court. Echoing her message on Twitter earlier today, Psaki emphasized that the White House would not go into detail about a potential nomination process until Breyer makes his plans officials. “It has always been the decision of any supreme court justice if and when they decide to retire, how they want to announce it, and that remains the case today. So we’re not going to have additional details,” Psaki said at the beginning of her briefing. But no surprise here: the first question from reporters was still about the Breyer news. A journalist asked Psaki whether Joe Biden intends to follow through on his campaign promise to nominate a Black woman to the court. “The president has stated and reiterated his commitment to nominating a Black woman to the supreme court and certainly stands by that,” Psaki replied. “For today, again, I’m just not going to be able to say anything about any specifics until, of course, Justice Breyer makes any announcement should he decide to make an announcement.” Joe Biden dodged questions about Stephen Breyer’s reported plans to retire from the supreme court, saying he would wait until the liberal justice made the news official. Meeting with CEOs at the White House to discuss his economic agenda, Biden initially ignored reporters’ shouted questions about Breyer before offering a comment. “Every justice has the right and opportunity to decide what he or she is going to do and announce it on their own. There has been no announcement from Justice Breyer,” Biden said moments ago. “Let him make whatever statement he’s going to make, and I’ll be happy to talk about it later,” the president added. Biden then kicked off his meeting with CEOs to discuss the Build Back Better Act, Democrats’ $1.75tn spending package that includes major investments in childcare, healthcare and climate initiatives. The bill has been blocked in the Senate due to opposition from Joe Manchin, but Democrats are looking to restart negotiations and pass a version of the legislation before the midterm elections in November. At the White House coronavirus team briefing a little earlier, Rochelle Walensky, director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, warned of taking a laissez-faire attitude towards the “milder” Omicron variant of Covid-19. “Milder does not mean mild,” Walensky said, of the coronavirus variant still raging in the US and many other parts of the world. She added: “Now is the time to do what we know works. Wear a mask, get vaccinated and get boosted.” At the briefing, it was announced that the US has donated over 400 million vaccine doses to 112 countries, marking a major milestone in the White House’s goal of donating 1.2 billion vaccine doses under Joe Biden’s direction. White House Covid-19 response coordinator Jeff Zients said that the total donation is four times higher than that of any other country. Zients also revealed that the country hit another major milestone this week, with 70% of eligible seniors, who are most at risk and most vulnerable, having now received their booster shot. And half of all eligible adults are now boosted. “This is significant progress as the doctors and data have made crystal clear. Vaccinations and boosters provide the best protection,” Zients said. Over the past week, the daily averages of cases and hospital admissions have decreased, according to Walensky. The current seven-day daily average of Covid-19 cases is approximately 692,400 cases per day, a 6% decrease over the previous week. The seven-day average of hospital admissions is around 19,800 per day, an 8% decrease over the previous seek. However, the seven-day average daily deaths are around 2,200 per day, an increase of around 21% over the previous week. “These data demonstrate that Covid-19 disease severity appears to be lower with the Omicron variant than with prior variants… Although it’s encouraging that Omicron appears to be causing less severe disease, it is important to remember that we are still facing a high overall burden of disease. Milder does not mean mild,” the director said. Hillary Clinton just called Stephen Breyer’s decision to retire “admirable” and his decades of service on the nine-member bench “distinguished”. Breyer was nominated by the former secretary of state and Democratic presidential candidate’s husband, Bill Clinton, when he was president. And Senate majority leader and New York Democratic Senator Chuck Schumer has voiced optimism that there won’t be any problem getting Biden’s pick to replace Breyer installed on the hallowed bench. Joe Biden nominated Ketanji Brown Jackson to the United States court of appeals for the District of Columbia circuit just last April and now the 51-year-old is widely considered to be a leading contender, if not the frontrunner, to succeed Stephen Breyer on the supreme court. She was confirmed shortly afterwards with unanimous Democratic support in the Senate and yea votes from three Republicans, Susan Collins of Maine, Lindsey Graham, of South Carolina, and Lisa Murkowski of Alaska. Jackson has served as a clerk to Breyer. She was a federal judge on the US district court for DC prior to joining the appeals circuit, and had been nominated to the district court by then-president Barack Obama in 2013. Here are some other names suggested by Natalie James, who’s running for the senate as a Democrat in Arkansas. Jackson attended Harvard and is married to Patrick Jackson, a surgeon who just so happens to be the twin brother of, stick with us here, the brother-in-law of Paul Ryan, Republican former House Speaker and running mate to Mitt Romney in the 2012 presidential election (lost to Obama-Biden, obv). Here’s where the day stands so far: Supreme court justice Stephen Breyer plans to announce his retirement, according to multiple reports. Breyer’s retirement will give Biden his first supreme court seat to fill, and the president has promised to select a Black woman for the role, which would mark a historic first for the US. Senate Democrats are expected to move quickly to confirm Biden’s supreme court nominee. The party controls the upper chamber and should be able to advance the nomination quickly, although a confirmation would not alter conservatives’ advantage on the bench. Even with Breyer’s replacement confirmed, the six conservative supreme court justices would still outnumber their three liberal colleagues. Officials from France, Germany, Russia and Ukraine are meeting in Paris today, in the latest effort to deescalate tensions along Ukraine’s border. The talks come two days before French President Emmanuel Macron is scheduled to speak to Russian President Vladimir Putin, as the west seeks to avoid a Russian invasion of Ukraine. The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned. Senate Democrats should theoretically be able to confirm Joe Biden’s nominee to the supreme court relatively easily, even with their narrow majority in the upper chamber. Since Senate Republicans changed chamber rules in 2017, supreme court nominations are not subject to the filibuster and thus require only a simple majority for confirmation. As long as Biden’s nominee can secure the support of every Democratic senator, she should be able to get confirmed. And even Senators Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema, who have presented problems for Biden’s legislative agenda, have generally deferred to the president when it comes to judicial nominees. Patty Murray, a member of the Senate Democratic leadership team, has already released a statement urging Joe Biden to keep his promise about nominating a Black woman to the supreme court. “The Court should reflect the diversity of our country, and it is unacceptable that we have never in our nation’s history had a Black woman sit on the Supreme Court of the United States—I want to change that,” Murray said. “There is no shortage of exceptional nominees who would serve with the judgment, qualifications, and ethical standards each Supreme Court Justice should embody—and Black women in America should be able to look at the highest court in the land and finally see themselves represented.” Murray added that she is “ready to move as quickly as possible to consider and confirm a highly qualified nominee who will break barriers and make history as the first Black woman on the Supreme Court of the United States”. Joe Biden has previously promised that he will select a Black woman to fill the first supreme court vacancy of his presidency. With that in mind, Ketanji Brown Jackson, who was confirmed to the DC circuit court last year, has been named as a likely contender for the nomination. Elie Mystal of the Nation noted that Leondra Kruger of the California supreme court Michelle Childs of the South Carolina district court are also likely to be considered for the job. Although Stephen Breyer’s retirement would give Joe Biden his first supreme court seat to fill, it would not alter the ideological split among justices. As of now, there are six conservative justices and three liberal justices, including Breyer, sitting on the bench. If Breyer retires, conservatives will maintain their significant advantage on the supreme court, although his departure will give Biden the opportunity to fill the seat with a younger liberal who may serve in the role for decades. If Stephen Breyer does indeed announce his retirement, the decision will have massive repercussions for the midterm elections in November. Senate Democrats will attempt to approve Joe Biden’s supreme court nominee before November, in case the party loses control of the upper chamber after the elections. If Republicans take control of the chamber, they could block Biden’s nominee from getting confirmed or even receiving a hearing, as Mitch McConnell did when Barack Obama nominated Merrick Garland to the court in 2016. The high stakes of a supreme court confirmation may also reenergize voters on both ends of the political spectrum, as it underscores the importance of Senate control. According to NBC News’ Pete Williams, who broke the news of Stephen Breyer’s planned retirement, the decision is not related to the supreme court justice’s health. Breyer will turn 84 later this year, and he has served on the court since 1994, so he may have simply decided that it’s time to step down, Williams said. The White House would not provide any additional information after reports emerged that liberal supreme court Justice Stephen Breyer intends to announce his retirement. “It has always been the decision of any Supreme Court Justice if and when they decide to retire, and how they want to announce it, and that remains the case today,” White House press secretary Jen Psaki said on Twitter. “We have no additional details or information to share from @WhiteHouse.” Joe Biden promised during the 2020 presidential campaign that he would nominate a Black woman to the supreme court, which would be a historic first for the US. In response to reports of Justice Stephen Breyer’s planned retirement, progressives celebrated the prospect of Biden securing another historic achievement before the midterm elections in November. Brian Fallon, executive director of the progressive group Demand Justice, said in a tweet, “Biden will get a chance to make history by putting the first Black woman on SCOTUS, and he will have many highly qualified candidates to choose from. One of those candidates, Judge Ketanji Brown Jackson, was supported by all 50 Dems and three Republicans for DC Circuit last year.” More major breaking news out of Washington: NBC News is reporting that liberal supreme court justice Stephen Breyer plans to retire. Breyer’s retirement would give Joe Biden his first seat to fill on the supreme court, which is tilted six to three in favor of conservatives. Breyer, who is 83, had faced calls from progressives to step down from the bench in order to allow Biden to select a new justice for the lifetime appointment. Joe Biden will meet with several CEOs this afternoon to discuss Democrats’ Build Back Better Act, the $1.75tn spending package that includes massive investments in healthcare, childcare and climate initiatives. “This afternoon, I’m meeting with CEOs who support passing my Build Back Better Agenda to discuss how it’ll invest in American workers, grow our economy, and lower inflation in the long-term,” Biden said on Twitter. Mary Barra of GM, Marc Benioff of Salesforce and Jim Farley of Ford are among those expected to be in attendance for the White House meeting, according to Punchbowl News. The meeting comes one month after Joe Manchin blocked the bill in the Senate because of his opposition to the cost of the proposal, although there have been recent signs that the negotiations are restarting. The White House has deflected questions about the talks, saying the president wants to remain private about the negotiations. “We’re just not going to speak to or confirm any conversations the president has with members of the Senate moving forward,” press secretary Jen Psaki said Monday. The US deputy secretary of state, Wendy Sherman, repeated a US warning that a Russian assault could start in the next few weeks but said Vladimir Putin might wait until after his attendance at the Winter Olympics in China. “I have no idea whether he’s made the ultimate decision but we certainly see every indication that he is going to use military force some time [between] now and middle of February,” Sherman said in an online discussion with the former Estonian president Kersti Kaljulaid. “We all are aware that the Beijing Olympics are beginning on February 4th, the opening ceremony, and President Putin expects to be there. I think that probably President Xi Jinping would not be ecstatic if Putin chose that moment to invade Ukraine. So that may affect his timing and his thinking.” The state department has just announced that secretary of state Antony Blinken will hold a press briefing this afternoon, amid escalating tensions between Russia and Ukraine. Blinken will speak to reporters at 12pm ET, so journalists will have a chance to ask the cabinet secretary questions in about an hour. Blinken has previously warned that any movement of Russian forces into Ukraine would be met with a severe response from the US and its allies. “If a single additional Russian force goes into Ukraine in an aggressive way, as I said, that would trigger a swift, a severe and a united response from us and from Europe,” Blinken said Sunday. The US and its Nato partners are considering sending thousands more troops to allied countries in eastern Europe, due to escalating fears of a Russian invasion of Ukraine. CNN reports: The deployments -- numbering approximately 1,000 personnel from each -- would be similar to the forward battle groups currently stationed in the Baltic States and Poland, two defense officials said. Among the countries considering accepting the deployments are Romania, Bulgaria and Hungary, all three officials said. No final decisions have been made. The US and UK are among those considering the new, pre-invasion deployments, but not all 30 NATO members are willing, according to a European diplomat. Therefore, the US is in discussions to send the additional forces on a bilateral basis or, as one official described it, as a ‘coalition of the willing.’ Asked yesterday about potential troop deployments to Ukraine, White House press secretary Jen Psaki said the administration was focused on working in conjunction with Nato in all military efforts. “We’re working through Nato to plus-up support in our eastern flank countries. That is what Nato is there for, and we are committed to the sanctity of that alliance,” Psaki said. “Just to be clear, there is no intention or interest or desire by the president to send troops to Ukraine. Nato is a forum to support our eastern flank partners and countries, and that’s what the focus has been on.” Before the meeting in Paris, Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, said Moscow was willing to take unspecified “appropriate measures” if its security demands were not met. The US is due to give a written answer later this week. Russia wants assurances that Ukraine and Georgia will never be allowed to join Nato and has called for a pullout of Nato forces from eastern Europe, including Romania and Bulgaria, and a return to 1997 levels of deployment. Joe Biden’s US administration has dismissed the demands, which amount to a cold war-style zone of influence for Russia, as a non-starter. The White House has placed 8,500 troops on heightened alert to deploy to Nato countries in eastern Europe if necessary. On Tuesday President Biden said he would consider personal sanctions against Vladimir Putin if Russia further invaded Ukraine, as well as “enormous consequences” that would damage the Russian economy. Senior officials from France, Germany, Russia and Ukraine are meeting in Paris today, in the latest effort to deescalate tensions along Ukraine’s border. The talks come two days before French President Emmanuel Macron is scheduled to speak to Russian President Vladimir Putin about the situation in Ukraine. However, Russia’s outrage over allied countries’ shipments of weapons to Ukraine make any kind of deescalation seem unlikely at this moment. Another US shipment of equipment of munitions and equipment arrived in Ukraine yesterday, as part of allied countries’ security assistance to Kyiv. Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, accused the West of supplying Ukraine with “lethal weapons” and told members of his country’s parliament that Russia “would not sit idly by in this situation”. Russia does not currently have enough troops on the border with Ukraine to carry out a full-scale military invasion and occupation of the country, according to western experts and senior officials in Kyiv. They believe a Russian attack to capture most or all of Ukraine in the near future is unlikely, despite an unprecedented buildup of about 125,000 Russian soldiers, and military exercises due to take place next month in Belarus, within striking distance of the capital. In an article published on Monday, Ukraine’s former defence minister Andriy Zagorodnyuk said the Kremlin has not yet amassed the several hundred thousand troops necessary for a large-scale operation, on the border and in Russian territory behind the frontline. “If Russia was conducting preparations for a large-scale invasion, it would have been much more noticeable,” Zagorodnyuk said, in a paper written with colleagues from his Kyiv thinktank, the Centre for Defence Strategies. Read the Guardian’s full report: Greetings from Washington, live blog readers. Tensions continue to escalate over Ukraine, as the US and its allies prepare for the possibility of a Russian invasion that would have massive reverberations around the world. Joe Biden said yesterday that Vladimir Putin continues to build up his forces along Ukraine’s border, adding that a Russian attack “would be the largest invasion since” the second world war. Meanwhile, another US shipment of equipment and munitions arrived in Ukraine yesterday, as the country’s allies offer them assistance in the face of Russian aggression. Biden’s efforts to keep the alliance together are the latest test of his leadership. The AP reports: Biden is trying to pull off the kind of alliance on the international front that has eluded him on his domestic agenda as he faces defeats on voting rights and his signature $2.2tn domestic and climate spending bill. Now, he faces a complicated and globally more dangerous task: keeping the West unified as it faces what White House officials say is an increasingly likely further invasion of Ukrainian territory ordered by Russian President Vladimir Putin. The pileup of difficult moments is providing a major test of the twin pillars of Biden’s 2020 candidacy: that he could get things done competently at home and restore America’s standing in the world after Donald Trump’s volatile four years in the White House. The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned.Two men have been taken to hospital after a double shooting near Wigan. Gunshots were fired at a property in Hawthorn Grove, Leigh at about 5.45pm on Wednesday evening before a second shooting shortly after in Shadwell Grove. Greater Manchester police said a man in his twenties was taken to hospital with gunshot wounds. Another man, in his thirties, was then taken to hospital after the second incident. While police believe the shootings may be linked, details of exactly what happened were yet to be confirmed. Det Supt Jamie Daniels said: “We are in the very early stages of our investigation into these incidents but we believe they could be linked. “We have officers in Leigh carrying out extensive inquiries to establish exactly what has happened. “Two people are in hospital with gunshot wounds and I can assure people that we will leave no stone unturned as we work to find out who is responsible. “We understand the community will be concerned and, as such, we have deployed extra patrols to reassure them. “If you have information that could help us with our investigation, please come forward. Anything said can be done so in confidence or anonymously.” Witnesses told the Manchester Evening News that a police helicopter was seen circling the area. One resident said: “There were a lot of police cars and a helicopter flying around just after 6pm. “My family and all the neighbours were very worried at seeing the number of police in the area.”Thanks for joining us and that’s all from me, Samantha Lock, for today. We will be launching another live Covid blog a little later today but in the meantime you can catch up with all the latest developments here. Thanks for following along and, as always, I appreciate your tips and reader insights. You can email me at samantha.lock@theguardian.com or via Twitter @Samantha__Lock If you’ve just joined us here on the Covid blog, here is a wrap of all the latest international developments: Europe: Italy will ease Covid restrictions for all visitors from European Union countries starting from 1 February, its health ministry said on Wednesday. Moderna has started testing an Omicron-specific Covid booster in healthy adults. In Denmark, the government announced it will scrap most pandemic restrictions next week, even as neighbouring Sweden extended its own measures for another fortnight. Police in Berlin have been authorised to crack down on protesters wearing badges resembling yellow star badges and other symbols associated with the Nazi era at demonstrations against vaccine mandates or other pandemic restrictions. Story here. The UK has reported a further 102,292 Covid infections and 346 deaths within 28 days of a positive test, according to the latest data from the government’s coronavirus dashboard. That compares with 94,326 cases and 439 fatalities in the 24 hours prior. Sweden will extend its current pandemic measures by another two weeks, the minister for health said on Wednesday, as Omicron is spreading at record speed. The curbs mean bars and restaurants have to close at 11pm and there is a cap of 500 people inside larger indoor venues. As pressure on hospitals eases, Austria will end its lockdown for people not fully vaccinated against the coronavirus on Monday, though some restrictions on public life will remain. Middle East: Israel has broadened its eligibility for a fourth dose of the Covid vaccine to include adults under 60 with underlying medical conditions, their carers and others over 18 at significant risk of exposure to coronavirus. United States: The United States has donated more than 400m vaccine doses to 112 countries, marking a major milestone in the White House’s goal of donating 1.2bn vaccine doses under president Joe Biden’s direction. The Americas have seen their highest daily Covid caseloads since the pandemic began, and Omicron has clearly become the predominant variant, the Pan American Health Organization (PAHO) said. Over in Kansas, US, a doctor-lawmaker who prescribed a parasitic worm treatment for Covid-19 symptoms has acknowledged that he is under investigation by the state medical board. Conservative Republican state Senator Mark Steffen disclosed the Kansas Board of Healing Arts’ investigation of him during a Senate committee hearing. He was testifying in favour of a bill that would require pharmacists to fill prescriptions for both the anti-worm treatment ivermectin and the anti-malaria drug hydroxychloroquine for potentially dangerous off-label uses in treating Covid-19, the Associated Press reports. During the committee’s two days of hearings, several Kansas doctors reported having trouble getting ivermectin prescriptions filled by pharmacists. Committee Chair Richard Hilderband, a conservative Republican from southeast Kansas, said he expects the bill to win the panel’s approval after it is debated next week. “That is something between a doctor and a patient, on what their best way forward on care is,” Hilderbrand said. While medical groups and health experts have worked to stamp out the use of ivermectin for treating Covid-19, hospitals around the nation have faced lawsuits over their refusal to give it to patients. Ivermectin is approved by the US Food and Drug Administration to treat infections of lice, roundworms and other tiny parasites in humans. The FDA has tried to debunk claims that animal-strength versions of the drug can help fight Covid-19, warning that large doses can cause nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, seizures, delirium and even death. Speaking of Australia and the surrounding Pacific area, Australian and British and navy ships arrived in Tonga on Wednesday and attempted to deliver contactless aid ashore to avoid spreading Covid in a nation which has so far never had an outbreak. Nearly two dozen sailors aboard the Australian ship HMAS Adelaide were reported to be infected on Tuesday, raising fears they could bring the coronavirus to the small Pacific archipelago devastated by an undersea volcanic eruption and a tsunami on 15 January. Since the pandemic began, Tonga has reported just a single case of Covid-19. It’s one of the few countries in the world currently completely virus free. About 61% of Tongans are fully vaccinated, according to Our World in Data. Meanwhile, the US announced it would provide an additional $2.5 million in humanitarian assistance to Tonga through the US Agency for International Development. The aid was in addition to an initial pledge of $100,000. The Australian government said its ship had completed the 3,300-km (2,050-mile) voyage from Brisbane and would deliver supplies without contact with the local population to avoid infections. “We appreciate the decision of the government of Tonga to enable HMAS Adelaide to dock and offload the humanitarian and medical supplies, and the high priority it has placed on Covid safety throughout the recovery process,” the statement said. “The ship is undertaking an entirely contactless delivery of humanitarian assistance and disaster relief supplies.” Hello it’s Samantha Lock back with you on the blog as my colleague Tom Ambrose calls it a night in London. I’ll be bringing you all the international headlines from over here in Sydney, Australia. Let’s start with a quick look at how Covid is unfolding Down Under. Australia’s most populous state of NSW has recorded 29 deaths and 17,316 cases while Victoria recorded 15 Covid deaths and 13,755 cases. Moderna has started testing an Omicron-specific Covid booster in healthy adults. The company announced on Wednesday that the first participant had received a dose. Earlier this week, competitor Pfizer began a similar study of its own reformulated shots. The Associated Press reported: It’s not clear whether global health authorities will order a change to the vaccine recipe in the wake of the hugely contagious omicron variant. The original vaccines still offer good protection against death and severe illness. Studies in the US and elsewhere show a booster dose strengthens that protection and improves the chances of avoiding even a milder infection. Moderna pointed to a small study published in the New England Journal of Medicine on Wednesday that showed antibodies able to target omicron persisted for six months after a booster dose, although the levels were dropping. Moderna’s new study will enrol about 600 people who already have received either two doses of the company’s original shots or two plus a booster dose. All the volunteers will receive a dose of the experimental omicron-matched version. Brazil has reported 224,567 new cases of coronavirus in the past 24 hours, breaking the country’s previous record for daily infections, according to data released by the health ministry. The South American country also reported 570 deaths from Covid. The previous record for daily cases was 204,854 on January 19. Brazil has now registered a total of 24,535,884 cases and 624,413 deaths. Italy will ease Covid restrictions for all visitors from European Union countries starting from 1 February, its health ministry said on Wednesday. Minister of health Roberto Speranza has signed an order stating that travellers from EU countries will only need a “green pass,” it said in statement. The Green Pass, is a document showing proof of Covid immunity through vaccination, previous infection or a negative test. On 14 December, Italy had ruled that all EU visitors had to take a test before departure, amid concerns over the spread of the Omicron variant of the coronavirus. According to the ministry, Speranza’s order also renews the go-ahead for travel to a number of non-European tourist spots, widening it to six other destinations: Cuba, Singapore, Turkey, Thailand (limited to the island of Phuket), Oman and French Polynesia. In September 2021, Italy had set up these so-called Covid-free tourist corridors: Maldives, Seychelles, Mauritius, Egypt (but only Sharm El Sheikh and Marsa Alam), Dominican Republic and Aruba. Israel has broadened its eligibility for a fourth dose of the Covid vaccine to include adults under 60 with underlying medical conditions, their carers and others over 18 at significant risk of exposure to coronavirus. An official statement said the health ministry’s director-general had approved the measures. Earlier this month, as the Omicron variant swept the country, Israel began offering a fourth dose, meaning a second booster, of the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine to people over 60. The United States has donated more than 400m vaccine doses to 112 countries, marking a major milestone in the White House’s goal of donating 1.2bn vaccine doses under president Joe Biden’s direction. In a press briefing on Wednesday, the White House Covid-19 response coordinator, Jeff Zients, said the donation is four times larger than that of any other country. Zients also revealed that the country hit another major milestone this week, with 70% of eligible seniors in the US having now received their booster shot. Half of all eligible adults in the country are now boosted. “This is significant progress, as the doctors and data have made crystal clear. Vaccinations and boosters provide the best protection,” Zients said. The daily averages of cases and hospital admissions have fallen over the past week, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). The current seven-day daily average of Covid-19 cases is approximately 692,400 cases per day, a 6% decrease from the previous week, while the seven-day average of hospital admissions is around 19,800 per day, an 8% decrease. Also in Denmark, the government announced today that it will scrap most pandemic restrictions next week, even as neighbouring Sweden extended its own measures for another fortnight. Danish prime minister Mette Frederiksen said that as of 1 February, Danes will enjoy free access to restaurants, cafes, museums and nightclubs, while mask use will cease to be mandatory. “We say goodbye to the restrictions and welcome the life we knew before” the pandemic, Frederiksen said. “As of 1 February, Denmark will be open.” Denmark currently requires face masks on public transportation, in shops, for standing clients in restaurant indoor areas, and for people entering hospitals, health care facilities and retirement homes. As of 1 February, the government will only recommend mask use in hospitals, health care facilities and homes for the elderly. Frederiksen said that while the Omicron variant is surging in Denmark, it is not placing a heavy burden on the health system and the country has a high vaccination rate. “It may seem strange that we want to remove restrictions given the high infection rates,” she said. “But fewer people become seriously ill.” Hello. Tom Ambrose here, taking over the global Covid live blog for the next couple of hours. I’ll be bringing you all the latest coronavirus news as it happens. Let’s start with the news that the BA.2 subvariant of the Omicron coronavirus variant appears more contagious than the more common BA.1 sub-lineage, Danish health minister Magnus Heunicke has said. “There is no evidence that the BA.2 variant causes more disease, but it must be more contagious,” Heunicke told a news conference today. The BA.1 lineage currently accounts for 98% of all cases globally but in Denmark has been pushed aside by BA.2, which became the dominant strain in the second week of January. The UK Health Security Agency has designated BA.2 a variant under investigation, saying it could have a growth advantage. Preliminary calculations suggest BA.2 could be 1.5 times more infectious than BA.1, Denmark’s top infectious disease authority, Statens Serum Institut (SSI), said in a note on Wednesday. However, an initial analysis by the institute showed no difference in the risk of hospitalisation for BA.2 compared to BA.1. Here is a quick recap of some of the main developments from today so far: Police in Berlin have been authorised to crack down on protesters wearing badges resembling yellow star badges and other symbols associated with the Nazi era at demonstrations against vaccine mandates or other pandemic restrictions. Story here. The Americas have seen their highest daily Covid caseloads since the pandemic began, and Omicron has clearly become the predominant variant, the Pan American Health Organization (PAHO) said. There were more than 8 million new cases, 32% higher than the previous week, while fatalities throughout the region increased by 37%, with 18,000 new deaths caused by Covid. The US continues to have the highest number of new infections, although cases decreased by nearly one million over the last week, the regional health agency said on Wednesday. Mexico’s southern states have seen new infections triple and Brazil has seen new cases surge 193% over the last seven days, PAHO said. The UK has reported a further 102,292 Covid infections and 346 deaths within 28 days of a positive test, according to the latest data from the government’s coronavirus dashboard. That compares with 94,326 cases and 439 fatalities in the 24 hours prior. Lower vaccination take-up among some ethnic groups in England contributes to an increased risk of Covid-19 death, particularly for people from black African and Caribbean backgrounds, new ONS research suggests. [see 1.08pm]. Sweden will extend its current pandemic measures by another two weeks, the minister for health said on Wednesday, as Omicron is spreading at record speed. The curbs mean bars and restaurants have to close at 11pm and there is a cap of 500 people inside larger indoor venues. “We have an extremely high level of spread,” the health minister Lena Hallengren told a news conference. “The restrictions must remain in place for two weeks. If everything goes as planned and if the situation allows, the restrictions will be lifted after that.” [see 12.20pm]. In the UK, adults aged 18 to 69 who had received their first two vaccines appeared to be 41.1% less likely to report experiencing long Covid symptoms if they contracted the virus, according to new data from the Office for National Statistics. Story here. The lower house of the German parliament began debating proposals to either require or robustly encourage residents to be vaccinated, as a new daily record of 164,000 Covid cases was reported. [see 11.36am]. As pressure on hospitals eases, Austria will end its lockdown for people not fully vaccinated against the coronavirus on Monday, though some restrictions on public life will remain. Since 15 November, those not vaccinated against the coronavirus have been under lockdown restrictions, meaning they are only allowed to leave their homes for a limited number of reasons such as shopping for essentials or working. The measure, which was suspended over Christmas, has been criticised as very difficult to enforce. However, while that restriction on their movement will be lifted, the unvaccinated will remain barred from taking part in a range of leisure activities including eating in restaurants or shopping for non-essential items. [see 11.19am]. German police have been told to detain Covid protesters trivialising the Holocaust in acts to be classified as “secondary antisemitism”, our Berlin bureau chief Philip Oltermann reports. Police in Berlin have been authorised to crack down on protesters wearing badges resembling the yellow Judenstern (Jews’ star) and other symbols associated with the Nazi era at demonstrations against vaccine mandates or other pandemic restrictions. According to an internal update by the Berlin police antisemitism commissioner, first reported by the newspaper BZ Berlin, “the use of adapted ‘Jewish stars’ at gatherings can now be assumed to be a fundamental disturbance of public peace”. Police in the German capital have been instructed to document, remove and confiscate the yellow star badges, which some German vaccine sceptics have taken to wearing with the superimposed words “ungeimpft” (“unvaccinated”) in order to draw a parallel between modern governments’ treatment of those who decline to take a jab against Covid-19 and the systematic stigmatisation of Jewish citizens in the Nazi era. The police’s internal memo clarifies that wearing the blue and white Star of David, classified as a purely religious symbol, remains legal at demonstrations. In addition, police are also instructed to take action against other analogies that trivialise the Holocaust, which are to be classified as forms of “secondary antisemitism”. Read the full story here: Germany to crack down on Covid protesters in yellow star badges A quick snap from Reuters. The Americas have seen their highest daily Covid caseloads since the pandemic began, and Omicron has clearly become the predominant variant, the Pan American Health Organization (PAHO) said. There were more than 8 million new cases, 32% higher than the previous week, while fatalities throughout the region increased by 37%, with 18,000 new deaths caused by Covid. The United States continues to have the highest number of new infections, although cases decreased by nearly one million over the last week, the regional health agency said on Wednesday. Mexico’s southern states have seen new infections triple and Brazil has seen new cases surge 193% over the last seven days, PAHO said. Children in the Americas are facing the worst educational crisis ever seen in the region, with millions of children yet to return to classes, according to PAHO, which recommended that countries try to get them safely back to school to protect their social, mental and physical wellbeing. It urged parents to get their children vaccinated. Many countries have already authorised and are safely administering Covid vaccines to adolescents, PAHO said. Last week the WHO’s expert group on immunisation authorised the Covid vaccine developed by Pfizer for children aged five to 12, offering a roadmap for countries to roll out vaccines for them, the regional agency said. The UK has reported a further 102,292 Covid infections and 346 deaths within 28 days of a positive test, according to the latest data from the government’s coronavirus dashboard. That compares with 94,326 cases and 439 fatalities in the 24 hours prior. Plastic PPE waste is to be given a second life as fresh PPE products or fuels as part of a new UK research project, PA reports. Since the start of the pandemic, 8.4 million tonnes of plastic PPE waste, including respirators and masks, have been generated from 193 countries, and the majority has been dumped in landfill. Now a partnership between Heriot-Watt University and PPE maker Globus Group will recycle some of the rubbish in a world-first collaboration. Dr Aimaro Sanna, an assistant professor in chemical and process engineering at the Edinburgh university, said: As the world strives to reduce its landfill, ocean impact and carbon emissions, this project is a significant step towards addressing the increased waste generated during the global pandemic. At the moment much of the plastic PPE waste cannot be recycled mechanically, but the project between the university and the manufacturer will turn used plastic protective equipment into pyrolysis oil, which can then be refined into new commercial products like new PPE products or fuels. The project will run for two years. Sanna said: Initially, the research will help to recycle over 100 tonnes of product generated by the manufacturing process every year – the equivalent to 10kg of waste every hour. However, our hope is that this new process will be adopted more widely. Many countries have been unable to process their plastic waste PPE properly. Our groundbreaking research aims to address these challenges providing an exemplar technique for application globally. Since the start of the coronavirus crisis, Globus Group has been producing 1bn masks for healthcare trusts across the UK, but the manufacturing process results in 7g of waste material per mask. It is hoped the project will develop a process for cost and energy efficient recycling and repurposing of the PPE waste. As part of the scheme to cut down on PPE waste, Globus Group has implemented thermal heating technology at its Alpha Solway factory in Golborne, near Manchester. The machine heats and compacts the plastic polypropylene into large, reusable blocks. They are then collected and processed, providing raw materials to create new PPE products and reducing its waste by around 85%. Pete Lee, the head of quality at the company, said the machine “is a fundamental part of our process to repurpose and utilise waste material to achieve a circular economy” and said the technology “will be a real gamechanger in the way we tackle our PPE waste”. Many EU countries are opting to reopen despite record infections as the World Health Organization suggests Omicron may signal a more manageable phase of pandemic, our Europe correspondent Jon Henley reports. The Netherlands has lifted its toughest Covid controls, Denmark is set to remove all restrictions within days and France will begin easing curbs next week, as many – but not all – EU countries move to reopen despite record infection numbers. The moves come as data shows hospital and intensive care admissions are not surging in line with cases, and after the World Health Organization suggested the Omicron variant – which studies show is more contagious but usually less severe for vaccinated people – may signal a new, more manageable phase in the pandemic. Dutch bars, restaurants and museums were allowed to reopen on Wednesday after the prime minister, Mark Rutte, said the government was “consciously looking for the limits of what is possible” as case numbers continue to hit new daily highs. Intensive care admissions and deaths, however, have been falling in the Netherlands, and the health minister, Ernst Kuipers, said a decision to prolong restrictive measures would have risked “harming our health and our society”. Cafes, bars and restaurants closed since mid-December can now reopen with reduced capacity and until 10pm as long as customers have a Covid pass, with cinemas, theatres, museums and sports events also allowed to welcome the public back. The Danish government, which two weeks ago allowed cinemas and music venues to reopen after a month’s closure, also announced on Wednesday plans to scrap remaining domestic coronavirus controls from 1 February. The move – which must be approved by parliament – will allow nightclubs to reopen, restaurants to serve alcohol after 10pm, and shops to lift limits on customer numbers. Vaccine passes will no longer be needed, and commuters may travel without wearing masks. Like the Netherlands, Denmark has set successive recent daily infection records But while coronavirus-related hospitalisations have risen, health authorities say between 30%-40% of patients with a positive test are in hospital for other reasons than Covid. “There has been a decoupling in the trend earlier in the epidemic, between increasing infection and increase in Covid hospitalisations,” the government’s expert advisory panel said. The number of Covid patients in intensive care has nearly halved since early January. Belgium last week announced a slight easing of its restrictions from Friday despite record infections, with bars and restaurants allowed to stay open until midnight and indoor activities such as play areas and bowling alleys to reopen. The country’s current Omicron wave is not expected to peak for a fortnight, but hospital admissions are rising at a far slower rate than infections and the number of patients in intensive care is falling. “The situation is manageable,” said Steven Van Gucht, a virologist. France on Tuesday reported a new daily record of 501,635 new cases, but again, while hospital admissions have risen, only about half as many patients are in intensive care as during previous waves, and the number has been falling since 12 January. The health minister, Olivier Véran, said the peak of the current coronavirus wave should be reached within the next few days, while the prime minister, Jean Castex, last week announced a timetable for lifting Covid restrictions from 2 February. Castex said France’s vaccine pass, required since Monday to enter restaurants, cinemas and other public venues, would allow audience capacity limits for concert halls and sports and other events to be lifted, with working from home also no longer mandatory for many employees and face masks not needed outside. The full story is here: Netherlands lifts toughest Covid curbs with Denmark and France set to follow This report is from the PA news agency. Lower vaccination take-up among some ethnic groups in England contributes to an increased risk of Covid-19 death, particularly for people from black African and Caribbean backgrounds, new research suggests. Most ethnic minority groups have continued to experience greater rates of death involving Covid during the third wave of the virus compared with people identifying as white British. These differences have been attributed mostly to social and demographic factors, including geography, type of residence and health. But levels of vaccination coverage are now contributing to the elevated risk of death observed in some groups, according to the Office for National Statistics (ONS). It is the first time vaccination take-up has been linked in this way with estimates of mortality rates. Between 13 June and 1 December 2021, the risk of death involving Covid for black African males in England was 1.4 times greater than that for white British males, after adjusting for age, demographic factors and certain pre-existing conditions. But after also adjusting for vaccination status - to reflect if someone has received a first, second or third dose – this difference was found to have been eliminated. A similar pattern was evident for black Caribbean males, with the risk 1.7 times greater before adjusting for vaccination status, but no excess risk after. For black African and Caribbean females, the risk of Covid death before adjusting for vaccination was estimated at 1.8 and 2.1 times greater than white British females respectively – but again, this excess risk disappeared after accounting for vaccine take-up. The figures suggest that, once adjusted for vaccination status, there is no evidence that the risk of death involving Covid-19 is greater for people from these ethnic groups than for the white British ethnic group, the ONS said. People identifying as black African and Caribbean have the lowest vaccination rates among people over the age of 50, however. Differences in vaccination coverage between these two groups and the white British group “explain a large part of the excess risk”, the ONS added. Overall the ONS found that, during the third wave of the virus, the fully adjusted risk of Covid-19 mortality – including vaccination status – is similar to the white British group for all ethnic groups, except the Bangladeshi group (2.2 times greater for males and 2.1 times greater for females) and for Pakistani men (1.2 times greater). Vahe Nafilyan, senior statistician in the ONS health and life events division, said: Today’s analysis shows that since the vaccination programme began, the risk of death from Covid-19 has continued to be higher in most ethnic minority groups than in the white British ethnic group. As already highlighted in our analyses of earlier periods, these differences in mortality are largely explained by socio-demographic and economic factors and health. For the first time, we show that the lower vaccination coverage in some ethnic groups also contributes to the elevated risk of Covid-19 death, particularly in the black African and black Caribbean groups. A further 145 deaths from Covid were registered by National Records of Scotland, the official statistics agency, over last week, as the country saw a fresh peak of fatalities linked to the pandemic. NRS said the 145 deaths recorded in the seven days to Sunday 23 January – including where Covid-19 was mentioned on the death certificate as a suspected or probable factor – was 10 higher than the previous week. That brings Scotland’s total under that measure to 12,283 fatalities. These fatalities, while lower than the last peak of 167 weekly deaths during the Delta wave in September, and well below the 663 recorded in April 2020, are continuing to rise while the overall number of Omicron cases in Scotland have fallen. This is due to a lag between initial infections leading to hospitalisations and deaths, which now run at a much lower ratio due to the vaccinations programme, much more successful hospital treatments and the lower lethality of the Omicron variant. Related: Scotland to relax strict work-from-home guidance from Monday Sweden will extend its current pandemic measures by another two weeks, the minister for health said on Wednesday, as the Omicron variant is spreading at record speed. The curbs mean bars and restaurants have to close at 11pm and there is a cap of 500 people inside larger indoor venues. “We have an extremely high level of spread,” the health minister Lena Hallengren told a news conference. “The restrictions must remain in place for two weeks. If everything goes as planned and if the situation allows, the restrictions will be lifted after that.” Sweden has seen some 270,000 confirmed cases in the last seven days but limited testing means the health agency believes the real number could be over half a million. The spread of the virus has put strain on the healthcare system but much less than during previous waves. The number of patients treated in intensive care have been between 90 and 120 people for the past four weeks. Sweden stood out early in the pandemic by opting against lockdowns, instead relying on voluntary measures focused on social distancing and good hygiene. It has seen deaths per capita much higher than Nordic neighbours but lower than most European countries that opted for lockdowns. In the UK, adults aged 18 to 69 who had received their first two vaccines appeared to be 41.1% less likely to report experiencing long Covid symptoms if they contracted the virus, according to new data from the Office for National Statistics. This figure is based on data up to 30 November 2021 and a comparison with people in the same range who were unvaccinated, the ONS said. “Longer follow-up time is needed to assess the impact of booster doses and the Omicron variant,” the ONS added. The lower house of the German parliament prepared to debate proposals to either require or robustly encourage residents to be vaccinated on Wednesday, as a new daily record of 164,000 Covid cases was reported, Reuters reports. Around 75% of the population have received at least one dose of a vaccine – less than in western European peers such as France, Italy or Spain, where the equivalent figures are 80%, 83% and 86% – and the vaccination campaign is stuttering. The proposals being debated include requiring all adult residents to be vaccinated against Covid, or only those over the age of 50, or merely requiring all those who have not been vaccinated to receive counselling. Early on in the coronavirus pandemic, Germany was more successful than many of its peers in limiting infections through case tracking, strict lockdowns and quarantines. But public discontent has been growing, with regular protests by those opposed to ongoing restrictions that exclude the unvaccinated from many indoor activities. The highly contagious Omicron variant has sent cases soaring in recent weeks. The 166 deaths recorded on Wednesday took Germany’s cumulative toll to 117,126. The German Hospital Federation chairman, Gerald Gass, said the number of patients in normal hospital wards with Covid had increased significantly. In North Rhine-Westphalia, Germany’s most populous state, the number rose by 37% in a week. “This development will affect all federal states shortly,” Gass told Reuters, adding that he was in favour of compulsory vaccination while the end of the pandemic was not in sight. Protests were expected in front of the Reichstag parliament building before and during the debate, with around 1,600 police officers due to be deployed to the area, the broadcaster RBB reported, citing Berlin police. Opponents of compulsory vaccination say it violates the second article of the constitution, which guarantees citizens control over their own bodies. According to an Allensbach survey published on Wednesday by the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung newspaper, the share of those who could imagine themselves taking part in protests against anti-Covid measures had doubled to 12% in the space of a year. As pressure on hospitals eases, Austria will end its lockdown for people not fully vaccinated against the coronavirus on Monday, though some restrictions on public life will remain, Reuters reports. New daily Covid infections are rising, driven by the Omicron variant, and hit a new record above 30,000 on Wednesday, the health minister Wolfgang Mückstein told a news conference. He added that they would peak in the next two weeks at around 35,000 to 40,000. The occupancy rate of hospital and intensive-care beds, however, has been falling, Mückstein said, leading experts to view the lockdown for the unvaccinated as no longer necessary: We came to the conclusion that the lockdown for unvaccinated people in Austria is only justifiable in the event of the threat of an imminent over-burdening of intensive-care capacity. Since 15 November, those not vaccinated against the coronavirus have been under lockdown restrictions, meaning they are only allowed to leave their homes for a limited number of reasons such as shopping for essentials or working. The measure, which was suspended over Christmas, has been criticised as very difficult to enforce. However, while that restriction on their movement will be lifted, the unvaccinated will remain barred from taking part in a range of leisure activities including eating in restaurants or shopping for non-essential items. Those measures will continue to form part of government efforts to increase the vaccination rate, which is among the lowest in western Europe. Good morning from London. I’m Lucy Campbell, I’ll be bringing you all the latest global developments on the coronavirus pandemic for the next few hours. Please feel free to get in touch with me as I work if you have a story or tips to share! Your thoughts are always welcome. Email: lucy.campbell@theguardian.com Twitter: @lucy_campbell_ Two-thirds of people recently infected with the Omicron variant say they had Covid previously, according to a new British study. Almost two out of every three Covid-positive participants reported having had Covid before, according to the findings published by the Imperial College London. “Among the 3,582 swab-positive individuals reporting whether or not they had had previous infection, 2,315 (64.6%) reported a confirmed previous infection,” the report read. The prevalence of Covid in the UK has fallen overall in recent weeks, but has risen in school-age children, say researchers who have warned the uptick could pose a risk to adults. The latest data from the React-1 study, which is based on more than 100,000 swabs from randomly selected individuals in England collected between 5 and 20 January this year, shows that the overall weighted prevalence of Covid was 4.41% Around nine in 10 young teenagers in the UK are likely to have Covid-19 antibodies, new analysis by the Office of National Statistics (ONS) suggests. The ONS figures are based on a sample of blood test results. The self-isolation period in Wales is to be cut to a minimum of five full days, the Welsh government has said. The new rules come in to force from Friday 28 January, and mean people will be able to end their isolation as long as they have two negative lateral flow tests on days five and six. Denmark aims to scrap all remaining Covid-19 restrictions next week, the most far-reaching easing of curbs yet seen among the Nordic countries. A wave of Covid record setting is going across central and Eastern Europe. Among countries setting new daily records for cases today are Germany, Poland, Hungary, the Czech Republic, Bulgaria, Russia and Romania. Russia has cut the isolation time for Covid contacts from 14 days to seven. Germany’s lower house of parliament is discussing the proposal to make vaccination mandatory later today. Options before lawmakers include requiring all adult residents to be vaccinated against Covid, or only those above 50, or merely requiring all those who have not been vaccinated to receive counselling. The Australian navy’s largest ship has docked at disaster-stricken Tonga and was allowed to unload humanitarian supplies in the South Pacific nation – despite crew members being infected with Covid-19, officials have said. South Korea’s daily new coronavirus cases has exceeded 13,000 for the first time, according to data from the Korea Disease Control and Prevention Agency. The US Department of Labor said it will withdraw its Covid-19 vaccine-and-testing requirement for large employers after the supreme court blocked the rule. It is a very lively day in British politics, as Downing Street awaits the delivery of Sue Gray’s report on No 10’s alleged lockdown parties. Andrew Sparrow is, of course, following that keenly for us. Lucy Campbell will be here shortly to continue this live blog, with all the latest coronavirus news from the UK and around the world. I will see you again tomorrow. Around nine in 10 young teenagers in the UK are likely to have Covid-19 antibodies, new analysis by the Office of National Statistics (ONS) suggests. The estimates, which are for children aged 12 to 15, range from 88% in Wales to 91.7% in Scotland, with 90.9% in England and 90.7% in Northern Ireland. It is the first time figures have been published for this age group. Ian Jones reports for PA Media that the presence of coronavirus antibodies suggests someone has had the infection in the past or has been vaccinated. It takes between two and three weeks after infection or vaccination for the body to make enough antibodies to fight the virus. The ONS figures are based on a sample of blood test results for the week beginning 3 January 2022. The very high level of antibodies among young teenagers reflects both the prevalence of coronavirus in this age group in recent months and also the impact of the vaccination programme. First doses of Covid-19 vaccine have been available for 12 to 15-year-olds since September 2021. The ONS said said there is a “clear pattern” between vaccination and testing positive for Covid-19 antibodies but “the detection of antibodies alone is not a precise measure of the immunity protection given by vaccination”. I mentioned earlier that Poland’s deputy health minister Waldemar Kraska had warned that the country would set a new daily cases record today [see 9.22am]. Reuters now have the official figure – 53,420. It means Poland joins Germany, Hungary, the Czech Republic, Bulgaria, Russia and Romania in hitting its highest infection rate of the pandemic. “We have to be ready for a further rise in cases, even above 60,000,” a health ministry spokesperson told a news conference. In an attempt to combat the surge, Poland has stepped up testing, performing a record 173,000 official tests in 24 hours. It has also said older primary and secondary schoolchildren must switch to remote learning from Thursday. The Australian navy’s largest ship has docked at disaster-stricken Tonga and was allowed to unload humanitarian supplies in the South Pacific nation – despite crew members being infected with Covid-19, officials have said. Associated Press report that nearly two dozen sailors aboard the HMAS Adelaide were reported infected yesterday, raising fears the mercy mission could bring the coronavirus to the small archipelago devastated by the recent undersea volcanic eruption and subsequent tsunami on 15 January. Since the pandemic began, Tonga has reported just a single case of Covid-19 and has avoided any outbreaks. The Australian government said in a statement: We appreciate the decision of the government of Tonga to enable HMAS Adelaide to dock and offload the humanitarian and medical supplies, and the high priority it has placed on Covid safety throughout the recovery process. The ship is undertaking an entirely contactless delivery of humanitarian assistance and disaster relief supplies. Denmark aims to scrap all remaining Covid-19 restrictions next week, the most far-reaching easing of curbs yet seen among the Nordic countries. In a letter addressed to parliament, Health Minister Magnus Heunicke said the government intends to follow recommendations issued by an expert panel on Tuesday to scrap all restrictions. Reuters note that the proposal is still subject to parliamentary approval. Poland is another country setting Covid records. Deputy health minister Waldemar Kraska said it will report a record number of new Covid-19 cases today, with the daily count rising above 50,000 and expected to climb in coming days, Kraska told website interia.pl that the highly transmissible Omicron variant currently accounted for around 40% of cases. “The fifth wave is gaining momentum. Today we will have over 50,000 new SARS-CoV-2 infections,” Kraska said. “This is a record number, and in the coming days there will be further increases in infections, which we can see from the number of referrals for PCR tests (...) and in the number of tests performed.” Germany today reported a new record of 164,000 Covid-19 infections in one day, as the lower house of parliament prepared to debate proposals to either require or robustly encourage residents to be vaccinated. Around 75% of the population has received at least one dose of a vaccine – less than in other western European countries such as France, Italy or Spain, where the equivalent figures are all over 80% – and the vaccination campaign is stuttering. Reuters report that the proposals being debated include requiring all adult residents to be vaccinated against Covid, or only those above 50, or merely requiring all those who have not been vaccinated to receive counselling. Early on in the coronavirus pandemic, Germany was more successful than many of its peers in limiting infections through case tracking and quarantines. But since last summer, vaccine-scepticism and a falloff in regional coordination have taken their toll, and public discontent has grown. Opponents of compulsory vaccination say it violates the second article of the constitution, which guarantees citizens control over their own bodies. Russia reported a record daily number of Covid-19 today, for the sixth consecutive day. Reuters report that new daily cases jumped to 74,692, up from from 67,809 a day earlier. The government coronavirus task force also reported 657 official deaths from coronavirus in the last 24 hours. Speaking of airlines, if you missed it, we had this report from Arthur Neslen earlier: At least 100,000 “ghost flights” could be flown across Europe this winter because of EU airport slot usage rules, according to analysis by Greenpeace. The deserted, unnecessary or unprofitable flights are intended to allow airlines to keep their takeoff and landing runway rights in major airports, but they could also generate up to 2.1 million tons of greenhouse gas emissions – or as much as 1.4 million average petrol or diesel cars emit in a year – Greenpeace says. “The EU Commission requiring airlines to fly empty planes to meet an arbitrary quota is not only polluting, but extremely hypocritical given their climate rhetoric,” said Herwig Schuster, a spokesperson for Greenpeace’s European Mobility for All campaign. “Transport emissions are skyrocketing,” he said. “It would be irresponsible of the EU to not take the low-hanging fruit of ending ghost flights and banning short-haul flights where there’s a reasonable train connection.” When the Covid pandemic began, the European Commission cut the benchmark for flight operations that airlines must meet to keep their slots open from 80% to 25%. But last December, Brussels upped the benchmark to 50%, rising again to 64% in March. Read more of Arthur Neslen’s report here: Airlines flying near-empty ‘ghost flights’ to retain EU airport slots More passengers took Wizz Air flights over the Christmas period despite the rise of the Omicron variant, and the carrier said it was cautiously optimistic about the continued recovery of air travel during the spring. The budget airline reported it carried 7.8 million passengers during the three months to the end of December, even more than it did in 2019 before the coronavirus pandemic, while its planes were more than three-quarters (77%) full. Read more of Joanna Partridge’s report here: Wizz Air passenger numbers rise to 7.8m despite Omicron fears The self-isolation period in Wales is to be cut to a minimum of five full days, the Welsh Government has said. The new rules mean people will be able to end their isolation as long as they have two negative lateral flow tests on days five and six. Health minister Eluned Morgan confirmed the changes would come into force from Friday 28 January, the same day the country is expected to complete the move to alert level zero. PA Media note that it will bring the nation in line with the measures in place in England and Northern Ireland. Morgan said: “After carefully reviewing all the available evidence, we believe that testing on days five and six together with five full days of isolation will have the same protective effect as a 10-day isolation period. “But it is really important everyone self-isolates and uses lateral flow tests in the way advised to ensure they protect others from the risk of infection.” The minister said that while isolation was important to prevent transmission of the virus, long periods of isolation could “have a negative impact on our mental health and can be damaging for our public services and the wider economy”. Those who test positive on either day five or day six will still have to continue to self-isolate until they have two negative tests taken 24 hours apart or until day 10, whichever comes first. Thousands of people gathered in New Delhi early this morning to watch a display of the India’s military power amid the annual Republic Day spectacle – however the event was curtailed due to Covid-19. Associated Press report that nearly 500 schoolchildren, folk dancers, police and military battalions, floats and stunt performers on motorbikes paraded from the presidential palace down the refurbished tree-lined boulevard of Rajpath. President Ram Nath Kovind received salutes from the marching columns, which included a camel-mounted regiment. Prime Minister Narendra Modi, government ministers and foreign diplomats attended. Republic Day marks the anniversary of the adoption of the country’s constitution on 26 January 1950. Because of the risk of the coronavirus, authorities shortened the usual parade route, which normally culminates at the 17th century Red Fort. The number of people watching the parade was limited and included only fully vaccinated adults and children over 15 who have had at least one dose of vaccine. All spectators were required to wear masks and observe social distance. On Wednesday, India’s health ministry reported 285,000 new cases, including both delta and omicron variants, and 665 deaths across the country in the past 24 hours, with a test positivity rate of 16.16%. Hungary’s daily tally of new Covid-19 infections has jumped to a record 20,174 today, but Reuters report that government data shows the number of patients being treated in hospital has remained at a relatively low level. There are 3,145 coronavirus patients in hospital now, including 164 on ventilators, the government said. Andrew Sparrow is up and running early for us today with the UK politics live blog. You can find that here. I will be continuing on this blog with coronavirus news from around the world. The prevalence of Covid in the UK has fallen overall in recent weeks, but has risen in school-age children say researchers who have warned the uptick could pose a risk to adults. The latest data from the React-1 study, which is based on more than 100,000 swabs from randomly selected individuals in England collected between 5 and 20 January this year, shows that the overall weighted prevalence of Covid was 4.41%, with 99% of positive tests involving the Omicron variant. The team note the overall prevalence is more than three-fold higher than the previous round in December 2021. “[It] is by far the highest we’ve seen throughout the pandemic,” said Prof Paul Elliott of Imperial College London, and who led the study. The team add among those aged 75 years and older the prevalence increased almost 12-fold between rounds, however Elliott noted prevalence was highest in the latest round of the study in children aged 5-11 years, at 7.81%. While the team add that during January, prevalence overall was found to be decreasing, among children aged 5-17 it rose. That, they write is “likely the consequence of the peak occurring during the end-of-year school break, causing a delay to school-based transmission among children,” noting the rise could pose a risk to adults. “Clearly there is a risk of transmission from the children to adults, even though currently the adults the rates are decreasing,” said Elliott. The study also reveals around two-thirds of those who tested positive in the latest round reported previously having had a confirmed Covid infection – although the Elliott noted that could have been at any point during the pandemic, meaning not all may be true reinfections. However the team say the finding suggests there are certain groups have an ongoing higher risk of being exposed to the coronavirus. While the researchers say vaccination remains the mainstay of the defence against Covid, particularly given the protection it offers against hospitalisation, other approaches might be needed. “Further measures beyond vaccination may be required if the very high rates of Omicron infection persist, despite Omicron appearing to be intrinsically less likely to cause severe disease,” they write. Here’s the video clip of UK foreign secretary Liz Truss – complete with awkward pause – denying that she attended or was invited to any parties during lockdown. The key lines from UK foreign secretary Liz Truss on Sky News are that she has reiterated her 100% support for the prime minister, she has said that she herself attended no parties during lockdown, and she also said – albeit with a slight pause – that she had not been invited to any parties during lockdown. She declined, when asked, to call for Labour leader Keir Starmer to also be investigated by police over having a beer in a constituency office. Beyond that she said “I’m not going to prejudice the findings of the Sue Gray report, or indeed, the police investigation” or words to that effect quite a lot. She said: I believe that he’s done a fantastic job as prime minister, whether it’s delivering Brexit, delivering the Covid vaccines, the booster programmes. We’ve now got a much faster growing economy than many of our competitors, thanks to his work, and I believe that’s what we should focus on … I don’t think it’s helpful to speculate on specific claims or specific accusations about what may or may not have happened. A quick snap from Reuters here that the Czech Republic has recorded 39,614 new Covid-19 infections for its highest daily tally since the pandemic began, health ministry data showed on Wednesday. Tuesday’s figure is the week’s second highest in the nation, after 30,367 infections were found on Monday in the country of 10.7 million people, which is bracing for an expected peak in Omicron infections this month. Our political editor Heather Stewart has five things to look out for from the Sue Gray report when it is published. She identifies these key questions: What was the prime minister’s direct involvement in lockdown breaches? What does Gray say about the culture in No 10 and who is responsible? Which senior civil servants and advisers are named – and shamed? Are any other ministers, aside from Johnson, implicated? Has Gray found evidence of carousing upstairs in the flat Johnson shares with his wife, Carrie? You can find her answers here: “We will absolutely publish the findings of the report … unless there is some specific issue” is the line that UK foreign secretary Liz Truss has immediately taken on Sky News this morning over the Sue Gray report. Asked whether Boris Johnson would have to resign if he had broken the law or misled parliament, she said: The prime minister has appeared before parliament. He has apologised for what has happened. He has admitted that mistakes were made, and I 100% support him and want him to continue as prime minister. Hello from London. It is Martin Belam here taking over from Samantha Lock. As you know by now, I usually bring you quotes and key lines from whichever government minister in the UK is on the airwaves. Sky News and Times Radio are promising they will have Liz Truss on, although Good Morning Britain are suggesting they haven’t had any minister confirmed. Speaking of reinfections, here is a handy guide compiled by Guardian science correspondent Nicola Davis. According to the latest figures for England from the UKHSA, from the start of the pandemic up to 9 January this year there were 425,890 possible reinfections, with 109,936 found in the week ending 9 January, accounting for almost 11% of all cases that week. Read the full analysis below. Two-thirds of people recently infected with the Omicron variant say they had Covid previously, according to a new British study. The REACT (REal-time Assessment of Community Transmission) research team swap-tested thousands of volunteers across England. Almost two out of every three Covid-positive participants reported having had Covid before, according to the findings published by the Imperial College London on Wednesday. “Among the 3,582 swab-positive individuals reporting whether or not they had had previous infection, 2,315 (64.6%) reported a confirmed previous infection,” the report read. The researchers concluded that past infection was associated with a high risk of reinfection with Omicron. However, more work is needed to determine how many of the results are true reinfections or PCR tests which may have picked up old traces of the virus. Risks of infection were found to increase among people living in large compared to single-person households, those in more deprived areas and among people of Asian, Black and other ethnicities, according to the findings. The research programme, commissioned by the Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC) and carried out by Imperial College London, is in partnership with Ipsos MORI and Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust. South Korea’s daily new coronavirus cases has exceeded 13,000 for the first time, according to data from the Korea Disease Control and Prevention Agency. The record of 13,012 comes just a day after the tally topped 8,000 for the first time amid a rapid spread of the Omicron variant and despite an extension of tough social distancing rules. Omicron is likely to account for more than 90% of new infections over the next few weeks, with the daily numbers surging to 20,000 to 30,000 or more, health officials said. The variant became dominant in the country last week. “Going forward, our top priority is to reduce critically ill patients and deaths,” prime minister Kim Boo-kyum told an inter-ministry meeting on Wednesday. A new testing policy has taken effect in four designated cities on a pilot basis, under which only priority groups can take a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test while others should get a rapid antigen test first at a local clinic. The programme will be expanded on 29 January to include some 256 state-run testing stations nationwide, and then hundreds of local clinics starting 3 February, Kim said. The government has also cut mandatory isolation for people who have been vaccinated but tested positive to seven days from 10, as part of efforts to free up resources for serious cases. The Dutch government will today further ease Covid restrictions despite record numbers of infections, with restaurants, bars and theatres set to re-open on Wednesday. Prime minister Mark Rutte told a news conference on Tuesday: The Netherlands has missed you. Today we are taking a big step to further unlock the Netherlands. That feels contradictory while the contamination figures are going through the roof, and we have to be clear that we are taking a risk. Rutte said the decision was in response to “great tensions” with the hospitality and cultural sectors over a virtual lockdown imposed days before Christmas. Anger mounted after shops, gyms, hairdressers and sex workers were allowed to resume business on 15 January, but other venues had to stay shut. Cafes in several cities opened in defiance of the restrictions the weekend before last, while dozens of museums even opened as well as beauty salons for a day in protest, Agence France-Presse reports. The European country is currently seeing record numbers of coronavirus cases, with new infections running at around 60,000 a day, fuelled by the Omicron variant. However, intensive care admissions and deaths have been falling. Cafes, bars and restaurants can open again until 10pm, so long as patrons have a Covid pass, wear masks when not seated, and capacity is reduced, the government said. Cinemas, theatres and museums may also welcome back customers, but nightclubs must stay closed for the time being. Fans can also return to football matches and other professional sports, but stadium capacity will be limited. Quarantine rules for schools will also be relaxed, with classes no longer having to shut if three or more cases are confirmed, and children under 18 need no longer isolate after contact with an infected person. Hello it’s Samantha Lock back with you on the blog to unravel all the latest Covid developments. Amid the chaos surrounding alleged Downing Street lockdown breaches it may be easy to forget we are still in the midst of a global pandemic. However, the saga is set to enter a new phase with an official report by senior civil servant Sue Gray due to be published in the coming days. Arch-critics of prime minister Boris Johnson are hopeful that Gray’s findings will be damaging enough to trigger what they believe will be the final trickle of letters needed to get to 54 and force a no confidence vote. Just across the UK border in the Netherlands, the Dutch government will further ease Covid restrictions despite record numbers of infections, with restaurants, bars and theatres set to re-open on Wednesday. “The Netherlands has missed you,” prime minister Mark Rutte told a news conference on Tuesday. “Today we are taking a big step to further unlock the Netherlands. That feels contradictory while the contamination figures are going through the roof, and we have to be clear that we are taking a risk.” The Netherlands has so far endured some of Europe’s toughest Covid restrictions. Here are all the global Covid developments from the past 24 hours: Europe: Boris Johnson said he welcomes a police inquiry into Downing Street parties and will help “draw a line” under matters. Earlier, Metropolitan police said they would begin investigating parties held at No 10 during coronavirus lockdowns. The development piles further pressure on the prime minister after fresh revelations of two more gatherings, including one to celebrate his birthday. Sue Gray’s inquiry report is reportedly set to come this week after the Met said there is no need to hold material back. The UK reported 439 deaths within 28 days of a Covid-positive test. That’s the highest tally since February 2021. Tuesday’s data showed 94,326 new daily cases. The figures are often higher on a Tuesday when most deaths at the weekend are included in the tally. Last Tuesday, 438 deaths were reported. The UK’s health secretary, Sajid Javid, said 77,000 NHS workers remain unvaccinated, and Covid policies – including on mandatory jabs for NHS staff – should be kept “under review”. Scotland will allow people to return to offices from Monday, in a “phased” plan announced by Nicola Sturgeon. The first minister asked employers to begin a phased return to work by introducing hybrid working next week after a continuing decline in Omicron variant cases in Scotland, in an update to MSPs at Holyrood. Italy’s daily cases have more than doubled in a day to 186,740. This is up from 77,696 a day earlier, the health ministry said. The number of deaths jumped to 468 from 352, though more tests had been taken in the past day than on Monday. In Germany, the anti-vaccination movement is ramping up, with thousands of people taking part in weekly protests across the country. More than 2,000 rallies were held on Monday. Russia has cut the isolation time for Covid contacts from 14 days to seven, amid a surge in infections driven by the Omicron variant. On Tuesday, daily cases reached the record high of 67,809, official figures show. Doctors have discovered an “antibody signature” that can help identify patients most at risk of developing long Covid. Malta will start to scrap a requirement for people to present a vaccination certificate for entry to restaurants and other venues from next month. Bars, restaurants and theatres in the Netherlands can reopen on 26 January, Prime Minister Mark Rutte said, further relaxing restrictions despite record infection levels. United States: The US Department of Labor said it will withdraw its Covid-19 vaccine-and-testing requirement for large employers after the Supreme Court blocked the rule. An appeals judge has temporarily restored New York’s mask mandate on Tuesday, a day after a judge in a lower court ruled that Governor Kathy Hochul’s administration lacked the constitutional authority to order people to wear face coverings. Elton John has postponed two farewell concert dates in Dallas, Texas, after contracting Covid-19. Asia: South Korea’s daily count of new cases topped 8,000 for the first time, despite the recent extension of strict social-distancing rules.* Two years since its first infection, Australia recorded one of its highest number of Covid-related deaths in a day. Japan expanded regions subject to tighter curbs to cover 70% of the country, as the government tried to counter a record wave of Covid-19 cases caused by the Omicron variant. Middle East: An Israeli government advisory panel has recommended offering a fourth vaccine dose to all adults, on condition that at least five months have passed since they received the third or recovered from the illness. Pfizer and its German partner, BioNTech, have begun testing a vaccine specifically designed to fight the Omicron variant of the coronavirus, the companies have announced.In his spare time, Justice Stephen Breyer enjoyed taking the bench at humorous “mock trials” of characters such as Macbeth and Richard III for Washington’s Shakespeare Theatre Company. The case usually turned on epic battles over succession. Now Washington is about to be consumed by the question of who will inherit Breyer’s crown following his reported decision to retire from the US supreme court. At 83, he is its oldest member, one of three liberals outnumbered by six conservatives. This is a perfectly timed political gift for Joe Biden, aware that choosing a supreme court justice is one of the most consequential decisions that any president can make. After a year in the White House, Biden was limping with a stalled legislative agenda, a tenacious pandemic and Vladimir Putin threatening Ukraine. He was a tired brand in desperate need of a relaunch, a tough ask at the age of 79. Breyer has provided it, instantly changing the conversation. “This has to feel like a political elixir right now,” observed Chuck Todd, host of MSNBC’s Meet the Press Daily show. A vacancy on the highest court enables Biden to rally the Democratic base and begin to cement a legacy that, despite early ambitions, had recently looked to be in jeopardy. Although the ideological balance of the court will not change, Biden could choose a young liberal who will serve for decades. The Senate, which must approve his choice, is divided between 50 Democrats and 50 Republicans with Vice-President Kamala Harris casting the tiebreaker vote. Breyer has given it enough time to confirm the president’s pick before the midterm elections could shift the balance of power. Democratic divisions have been on display of late but a supreme court vacancy typically unites a party like nothing else. Even senators Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema, who broke ranks over the Build Back Better plan and voting rights, have voted for every Biden nominee to the lower courts so far. Both will presumably regard this confirmation as an easy way to win back some favour with angry liberals. Not for the first time, however, Biden has raised expectations. At a debate in the 2020 Democratic primary, he declared: “I’m looking forward to making sure there’s a Black woman on the supreme court, to make sure we, in fact, get every representation.” His judicial appointments so far have been historically diverse, and Jen Psaki, the White House press secretary, told reporters after the news of Breyer’s imminent retirement broke that Biden “certainly stands by” his promise. The upshot is that if he now nominates anyone other than a Black woman, there will be disappointment on the left. Sean Eldridge, founder and president of the progressive group Stand Up America, said on Wednesday: “President Biden promised to appoint the country’s first-ever Black woman supreme court justice, and he must make good on that promise. “The president and vice-president’s voters are watching eagerly to see that he follows through and makes history with his first supreme court nomination.” Potential candidates include the US circuit judge Ketanji Brown Jackson, California supreme court justice Leondra Kruger, civil rights lawyer Sherrilyn Ifill and US district judge Michelle Childs, a favourite of the South Carolina congressman James Clyburn, a Biden ally. Notably, when Jackson was confirmed last year to the influential US court of appeals for the DC circuit, often seen as a springboard to supreme court, the Republican senators Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, Susan Collins of Maine and Lisa Murkowski of Alaska voted with Democrats in favour. Carl Tobias, Williams chair in law at the University of Richmond, said: “I expect that the Democrats will remain united, as they have so far, because all Democratic members, including Senators Manchin and Sinema, have voted for all of Biden’s lower court nominees. “Most GOP senators have voted against many Biden lower court nominees. The major exception is Lindsey Graham, who has voted for many Biden lower court nominees in committee and on the floor. Senators Collins and Murkowski have also voted to confirm a number of Biden lower court nominees. If the Democrats vote together, they do not need GOP votes.” It remains an open question whether a handful of Republicans might back Biden’s nominee given the politicisation of the court in recent years – from Republicans blocking Barack Obama’s pick Merrick Garland to the rancour that surrounded Donald Trump’s three appointments, and the court’s imminent decision on the constitutional right to abortion. In an ominous statement on Wednesday, Graham said: “If all Democrats hang together – which I expect they will – they have the power to replace Justice Breyer in 2022 without one Republican vote in support. Elections have consequences, and that is most evident when it comes to fulfilling vacancies on the supreme court.” Meanwhile, Carrie Severino, president of the conservative Judicial Crisis Network, fired the first shots of a partisan battle to come. “The left bullied Justice Breyer into retirement and now it will demand a justice who rubber-stamps its liberal political agenda,” she said. “And that’s what the Democrats will give them, because they’re beholden to the dark money supporters who helped elect them.” Yet it is Republicans who waged a multi-generational project to tilt the court in their favour with the help of the Federalist Society, which created a pipeline of young, ideologically rightwing lawyers. Trump’s release during the 2016 election of a shortlist of judges for the court helped him secure the conservative base; his three justices are likely to be his most lasting legacy. Democrats were criticised for being slow to wake up to the threat and lacking similar aggression. Now, thanks to Breyer’s retirement, they find themselves with the unaccustomed comfort of having political momentum on their side.Amy Schneider’s dazzling Jeopardy! streak is over, when the groundbreaking champion was finally defeated after 40 consecutive wins and about $1.4m in prize money. Earlier this week, Schneider became the second-longest-running champion in the game’s history. Her success put her in the ranks of Ken Jennings, who is serving as guest host, and the quizshow’s other all-time greats. It also made Schneider, a trans woman, a visible symbol of achievement for often-marginalized people. “It’s still a little hard to believe,” she said of her impressive run. “It’s something that I’m going to be remembered for, and that’s pretty great.” New champ Rhone Talsma, a Chicago librarian, had the correct response to the final Jeopardy! clue for a winning total of $29,600. “I’m still in shock,” Talsma said in a statement. “I did not expect to be facing a 40-day champion and I was excited to maybe see someone else slay the giant. I just really didn’t think it was going to be me, so I’m thrilled.” The answer that stumped Schneider was about countries of the world: The only nation whose name in English ends in an “h” and which is also one of the 10 most populous. (The answer: “What is Bangladesh?”) Schneider, an engineering manager from Oakland, California, scored her 39th win on Monday night, giving her the second-longest winning streak of any contestant. Since November, she has won about $1.3m, making her the first woman and fourth person to win more than $1m on the show. She has also become the first transgender person to qualify for Jeopardy’s Tournament of Champions, an annual event with the game’s top players. She was braced for her streak to end, she told the Associated Press. “I had a feeling my time was winding down, even though it didn’t look that way in the scores,” Schneider said. In an interview with the New York Times, Schneider added: “The fatigue of this taping was really starting to add up.” Schneider was also admired for increasing LGBTQ+ visibility and for her measured handling of anti-trans critics. “The best outcome of all of this always is going to be whatever help I’ve been able to offer the trans community,” Schneider said. “I’m here because of the sacrifices countless trans people have made, often to the extent of risking their lives. To do my part to move that cause forward, it’s really special.”Rosalie Kunoth-Monks, the Arrernte Anmatjere advocate for Aboriginal rights who shot to fame as a teenager when she became the first ever Indigenous Australian female lead actor in the 1955 film Jedda, has died aged 85. She died in Alice Springs hospital on Wednesday, after having several strokes. Her family has given permission to use her image. The film-maker John Pilger, who featured Kunoth-Monks in his 2013 documentary Utopia, paid tribute to her on Wednesday, writing on Twitter: “The best of Australians are Indigenous. Among the most inspiring was Rosalie Kunoth-Monks, the Arrente/Ammatjere warrior, who has died.” Amnesty International Australia Indigenous rights advisor Rodney Dillon called her “a staunch warrior for our people - her depth of knowledge of her country as well as the political arena was remarkable and her legacy is profound. “I have known and worked with Rosalie for years and I would like to give my condolences to her family. We have lost a great champion of justice for First Nations people,” he said. Kunoth-Monks was born in Urapuntja (Utopia Station) in the Northern Territory in 1937. Her parents were of the Anmatjere people and her paternal grandfather was German. When she was 14, the film-makers Charles and Elsa Chauvel spotted her in Alice Springs and recruited her to play Jedda, a girl who is raised by the wife of a white cattle station boss after her mother dies, and who is later forbidden from learning about her culture. Jedda was the first ever Australian feature film to be shot in colour, and was a success in the country but not overseas. The Chauvels credited Kunoth-Monks as Ngarla Kunoth in the film, as they wanted her to have a distinctively Indigenous name. They chose her mother’s skin title, which Kunoth-Monks found distressing. She later described the experience of filming Jedda as “traumatising”. The film premiered at Darwin’s Star Theatre in 1955; as it was a segregated cinema at the time, Kunoth-Monks was given special dispensation to sit with the white audience. In 1960, Kunoth-Monks became the first Indigenous Australian Anglican nun, working in Victoria, then left the order after 10 years to work more with her community. She got married and began working with the Department of Aboriginal Affairs, setting up the first home for Indigenous Australian children in Victoria. She returned to Alice Springs in 1977 and continued in social work, including at the Central Australian Aboriginal Legal Aid Service and the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commission. She was appointed as an adviser on Indigenous affairs to Paul Everingham, the chief minister of the Northern Territory. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning In 1993 she was awarded a medal of the Order of Australia for her services to Indigenous Australia. In 2015 she was named Northern Territorian of the Year, was a finalist for Australian of the Year, and was awarded Naidoc Person of the Year during the Naidoc Week celebrations. She stood unsuccessfully for election twice, for the Northern Territory legislative assembly in 1980 and for the Senate on behalf of the First Nations Political party in 2013, when she was 76. In 2008 she returned to Utopia and became president of the Barkly region. She spoke out against the federal government intervention in the Northern Territory. “It’s not that they’re coming here with bulldozers or getting the army to move us. It’s that they’re trying to starve us out of our home,” she said months later, adding: “They won’t support us becoming sustainable in our own right. If you’re made to feel a second-class humanity, if it’s not ethnic cleansing, please let me know what is.” Kunoth-Monks featured heavily in Pilger’s film Utopia, a documentary focused on her homelands that denounces the treatment of Indigenous Australians by white Australians, politicians and corporations. After the documentary, she made headlines for an impassioned speech made on the ABC’s Q&amp;A program, in which she addressed fellow panellist and politician Peter Coleman’s call for the “assimilation” of Indigenous Australians. “I didn’t come from overseas. I came from here,” she said, weaving in Arrernte language. “My language, in spite of whiteness trying to penetrate into my brain by assimilationists, I am alive. I am here and now. I speak my language. I practice my culture. Don’t try and suppress me, and don’t call me a problem. I am not the problem. I have never left my country, nor have I ever ceded any part of it.” Kunoth-Monks is survived by her daughter, Ngarla, and her granddaughters, Amelia and Ruby.“Friends and relatives have been messaging and calling me more worried than Ukrainians,” says Alex Borbely, an Australian living in the Ukrainian capital, Kyiv. Borbely is one of several Australians who have told Guardian Australia they will stay in the country despite the advice from the Australian government to leave immediately due to the security threat. “I guess when it’s something unknown and far away, it feels stronger and more threatening,” he says. “When you’re in the middle of it, on the ground, and you see the reactions of people around you who are operating as normal, still going to bars and cafes, there is no sense of fear.” There are about 1,400 Australians in Ukraine, according to the foreign affairs minister, Marise Payne, who said on Tuesday the advice to leave was “a cautious and prudent step because the security situation is unpredictable”. The foreign affairs department has also encouraged Australian citizens and residents in Ukraine to register their whereabouts through a dedicated page on its website. Ukrainian authorities have urged the public to stay calm. Earlier this month, they claimed Russia was trying to destabilise Ukraine and sow panic by launching a massive cyber-attack on its government websites. The Russian government has denied any involvement. A wave of false bomb threats in schools has also added to anxiety, although it is unclear whether any political motive is behind them, and schools in some Russian cities have experienced similar threats. On Tuesday Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelensky, tried to assuage public anxiety and said the decision of Australia, the United States, UK, Germany and Canada to withdraw the families of their diplomats from Kyiv “didn’t mean an inevitable escalation”. The defence minister, Oleksiy Reznikov, told journalists in Kyiv that so far there were no grounds to expect a full-scale invasion. While daily life in Kyiv shows no signs of panic, Ukrainians and foreign residents alike are considering their options. Borbely, who is from Sydney and has lived in Ukraine for more than three years, doesn’t intend to leave yet. “I understand there is some danger,” he says. “People here don’t seriously believe, at least those who I have talked to, that there will be a full-scale conflict. This is my feeling at the moment too.” He says he is thinking of heading to the western part of Ukraine if there is “some action”. Ken Herbert, an IT project manager from Wollongong, also sees no reason to leave just yet. He moved to Ukraine in 2019, fell in love with the country, and made Kyiv his home. Nevertheless, he has prepared for the worst. He has a bag packed, a small stockpile of food, a sleeping bag and an air mattress if he needs to escape urgently. He also has a plan of how to get out of Ukraine in case direct combat reaches the capital, which he doesn’t believe is likely. “I’m not expecting too much to happen. A lot of media is hyping the situation much worse than it is,” he says. “The warning of the Australian government is very much premature.” ‘Alert but not alarmed’ Hugh Simpson, a former military officer and hostile environment trainer, now the chief executive of a software company, says he understands the federal government’s perspective of trying to protect its citizens, but has decided to stay in Ukraine and rely on his own risk perception. “We are alert but not alarmed. We are monitoring the situation through both official and non-official channels,” he says. “Choosing to stay is not something I have done without preparing to ensure the safety of my staff and the continuation of my business.” He declines to disclose his contingency plans, but says the most important thing anyone can do is have a bag and key documents ready, keep an eye on the news, and trust their gut. The latest warnings have prompted Gold Coast native Brayden McKay and his Ukrainian fiancée to move to Australia months earlier than they initially planned. An English teacher who has lived in Kyiv for a little over two years, he says life carries on as usual, and “chaos and crisis” are observed primarily among English-speaking foreigners. Yet, he prefers to play it safe. “It’s good that the [Australian] government is being cautious because we never know what will happen. It should be taken seriously,” he says. “A lot of us here think a full-scale invasion wouldn’t make sense for the Russian government, but something will happen. We just don’t know what and when. Uncertainty is one of the scariest things.”Victoria’s premier Daniel Andrews is hopeful national cabinet will change the definition of fully vaccinated to mean three doses of a Covid-19 vaccine, paving the way for changes to the state’s mandate. “This is not a two-dose thing, of two doses and a bonus,” he told reporters on Thursday as Victoria recorded 15 deaths and 13,755 new infections. “International evidence, our own experience, the views of experts and hopefully the confirmation of both Atagi and national cabinet later today will mean that everyone knows and understands that this is a three-dose project.” Andrews has been pushing for the definition change for some time and had expected it would happen following last week’s meeting of state and territory leaders. He denied there was pushback from other jurisdictions on the issue, instead blaming the hold-up on delayed advice from the national advisory panel on vaccines. “No one’s upset about it, don’t read anything into that,” Andrews said. The premier also gave his strongest indication yet that people will be required to have three doses to enter restaurants, bars and cafes as well as hairdressers and other beauty services. “At this stage it is two doses and I think it will very soon be three doses to get the green tick,” Andrews said. Workers in health and aged care, disability, emergency services, corrections, quarantine accommodation and food distribution have already been told they must get their third dose to continue working on site. Some 35% of Victorians have received a third dose of a Covid-19 vaccine, with a remaining 2.3 million eligible. There are 1,057 Victorians in hospital with Covid-19, including 117 in intensive care. According to data from the health department, almost 23% of patients admitted to hospital and 35% of those in intensive care are unvaccinated, despite accounting for less than 6% of the total population. In contrast, those who have received three doses make up only 6% of cases in hospital and intensive care. Meanwhile, New South Wales recorded 29 deaths and 17,316 new infections. There are 2,722 people with the virus in the state’s hospitals, with 181 in intensive care. The health minister, Brad Hazzard, said more than 36% of eligible people in NSW had received their third dose of the Covid vaccine but he stressed the figure was not high enough. “The numbers of boosters are not where we need them to be to keep people safe,” he said. “In [the Royal North Shore Hospital] today, there are seven people in ICU and not one of them has had the booster.” He said it may be necessary to mandate boosters in some sectors including health and education if uptake doesn’t improve, while the premier, Dominic Perrottet, noted the lifting of restrictions next month also hinged on a higher booster rate. The Northern Territory is yet to release its latest Covid numbers, but some health experts are calling for a region-wide lockdown to protect remote Indigenous communities. The Central Land Council’s chief executive Lesley Turner told ABC radio an urgent lockdown of remote communities “will save lives”. In Queensland, there were 11,600 new Covid infections and 15 deaths, while there are 829 people in hospital with the virus, including 48 in intensive care. In South Australia there were 1,953 new cases, in the Australian Capital Territory 884 and in Tasmania 726. None recorded a death. Western Australia recorded 12 new cases, 10 of which were linked to its Omicron outbreak.When Dylan Alcott was announced as Australian of the Year on Tuesday, I was thrilled to see another disabled Australian honoured in this way (he wasn’t the first, his predecessor also had a disability, albeit invisible). I was moved by his speech and I felt hopeful that, as a result, national attention would be drawn towards the important issues affecting people with disabilities – NDIS, discrimination, unemployment, poverty and social isolation to name just a few. Dylan is an amazing athlete, an entrepreneur and a great public speaker. He deserves this – no doubt about it! Dylan’s story is a delicious blend of inspiration and all the good feels. But forgive me, it’s been hardly 48 hours since he was awarded the accolade and I’m already feeling a bit cringe listening to interviews about how much he loves his disability and I am a little worried about what might become of all this in 12 months time. So I’m getting on the front foot and making a small request to the people of Australia in this year of Dylan Alcott: please don’t judge me and other disabled people for not being as “in love” with our disabilities as Dylan is. In his speech at the awards night and in the interviews I have seen so far, Dylan tells his story of once hating his disability and that over time and with the support of family and friends, he has grown to love his disability. His narrative is one I have heard shared by many disabled people over the years, especially among disability activists as we discovered that our problems lay in the obstacles placed before us by society rather than being inherent to our disability or impairment. It is a very important story that needs to be heard because it challenges the prevailing social narrative that disability is a tragedy and that in turn our lives must be miserable. While I recognise that a lot of the discrimination and injustices I face are societal, I hate the fact that I have a genetic condition that causes severe muscle wasting and that over the years it has slowly crippled me, to where the only movement I have remaining is a wriggle in my thumbs. Does that make me less evolved in my disability journey? Does it mean that I am yet to reach my ultimate destiny of fully embracing and celebrating my disability? Some may presume so. But no, it reflects the severity of my disability and the fact that my disability makes my life really hard. Depending on others for the most basic things. Struggling to eat, drink and breathe is no picnic. Neither is the pain of extreme scoliosis that I experience on a daily basis. I don’t want sympathy. I want people to understand that we can’t all “love our disability”. For me, there’s really not a lot to love. I hate it and always will. Hating my disability doesn’t mean that I hate my life. I love my life and I feel proud of what I have achieved and of the work that I do. I feel proud of and love the disability community that I belong to. So as we spend the next 12 months listening to Dylan and his inspiring, “feel-good” story, don’t forget there are many other stories that might not be quite as heartwarming but that represent the daily reality of disability in its many forms. We can’t all love our disability. We don’t have to. But what we all need to do is work towards a society where accessibility and inclusion are front and centre of social policy so that there is more to love and less to hate about being disabled. • Dr George Taleporos is chairperson of the Victorian Disability Advisory Council and host of the podcast Reasonable and Necessary. You can find him on Twitter. This article was first published here and is republished with permission of the authorAustralia’s defence minister has branded the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, an ageing dictator who is becoming “more and more irrational”. Peter Dutton also vowed to continue to speak out against China’s “belligerent approach” just hours after the new Chinese ambassador arrived in Australia with a conciliatory message about getting the troubled relationship “back to the right track”. Dutton, a conservative former leadership contender who is becoming increasingly outspoken on foreign affairs, said on Thursday the international community must “put as much pressure on Russia as possible” to prevent a “devastating” invasion of Ukraine. “Now, whether or not they listen to that, ultimately, is a decision for Putin, and he sees no doubt that Ukraine is part of the Russia that he wants to bequeath to his successor at some point,” Dutton told Sydney radio station 2GB. “He’s 69 years of age, and these sort of dictators, who are getting older and want to leave their legacy, start to become more and more irrational.” Western countries have voiced increasing concern about Russia’s buildup of more than 100,000 troops near the Ukraine border but opinions differ on if, or when, Putin plans a full-scale military invasion. Russia has demanded security guarantees and a promise that Ukraine never be admitted to Nato, which the US has rejected. Ukrainian leaders have said they don’t believe an invasion is imminent and have called for calm. Dutton said there were “worrying signs” regarding Russia’s intentions with “the movement of troops and the considerable buildup … of concern to every observer”. He said an invasion of Ukraine “would be devastating because it would disrupt world economic markets” and have an effect on energy security in Europe. “But more importantly than any of that is that you’d see tens of thousands of people die.” Britain and other Nato allies are currently considering a request from the US to deploy hundreds more troops to support member countries in eastern Europe. The Australian government says it is not planning to send troops or military assets to the region in the event of a conflict, but it is considering supplying extra liquefied natural gas (LNG) to Europe. Those talks were launched after the US and the UK raised fears the continent’s reliance on Russian gas makes it vulnerable in the growing standoff with Putin. Dutton said recent cyber-attacks against Ukraine could be viewed as “the first step in trying to knock out some of their systems and compromise some of their capability to respond to Russian incursion”. He said he hoped for “an 11th hour reprieve”. In broader remarks, Dutton called on China to “be a good neighbour” and said Australia wanted “to be a good neighbour to them” – but indicated the government was not about to tone down its commentary about Australia’s biggest trading partner. China’s new ambassador, Xiao Qian, who landed in Australia on Wednesday after years of increasing tensions between the two countries, said the relationship was “at a critical juncture” and faced “many difficulties and challenges”. Xiao, the former Chinese ambassador to Indonesia, was relatively upbeat in his first comments in Sydney, saying the relationship also had “enormous opportunities and potential” and he saw his new diplomatic role “as a noble mission”. In a statement distributed by the Chinese embassy, Xiao said the relationship would improve “as long as both sides adhere to the principles of mutual respect, equality, inclusiveness and mutual learning”. “I look forward to working with the Australian government and friends in all sectors to increase engagement and communication, enhance mutual understanding and trust, eliminate misunderstanding and suspicion, promote mutually beneficial exchanges and cooperation in all areas between the two sides, and jointly push the China-Australia relations back to the right track.” Dutton said the Australian government welcomed the new ambassador and still wanted “a good, strong, friendly relationship with China”. But he said China was “in conflict” or “at loggerheads” with Australia and “many, many other countries”. “It’s a belligerent approach, and it’s unacceptable,” Dutton said. Dutton said Australia would continue to talk about human rights issues, including the case of tennis star Peng Shuai, who in November alleged that a senior Chinese official had sexually assaulted her in the past. Dutton – who said in 2019 that some women detained by Australia on Nauru had been “trying it on” in claiming they were raped and needed an abortion – implied that Peng was subsequently pressured to retract the allegations. “We haven’t heard from her except for, you know, the rehearsed, sort of trotted-out lines,” Dutton said. “These are issues that the world needs to speak about, and if we remain silent, we remain weak, we block our ears and pretend it’s going to go away, the problem will only just compound.” Dutton’s response contrasted to that of the employment minister, Stuart Robert, who said the new ambassador’s opening remarks were “very pleasing”. Robert said he and other ministers looked forward to “a very constructive relationship”. “It’s wonderful to see the new Chinese ambassador coming forward with a very open approach and I think they’ll find the Australian government’s response equally open to ensure dialogue continues strongly,” Robert told Sky News. A spokesperson for the foreign affairs minister, Marise Payne, said: “The Australian government welcomes the new Chinese ambassador-designate to Australia and looks forward to engaging with him.” Australia and China have been increasingly at odds over the past few years, with the Australian government raising concerns about human rights in Xinjiang, the crackdown on dissent in Hong Kong, Beijing’s ratcheting up of military pressure against Taiwan, and its disputed claims in the South China Sea. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Beijing has objected to Australia’s laws against foreign interference that were seen as targeting China and the ban on Chinese telco Huawei from the 5G network. Beijing rolled out trade actions against Australian export sectors, including barley, red wine and coal, and froze high-level talks in 2020 – moves the Australian government branded as “economic coercion”. The Chinese embassy’s release of a document, later branded a “list of grievances” against Australia, also triggered a diplomatic storm. Xiao’s predecessor as ambassador, Cheng Jingye, warned in April 2021 that Beijing would respond “in kind” if Australia imposed sanctions against Chinese officials over human rights. In November the acting ambassador, Wang Xining, likened Australia to “a naughty guy” over the Aukus nuclear-powered submarine deal.New research co-led by the director of the Doherty Institute, Prof Sharon Lewin, has found a medicine used to treat cancer can also draw HIV out of hibernation, exposing the virus to the immune system and making it more susceptible to attack. HIV’s ability to “hide” in cells, even in people on antiretroviral therapy and with undetectable amounts of the virus in their blood, is one of the significant barriers to finding a cure for the disease. While HIV patients on antiretroviral drug treatments have no chance of passing it on and can live normal and healthy lives, the virus is never eliminated from their cells entirely. This is because a HIV reservoir “hides” in a state of hibernation in immune system cells. To destroy the virus, these cells need assistance from killer T-cells. But because these T-cells cannot detect and find the hidden HIV, they are unable to kill it. In cancer patients, killer T-cells become dysfunctional, leading them to express exhaustion proteins on their surface called PD1. Previous research by Lewin found PD1 are the same exhaustion markers which allow HIV to hide in cells. Pembrolizumab, an immunotherapy drug administered intravenously, blocks these exhaustion markers in cancer patients, allowing the killer T-cells to regain function and fight the cancer. The anti-PD1 drug has revolutionised the treatments of several cancers, including melanoma. A barrier in testing the treatment for HIV patients has been that pembrolizumab can lead to significant side-effects. “Five to 10% of people will get an adverse event from pembrolizumab,” Lewin said. “In a cancer setting this isn’t a major concern as you have a life-threatening illness, but in HIV, the situation is very different. People can now live normal and healthy lives with HIV, so any intervention for a cure must have very low toxicity.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning But Lewin and her team were able to test pembrolizumab against the virus by administering it to 32 people living with HIV but who also have cancer. They found the drug did have anti-PD1 properties for HIV. Their discovery was published on Thursday in the journal Science Translational Medicine. Until now, there had only been individual case reports to show the effect of anti-PD1 because people with HIV who also need the treatment for their cancer are very rare. And while other treatments have been shown to reverse HIV latency, anti-PD1 has the added potential to boost the immune response. “So it’s like you have a two-in-one drug,” Lewin said. Lewin’s research has proven the concept that the drug can reverse latency in HIV patients, but whether anti-PD1 also boosts the immune system enough to then attack and destroy HIV will form the next part of her work. “Can you enhance the immune system effect further by putting anti-PD1 with other agents [drugs] to even get a bigger effect? And then the most important thing to examine now is, how can you dose anti-PD1 safely in people with HIV but who don’t have cancer?” Lewin said. “That’s a study that we are about to embark on.” Stuart Turville, an associate professor and virologist with the Kirby Institute’s immunovirology and pathogenesis program at the University of NSW, said Lewin’s team was known for examining latency reversing agents – “basically, compounds that could wake the virus up”. “It is normal for our immune system to be resting,” he said, “ticking over until our body sees something that we need to respond to. HIV takes advantage of this. It enters cells that rest and in doing so sits there for years. “Importantly in this study of cancer patients with HIV, they observed the virus was woken up upon administration of the PD1 inhibitor by using cutting-edge molecular techniques developed to analyse the HIV reservoir at high sensitivity and at [a] granular level.” He believes the study shows there may be “potential for this and other similar treatments to develop a pathway towards a pragmatic HIV cure”. Lewin said while existing treatments for HIV were safe, effective, and led to good health, working towards a cure was still important because treatment was lifelong and not everyone had access to it. “Globally 70% of people have access to treatment, and lifelong access to antiretroviral treatment is not guaranteed for everyone and is a real challenge for the world,” she said. “There’s 1.8 million new HIV infections every year so that pool of people is only going to get bigger. That’s why we need a cure as well as treatment. “I think anti-PD1 will ultimately form part of a multi-pronged intervention. But I think it’s very unlikely a single drug or intervention is going to cure HIV.”One of Japan’s best-loved snacks is to go up in price – by a whopping 20% – for the first time since its launch more than four decades ago. But Umaibo – literally “delicious stick” – will still be a steal for schoolchildren at just ¥12 apiece (US10c, not including sales tax), up from the current ¥10, when the change goes into effect in April. The crunchy corn snack’s producer, Yaokin, blamed the rising price of corn imported from the US for the hike, the first since Umaibo went on sale in 1979. Although the figures involved are tiny, the increase – less than 2c – is symbolically significant in “inflation-resistant” Japan, where firms have been reluctant to pass rising raw material costs on to consumers. Noriko Eda, a 59-year-old Tokyo resident, said she was “surprised” by the news. “Umaibo have been the same price for so long, so a ¥2 increase is a big deal.” A fellow Tokyoite, Naomi Hosaka, said it was a “bit sad” that the impact of inflationary trends in the global economy were affecting the cheapest items, including children’s treats. The cylindrical snacks, wrapped in aluminium film, come in more than a dozen flavours, many based on Japanese food, such as spicy cod roe and takoyaki octopus balls, with cream of corn soup the biggest seller. Around 700m of the sticks are sold annually – the equivalent of about five and a half for each person – both in packs and individually. Umaibo’s low price and colourful wrappers featuring its hyperactive mascot Umaemon have earned the snacks a special place in the affections of schoolchildren looking to make their pocket money go as far as possible, and among older people craving a fix of sweet-shop nostalgia. In the past, Japanese companies have countered rising costs by shrinking packages – Umaibo lost a single gram in weight in 2007 – but price increases could become a more regular occurrence. “There’s nothing we can do,” said Takeshi Nemoto, a buyer for a Tokyo snack shop. “From the manufacturer’s point of view, they can’t stay profitable unless they raise the price.” Celebrity fans mourned the looming demise of the ¥10 price tag and, possibly, the loss of Umaibo’s status as Japan’s “national snack”. “We’re witnessing a turning point in history,” tweeted rock musician Atsushi Osawa, whose band, Uchikubi Gokumon Doukoukai, referenced the snack and its “miracle” price in a 2010 song. “The price has started to diverge from the lyrics,” he said. Umaibo’s roots can be traced to central Japan, where the grandparents of Yaokin’s current president, Masahiko Sumiya, started selling shrimp crackers at their fruit and vegetable shop. His father founded the company in 1960 when he moved to Tokyo after the second world war, according to the Mainichi newspaper. Reuters contributed to this reportA Tennessee school board has banned a Pulitzer prize-winning novel from its classrooms over eight curse words and an illustration of a naked cartoon mouse. The graphic novel, Maus: A Survivor’s Tale by New Yorker Art Spiegelman, uses hand-drawn illustrations of mice and cats to depict how the author’s parents survived Auschwitz during the Holocaust. The graphic memoir elevated a pulp mass medium to high art when it nabbed a slew of literary awards in 1992 but appears not to have impressed educators in McMinn county. Ten board members unanimously agreed in favor of removing the novel from the eighth-grade curriculum, citing its use of the phrase “God Damn” and drawings of “naked pictures” of women, according to minutes taken from a board of education meeting earlier this month. “There is some rough, objectionable language in this book,” director of school, Lee Parkison, is recorded as saying in the session’s opening remarks. Parkison continued to say he had “consulted with our attorney” and as a result “we decided the best way to fix or handle the language in this book was to redact it … to get rid of the eight curse words and the picture of the woman that was objected to.” Board member Tony Allman supported the move to remove the “vulgar and inappropriate” content, arguing: “We don’t need to enable or somewhat promote this stuff.” “I am not denying it was horrible, brutal and cruel,” Allman said in reference to the genocide and murder of six million European Jews during the second world war. “It shows people hanging, it shows them killing kids, why does the educational system promote this kind of stuff? It is not wise or healthy,” he added. Allman also took aim at Spiegelman himself, alleging: “I may be wrong, but this guy that created the artwork used to do the graphics for Playboy.” “You can look at his history, and we’re letting him do graphics in books for students in elementary school. If I had a child in the eighth grade, this ain’t happening. If I had to move him out and homeschool him or put him somewhere else, this is not happening.” Mike Cochran, another school board member, described parts of the book as “completely unnecessary”. “We are talking about teaching ethics to our kids, and it starts out with the dad and the son talking about when the dad lost his virginity. It wasn’t explicit but it was in there,” Cochran said. “We don’t need this stuff to teach kids history. We can teach them history and we can teach them graphic history. We can tell them exactly what happened, but we don’t need all the nakedness and all the other stuff.” Cochran proposed revisiting the entire curriculum over concerns it was developed to “normalize sexuality, normalize nudity and normalize vulgar language”. “If I was trying to indoctrinate somebody’s kids, this is how I would do it,” he added. “You put this stuff just enough on the edges, so the parents don’t catch it but the kids, they soak it in. I think we need to relook at the entire curriculum.” The decision comes as conservative groups across the country are stepping up campaigns to ban books from school libraries, often focused on works that address race, LGBTQ issues or marginalized communities. The board did have some supporters with Julie Goodin, an instructional supervisor and former history teacher, and Melasawn Knight, the federal programs supervisor, backing the novel’s inclusion in the curriculum. “I think any time you are teaching something from history, people did hang from trees, people did commit suicide and people were killed, over six million were murdered. I think the author is portraying that because it is a true story about his father that lived through that,” Knight said. “I can talk of the history, I was a history teacher and there is nothing pretty about the Holocaust and for me this was a great way to depict a horrific time in history,” Goodin added. After much discussion over the redaction of words the members found objectionable, the board eventually decided that alongside copyright concerns, it would be better to ban the graphic novel altogether. Spiegelman said he was “baffled” by the outcome in an interview with CNBC on Wednesday. “It’s leaving me with my jaw open, like, ‘What?’” the 73-year-old author said, adding he thought the school board was “Orwellian” for approving the ban. Spiegelman’s Jewish parents were both sent to Nazi concentration camps and his mother took her own life when he was just 20. “I’ve met so many young people who … have learned things from my book,” Spiegelman said. “I also understand that Tennessee is obviously demented. There’s something going on very, very haywire there.” In a statement on Thursday, after the ban drew wider backlash, the McMinn county board of education defended its decision, saying the novel was removed from the curriculum because “of its unnecessary use of profanity and nudity and its depiction of violence and suicide” and that the book was “too adult-oriented” for use in its schools. The board called the Holocaust “shameful beyond description” and said that the move did “not diminish the value of Maus as a meaningful and impactful work of literature” and that it was seeking “other works that accomplish the same educational goals in a more age-appropriate fashion”. Maanvi Singh contributed reporting.Australia’s Woodside Petroleum has announced it is following multinational energy groups Chevron and Total in exiting Myanmar, saying it is unable to work in the country following the military coup nearly one year ago and the regime’s continuing human rights abuses and violence against civilians. The moves follow pressure from human rights groups, who have called on companies to stop doing business in Myanmar and cut off the flow of money from projects to the junta. February marks a year since the military re-took control of Myanmar in a coup. Last week Woodside revealed it had terminated a production-sharing contract with the state-owned oil and gas enterprise MOGE in November, and on Thursday the company said it would abandon the remainder of its licences in the country. The contract termination covers an offshore block known as A-7, where Woodside owns 45% and Shell owns 45%, and comes into force on 30 September “with the formal relinquishment process ongoing”, Woodside said. Shell has also given up its licence and “has no licences in Myanmar” after relinquishing them all, a spokesperson said. On Thursday Woodside said it was also withdrawing from two other offshore fields where it holds exploration licenses, AD-1 and AD-8, as well as a second contract with MOGE covering a third block, A-6. The withdrawal will cost a total of US$209m, Woodside told the Australian Stock Exchange. “Given the ongoing situation in Myanmar we can no longer contemplate Woodside’s participation in the development of the A-6 gas resources, nor other future activities in-country,” the company’s chief executive, Meg O’Neill, said. Woodside has not conducted any activities in Myanmar since shortly after the coup and has paid no permit fees to the government in the past year, a spokesperson said. Myanmar’s military seized control of the country in a coup in February 2021 and has since killed more than 1,200 civilians in a crackdown on pro-democracy protests. Known as the Tatmadaw, the military has faced international condemnation over its 2017 “clearance operations” – executed with “genocidal intent”, according to UN investigators – against the ethnic minority Rohingya in Rakhine state, which included mass killings, including of children, gang rapes, arson and torture. More than 25,000 Rohingya were killed, and 700,000 driven over Myanmar’s border into Bangladesh. Yadanar Maung, a spokesperson for Justice for Myanmar, welcomed the withdrawals as “a major step in cutting off funds to the illegal military junta”. “It is essential that the companies exit responsibly, mitigating negative impacts and ensuring the junta does not benefit financially from their withdrawal.” Yadanar Maung said it was “shameful the Australian government had failed to take any meaningful action to stop revenue flows to the junta, not even sanctioning the war criminal and commander-in-chief Min Aung Hlaing even though nearly a year has passed since the attempted coup”. “Australia is now even lagging behind big oil when it comes to action on Myanmar.” Clancy Moore, the Australian director of anti-corruption coalition Publish What You Pay, welcomed Woodside’s action but said other Australian companies should also pull out and the government should take action against the regime by sanctioning its generals. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Governments including Australia must still introduce sanctions to stop revenue flow from gas, oil and mining funding the military … to wage war against the people of Myanmar.” Elaine Pearson, the Australia director of Human Rights Watch, said the departure of Woodside following Total and Chevron underscored the need for coordinated and targeted sanctions from the US, EU, Australia, UK, Japan and other concerned governments on Myanmar’s natural gas revenues. “Myanmar’s military will continue to collect massive revenues from natural gas and other extractive sectors unless new targeted sanctions block foreign currency payments, because other companies will take over their operations. Sanctions are urgently needed now on MOGE and other military-controlled entities.” Pearson said the departure of energy companies from Myanmar would be only gestures so long as the junta kept making money. “The US, EU, Australia and others need to impose measures that will have real economic impact on the junta, if there is to be any progress on human rights.”Hove pigeons heave to. A sudden move and up they go, an applause of them, airborne. They lift above the kiosk roof, above the dog and the sign that says No Dogs, above parked cars, trees and lawns down to the sea startled by its own light. How many times a day do the pigeons do this? Disguised in their pigeon-ness, cooing, pecking at invisible stuff, they’re only waiting for a clap to make the thunder. How do they decide who goes first? This one, that one, all. The sudden reclamation of their ancestral rock-dovery rises before Regency-windowed cliffs of the seafront – savage little shadows in a polite breeze. Caught in the act, at shutter speed, their grey-on-blue silhouettes are like joyfully cast underwear. What is it to be wound so tight that the slightest quiver scares you into the sky? Danger wears feathers, too. Death flies a falcon, drives a van, monitors through the beady eyes of gulls, who stand aloof on chimney pots in winter quiet. A couple of jays (Leonard and Kenneth, apparently) in their pieds, pinks and blues, attend to street elms. People, lifted by class A sunshine, keep their little familiars on leads. What is it to see as a pigeon sees? Unlike the three-cone types of our retinas, pigeons have four – red, green, blue and ultraviolet; some cones contain coloured oil droplets allowing them to see even more colours than we can. What is it to feign panic but never touch, only smack wings together above and below the body on takeoff; clapping the moment, not the cause of the moment; clapping not being dead but deft. To speed through lanes of air, around buildings and trees, more dance than flight. To map which way is up and down, north and south, prospect and refuge, home. To have all that data spooling around the mind as feathers fly in and out of jeopardy. To wear a memory, coded in the iridescence around their necks, of a lost world of wild coasts hidden under the pavement, never found because every time they search for it, there’s a sudden move and they’re airborne again. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryNature lovers will be able to enjoy the high-speed flight of the chequered skipper butterfly in an English woodland for the first time in more than 45 years this summer. Such is the success of a four-year reintroduction programme to return the rare insect to the woods of Northamptonshire, where it fell extinct in 1977, that its secret site can be revealed to the public. The exact location of the butterflies was previously a closely guarded secret to protect fragile populations, but the charity Butterfly Conservation, which leads the project, has now announced that the public will be able to see the butterfly in Forestry England’s Fineshade Wood. Last year 65 were spotted in the woods, after adult butterflies were brought from Belgium in 2018 and 2019. The English offspring have successfully bred for several years and have increased their range by 20 hectares, with the wider woodland being carefully managed to create the sunny ridges and glades that the species requires. Dr Dan Hoare, the director of conservation for Butterfly Conservation, said: “We have had to keep the exact location of these butterflies secret for the first few years following their introduction to allow them time to get established. While our work to secure the future of this population of chequered skipper continues, we are delighted to be able to reveal their location so that butterfly enthusiasts can come and enjoy spotting them in the wild in England for the first time in more than 40 years.” While the chequered skipper is flourishing again thanks to the Back from the Brink project, Susannah O’Riordan, the chequered skipper project manager for Butterfly Conservation, said they hoped the butterfly would expand further across its traditional stronghold of Rockingham Forest in Northamptonshire. The chequered skipper’s only other British population is in the Highlands of Scotland. “It’s always a work in progress and we’ve still got to maintain the population size,” said O’Riordan. “They are such a difficult butterfly to monitor because they are so fast, and sneaky about where they are. We’re definitely only seeing a proportion of the population on site.” The butterfly typically emerges at the end of May and visitors to Fineshade Wood will be supervised by two “skipper rangers” as well as Butterfly Conservation volunteers and Forestry England staff. Visitors are being urged to stick to marked footpaths and not trample long grass, which the butterfly’s caterpillars feed on. “It can be a problem if people aren’t respectful of their habitat,” said O’Riordan. “But we’ve been doing a lot of management in nearby woodland and we hope as numbers increase that the butterfly will colonise some of the additional woodlands in the area. That’s always been our aim through the project – to create lots of habitat for the chequered skipper to colonise naturally. There’s a lot more open habitat and sunny spaces for the butterfly to expand into.”If Boris Johnson’s premiership is brought to a humiliating close in the coming days, it will not only be because he allowed Downing Street’s boozy lockdown parties to happen on his watch – but because he lied about them. When allegations of parties first emerged, Johnson told MPs in the House of Commons that Covid guidance “was followed completely in No 10”, and on another occasion – vehemently – that he had been “repeatedly assured” there were no parties. Both of those assertions now seem increasingly hard to believe, as has been evident in Johnson supporters’ tortuous efforts to defend him. Slavish loyalist Conor Burns plumbed new depths of absurdity this week by saying the prime minister was “ambushed by a cake”. On Wednesday Labour claimed there was further evidence of lies when newly released Foreign Office emails appeared to contradict Downing Street’s insistence that Johnson did not personally authorise the controversial rescue of cats and dogs from a British animal charity in Afghanistan. Even those cabinet ministers who have backed him in recent days have stressed the sanctity of the ministerial code, which says bluntly that “ministers who knowingly mislead parliament will be expected to offer their resignation”. Citing that rule on Wednesday, Labour leader Keir Starmer called on Johnson to resign immediately. But judging by the prime minister’s half-apology for attending the “bring your own booze” party in May 2020, which he insisted he believed was a “work event”, he appears likely to argue that if he did mislead parliament, he did so unwittingly. Amber Rudd resigned as home secretary in 2018 when she discovered she had “inadvertently misled” the home affairs select committee but Johnson appears unlikely to take the same approach. His allies have insisted he will fight any vote of no confidence. Those who have worked closely with Johnson over the years say fibbing is an entrenched part of his psychological makeup – and his political toolkit. His first instinct, when backed into a political corner, is to tell a wilful untruth, they say. Indeed, they suggest that, over time, Johnson comes to believe the version of reality he weaves for himself as he fibs his way out of trouble. “It’s almost a superpower in a way,” one former colleague said with something approaching awe. He has twice been sacked in the past for lying. In 1988, the Times got rid of him after he made up quotes in a news story. He later conceded that he had “mildly sandpapered something somebody said”. As an MP in 2004, he was dispatched from the Tory frontbench, not for having an affair but for failing to come clean about it. He had described the claims of a long-running relationship with Spectator colleague Petronella Wyatt as “complete balderdash”. During the 2019 Tory leadership contest, Conservative MPs who compared notes afterwards found he had made completely contradictory promises to them about what stance he would take on particular policies. None of that appeared to matter too much when the odd fib was part of the devil-may-care persona his own MPs believed made Johnson the “Heineken politician”, reaching groups of voters the Tories had previously struggled to win over. And it was of a piece with the ruthless approach he and his band of Vote Leave veterans took to bulldozing Brexit through – even when that meant proroguing parliament, or taking the whip away from senior and long-serving MPs. Little more than two years after Johnson secured a thumping parliamentary majority and did indeed “get Brexit done”, he may be felled by the very maverick qualities that helped him into Downing Street – not least his seeming inability to stick to the truth.A one-night stand, people used to say, is like a short story: if it is any good, you want it to go on for longer; if it isn’t, you could have done with 15 minutes’ more sleep. To which the retort is: sure – but a lot of people really like short stories. A lot of people, in the pre-pandemic days, used to really like one-night stands, too. The sex therapist Jenny Keane hosts a wide-ranging sex chat through her Instagram account. On it, one woman wrote appreciatively: “The sex is purely focused on pleasure. You’re not thinking about your relationship dynamics, them not doing the dishes. It’s about being served and cared for physically. It can be a very empowering and beautiful thing.” But not any more. While it is difficult to separate the immediate pandemic effects from long-term trends, the one-night stand has been replaced by encounters that may still be casual, but aren’t total one-offs: the friendship with benefits, if you like, or the “situationship”. The National Survey of Sexual Attitudes and Lifestyles (Natsal) is a huge-sample longitudinal study that has taken place every 10 years since 1990. In 2020, the usual face-to-face fieldwork was interrupted by Covid, but the web-based study that replaced it found a precipitous drop in the number of sexually active people reporting a new sexual partner over the previous four weeks, down by half (from 8% to 4%). Fair enough: it was the start of lockdown and no one was meant to be doing anything with anyone they didn’t live with. The researchers then divided the responses into four groups: those not in a relationship and not having sex; those not in a relationship but having sex; those in a relationship and living apart; and those in a cohabiting relationship. When they drilled down into these, they discovered patterns that would certainly have surprised and discomfited the health secretary (unless that health secretary was Matt Hancock, who has not been a model of sexual restraint). Those most likely to have had any physical contact in the four months since lockdown – most likely to have had penetrative sex, most likely to have had sex several times a week or every day, most likely to have sex toys, and most likely to report an improved sex life during the pandemic – were those in the “casual” bracket (having sex but not in a settled relationship). In sum, there has been no shortage of sexual activity among single people; there is just less churn, which is to say the pace of relationships has changed from a mayfly’s to a caterpillar’s. This has been the experience of Marie, 48, who is recently divorced. “In your 20s, you’d go into a bar and you’d lock eyes with the one you wanted a one-night stand with, and you’d go home with him,” she says. Now, however, she is having two casual “ongoing encounters”, which are “absolutely perfect”, she says. “Obviously, I’m nearly 50; I didn’t think I could do that kind of thing again.” Where does someone look if they do want a one-stand? Not in bars, apparently. “Until now, I don’t think I’d ever been out for an evening and ended up just with the people I went out with,” says Jess, 27, from Edinburgh. “Someone would know someone else from another group, the two groups would merge – that used to happen all the time. You can sleep with someone you’ve just met, knowing you don’t want to take it any further, in a way you wouldn’t with a friend.”’ “It’s very rare to get hit on in real life these days,” adds a female foot soldier in Keane’s Instagram army. “And dating apps don’t facilitate one-night stands like mums think.” We think of apps as opening up a world in which more people can connect more easily, with less risk of humiliation, which therefore results in vastly increased numbers of one-off sexual encounters. When you can make the first move on your phone and experience any rejection at one remove, what is to stop you making moves all the time? But perhaps the more important impact is that online dating has ushered in structured communication about what people actually want from sex: whether they want something long-term or no-strings. From memory, one-night stands are often rooted in pre-emptive face-saving: you don’t revisit in case the other person thinks you are more serious than they are. These minuscule considerations of pride and humiliation are obviated when everyone states their intentions in their profile. Last year, we were supposed to have a hot girl/boy summer: an explosion of promiscuity and random, meaningless, one-off sexual encounters. But not everyone thought this was likely. “Everyone in the sex toy industry, when people were talking about the summer of love, was going: ‘No, that’s not what’s going to happen,’” says Julia Margo. She is one of the founders of Hot Octopuss, a high-end sex toy company. “If you’re making sex toys, you have to understand how people are using them and how they’re having sex, because that determines what people are going to buy,” she says. At the start of the pandemic, “you could trace the spread of lockdowns by buying behaviours across the world. Once the US went into lockdown, we saw crazy sales, and those were mainly masturbatory aids.” This was in 2020; as we moved into summer, people started buying couples’ toys, then, as we entered 2021, people tended towards the interactive; things you could control by an app and use with a partner long-distance. People were trying hard to keep intimacy alive, in the face of hopelessly insurmountable barriers. “It was similar to what you saw with comms platforms at work: first people set up their home offices, then it was Zoom,” she says. Many people experienced devastating losses during Covid, while those who didn’t had a pressing and unfamiliar awareness of mortality. While the sex toy industry focused on what this meant for physical intimacy, it meant a lot emotionally, too. A carpe diem approach to love is not yet visible in marriage statistics, which lag restrictions and are hard to read, not least because lots of couples who wanted to wed before the pandemic still haven’t had a chance to rebook. However, the ground is thick with anecdotes. As the actor Riz Ahmed said in a recent interview, he got married with this in mind: “Work out what matters to you, stand by it and just don’t fuck about. Get on with it!” A joint survey by the counselling charity Relate and the dating site eHarmony identified the “turbo relationship”; one piquant response was that, during lockdown, “two months felt more like two years of commitment”. Lockdown rules acted as an accelerant, forcing a choice between never seeing each other and moving in together. All this added up to fewer people on the one-night-stand market, whether or not it had been temporarily shut down. As we have been forced into greater intimacy, we have become more open to new experiences. “Unquestionably, people have become more experimental in their interests, forming more couple partnerships [exclusive relationships] and becoming more adventurous within that partnership,” says Margo. A lot of people describe sex in one-night stands as “vanilla”; it is hard to ask for anything out of the ordinary with someone you don’t yet know or trust. There is a theory that a decline in random sexual encounters might indicate a new age of inhibition or sexual moralising, but it looks as if the opposite is true. It could be precisely because people are less inhibited that, even if they don’t want a traditional, monogamous relationship, they want the intimacy and depth it takes to experiment. “You used to be able to categorise people. I could say: this is a BDSM-type person – they’re going to go to a specialist site,” Margo says. She would never have thought of stocking up on stocking gags and dog leads, she says. “To me, these were really niche products. But they are so popular – and it’s the same people who are buying normal vibrators.” Before Covid, it would have been unusual for 55-plus consumers to buy BDSM sex furniture, she says. “But there’s huge experimenting in this age bracket – and they’re spending real money on their sex lives.” For people who have been sexually active during the pandemic, there has been a constellation of effects. Many have had more time to explore latent desires. Sex has offered comfort amid external anxieties. There has been more loaded on to sex lives as other social identities have been pared down. Ultimately, if physical contact is going to be fraught with danger, sex needs to be good. You don’t want to waste it on a one-night stand, which is to libido as a pasty at a service-station is to appetite. Yet, according to the latest Natsal study, one-quarter of people haven’t been sexually active at all in the past two years. They are part of what is driving down the number of one-night stands. The Relate/eHarmony survey found that 39% of single people emerged from the pandemic looking to meet “the one”, while 24% did not want “to waste any more time”. Counterbalancing that determination and certainty, though, was a sense of insecurity, with 25% feeling “out of practice” and 13% “not ready to be intimate” after so many months of social distancing. Even while this skews slightly towards women in the survey, men also describe a sense of trepidation, self-doubt and futility. Andrew, 55, was newly divorced at the start of lockdown and hasn’t had sex since. “I don’t think I am attractive,” he says, matter-of-factly. “I weigh too much. Someone would look at me and think: ‘Oh no. He’s a fatty.’ It’s mainly in my own head, but that doesn’t mean it isn’t real.” Will Nutland, a researcher at the London School of Hygiene &amp; Tropical Medicine and a co-founder of the not-for-profit sexual health organisation The Love Tank, has observations from STI rates and clinic referrals that echo Margo’s. “The expectation that we’d all say: ‘Let’s pull our knickers off and throw them in the air and shag anyone around us’ – that’s not happening and was probably never going to happen,” he says. He points out that a number of opportunities simply didn’t arise during lockdown. Large events – the best hunting ground for one-night stands – have been the first things to close down and the last things to restart. Festivals were poleaxed by last year’s poor weather, while freshers’ week was conducted remotely in 2020. But by 2021, something else had happened: “People of all generations were scared about getting too close to other people,” Nutland says. “They’re not necessarily scared of Covid; they’ve just forgotten how to be intimate. We’ve lost some of those social skills and some of those sexual skills.” Without casual social intimacy, there is less impetus to initiate physical intimacy; we lose our body confidence, which makes us more withdrawn. Also, no one has had to question or confront their new hermit habits, because Covid looms over everything, receding for a while and then returning with a vengeance. The predicament of sexually inactive people is fascinating: have they been living under such harsh restrictions, and in such solitude, that they have started to internalise the rules to create a profound sexual inhibition? Or has the virus provided cover for a level of asexuality that was previously taboo? But these questions don’t tally with the behaviours of sexually active people, which have changed, but not necessarily for the worse: just as much sex, fewer partners, more experimentation. It is unsurprising when you consider the external context – more time in the private sphere, a new and pressing awareness of mortality, far fewer chance encounters with strangers. “It all makes sense – except a lot of these scenes, this experimentation, it all takes time,” says Margo. “It’s not a Wednesday date night thing you can do after the kids are in bed. Maybe that’s why we mainly saw it in the 40-pluses and under-30s.” In other words, parents of young kids are the ones we should be worrying about. If, for others, one-night stands have turned into 15-night stands, the post-pandemic reality may be more sexual fulfilment. Some names have been changedRing ring. Gary Hersham’s phone was going, as usual. The super-prime London estate agent blew through the Mayfair office of his company, Beauchamp Estates, scattering employees behind him. As he climbed into the passenger seat of the company car, a Volkswagen Golf rather than his personal BMW, I asked where we were going. “I don’t know!” he said. He found a postcode, and announced it to the driver. Ring ring. Hersham’s mobile has the high-pitched jangle of an old-fashioned telephone at fire-alarm volume. “I didn’t ask you for that,” he roared down the phone as we sat stationary outside his office. “What makes you assume that’s what I was doing? Could I speak to Emily please?” Emily, his fantastic secretary. Ring ring. Someone else was calling. “We’ve got to wait for Marcus!” Enter, at a trot, Marcus O’Brien, Hersham’s protege: tall, slicked hair, suited and groomed, just 30. (Hersham is 68.) O’Brien had been out for a big dinner the night before, knowable only from his stating the fact: there was no sickly pallor, despite being crammed into the back seat of the Golf, which was now winding its way through Mayfair, past the members’ clubs and hedge funds and townhouses, a neighbourhood in which Hersham has been selling property for 43 years. His agency has sold houses for quantities of money that seem increasingly conceptual as they rise: Belgrave Square (£50m), Caroline Terrace (£60m), Grosvenor Crescent (£100m). Then the ultimate, a career peak in an already elevated range, the most expensive house ever sold in Britain: 2-8a Rutland Gate in Knightsbridge, sold in early 2020 for £215m. As we drove, I asked Hersham what skills were required to do his job. “May I suggest,” he replied, “that you listen to my telephone conversations and see what goes on.” Well, this is what goes on. His phone rings constantly. He is usually having at least three conversations at once: two on the phone (there is typically someone on hold) and one in real life. He talks with the frenetic urgency of someone whose conversations contain the potential for expensive failure. He is often finding numbers, asking people for numbers, giving out numbers. Hersham has the kind of deep, multigenerational well of contacts that means he now sells not just to individuals, but entire dynasties. “He knows everyone,” a former colleague of his told me. And not just everyone in London. He shuttles between representatives of New York financiers, Middle Eastern royal families, the now-almost-quaint Russian oligarchs. “It’s probably third-generation wealth that he’s seeing now,” O’Brien told me. “They’re closer to my age than to his.” As he swerved from conversation to conversation, Hersham modulated his tone accordingly: from soothing compliments to bawling out an underling. He did this instinctively, it seemed, his personality as volatile as the job required, and indivisible from it. The work was the conversation. “Was it a good price or not?! Just a simple yes or no!” Next call: “Believe you me, I know it was the best apartment I’ve ever seen.” Next call: “You’ve got us into serious trouble because you left a door open!” Hersham would not leave a door open. He is fastidious, and arranges his stamp collection, which contains every stamp from the Queen’s coronation to the present day, in precise blocks of four. In an industry famed for its lack of scruple, he is a firm believer in probity. “Life is always to do with kindness,” he told me. “It doesn’t mean you can’t negotiate hard, but you’ve got to negotiate fairly, that’s my motto.” In other words, he shouts at people a lot, but what he shouts is true. We were going, it emerged, to a country house not far from London. The journey out of town allowed Hersham and O’Brien to exchange information on properties we were passing. “What’s going on over there, Gary?” asked O’Brien, of a grand edifice near Hyde Park. “Well, it was renovated about 10 years ago,” said Hersham. “A very strange house.” He knew its owner, its previous owner, its interior design, probably its future. He knows every building of note in the city: their provenance, square footage, basement depths and ceiling heights. He knows which would suit one of his buyers: the new-build penthouse for the Indian billionaire; a stuccoed hunk of Knightsbridge for the Chinese industrialist. London was soon behind us. Prime central London, or PCL as it’s known in the real estate industry, had given way to the kind of areas that tend not to cross Hersham’s desk. Acton, Ealing, Hillingdon, Hayes. Then the motorway, fields, lanes, villages. “One second,” shouted Hersham. “I’ve got no signal, this is a disaster! I’ve got no signal! You need to turn the car around. I need signal.” Ring ring. “Hi, how are you? I’m seeing a house in the country, I lost signal.” Pause. “Reverse the car, reverse the car, reverse the car! Every conversation I have I lose the fucking signal! Just stop the car!” Through a pretty village, down a narrow lane, the car stopped outside a large, gated redbrick manor. “Is this the house?” asked Hersham. “Yes, this is the house,” said O’Brien. “You sure?” “Positive.” “There’s no driveway!” * * * Middlemen. They say the right things, know the right people, take a cut. Sometimes, it’s not obvious what they actually do. But then you try to do something without them and it falls apart, because there’s no interpreter, no buffer, no oil. An agent, as their name implies, makes things happen. The world moves through them. Without them, you’re writing a book that no one reads, selling a house that nobody sees. Hersham is one of an older generation of estate agents in London – mostly men – who have been selling the city’s most lavish homes since the 60s. Among them, Andrew Langton of Aylesford (patch: Chelsea); Peter Wetherell of Wetherell (Mayfair); Trevor Abrahmsohn of Glentree (“the north-west London corridor”); Jonathan Hewlett (central London) and David Forbes of Savills (the entire rich world). These are names known to everyone in the industry, the “old school”, according to Anthony Payne, founder of LonRes, a digital network for prime London agents. They are agents from a pre-corporate age, who agent the old-fashioned way, through contacts, lunches and charm, who care less about KPIs than the unquantifiable skills of inspiring a client’s fidelity and always making them feel as if they’ve won. They all have their particular styles. Langton is frank and humorous – he was “drunk for about a week” after his first sale of a house in Fulham for £4,000 in 1968 – with a telephone patter that spans the problems with Barnes Bridge (“no one wants to repair the bloody thing”) and the woes of the job (“it’s not all beer and skittles, I can tell you”). Forbes, an ex-Gurkha, who started out in Knightsbridge with an A to Z and a battered old car, is gracefully self-deprecating: “I think people bought from me out of sympathy, I didn’t know a thing.” Wetherell is more stately, with the air of an old English hymn. (“I like selling history,” he told me.) Abrahmsohn, meanwhile, is more of a talk-your-head-off kind of guy, “a big Brexiteer”, full of stories of negotiating deals through a limo window, proud of his “vines and networks” that spread across the world. “I work on psychology, and a lot of chutzpah.” And then there’s Hersham, the character-in-chief, famous in the industry for his hair (flamboyant), his company’s impressive sales record (“100 units a year”) and his personality (so dominant and capricious that it can make the inside of a Volkswagen Golf feel like it’s laced with explosives). One fellow agent characterised Hersham’s selling style as, “lock them in the car and don’t let them out until they’ve bought something”. “Shout at someone and play hard until you get the price you want,” suggested another. Hersham does not trade in self-effacement. “Can I have an offer now, please,” I once heard him brusquely instruct a buyer on the phone, as if purchasing a multimillion-pound house was no longer the buyer’s choice. “As I’ve said to his face many times,” said Payne, who used to work with Hersham, “he’s a lunatic, but he’s a phenomenal operator.” (Hersham’s self-assessment of his industry reputation was less kind. “Some hate me, some think I’m not straightforward. Abrasive. Difficult to work with.”) Abrahmsohn, the self-described “parable of Thatcherite enterprise”, told me that he made a point of wearing Marks &amp; Spencer suits – his way of saying that even if he’s showing a £50m marbled mansion on The Bishops Avenue, he’s still Trevor, who started out in the 70s with a £10,000 bank loan and a bright green Alfa Romeo Alfasud. Hersham takes a different approach. His suits are tailor-made in Italy and his shirts come from a Milanese atelier. He collects art, reads widely, loves film. His professional mode, meanwhile, is “bullish”, according to O’Brien. “Bombastic?” interjected Hersham. “Bombastic is maybe the word,” conceded O’Brien. Hersham grew up in a large white house on a fine strip of super-prime, Avenue Road in St John’s Wood. He was the son of a successful businessman, Bill Hersham, who ran three public companies, working in textiles, banking and insurance. The family were what he describes as “modern Orthodox”, and Hersham remains devout (he prays every day). He speaks Hebrew, Yiddish, Italian, Spanish, French, German, “bad Arabic and bad Russian”. Education was prized, and Hersham got a lot of it: after school, he spent two years at a yeshiva in Israel, then studied zoology, biochemistry and applied entomology at Imperial College, before starting a PhD at the Royal School of Medicine. Hersham then went to work for his father, who was “a bit of a tyrant, probably like me”. Hersham decided to escape the family business and joined a friend who had just set up an estate agency – Scott Gilroy on Beauchamp Place in Knightsbridge. They changed the name to Beauchamp Estates, and in 1977, Hersham bought out his friend and began his dogged professional ascent. The name was key: a reference to the agency’s old-money address, but also a name that hints of French elegance and English aristocracy (William de Beauchamp, ninth Earl of Warwick, 1237-1298) and comes wired with potential humiliation by requiring you to know before opening your mouth that it’s not said how it’s written. (It’s pronounced “Beecham”.) Back then, London was a different place. “There were very few estate agents,” said Andrew Langton, who had started out a decade earlier, in the mid-60s. Most of the larger agencies were still only interested in commercial sales or farm management, rather than houses. There wasn’t even a property market in the way we understand it now. “You bought a house to live in, as opposed to make any money out of it,” said Langton. For two decades, from the early 50s to early 70s, house prices had barely risen. But then, as the Bank of England eased credit conditions, mortgages became more readily available, housebuilding slowed and supply became limited, house prices rapidly rose. At the start of the 70s, the average house price in Britain had been a little over £4,000. By the end of the decade, it was just short of £20,000. At the top end of the market, London experienced its first injection of overseas cash. The price of oil doubled in 1973 and had quadrupled by early 1974. “The Middle East got hold of their money,” as Langton put it, “and we witnessed this extraordinary buying spree.” That spree was replicated in the next few decades by buyers from Russia, after the fall of the Soviet Union in 1991, and China, after its rapid economic growth in the 2000s. An ongoing buy-to-let boom helped fuel the merciless climb in house prices, and all the while, the very nature of wealth was changing. “You have to understand, in the 70s and 80s, somebody worth £10m or £20m was phenomenally rich,” said Hersham. “Today, it’s a pittance, absolutely nothing.” O’Brien told me about a client he first met in 2019, then worth £1.2bn. By the time they were showing him properties the following summer, he was worth more than £25bn. “Wealth has grown exponentially,” said Hersham, and its effects have distorted the city’s property market. Whole neighbourhoods are now the preserve of the super-rich – not that you see them. “It’s not for me to be bothered about somebody keeping their house empty,” Hersham told me. “It’s not my position to be worried about things like that. The truth is, lots of people don’t occupy expensive houses all year round. Most have a second or third or fourth home. You can’t expect them, if they have that many homes, to occupy them all year round.” * * * The Beauchamp Estates head office, with its gold-tipped black railings and ice-blue external up-lighting system – oddly reminiscent of Elsa’s palace in Frozen the Musical – occupies an entire townhouse on Curzon Street in Mayfair, but Hersham sells across central London, rural England, Monaco, the French Riviera, Greece, Israel and New York. The walls of the reception area are covered with silver-framed photographs of sold properties, with captions that contain detectable Hersham flourishes. La Belle Epoque, Monaco, 16,000 sq ft, €250m: “Undoubtedly one of the finest and most expensive apartments sold anywhere in the world.” Beauchamp Estates employs 80 agents worldwide, and will often team up on a sale with an agency such as Knight Frank or Savills to extend the limited pool of buyers who can afford such properties. They then share the 2% commission, which is low compared to the European rate. “They’re on 3-5%,” Langton told me. “America, 6%. We’re scrambling around like chickens in a farmyard trying to get 1% or more.” At this end of the market, the aim is not volume of sales, but the value of those properties. As Nigel Lewis, an editor at The Negotiator, put it: “There are a lot of posh agencies fighting over a very small number of sales.” The British prime market has had a strange couple of years. During peak Covid, when overseas buyers couldn’t travel, it turned purely domestic, and the rich who were already here wanted out of the city. “You’d try to find a nice four-bed near Newbury with a tennis court and a swimming pool and it’s gone by the time you’ve got down the motorway,” said Langton. But then the buyers realised that Newbury was a solid 90 minutes down a congested M4, and London prime sales began to rise again. In January this year, Beauchamp Estates revealed that they’d doubled their number of super-prime sales in 2021, from 17 sales over £15m in 2020, to 32 in 2021. They predicted the figure would double again in 2022. Savills, meanwhile, reported that prime London property prices were now rising at their fastest pace since 2014, and predicted an 8% growth in prices this year as “pent-up demand from international buyers” flowed back into town. The international buyers want the same things they’ve always wanted: a safe place for their cash, rule of law, no corruption (ha!), and an expensive British education for their children. “One of the key things is schools,” said Edwin Smith of Spear’s, a magazine for ultra-high-net-worth individuals. (Eton, Wycombe Abbey, Wellington College, Charterhouse, Millfield and Milton Abbey are the most viewed by readers on the Spear’s online Schools index.) A buyer from China or Russia “might relocate their whole family when they put their child into one of the top schools”. For these kinds of buyers, London’s prime agents have a “bottom drawer” of the best properties for sale that never go anywhere near the open market. “We let them into the inner sanctum,” Abrahmsohn told me, referring to the small group of buyers who are shown the most exclusive properties. “That’s called a placing. It’s not to do with boards and advertising, or internet nonsense.” Full transparency about how the actual process unfolds is neither required, nor desirable. “Confidentiality is an important part of our business,” he added. The agency itself, then, is a kind of mirage. The biggest sales are quietly negotiated by a small group of extremely well-connected agents concealed behind company names invented to imply upper-class British discretion. “It’s why Foxtons is called Foxtons,” said Nigel Lewis. “It’s just a name they picked because it sounds posh.” This is Britain as brand: a commodification of a fractional way of life that required a townhouse, acreage, staff – and died between the wars. Never mind that there’s almost no one in this country who can remember or afford such an existence. Extremely rich people from other places adore it and want to recreate it, and the prime estate agents know how to sell it. You hear it in their language, the lexicon of heritage filling the Beauchamp Estates brochure: “Steeped in history”; “one of London’s finest addresses”; “the heart of old Chelsea”. A slice of fictional England, a portal to aristocracy, yours for £10,000 a square foot. * * * Back at the driveway-less country house, Hersham strode through some light rain to the front door. “Just need to warm up for a second,” he announced. Tea was served by the housekeeper, who beamed as Hersham complimented the unusual blend of tea-leaves in the pot. Warmed, Hersham coursed with new energy. The bleak country lanes were forgotten now that he was back in his natural habitat of beautiful rooms. As the housekeeper led him round, he gave a virtuoso performance, accurately guessing when the house was built, praising the handmade wallpaper, which covered even the light switches, and leaping upon a set of delightful hinges that enabled some double doors to fold back completely. O’Brien, meanwhile, deftly handled the plastic covers of the golf carts that whisked us round the outbuildings in the rain. Hersham doesn’t need long in a place to get the measure of it. He can estimate square footage by sight, commit a floorplan to memory and offer a sensible valuation. He is not a believer in overstating the price. “There’s a lot of people out there in my profession who have the ability to be straight-faced and to say one thing one day and one thing on another day. This is not what I want to be,” he said. “This is more the younger generation,” he added, darkly. “Not the older generation.” There is much talk, in London prime real estate circles, of this new generation, perhaps because they pose a challenge to the old guard. They’ve found new ways of doing the work. Younger prime agents fill Instagram with videos of themselves giving tours of London mansions, a style pioneered by a man whose name suggests he was always destined to become a personal brand: Daniel Daggers. “Along with Gary Hersham, he’s the other really interesting person in this market,” said Edwin Smith of Spear’s. Daggers – “AKA #MrSuperPrime”, according to his Instagram profile – grew up in local authority housing in west London, began working at a small agency in his late teens, then moved to Knight Frank where, in the early days of Facebook Live, he streamed himself wandering round 432 Park Avenue, more than 80 storeys of latticed white concrete containing some of New York’s most expensive new apartments. “I walked around this apartment like a novice, shifting the camera back and forth,” Daggers told me. But it worked: the video picked up thousands of views thanks to an early version of what would become his trademark style: relaxed, chummy, with a warm to-camera gaze. Daggers realised he was on to something – people liked the chance to snoop inside luxury properties, and the videos were essentially free marketing. “I got back to London and said: we need to professionalise this; this is the future of our industry,” he said. Daggers’ approach caused him some problems, however, when he was reported to have posted photos of a client’s house on Instagram without their permission and was obliged to leave Knight Frank. “All of the posh agents mention him as an example of why you should never use social media,” said Nigel Lewis. “But it’s been the making of him.” In early 2020, Daggers launched his own company, Daniel Daggers Real Estate. The website boasts that Daggers has sold more than $4bn worth of property, and carries a large portrait of him on the front page, smiling into the distance, a slice of expensive watch poking out from under his jacket sleeve. Seven years after his Facebook Live breakthrough, his selling strategy still involves committed use of social media. “Exactly the kind of space you want to live in,” he said in a recent Instagram tour of a shining white marble kitchen-breakfast room, “because you will end up living here, no doubt.” But Daggers emphasises that he’s not going to plaster your toilet all over his Instagram stories if you don’t want it there. “I can do super-discreet and I can do super-loud,” he told me. His self-promotional mode follows the American style, where realtors have long planted pictures of their faces on sticks in front lawns and Netflix’s Selling Sunset has made stars of its Los Angeles agents. Daggers’ own celebrity complements that of his clients. His insight, according to Lewis, is that “there’s a new type of wealth coming out: a wealth built on fame”. For this kind of buyer, a house is the ultimate avatar: the easiest way to demonstrate financial and domestic success, sexier than a balance sheet and far more effective in photographs. “That’s why Daggers has got it right,” said Lewis, “because that’s the way it’s going.” “He’s creating brand Danny Daggers,” said Anthony Payne. Or, as Daggers put it, “I digitised me as a human being.” Many of the older agents remain unconvinced. Instagram offers cost-effective marketing, said Abrahmsohn, but “it’s not going to help you do the deal”. Buyers who wanted privacy would still turn to the traditional agents. Hersham’s objections were more fundamental. “Let me put it this way,” he told me. “I’ve never been on Instagram. I’ve never looked at it. My children use Instagram. I don’t even know how to use it, nor do I want to know how to use it.” (Beauchamp Estates employs a social media manager.) For Hersham, it wasn’t just technological discomfort, but a sense of decorum, of how things should be done. “There’s one chap whose name I don’t want to mention,” he told me. “I’m a joint agent with him on a £110m property and I was on a call with him today.” The other agent suggested to the client they remove a rug in the hallway to better show off the space, and “I wanted to say, ‘Fuck off!’ Excuse my language. You can’t afford a £110m house, how do you dare turn round to the client and say take that away?” To Hersham, such behaviour was an unconscionable failure of etiquette. The client is king; you compliment their taste even if you think it’s awful. You certainly don’t tell them how to decorate. In this case, the interior was “impeccable” anyway, which suggested the younger agent didn’t know good taste when he saw it. The next generation could post any number of adrenalised house tours on social media, but they couldn’t summon four decades of deep expertise, nor could they be trusted to know the quality or correct positioning of a rug. The job, to Hersham’s eye, has little to do with self-promotion. (Although, always contrary, Hersham frames and hangs his press interviews in the Beauchamp Estates lobby.) Instead, it requires a more complicated performance: simultaneously powerful and deferential, an insatiable desire to sell combined with a refined discretion. At times, his commitment to propriety leans into absurdity. I once heard Hersham reprimand a junior employee about a pair of shoes being left in the office reception area, as if their presence constituted a grave moral transgression. Another time, he bellowed at a buyer on the phone, warning them not to go with a rival agent. His tone was so extreme, I presumed he must be joking. “Absolutely not,” he told me. “Because I’ve put so much work in – my work has to be respected. There is an obligation on people to be loyal.” His expectation of appropriate behaviour often seemed to result, paradoxically, in questionable behaviour. No one could possibly meet his standards, least of all himself. * * * Early summer, and Hersham was at his desk in the Mayfair office, punching out emails with one finger. Ring ring. “For God’s sakes!” Ring Ring. “Big kiss. Love you.” Ring ring. “They can’t go! They’re going to be in quarantine!” A breath, the briefest of pauses. “It’s quite quiet at the moment,” he told me. We’re about to do a deal at just under £100m. Don’t ask where; I wouldn’t tell you. I wouldn’t dream of telling you.” He’d been in the office until 2am the previous night. Often, Hersham will go home to his flat in Knightsbridge, have dinner with his wife, then come back. The billionaires can call him any time, day or night. (“If you think he’s intense now, he’s calmed down quite a bit,” Anthony Payne told me.) Today, the conversations were operating on multiple platforms, a situation with which Hersham was struggling given his generational preference for the telephone. “What with all these applications – WhatsUp, emails, SMS, LinkedIn – I never finish,” he said. WhatsUp? “What should one say?” WhatsApp? “Oh! I always call it WhatsUp.” As if the app had got it wrong. A three-way Zoom was due to start with two representatives of an anonymous buyer, but the technology was defeating him. Emily, his fantastic secretary, was summoned. Finally, there they were, boxed on his screen: two other middlemen on the hunt. “Hello, I don’t know what we’re talking about. Do you want to tell me?” Hersham barked. “I think you have a few hotels? We’ve got a few buyers, looking for hotels.” Hotels to buy, that is. Hersham confirmed he had hotels. They wanted details. “Absolutely not! Please let’s do things the correct way. You need to tell me who you’re acting for, and are these people capable of spending £165m?” The men, so recently bullish, began to crumple. Hersham wanted everything on email. One of the men promptly sent over his email address on WhatsApp. Mistake. “Don’t do it by WhatsUp please. Send me an email properly. I can’t get all this nonsense. The idea of sending me to WhatsUp so I’ve got to email is madness.” Ring ring. Hersham took the call, chatted in Italian, ended the call, “Grazie, ciao.” An assistant placed a pile of files on his desk. He’d lost interest in the Zoom call, wanted to move on. The men asked if they could talk to any of the hotel investors. Another mistake. “No! I made it quite clear. You can’t speak to anybody. You can’t, you can’t, I’m sorry!” More crumpling. “Boys, I have to go!” He shook his head. Dodgy business. I wondered how he knew. “You get a feeling,” he said. Suspicious people cross his path all the time. A few years ago, he’d shown a flat on Wilton Crescent to a man obviously faking a Russian accent. Hersham man-marked him round the building, then reported him to the police. Turned out, he was one of the gang who had stolen Tamara Ecclestone’s jewellery from her Kensington mansion in 2019. The Zoom call raised Hersham’s suspicions because of the men’s unwillingness to say who they were working for. “I know how I like to work,” he said. “And if somebody has a buyer, they need to name their buyer to me.” This wasn’t just Hersham’s propriety talking. Until 2017, an overseas buyer could hide a purchase beneath “three or four layers and park up £20m over here with no one blinking an eye”, as one agent put it. Or in other words, use a massive London house to launder a lot of cash. (In 2015, the magazine Private Eye discovered that over the previous decade, £170bn of property in England and Wales had been acquired by offshore companies registered in tax havens.) Now, however, there are stricter requirements, introduced under the 2017 Money Laundering Regulations and recently upgraded. Estate agents have to obtain more detailed information on buyers before they can proceed with a sale. They can’t just be palmed off with a company name, but must have a proof of ID and address for the “ultimate beneficial owner” of the property. Some agents bemoan the increased paperwork, and some, according to Nigel Lewis, still “turn a blind eye to money-laundering”. But most I spoke to welcomed the tightened rules, tired of being blamed for the tide of murky wealth that swept into London over the decades (from which they were quite happy to take their cut). “If you go back two or three years, a lot of agents had to stop and look at themselves,” said John Ennis, head of Foxtons private office, who told me of deals now falling through if buyers tried to sidestep the correct process. “People think it makes life harder,” Hersham told me, “but it makes things easier, because you know who you’re dealing with.” But the new rules don’t stop billionaires from buying up chunks of London and leaving houses empty for years. Take 2-8a Rutland Gate, Beauchamp’s triumph, previously owned by Crown Prince Sultan bin Abdulaziz of Saudi Arabia, and bought by the Chinese billionaire property developer Cheung Chung-kiu, who also owns the “cheesegrater” skyscraper in the City. After the sale went through in early 2020, Cheung’s team launched a website on which they published planning applications and design schemes. Once finished, the house could be worth between £500m and £600m, making it the world’s most expensive individual home. One winter afternoon, I went to look at it, walking there from Green Park, the Ritz glinting at my back, along Knightsbridge, past One Hyde Park, the Candy brothers’ luxury development in which the penthouse was marketed for £175m last year, and past a yellow Ferrari parked outside the Harvey Nichols Christmas display of men lounging in skiwear. Finally, there it was, six storeys of 19th-century white stucco, 12 filthy windows across. The property looked run-down, unlovely and unloved. The only sign of life was a row of hi-vis vests hanging on a coat rail in a basement room. (The place will be a building site for years.) Like other parts of prime central London, the only people out on the street round here were its private workforce: builders, cleaners, gardeners, housekeepers. Seeing this lifeless husk of real estate prompted all the obvious furies: the waste of space in a city where most people lack it, where many have none at all; the pointlessness of that kind of wealth; the ways it could be better distributed. But there was something else, too – the particular atmosphere around a property whose owners can afford not to use its 45 bedrooms. Uninhabited, it was simply an asset with none of the qualities you might associate with a home. Lights, people, sounds. It’s the same in so many prime London neighbourhoods where the houses sit empty. The buildings reek of loneliness; a kind of great, oppressive vacancy. Nothing moves. * * * November, a central London townhouse. Carpets like fresh snow, so deep and soft we left footprints. Hersham noted the backlit onyx, the neat en suite attached to the staff bedroom, the dumb waiter that came up from the stainless-steel professional kitchen in the basement. (The family kitchen was an overwhelming marble creation upstairs.) In the sub-sub-basement, inside the tiled cubicle by the pool, there was a shower head the size of a Sky dish. We climbed the marble stairs to the hallway. Ring Ring. “Fabulous,” Hersham told someone on the phone. He turned to me. “What do you think?” My face must have betrayed me. “It’s not about taste,” he admonished. The house was perfect for a certain kind of buyer. A voicemail to O’Brien, itemising the particulars. Back in the car, we drove to Hersham’s apartment in Knightsbridge. Two other deals were playing out as we climbed the stairs to the first floor. After a quiet summer, the market had revived and business was frenzied again. Ding ding ding. The messages chimed relentlessly. “Fuck-a-duck,” said Hersham, putting someone on hold. Inside the flat were all its original features, huge windows, extravagantly high ceilings. The living room contained an unexpected disco ball in one corner, alongside contemporary light sculptures and modernist paintings. “Do you notice a single painting that isn’t straight?” A multiplicity of taste was on display, as if to reflect the contradictory impulses of Hersham’s character – overspilling excess combined with obsessive order. “Imagine the light pouring in in the daytime,” he boomed. “Imagine the disco ball with the sunlight shining on it around the room.” Intricate frieze decorations were picked out in gold leaf at eye level and gold paint higher up. There were Chinese urns, art books, mantelpieces crammed with so many pictures of his family that you couldn’t see most of their faces. “Family is everything. Everything.” Unlike the apparently untouched homes in the Beauchamp Estates brochure, full of rooms that have the distinctive air of having been designed remotely by a professional with too large a budget, this seemed to be a place where people actually lived. The sofa looked much sat upon. The books had been read. At the kitchen table there was a little high chair for his grandson. For the first time in our meetings, Hersham sat down on an armchair and did not look at his phone for 20 minutes. He looked physically distressed by the experience, as if trying to suppress a bout of indigestion. Ding, ding, ding. “You don’t understand how stressful agency is,” he said. The kind of stress that is addictive, adrenalin-rich. “Do you have a picture of me?” he suddenly asked. “Do you understand who I am?” As if there might only be one answer. The night before, he’d been invited to a grand dinner by some business colossus. He was seated next to the host, which surprised Hersham, as he’d only met him for the first time a few weeks ago. “I asked,” – as only Hersham would – “‘Why have you invited me? And why am I sitting next to you?’” The host told him that they had found him easy to talk to and – evidently to Hersham’s delight – knowledgable. That is, he was more than just an estate agent. Most agents, he told me, were limited characters who could talk about nothing but property. “You wonder to yourself, would they be good company at supper?” Hersham, by logical extension, was good company at supper. All those languages. All that learning. An ability to transform himself into whatever was the most beguiling version of his character, a chameleon gift that appeared instinctive, but was in fact, as he put it, “honed”. Ring ring. An overseas buyer, looking in London. “You’re not to go to any other agent! You’re not to go to any other agent! If I find you going to another agent, I’ll be really upset with you!” There was a pleading tone on the other end of the line: would Hersham look after her? Hersham made a signature tonal switch, suddenly all softness. “Of course I will.” After the call, Hersham lapsed into self-reflection. “I don’t want to be painted as anything other than the way I am,” he said. “I’m as black and white as you can get. Either people like me or they don’t like me. I just say what I have to say. No, I say what I want to say.” He paused, realising something. “The funny thing is sometimes words come out of my mouth that actually my head hasn’t told me to say. I can’t quite explain it. I feel it. How did I say that? I’m not talking about saying things rudely, or impolitely. Just the content. ‘Ooh, that’s rather clever, or ooh, that’s rather stupid.’” He looked amused, a little perplexed, as if trying to fathom how the performance of being himself, a performance he’d been refining all his working life, could remain a mystery to his own intelligence. Ding ding ding. You could see the cortisol thrill through his body. “I need to check my messages.” Out came the phone. Ring ring. • Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread, listen to our podcasts here and sign up to the long read weekly email here.Jeremy King is a devotee of the dice. The restaurateur behind the Wolseley and the Delaunay gave up his place at Cambridge University in the 1970s on a throw of the dice after reading George Cockcroft’s cult novel The Dice Man. “It was something I did casually about deciding where I should go for dinner,” King said in a speech about his career last year. “[But] then I ended up throwing the dice on my life.” When the envelope from Cambridge dropped through the letterbox of the family home in Burnham-on-Sea, Somerset, he threw the dice. The throw said: “If you become a manager within a month of your 21st birthday then you will stay in this business for the rest of your life.” He had part-time job at Charco’s wine bar, a celebrity haunt off Kings Road in Chelsea. Within a month of his 21st birthday he was appointed the manager. The dice kept calling, though, sending him off to become a merchant banker. His careers adviser at school had told him he would make a “a really brilliant accountant”. But in reality he found it terribly boring and described working in the City as “hell”. Then it was back to restaurants, this time at New York-style brasserie Joe Allen in Covent Garden. After work he would hang out at Langan’s Brasserie where he struck up a firm friendship with then general manager Chris Corbin. The pair, then 26 and 28, decided they should open their own restaurant. Within a year they had taken over Le Caprice in 1981, but almost immediately fell out with their financial backers as they couldn’t agree how to run a modern restaurant. King persuaded his mum and dad to back him instead. “My parents mortgaged their house and we bought the lease. We were young with 100% control. No one could tell us what to do,” he said. Over the past 40 years Corbin and King have been described as “near deities on the London restaurant scene”, the “Rodgers and Hammerstein of relaxed eating” and “the Rolls and Royce of London gastronomy”. But now their Corbin &amp; King empire – which includes the Wolseley next to the Ritz on Piccadilly, Delaunay on Aldwych, Brasserie Zédel by Piccadilly Circus, Fischer’s in Marylebone, Café Wolseley at Bicester Village, and Bellanger in Islington – is under fire from American-born Thai billionaire William Heinecke. Heinecke’s Minor International hospitality investment fund bought a 74% stake in Corbin &amp; King for £58m in 2017 and on Tuesday forced the company into administration warning it was “unable to meet its financial obligations” and claiming King, who serves as Corbin &amp; King’s chief executive, had repeatedly rejected “proposals to recapitalise the company”. King accuses Heinecke of making a “power play” for full control of the company, and said that post-lockdown the restaurants were “trading extremely well” and there was “absolutely no need to go into administration”. Quoting 18th-century Soho poet William Blake to the Financial Times, he said: “A truth that is told with bad intent beats all the lies you can invent.” While he has mostly worked running restaurants, King has always considered himself a literary man and has admitted to “secretly wishing I had been in the theatre”. “But of course restaurateuring is, in a funny way, theatre,” he told the Association of Jewish Refugees in a speech last year (King isn’t Jewish, but his children from his first marriage to theatre producer-turned therapist Debra Hauer are.) “You learn your lines, you practise, you rehearse and then suddenly it’s makeup, costumes and the curtain’s up and you’re performing.” Contrary to expectations, King says “deep down I am an extremely shy person” but he is transformed “in the context of a restaurant’s stage”. King’s Rolodex must rate as one of London’s most extensive, as his restaurants have been – and still are – popular with both FTSE 100 chief executives having power breakfasts as well as members of royalty and celebrities enjoying themselves. He describes one night at Le Caprice in the 1980s when Norma Heyman, the producer of films including Dangerous Liaisons, came in requesting a table for eight without a reservation. “Suddenly the table [at which] Laurence Olivier was celebrating his birthday at got up earlier than expected, thank God,” he told the Jewish refugee association. “Then I saw flashlights … and Liz Taylor promptly sat down on the same seat that Olivier had just vacated”. Princess Diana was a regular at Le Caprice in the 1980s, always sitting at the most coveted “table nine”. The same table at which Jeffrey Archer – who named checked Le Caprice in his fateful 1986 alibi – ate his first meal after being freed from jail for perjury. Madonna famously ate sticky toffee pudding with Harold Pinter and Tom Cruise at the Ivy, while the Beckhams prefer the Delaunay. Lucian Freud dined at the Wolseley most nights up until his death in 2011. King sat for Freud, becoming one of the artist’s last subjects. King also owns a Freud, which sits alongside an Andy Warhol print of Goethe in the main living room of his five-storey Grade II-listed Belgravia home. Also in his collection are works by Damien Hirst and Robert Longo. His second wife, American interior designer Lauren Gurvich King, says King’s love of art “stems from curating and collecting works for the original Ivy, which helped with the careers of many YBAs”. The Angel of the North sculptor Antony Gormley, a friend of King’s who made an “inhabitable sculpture” for the Beaumont Hotel, said: “They [Corbin &amp; King] have always understood art as an integral part of the way an environment makes you feel. Their restaurants have never been just about food but the curating of an experience.” The Hauer-King children have inherited their parents’ love of the arts. Jonah Hauer-King is an actor who starred in the acclaimed BBC drama series World on Fire, Hannah Hauer-King is a producer for the all-female Damsels in Distress theatre company, and Margot Hauer-King is an advertising executive in New York. • This article was amended on 28 January 2022. Corbin &amp; King no longer owns The Beaumont in Mayfair.The tortured lives of comedians form a biographical genre all of their own; there’s always an audience for the tears of a clown. No wonder Nick Newman and Ian Hislop chose Spike Milligan as the subject of their new play. Milligan, who died 20 years ago next month, is the troubled comedy genius to end them all. Shellshocked in the second world war, repeatedly admitted to hospital for mental ill health, subjected to electroconvulsive therapy, and increasingly embittered as his career failed to deliver on early promise – the Spike Milligan sad-clown drama writes itself. “But we didn’t want to do that,” says Newman. “We wanted to ask: how did he come to create these brilliant things?” Their play – a cheerful act of ancestor-worship by by Private Eye’s editor and its eminent cartoonist – is about the first three years (1951-54) of The Goon Show, as its chief writer Milligan battles the BBC to get his vision on air. “It’s: will he survive the fallout from the war?,” says Newman, “and will he crack radio?” And, “spoiler alert!,” chimes in Hislop. “Milligan wins! We just wanted to have a play where he wins.” Spike sustains a rich collaboration between the duo and the Watermill theatre in Berkshire, which produced their 2016 first world war play The Wipers Times, about a satirical newspaper published in the Flanders trenches. Talking at the venue while their play rehearses next door, Newman classifies Spike as “a sort of sequel” to the earlier play – because, they argue, Milligan’s comic sensibility sprang from his wartime experiences. “When you think of the Goons,” says Hislop, “you think: how many jokes about the Naafi are there, how many reruns of war films, how many explosions and references to [fictional military stuffed-shirt] Major Bloodnok? It’s riddled with it. It’s their wartime experiences put into joke form” – and abstracted into wild sound effects, silly voices and surrealism, too. (“Shellshock on radio,” some called it.) But the BBC didn’t welcome “their finest hour” being held up to ridicule – nor Milligan’s anti-establishment airs in general. After the Goons’ coronation special, when Peter Sellers – horror of horrors! – impersonated Churchill and the Queen, “about 30 BBC managers demanded Spike be sacked for this appalling attack on the monarchy”. That is the conflict the play dramatises: anarchy versus deference, the 60s satire boom in embryo. “What the Goons did,” says Hislop, “was channel the khaki election” that swept the 1945 Labour government to power. But it didn’t happen, at least for Spike, without a fight. “He moved from a world where people were saying: ‘Get on with it, Milligan, and stop messing about’,” says Hislop, “to another world where people said exactly the same thing.” And so, Newman joins in, “he basically carried on fighting the war, but this time against the BBC.” The play was first conceived for television, commissioned by that same BBC to mark the 2018 centenary of Milligan’s birth. The corporation made available an archive of internal memos relating to the Goons, and all Milligan’s correspondence with the broadcaster. As many published volumes have revealed, Spike’s letters were often hilarious. But they also disclose the strain on his mental health of producing so many episodes, and the everyday peevishness of his relationship with the BBC. “You might think ‘I wonder what amazing things Spike wrote to the BBC?,’” says Hislop. “But it’s always: ‘Why haven’t I got a repeat on a Sunday? And: ‘No one listens to us in this slot!’ But that is what drives humans, and he was as human as the rest of us.” Both Hislop and Newman can identify with Milligan’s experiences smuggling hot-potato material on air. Long before Hislop’s Have I Got News for You gig, the pair worked on ITV’s Spitting Image in the 1980s, where Hislop remembers “one election night watching the entire ITV management hugging themselves at their own bravery for broadcasting this programme – a programme that all along they’d been trying to take off the air!” He also recalls, as a rookie journalist, interviewing Milligan on Radio 4’s Midweek. “In those days, there was a bottle of champagne for the guest. I opened the bottle for Spike, very badly, and it went all over my notes. Which I’d written in felt pen.” “Spike, who hadn’t wanted to be interviewed, suddenly warmed up and thought this was the funniest thing ever. It was anarchy, I had no questions – and so he started asking himself questions, far better than the ones I’d planned.” With their play, the pair want to introduce this wild comic sensibility to a new generation – stung by the fact that “my kids didn’t know who Spike was”, as Newman says. “Nor mine,” says Hislop. “Not a clue.” “For a younger generation,” he goes on, “we wanted to banish the image of some very old men, one of whom was on Songs of Praise [Harry Secombe], and another who made really terrible films [Sellers].” They’re less interested, too, in the other side of Spike’s reputation – as a misanthrope, and an artist whose work (including the racist sitcom Curry and Chips) has not always worn well. Instead, Spike tells the story of a moment in time, when the artist’s creativity, his trauma and the spirit of the age came together and made sparks. “Spike wrote 250 episodes of The Goon Show in a 10-year period,” says Newman. “In every series, there are many, many references to the war. Pretty much after that, he stops – and in his later work, hardly mentions it again.” “Can we recreate a period,” asks Hislop, “when these people were incredibly young, fresh out of the army, all working-class, all come up through the ranks? Can we depict this show that started off with lots of people harrumphing, and within a couple of years had audiences that television would now die for? Who thought this was the funniest programme there has ever been?” He beams. “It feels like an amazing thing to try and reignite.” ‘He was extraordinary’ – comedians on Spike Milligan Michael Palin It was such a liberating discovery to listen to The Goon Show. I was about 10 when a friend told me about the show. And once I listened, I was hooked. It was so unlike the rest of comedy at the time. There were no roots to what Spike did: it just took off, and went anywhere. In a half hour, he could be all over the place: that was the thrill. And as well as this wonderful, imaginative comedy, you got to hear all the chuckles, things going wrong and performers having a great time. That was new, at a time when broadcasting was very respectable. There was no one like Spike, really. No one wrote in quite the same way. And what he did gave me a sense of what I could do. I’d think: what I’m writing may be a bit odd, but it’s not nearly as odd as what I’m hearing here! Paul Merton There was a short-lived show called the Telegoons, in the early 60s. It had puppets performing to recorded editions of the radio show. That was my introduction to Milligan, and I was immediately struck by the surreal humour and the strangeness. He was a huge influence on me and seeing him on a chatshow was always funny. I remember one where he said “Now let me demonstrate a cheap but noisy way to travel” – then he just walked across the stage screaming his head off. When he didn’t have to worry about costume changes or rehearsal time, and just let himself be spontaneous, he was extraordinary. AL Kennedy I first encountered him when I was just four or five. He occupied this space that children could understand as well as adults. He was the kid at the side of the road going “yeah, but he’s not wearing any clothes!” But you could tell when he was having an off-day: he could get angry. And part of what upset him was that his productivity was horrific. When I actually looked at his output – Jesus, that would crush you! You have to write an episode of the Goons every week! It’s just: “be good at being funny, every week, any way you want. Three hundred and sixty degrees of possibility.” That would break most people. But if you can do it, and Milligan could, it’s magnificent. Eddie Izzard It was 1974, my dad was working for BP in Abu Dhabi, and he used to record the Goons on Radio Dubai and send it back to us. John Cleese once talked about how each episode was broadcast twice, and he would listen to the second one with the radio to one ear and a pillow to the other, to hear any jokes he had missed. I totally identified with that. Spike’s creativity was beautiful. All these weird sound effects of chickens and motor engines. He was the godfather of alternative comedy. His timing was perfect and his imagination was limitless. I absolutely recommend young comedians listen to as much of Spike’s stuff as they can. Spike is at the Watermill Theatre, Newbury, 27 January until 5 March.A hundred years ago, on 27 January 1922, a major snowstorm hit the region around Washington DC, depositing more than 71cm (28 inches) of snow. This was an unusually heavy fall, and tragedy was to follow. The Knickerbocker theatre had a full house of 900 people for a new silent movie, Get-Rich-Quick Wallingford. One of the newest and largest cinemas in the city, the Knickerbocker had an unusual flat roof. At 9pm, the movie commenced. Then, without warning, with no cracking or creaking, the roof gave way under the weight of snow. It collapsed and brought down the balcony inside the theatre. Hundreds of soldiers assisted in recovering victims from the rubble. Ninety-eight people were crushed to death and many more injured, including a violinist in the orchestra whose arm had to be amputated. Movie theatres in the capital were shut down for inspection and building codes quickly updated with a requirement for steel beams to support flat roofs. The construction of the Knickerbocker was flawed, and both the architect and the building’s owner later killed themselves. However, litigation failed and neither the victims nor their families ever received compensation. The storm later became known as the Knickerbocker snowstorm, and any heavy snowfall in Washington triggered speculation about another building collapse. In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or by emailing jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.Officials in Los Angeles have cleared a homeless encampment near SoFi stadium, where the Super Bowl will take place in three weeks, drawing backlash from human rights groups and the unhoused residents who have been displaced. On Monday and Tuesday, the state transit agency Caltrans shut down the tent community, which visitors would probably have passed on their way to the big game, calling it a “safety issue”. But some have accused authorities of forcing people out of sight without providing housing or services. “They are just trying to survive,” said Sofi Villalpando, who works with some of the displaced residents. “It feels like [authorities] are removing people so they won’t be seen.” Dawn Toftee, 57, who was living at the encampment that was cleared, told the Guardian on Wednesday that she lost the couch she had been sleeping on during the sweep and was now sleeping on a blanket on a nearby street where she felt less safe. “Now I’m at this site where I didn’t want to be. There’s been killings and shootings around here … They should let us have our home back.” Toftee said another unhoused resident, who uses a wheelchair, had also lost the mattress he had been sleeping on during the cleanup. She blamed the Super Bowl: “It’s terrible and it’s bullshit.” The controversial sweep comes as elected officials in LA have increasingly launched high-profile encampment shutdowns in response to a worsening humanitarian crisis. There were an estimated 48,000 people living on the streets in LA county at the start of the pandemic, the latest count. The strategy of sweeps, critics say, has prioritized aesthetics and the complaints of neighbors, leading people in established tent communities to be scattered into more dangerous living conditions. It also comes as the region is dealing with major Covid outbreaks in homeless shelters across the county, further limiting unhoused people’s options. It is unclear how many people were affected by this week’s sweep and whether anyone received housing, shelter or other services. Michael Comeaux, a Caltrans spokesperson, directed the Guardian to the Los Angeles Homeless Services Authority (Lahsa), the county service provider that partnered with Caltrans for “outreach and support”. A Lahsa spokesperson said that the agency had talked to eight encampment residents on Tuesday, but he did not confirm whether any were successfully placed into housing. Comeaux said Caltrans had brought “personal belongings left behind” to a nearby maintenance yard where they would be stored for a few weeks, and that the agency had posted notices about the “cleanup” 72 hours in advance. Comeaux said that if a couch or mattress looked to be in “unusable condition”, the crew would dispose of it. Madeline deVillers, another advocate working with the residents, said Caltrans had showed up hours earlier than some residents had expected and that she had witnessed people’s belongings being thrown out. She estimated that more than two dozen people had been displaced by the sweep and said she did not personally know of anyone who received any form of housing or shelter. Most people were camping around nearby streets, she said. “There are community bonds out here – people help each other,” she said. “If I give out certain supplies, they get passed on through other people. So having this loss of community really takes a lot of resources from people … and is really hard and dangerous for these folks.” While Caltrans has said a “fire safety” concern was driving the cleanup, advocates questioned why the whole camp had to be closed. And a worker on site told the local station KTLA that the Super Bowl was the impetus for the sweep. “No one wants to take responsibility for what is happening,” said Annie Powers, an organizer with NOlympics LA, a coalition that has organized against the Olympics in 2028 in LA, partly out of concern that it will lead to these kinds of sweeps. “We see this time and time again – with sports capitalism, celebrations or other big events like the Super Bowl or Olympics, the city tries to make the city look better for investors coming from out of town. So they’re very encouraged to try to disappear the poor from the streets.” The residents there had a wide range of experiences that led them to the streets, Villalpando said, including some whose partners had died, resulting in a loss of financial stability, and others out of work due to injuries. Some had previously been displaced from another area that went through an encampment sweep: “It’s such a broken system and I don’t feel like there is any accountability.” Toftee, the displaced resident, said she did not mind officials cleaning up the area, but that she wished they could return to the site, where she said she had been camping for roughly two years. “I am tired of being on the streets, and I don’t want to die here,” she said, noting that she had multiple unhoused friends who had died recently. A recent UCLA report estimated that 1,500 unhoused people died while living on the streets from March 2020 to July 2021. Toftee said she wished elected officials understood their experiences: “Why don’t they come and spend a day or two out here, and see what we’re going through?” “I have nowhere to go,” added Dawn Wilson, 49, another displaced resident, who said she wasn’t offered housing and was now camping on a sidewalk with her dog. “They don’t care what happens to us.” NFL spokespeople did not immediately respond to an inquiry on Wednesday afternoon.Aged care advocates and unions have lambasted the minister for aged care and sport, Richard Colbeck, for attending the Ashes cricket on the same day he declined to front an inquiry about the federal government’s Covid response. Advocacy group Aged Care Matters and the Health Services Union have accused Colbeck of failing to do his job and dodging accountability during the peak of the Omicron crisis. Colbeck declined to attend the Senate Covid-19 committee on 14 January citing the need not to divert health department officials from their “urgent and critical” work. He then attended three days of the Hobart Test between Australia and England from Friday 14 to Sunday 16 January, it was revealed earlier this week. A spokesperson for Colbeck said the suggestion he had “put his sporting commitments ahead of the health and wellbeing of senior Australians … [was] completely misguided” because he had performed other Covid-related duties on that day and the Test was a day-nighter. A spokesperson for Cricket Tasmania has confirmed Colbeck attended the match following an invitation from it and Cricket Australia – although Colbeck failed to declare the source of the “sponsored travel or hospitality” he disclosed on the register of interests. Lloyd Williams, the national secretary of the Health Services Union, told Guardian Australia he was “absolutely staggered” Colbeck had gone to the cricket. He labelled it part of an “ongoing pattern of poor behaviour” including not knowing how many aged care workers have been vaccinated and not knowing the number of people who have died in aged care. “Aged workers are absolutely getting smashed, people are dying in aged care, there’s a lack of planning around the pandemic, poor surge workforce planning, and the slow rollout of boosters,” Williams said. “And the leadership of the government is off enjoying a day at the cricket instead of being accountable for the care for older Australians – it’s a disgrace and complete abrogation of responsibility and accountability. “Staff in the aged care sector are working multiple shifts, in crazy situations where they can’t get a day off. Many would’ve loved a day at the cricket but they couldn’t go because they were looking after elder Australians.” Carolyn Smith, United Workers Union national aged care director, said aged care workers are “putting themselves on the line during a pandemic, the fact Colbeck couldn’t be bothered to turn up to a committee just shows his priorities and the priorities of this government”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Sarah Russell, the director of Aged Care Matters, accused Colbeck of having shown “complete disdain for the aged care sector”. “How dare he not do his job? Someone being diligent would have fronted to answer questions but instead – he’s actually gone to the cricket. We need an aged care minister who cares about older Australians.” Russell criticised the Morrison government’s handling of aged care throughout the pandemic, including a delay in calling an inquiry into early outbreaks at Dorothy Henderson Lodge and Newmarch House, the lack of a national plan before a 7th edition of the plan was drafted, the slow vaccination rollout and poor infection control protocols. According to Aged Care Matters, on 14 January there were 1,107 aged care centres with outbreaks, rising to 1,198 on 21 January. Russell said the Omicron wave had resulted in exponential growth in infections in some aged care centres which now had hundreds of cases just weeks after having none. Rules preventing visitors to aged care had been “devastating for the mental health of residents and their families”, she said. “They’re not worried about dying of Omicron in many cases, residents are worried about dying of neglect. Staff have been devastated, and many are out on furlough. “The surge workforce has been pathetic – there haven’t been enough people in the workforce.” Colbeck’s spokesperson said on 14 January the minister had helped deal with the Omicron outbreak by meeting the head of the Covid vaccine rollout, Lt Gen John Frewen, as well as the aged care quality and safety commissioner, the acting secretary of health and the deputy chief medical officer. The spokesperson said Colbeck’s attendance at the Test was “part of his commitments as minister for sport and senator for Tasmania” and the Test was a “day/night match [that] did not start until late afternoon”. “At a time when the Australian government continues to work to protect the lives of senior Australians in care, attempts by the Senate select committee on Covid-19 to redirect resources away from the department of health for political purposes is of serious concern and should be noted by Australians as we navigate the impact of the pandemic,” the spokesperson said. On Wednesday, Labor’s shadow aged care minister, Clare O’Neil, said although dialling into meetings was important, Colbeck’s actions were not “properly commensurate with how catastrophic the situation was in aged care at that time and still is”. “At the time that Richard Colbeck was too busy going to the cricket and couldn’t appear before a Senate committee to answer questions about aged care, about 40% of aged care homes across the country were in a lockdown because of Covid,” she told ABC Radio. “The practical impact of that is that the frailest, most vulnerable people in the country are bound to their rooms. “This is a sector that … is operating at unsafe staffing levels as a matter of routine,” O’Neil said, “because there are just not enough people to provide basic assistance to elderly people who are in residential aged care.”And Just Like That … 9pm, Sky Comedy Just as it is finally starting to feel that the Sex and the City reboot is getting its Manolo Blahnik footing, we reach the penultimate episode. Can Carrie find hope (and perhaps romance) again? Has Che given Miranda the finger for the last time? What about Steve? And will Charlotte … actually, what has she been doing this whole series? (The conversation about her bathroom situation with Harry was a very funny moment, to be fair.) Hopefully, all will work itself out. Hollie Richardson Dragons’ Den 8pm, BBC One Feeling the heat in the fire pit this week, a mother of two aiming to go global with her children’s clothing subscription. Another hopeful pitches a low-alcohol, plant-based beverage. HR The Dog House 8pm, Channel 4 With whom will tonight’s canines be going home? Three cockapoo puppies are in with a chance of becoming nine-year-old Kiya’s new best friend. Meanwhile, an overexcited yorkie called Bam Bam needs to relax if he wants to be in with a chance of going home with Hannah from London. HR The Apprentice 9pm, BBC One Do the stressed teams have what it takes to create a tasty fish dish that will appeal to the public and demanding corporate clients? Whether this is a genuine test of business acumen or merely an excuse to ladle on aquatic puns is up for debate, but at least some candidates get a trip to Cornwall. Graeme Virtue Survivors: Portraits of the Holocaust 9pm, BBC Two As part of a project commissioned by Prince Charles, we meet the seven survivors of the Holocaust who had their portraits painted for display in Buckingham Palace. The remarkable men and women, who were children when they witnessed the atrocities, share their harrowing testimonies. HR First Dates 10pm, Channel 4 The joy of this show has always been the impeccably well-matched pairings of singles, but the biscuit might be taken tonight. The choice of date for the rugby-boy-fancying, Tom Hardy-loving student Madeleine? A rugby-playing Tom Hardy impersonator. Alexi DugginsHalf of the targets set by the New South Wales state government to enhance residents’ quality of life are not on track to be met, despite assurances from the premier, Dominic Perrottet, that the goals “remain core” to his agenda. Education, disability representation and domestic violence are among those falling short in targets set by then premier Gladys Berejiklian following the 2019 state election. These form part of 14 “premier’s priorities” setting benchmarks for progress in key areas. “I am a firm believer that what gets measured, gets done and I will be watching closely how we track against these new priorities,” Berejiklian said at the time. Efforts to keep women and children safe are among those areas lagging, including reducing the number of domestic violence reoffenders by 25% by 2023. Recently released data found there had instead been an increase from 1,814 reoffenders in 2015 to 1,886 in 2020. Domestic Violence NSW chief executive Delia Donovan warned lives would be lost if the trajectory was not changed. “This goal being brought back on track will save lives,” she said. “We can’t bring rates of offending down if we lack crisis accommodation options and long-term housing solutions, which continue to be a concerning issue.” She said it was critical to keep domestic violence prevention top of mind, despite the coronavirus pandemic. “Domestic violence thrives on fear and isolation,” she said. “This means frequency and severity of violence has increased during the pandemic, leaving victim-survivors further trapped and in danger.” Government data also revealed a consistent year-on-year increase in “risk of significant harm” reports for children and young people – despite the goal to see a reduction of cases by 20% by 2023. Key among the education priorities was increasing the proportion of public school students in the top two Naplan bands for literacy and numeracy by 15% of the 31.6% baseline by 2023. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The data showed results had risen just 0.8% between 2019 and 2021 – still 3.4% short of the target, which would see 36.4% achieving at the top level. Also falling short in education was the goal to see a 50% rise in the number of Indigenous students finishing year 12 with an HSC while maintaining their cultural identity. Interim results for 2020 showed a dip to 45% – far short of the 69% target for 2023. NSW Coalition of Aboriginal Peak Organisations (CAPO) co-chair Charles Lynch said it was important to recognise the impact Covid had on learning outcomes, but that it was vital to boost completion rates. “Sometimes when our kids are pushed outside the school gate, whether it be through suspensions or the disruption of Covid, they can become out of mind, out of sight,” he said. Despite the fall, Lynch was hopeful the rollout of a joint CAPO and government initiative in regional NSW would see completion rates increase in coming years. “It is about making sure those that are having those rocky times, having distractions, how do we help to get through that,” he said. “This is where we will make a big difference in closing the gap.” While the government has already exceeded its goal to bolster senior Aboriginal leaders in public sector jobs and is on track for senior women, it is far behind on its disability employment. The government wants to lift the proportion of government jobs held by people with disabilities to 5.6% by 2025, however it is sitting at just 2.5%. People with Disability Australia president Samantha Connor said there was no excuse for the dire number, at a time when there should be more flexibility than ever before. “In a time of enormous opportunity where most employers have progressed to working online it’s very sad to hear that that hasn’t happened in NSW,” she said. She wants the government to overhaul its strategy, looking at other jurisdictions that are doing better. “There is a range of measures that people can take and they’re all pretty well known,” she said. “You can’t just say ‘we have a target’ and then fail every five years. “We need to make sure that we put measures in place to make sure that people are safe during the pandemic and also that they’re able to work from home.” Goals to improve timely treatment for hundreds of thousands of people who seek treatment for imminently or potentially life-threatening conditions in emergency departments was also lagging. Perrottet said the bar had been set high “so that our actions will deliver genuine and lasting improvements”. “The priorities remain core to ensuring we’re improving outcomes, particularly for the vulnerable, and will continue to be progressed.” The premier said the areas he outlined in December – including quality of life, strong foundations, lifelong learning and homeownership – would be built upon this year. “Further announcements will be made over the coming months on reforms and initiatives the government is putting in place to make progress against these areas,” he said. NSW opposition leader Chris Minns said the government needed to refocus on the targets. “We understand there is a pandemic but Covid must not mean these important issues get put on the back burner,” he told Guardian Australia. “These are vitally important initiatives that deserve the government’s serious attention.”Checking-in is currently “useless” in stopping the spread of Covid-19 but QR codes can still play an important role as the nation enters a new phase of the pandemic, according to epidemiologists. Mandatory QR code check-ins remain in several settings across Australia, including in states where contact tracing efforts have been wound back in the face of rising Omicron infections. The Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, on Thursday conceded there was “not very much contract tracing going on” in the state, with the Service Victoria app now largely used to show proof of vaccination where necessary. “There might be some very limited circumstances where we would use that information for contact tracing,” he told reporters. “When you’ve got as many cases as we’ve got and you’re up against a variant that’s as wildly infectious and as easily transmitted as Omicron, we’re well beyond outbreaks, we’re well beyond contact tracing.” Asked whether there would be any changes to Victoria’s QR system, Andrews replied they were here to stay for “as long as the experts tell us they serve a purpose”. The University of South Australia epidemiologist Adrian Esterman said while there were limits to the use of QR codes for now, it was important to keep the infrastructure in place. “When you start getting into the hundreds of cases and even worse, thousands of cases, there’s no contact tracing in the world that can manage ... by the time that you get notified you’re a close contact, it’s probably a week late and you’ve already had the infection and you’ve recovered,” he told the Guardian. “It is simply not needed unless we get down to sufficiently low case numbers that contact tracers can actually use the information. Until then, QR codes are pretty useless unless they are used for entry where they check your vaccine status.” However, Esterman maintains they should continue being used in the event a new more virulent variant arises in the future. “If we say that people don’t bother to use QR codes, what happens when the next variant comes along and potentially it could be useful then?” he said. “QR codes are a bit like wearing a face mask, they should really be ubiquitous, you simply just get used to doing it.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Mike Toole from the Burnet Institute agrees. “We should keep those restrictions that have some proven effectiveness and yet don’t intrude on our lives and don’t affect the economy,” he said. “I don’t know why it’s fatiguing, it takes two seconds.” While there are reports fewer people are using QR codes than in previous months, Toole notes many people are choosing to stay at home amid the latest outbreak. The chair of epidemiology at Deakin University, Catherine Bennett, said even without contact tracing QR codes continued to serve a purpose, helping those who have tested positive to keep track of where they’ve been and who they’ve come into contact with. But she suggested governments rethink their approach. “It needs to be more discerning. With high exposure rates in the community, less is more. Concentrate on fewer sites that are more risky and really make sure we do get people using it,” she said. NSW scrapped the use of mandatory codes in mid-December other than for high-risk venues including hospitals, aged and disability care facilities, gyms, places of worship, funerals, personal services, pubs and clubs and outdoor music festivals with over 1,000 people. But as the surging case numbers saw thousands of workers furloughed in the lead up to Christmas, the government backflipped on the decision a week later, when the premier, Dominic Perrottet, announced mandatory QR codes would return along with an indoor mask mandate. The Guardian understands the original decision to scrap mandatory check-ins at lower-risk settings such as supermarkets was based on advice from NSW Health they were of little use as the state moved away from stringent contact tracing. That advice had not changed when the government reintroduced the measure. The Australian Health Protection Principal Committee, which advises national cabinet, also recommended in late December to review the utility of QR codes where people are unlikely to catch Covid-19. When the NSW government announced on Tuesday that it was extending mandatory QR check-ins until 28 February, Perrottet defended their use as a measure to increase confidence. “People feel confident checking in, and our job as government is to instil confidence in our people, in the circumstances where we have a highly vaccinated population, to go out to enjoy the best that NSW has to offer in a way where you keep yourself, your friends and your family safe,” he said. Bennett said QR codes should only remain in high-risk settings such as hospitals, aged care and disability facilities as well as at venues where you are more likely to contract the virus, such as hairdressers, beauty salons and nightclubs. “They’ve got to think about what they’re trying to get out of the system. It’s not just about telling someone they might have been exposed to a case in a place where they probably had a very small chance of contracting the virus a week ago,” she said. “The worry now is that it’s all lost in the noise.”Top story: Forcing people into jobs flawed – experts Hello, Warren Murray taking you on a quick scroll through the news. Unemployed workers will be forced to take up a job in any sector within four weeks or face losing part of their universal credit, ministers have announced. The Way to Work campaign was flagged up by an embattled Boris Johnson at prime minister’s questions, with the opposition calling it out as an attempt to distract from his political woes. It is pitched as an initiative to get 500,000 people into work by June and fill 1.2m job vacancies nationally. Welfare experts said it would be counterproductive, forcing people into worse jobs and damaging careers. “The government is right that people need and deserve good jobs, but these will not be delivered by compelling people to seek any work, and against a context of continuing in-work poverty,” said Ruth Patrick from the University of York. The National Audit Office has found no evidence that benefit sanctions achieve their goal of pushing people into jobs. * * * Numbers build against PM – A new raft of senior Conservative MPs are poised to send letters of no confidence in Boris Johnson when the long-awaited “partygate” report is published. Among those prepared to move against Johnson are more than two dozen out of 70 former ministers, according to Tory rebels’ calculations. There has been no official explanation for why Sue Gray’s report has not yet been sent to Johnson. On Wednesday night the business secretary, Kwasi Kwarteng, indicated on ITV’s Peston that it might not be out until next week. Police will ask aides of Johnson who end up being named in Gray’s report whether they are guilty over the lockdown parties and will accept a fine under regulations passed by the government they work for. * * * Biden to make his mark on court – Joe Biden has been gifted the opportunity to change the political narrative around his administration with a supreme court justice set to retire. The expected departure of Justice Stephen Breyer will allow the president to fulfil his promise to make the first ever appointment of a black woman to the bench. After a year in the White House, Biden has been limping with a stalled legislative agenda, tenacious pandemic and Vladimir Putin threatening Ukraine. Although the ideological balance of the court will not change, Biden could choose a young liberal who will serve for decades. * * * Nuclear option – Ministers have thrown a further £100m behind EDF Energy’s £20bn Sizewell C nuclear power station in Suffolk. The government will have rights to an equity stake in the development company behind the project, and over the site. If EDF is able to secure enough investor backing to make a final decision on Sizewell, it would reimburse the government with a stake in the project or in cash. It is understood that EDF and the UK government also hope to secure enough new investment to replace Chinese state-controlled CGN, which has a 20% stake. Sizewell, which is still going through planning and development, would power 6 million homes, but has been plagued by opposition from local campaigners, fears over its price tag and China’s involvement. * * * Pipe crimped if Russia invades – The Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline between Russia and Germany will not be switched on if Russia invades Ukraine, the US state department has said. The pipeline bypasses the traditional transit route through Ukraine. It has faced resistance within the EU for its potential to make Europe too directly reliant on Russian gas. In a letter to the Russian regime, the US has repeated its commitment to upholding the “open-door” policy to countries like Ukraine joining Nato, while offering a “principled and pragmatic evaluation” of the Kremlin’s concerns, said the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken. Britain and other Nato allies are considering a request from the US to deploy hundreds more troops to support member countries in eastern Europe in advance of any Russian invasion or attack on Ukraine. * * * Uni diversity – Black and Asian students won places at prestigious UK universities at record levels in 2021, rising by 19% in a year, alongside increasing numbers of students from all backgrounds, and the chief executive of the Ucas admissions service has said there could be 1 million applications for places by 2026. The record numbers of applications and acceptances were driven by the rise in higher A-levels awarded in 2021 after the government’s decision to cancel exams and replace them with teacher-assessed grades. The boost in results and rising numbers of 18-year-olds in the UK population saw more applicants awarded places across the board, with 492,005 students accepted on to a course. Today in Focus podcast: The edge of war With diplomatic talks at an apparent impasse, Vladimir Putin seems prepared to start a war. Andrew Roth reports from Moscow. Lunchtime read: Covid exposes the kink in our amour During the pandemic there has been a sharp drop in one-off encounters, researchers say, but more people are enjoying friends with benefits and getting experimental in bed, Zoe Williams writes. Sport Australia have made a strong start in the women’s Ashes under way at Canberra’s Manuka Oval – Rachael Haynes (86) and Meg Lanning (93) leading the charge. Australia were 317-6 just now going into the last 10 overs of the day. Nicholas Pooran and Rovman Powell have blasted West Indies to a 20-run victory over England in their third T20 at Kensington Oval in Barbados. In football’s Africa Cup of Nations, Egypt have beaten Ivory Coast on penalties after a 0-0 draw, as Mohamed Salah’s decisive spot-kick was enough for Egypt to progress. Professional female footballers in England are to benefit from maternity and long-term sickness cover in a landmark change to their contracts. The Six Nations chief executive, Ben Morel, has denied that Italy’s dismal recent record is damaging the credibility of the tournament and kept the door shut on South Africa joining Europe’s premier rugby event. Robert Kitson writes that it is shaping up as a wonderfully poised and evenly matched tournament. Business Asian shares have plunged today after the US Federal Reserve signalled it is on course to make fighting inflation a priority this year by raising interest rates. The prospect of more costly borrowing has unnerved markets but the confirmation of Fed intentions saw heavy losses in Japan, South Korea and Australia. The FTSE100 is tracking for a hefty drop of almost 2% at the opening while the pound is on $1.343 and €1.197. Meanwhile, private rents in Britain have risen at their fastest on record, piling pressure on household finances. The papers Our Guardian print edition leads with “PM accused of lying over rescue of animals during fall of Kabul”. New Foreign Office emails appear to contradict Boris Johnson’s insistence he did not authorise the rescue of cats and dogs from a British charity in Afghanistan during the fall of Kabul. In the picture slot, the food writer and activist Jack Monroe hails the new way that official inflation will be calculated, to account for a wider range of income levels and household circumstances. On the third-edition front page we also have “Andrew demands trial by jury in US”. The Duke of York has denied he was a co-conspirator of Jeffrey Epstein and insisted on a jury trial in Virginia Giuffre’s sexual abuse lawsuit against him, his lawyers said in court papers filed on Wednesday. On that latter story the Mirror says “Andrew: I’ll face a sex trial jury” while the Sun has “Andrew: I’ll go to trial … no sweat”. It’s also on the front of the Mail, which says the duke has issued 41 denials over sex claims, but the paper’s lead is “Tory MPs tell Boris: spike tax hike and we’ll back you”. It’s the other way round in the Express, which has as its lead “Andrew shock: I want jury trial” while Boris Johnson gets a full-width picture and the supportive headline “Party rallies behind Boris” – presumably meaning the Conservative party, not another accidental booze-up or cake ambush. The Express has “Andrew: it’s trial by jury” while the Financial Times leads with “ECB warns Europe’s banks over risks in Russia-Ukraine sanctions”. The Telegraph says “National insurance rise will push up prices, PM warned”. And the front-page lead in the Times is “Shops and trains stick to masks as plan B ends”. Sign up The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekend.For a while on the first morning of the women’s Ashes Test in Canberra, England had the match firmly in their hands. Then those same hands let it slip, dropping catches in the cordon from Meg Lanning and Rachael Haynes before they both went close to making centuries. By stumps, the score was a hefty 327 for seven. England captain Heather Knight was sure from years of Big Bash experience that the surface at Manuka Oval would be good for batting throughout the full four days. Confident that any assistance for bowlers would come at the start of the match, she chose to field on winning the toss. Initially, it worked. Long-time attack leaders Katherine Brunt and Anya Shrubsole found significant swing and got movement off the pitch, with Brunt drawing Alyssa Healy’s edge from a loose drive for a duck before Shrubsole found the edge of Beth Mooney’s defensive push for three. Mooney was playing despite a recently broken jaw, but her courage was not rewarded with Australia’s score at four for two. The bigger dismissal came when Ellyse Perry top-edged a pull shot from Natalie Sciver on 18. From the Ashes Test in 2017 until that moment, Perry had made 492 Test runs for a solitary dismissal. As wicketkeeper Amy Jones ran around to backward square leg to tumble for her third catch, Perry was out for 18, and Australia were 43 for three. Just before lunch, England had the chance to seize the Test. Left-arm spinner Sophie Ecclestone came on for a solitary over, turning the ball away from the right-hander. Lanning offered an outside edge to the left of Knight at slip, who got hands to the regulation chance but deflected it. Lanning would have been out for 14, the score would have been 78 for four, and the session would have been undoubtedly England’s. Instead, given Australia’s deep batting, honours were fairly even. In the second session Haynes was given two reprieves, first by Shrubsole running around a possible catch at mid-on instead of attacking it, then by Sciver half-diving to her left at second slip for a thick edge off Brunt at a comfortable height. Haynes was on 42 for the first error, 44 for the second, and until that point had been taking on the bowling especially through point while her partners had struggled. Shrubsole produced a good spell to Lanning, finding inside and outside edges while swinging the ball in at the pads. But most everything else went Australia’s way as Lanning and Haynes batted through the session and raised half-centuries, with Lanning passing her curiously low Test best of 57. Ecclestone has become England’s major weapon, but dropped short consistently and was punished on the cut and the pull. Likewise Kate Cross, who drew Lanning’s edge on a couple of occasions but also offered fodder for her strength through point. Off-spinner Charlie Dean on debut produced nice flight and occasional turn but rarely looked threatening, though Knight used a DRS review for a Lanning sweep that could have been gloved to slip or out leg before wicket, but was neither. By tea Lanning was 84 and Haynes 82, and Australia were cruising at 199 for three. The third session saw England come to life for a moment. Sciver’s outswinger had Lanning driving on 93 for Knight to take a diving catch at a wide slip, ending the partnership on 169. Three balls later, Brunt got a ball to rocket off the surface at Haynes, surprising the left-hander into gloving a catch to Jones on 86. Australia had new players in Tahlia McGrath and Ash Gardner at the crease. They were happy to take the game on though, with Gardner hooking the first six of the match and both players driving powerfully down the ground and square, especially facing spin. Gardner raced to 50 from 63 balls before Brunt trapped her lbw for 56, while McGrath reached 52 via a successful lbw review against Shrubsole and another drop at point by Sophia Dunkley. Sciver got McGrath’s edge from the last ball of the day for Jones to take a fifth catch, but Australia will resume with capable batters in Annabel Sutherland and Jess Jonassen, while England will be wondering what might have been.My Covid booster vaccination in October does not appear on my NHS app, leaving me in a desperate situation. For the last month I’ve been in Italy where a “super green pass” is required for access to public transport and all indoor public spaces, but it expires 270 days after the last vaccination. My second jab, last April, is now invalid. I’ve been trying since November to get this resolved. The NHS website directed me to 119, which referred me to the Vaccine Data Resolution Service (VDRS). It was supposed to ring me within three weeks. Six weeks on, I’m still waiting, but the 119 number doesn’t work from Italy. I have had to cancel all future social and business arrangements and I am concerned that I may not even be able to access the airport to fly home. I cannot be the only one caught up in this. MT, London Indeed you are not, which is why the VDRS was set up for patients registered to an English GP who received their jab in England. NHS England wouldn’t comment on whether it’s struggling with a backlog of incomplete vaccine records, but in an email to you a caseworker explained that demand had been higher than expected. The trouble is, patients can’t contact the VDRS directly. They call the 119 number which, as you’ve found, is inaccessible from overseas, and the NHS advice page on updating a vaccine record gives no alternative. Nor is there the option for you to log your details online. The VDRS pledges to attempt to make contact up to three times within 21 days, and expects the person to have vaccine dates, batch numbers and the full address of the vaccine centre at the ready when the call comes. You were contacted by an agent after I intervened and, three months after your booster jab, your pass was updated. The NHS says: “Staff are working hard to resolve all issues as quickly and efficiently as possible.” The telephone number for overseas callers is +44 151 905 0119 and anyone facing delays can complain to england.contactus@nhs.net. Incidentally, Britons planning to travel within the EU may be unaware that, from 1 February, they will be deemed unvaccinated if their second jab was more than 270 days ago, and have not received a booster. Although new rules, announced last month by the European Commission, do not affect entry to the EU, they would effectively bar travellers from amenities in many member states once they are there. You wouldn’t necessarily know this because there’s not a word about it in the travel sections of the Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO) website. The FCO tells me member states are not compelled to follow this ruling. Not true. It is legally binding, and the EC proposes to extend it to non-EU citizens entering the EU in due course. Email your.problems@observer.co.uk. Include an address and phone number. Submission and publication are subject to our terms and conditionsThe first few days of Stella Nyanzi’s new life in Germany have not been without their challenges, from navigating the TV and internet in a different language to finding the right school for her three teenagers. On the second day, the family went shopping for clothes – “thick jackets, mittens and scarves” – to see them through the fierce Bavarian winter. For her 14-year-old twins, who have lived their whole lives in sub-Saharan Africa and who insisted on wearing Crocs with no socks on the flight over, the sub-zero temperatures were a rude awakening. At the centre of it all, however, has been deep sense of relief. Nyanzi, a 47-year-old outspoken scholar, poet and human rights advocate whose irreverent writing about Ugandan president, Yoweri Museveni, has seen her jailed twice, decided enough was enough. She has been accepted on a writers-in-exile programme run by PEN Germany, and has no intention of returning to Uganda while the 77-year-old Museveni is in power. And while there are many concerns about how she and her children are going to settle into Munich life, the sense of freedom is powering her on. “Because I’m very much a free-thinking, loud-mouthed, crass woman who boldly speaks her mind, I think one of the greatest joys is to be able to criticise Museveni’s dictatorship and not fear for my life,” she says. “To not have thick-voiced men breathing down my telephone. And to be threatened online, but to know that the threats won’t reach me, is really relieving. I know it’s going to be difficult [with regards to] the practicalities. But, Jesus, the sense of freedom! The freedom from fear of retribution and reprisal and punishment, simply because one refuses to only praise the dictatorship, is to die for. “I can suffer the winter and the cold and the hard language – and the food is a bit different. But it’s freedom. You know: I am free at least. My children don’t have to fear that they’ll have more nights with mama in prison or locked up in a police cell simply because I wrote a Facebook post or I wrote too harshly about a dictator who is begging to be written harshly about. So that’s freedom from fear, much more than freedom to do. Freedom to be is, like, immediate relief.” This week, the international spotlight has been on another critic of Uganda’s president, novelist Kakwenza Rukirabashaija, whose book The Greedy Barbarian was seen as a satire of Museveni’s Uganda. Rukirabashaija, 33, was charged earlier this month with “offensive communication” over tweets about the six-term president and his son. For two weeks, he was held in detention in an undisclosed location before he was released on bail. His lawyer says he was tortured. Rukirabashaija’s case is not unfamiliar to Nyanzi. The former university lecturer went to prison for a month in 2017 after referring to Museveni as “a pair of buttocks”, and for nearly 16 months the year after, for writing a poem that described his mother’s vagina in a variety of grotesque ways. (“Yoweri, they say it was your birthday yesterday./ How painfully ugly a day!/ I wish the lice-filled bush of dirty pubic hair overgrown all over Esiteri’s unwashed chuchu had strangled you at birth./ Strangled you just like the long tentacles of corruption you sowed and watered into our bleeding economy.”) Nyanzi had tried to leave Uganda for Kenya in January 2021, after losing her bid to be elected as Kampala’s women’s representative. But, stymied by red tape, she returned home within months, trying to keep a low profile. Then, at the end of December, Rukirabashaija was detained, the doors of his home broken down by gunmen who whisked him away. “And I thought: fuck the silence,” Nyanzi says, speaking by telephone from Munich. “We cannot keep quiet in the face of such brutality. And I began to agitate again.” In response, she says, the threats and intimidating messages started to return. For anyone who has seen her bare her breasts in protest at a jail sentence or exit that jail clad in a tiara and sash declaring “FUCK OPPRESSION”, it is hard to imagine Nyanzi ever not being a political activist. But, she says, it was only in recent years that she found her cause. Her first show of dissent was a naked protest at university. From then she embraced the anti-colonial Ugandan tradition of “radical rudeness” as a tool against oppression. It is, she says, highly effective, particularly from an otherwise respectable mother and university academic. “People have said to me: perhaps radical rudeness will not oust Museveni. And I say: perhaps the intention is not to use rude poetry and big breasts in public to oust Museveni; perhaps the idea is to invite others to be able to poke holes in this huge over-glorification of a mighty, untouchable demigod and, if many of us are poking small holes, perhaps the mighty trunk of the tree will fall. I don’t know.” She adds: “Many do not approve. But I’m not looking for approval.” When she went to Kenya in 2021, there was a backlash from fellow opposition critics who accused her of “leaving the battlefield” before the fight was won, and she anticipates similar censure now. But, after years of vigorous participation in the struggle, she thinks it is time for her to prioritise her children. Moreover, she feels freer to criticise Museveni from the safety of Germany. For the president, then, there is unlikely to be any letup. “Now that I’m out of the country, there’s a bigger onus on me … to write and speak out and use my voice,” she says. The Writers in Exile programme, funded by the German government, runs for up to three years. Some – but by no means all – of its participants go on to claim political asylum in the country. Does Nyanzi believe she will ever go back? “Uganda is my home. I have booked to be buried beside my father in our village,” she says. “We have a beautiful equatorial sun; we don’t have winter and snow. We have sweet pineapples and sweet bananas; we don’t have frozen foods. We pick mangoes from the trees and eat them. I’d like to go back to that and live like that, but I also don’t want my children to sleep on their own at night because their mother is in a prison cell simply because she writes a poem about Museveni.” She adds: “I hope to return because I have work to do in Uganda … I want to make a change, contribute towards building the new Uganda post-Museveni. However, I do not want to go and live in fear simply because I’m being myself … I don’t want to kill the voice inside of me. As long as it’s dangerous to speak out, as long as it’s dangerous to write freely, I don’t want to be in Uganda.” Sign up for Her Stage to hear directly from incredible women in the developing world on the issues that matter to them, delivered to your inbox monthly:Camp Wildfire, Sevenoaks, Kent Ready to get in touch with your inner child? Expect good clean fun at this “summer camp for adults” – no less than 100 activities, run by monitors decked out in retro Scout uniforms, are included in your ticket. Leave your doldrums at the door and try your hand at flying trapeze, building a giant catapult or playing in a vegetable orchestra, which involves fashioning working instruments from vegetables such as carrots! Things are bit more grown-up after dark – hop between DJ sets including Charlotte Church’s Late Night Pop Dungeon. • 26-29 August &amp; 2-5 September, £245, over-18s only, campwildfire.co.uk Verve festival, Tisbury, Wiltshire Here for a blissful time, but not for long, Verve takes over the grounds of Hatch House in Wiltshire for just one day in September and describes itself as the “ultimate reset”. It’s one of the first zero-waste festivals in the UK, and the vibe is more garden party than mosh pit. The focus here is on feeling good – head to the intimate garden area for pop-up talks on everything from medicinal plants to mindfulness, or bring your yoga mat to sample “om and bass” rhythmic yoga. Kids and teens (entry only £5) get their own tailored yoga and meditation sessions. • 17 September, £69, feeltheverve.com Summer Camp at the Good Life Society, Hawarden, north Wales Festivals don’t get more bijou than Summer Camp, which hosts 100 guests each weekend during the month of July for a get-together focusing on nature and wild craft. An A to Z of workshops includes everything from beekeeping and mushroom foraging to wood whittling, or you can bliss out with a dip in the lake, complete with wood-fired sauna. While Summer Camp tickets are on the steep side, two-course gourmet suppers are included in the price, and when the sun goes down, there are campfires and live tunes in the walled garden. If your average festival makes you feel a bit agoraphobic, this could be the perfect tonic. Can’t make summer? There’s an Autumn Camp in September, too – think bonfires, feasts and mellow fruitfulness. • 1-25 July, £485 for two tickets, thegoodlifesociety You-Phoria festival, Knebworth Park, Hertfordshire As its name suggests, this is a chirpy wellness-themed weekender. Expect an upbeat approach to getting active, complete with morning raves, yoga discos and roller skating – the cheery have-a-go vibes make this festival ideal for energetic families. Rob da Bank and DJ Yoda will keep you moving after dark, and affordable day and evening passes make this the perfect escape from the city for a few feel-good hours – Knebworth Park is less than an hour and a half from central London. • 20-22 May, £123.25, day/evening passes available, youphoria-festival.co.uk Love Trails festival, Gower peninsula Here’s proof that a shared passion for off-road running is a good enough reason to get together and party. Non-competitive trail running adventures across the Gower Peninsula and the Brecon Beacons are the backbone of this sporty festival, but once you’ve worked up a sweat it’s back to the Love Trails headquarters near Swansea for live bands and DJ sets until late. There’s a guided run to suit everyone, from 3km jogs to 55km stomps (plus a tempting pub crawl run), and non-runners can try out climbing, surfing and wild swimming sessions. If you like to explore hard and play hard, this is the place to be. • 30 June–3 July, £179, lovetrailsfestival.co.uk Also festival, Compton Verney, Warwickshire Pack your swimsuit for Also, a “festival of ideas” with a beautiful swimming lake at the centre of the site. Join fellow festivalgoers for dawn and sunset dips, workshops for beginner wild swimmers and introductions to standup paddleboarding. Back on dry land, Also’s eclectic workshops encourage you to sample something new, from making Chinese dumplings to robot coding. Up-and-coming bands rub shoulders with comedy and cabaret on stage. • 8-10 July, £120, also-festival.com Timber festival, Feanedock, Leicestershire If you go down to the woods today … you may stumble upon a party hidden among the trees. Timber festival is a celebration by The National Forest of sustainability and activism, with a big dose of music and creativity thrown in. Expect roaming art installations, talks by environmentalists and poets (poet laureate Simon Armitage returns this year) and an eclectic lineup of folksy bands. The secret acoustic sets and late-night storytelling pop-ups hidden in wooden glades are highlights. • 1-3 July, £128.40, day tickets available for £42.80, timberfestival.org.uk Alpkit Big Shakeout, Hathersage, Peak District “Do you want to climb, ride, hike, abseil, kayak, bushcraft, cave, run, slackline, sail, swim?” Alpkit organisers ask in capital letters on the Big Shakeout festival website. If that list fills you with adventurous lust, this action-packed weekender in the heart of the Peak District is here to get your adrenaline pumping. Outdoor brand Alpkit set up their not-for-profit festival with a simple idea in mind – activities in the day, entertainment at night. The School of Adventure sessions take you exploring into the Peak District, while at festival headquarters there’s a jam-packed schedule of talks, films and live music to fill your (hiking) boots in the evenings. 24-26 September, adults £80, children £40, alpkit.com Armchair Adventure festival, Mount Edgecumbe, Cornwall Ready to sit back and adventure? The Armchair Adventure festival is for would-be explorers looking for advice and inspiration. Once a virtual festival, this intimate party held on the Cornish coast hosts speakers who share stories of derring-do and offers “bootcamp” workshops on a range of topics, from photography to funding. It’s all designed to help attendees plan the expedition of a lifetime. There’s active stuff on the menu too – fancy paddleboarding with dolphins or going on a wild swimming safari? Live music kicks off as the sun sets. • 22-25 September, £99, armchairadventurefestival.com Fort William Mountain festival, the Highlands Can’t wait until summer to get your festival fix? Fort William, the self-proclaimed “outdoor capital of the UK”, kicks off the adventure festival circuit in February, when the snowy hills of Lochaber, in the western Highlands, come alive over a long weekend with a mix of mountain workshops and adventure film screenings. Head outdoors with experienced instructors to brush up on avalanche awareness, winter walking skills, canoeing and fell running, or be an armchair adventurer back in Fort William, where various locations across the town host a jam-packed schedule of outdoorsy films, talks and live music. • 16-20 February, most ticketed events and screenings £15, mountainfestival.co.ukI’ve never used the expression “casting pearls before swine”; in fact, I’ve just had to look up exactly what it means. I’m therefore neither surprised nor upset that it seems to be falling out of common use. Of the 2,000 people aged between 18 and 50 surveyed by the research agency Perspectus Global, 78%, like me, had never uttered it. Next on the list, disappointingly, is the, to my mind, rather useful “nailing one’s colours to a mast”, tied at 71% with “colder than a witch’s tit”, which I’ve neither liked nor found a use for – just like “pip pip”, in fourth place. It is to be hoped that while these things will fall in and out of favour, our language will always be rich with them. At their best they’re poetic, at least in the sense that their meaning might need a moment’s thought. Allow me to share some personal favourites. Only the other day, a friend of mine with a strong Swansea accent described something as “wet as an otter’s pocket”. Excellent. Another one I heard once and have used ever since relates to suddenly finding oneself in an environment where there are many people to whom you’re sexually attracted. In such circumstances you may or may not resemble “a one-eyed cat in a fish factory” – but, my word, how fine a phrase this is. Post-match football phone-ins on local radio are a rich source of these beauties. We had a full-back at West Brom who was great at going on marauding runs but struggled to keep the ball as he did so. He was, in the words of one caller, “like a dog with a balloon”. And I’m afraid he was. Best – or worst – of all, though, was a goalkeeper we had who, in the view of one caller to BBC Radio WM, “couldn’t keep a clean sheet on his honeymoon”. Sorry for the coarseness there – but come on: what’s not to love? Adrian Chiles is a broadcaster, writer and Guardian columnistNot parallel actually: that would mean they don’t touch. Here we have convergent mothers; intersecting mothers whose lives come together with a spark that ignites this moving melodrama, which audaciously draws a line between love, sex, the passionate courage of single mothers, the meaning of Lorca’s Doña Rosita the Spinster and the unhealed wound of Spain’s fascist past. Pedro Almodóvar’s new movie has the warmth and the grandiloquent flair of a picture from Hollywood’s golden age (something starring Bette Davis and Joan Fontaine maybe, with music by Max Steiner) and the whiplash twists and addictive sugar rush bumps of daytime soap. As ever with Almodóvar, there are gorgeously designed interiors with fierce, thick blocks of Mondrian colour, huge closeups of the female leads and overhead shots of food preparation. It’s impossible to watch this film without just feeling grateful that its director is still so fluent, so creative, still making us a gift of these films. There is a lot going on here, and perhaps the emotions and thoughts spill over the edges of its narrative form. But it would be obtuse not to let yourself travel downstream on this film’s emotional surge. One mother is Janis, played by Penélope Cruz, a stylish photographer in her late 30s whose agent is the worldly Elena (Almodóvar’s totemic regular Rossy de Palma). The other mother is Ana (Milena Smit), a serious-looking teenager whose family background is troubled. These heavily pregnant women share a hospital room and bond over their decision to go it alone. The father of Janis’s child is Arturo (Israel Elejalde), an anthropologist working with the historical unit formed under Spain’s historical memory law, tracing people murdered by Francoists during the civil war and buried in unmarked mass graves; Janis believes that her great-grandfather was one such victim. The two women’s newborns are whisked away for observational reasons at the same time. But when Janis gets her baby home, events conspire to plant a seed of doubt in her mind: she orders a DNA test online, which means a swab test weirdly similar to the one Arturo carries out on the recovered bodies at the gravesite. The disquieting results mean that Janis has to get back in touch with Ana and re-establish their remarkable relationship. The facts of the narrative make it sound contrived and implausible. Yet the sheer poetic conviction means that there is no problem believing that the personal is the political and that history, the future and the present are as one. Baby-swap dramas are nothing new: there was Hirokazu Kore-eda’s Like Father, Like Son from 2013, and the famous case from the 1930s of a British woman, Margaret Wheeler, who famously appealed to George Bernard Shaw for help when she suspected her baby had been muddled up with someone else’s at the hospital. But Parallel Mothers is superior to any of them in the way it springs tragedy on audiences expecting comedy. And the film allows you to ponder not just the mother-child bond – strong enough to confront fascism – but the way everyone has to let their children be influenced by strangers; the unintended upbringing of being out in the world. What an emotional experience. • Parallel Mothers is released on 28 January in cinemas.The federal government’s announcement that it has “freed” the Aboriginal flag is misleading and has been seriously misinterpreted, according to the company which still holds the exclusive licence to make Aboriginal flags for sale. “All is not what it appears,” according to Carroll &amp; Richardson Flagworld, which is challenging reports about the government’s $20m deal to acquire copyright of the flag design and buy out some of the licences to reproduce it, which were previously held by non-Indigenous companies. “The government’s announcement is misleading and confusing and does not ‘free the flag’ except for its use on clothing, badges, pins etc, or its reproduction in digital formats and on playing surfaces,” Wayne Gregory, the managing director of Carroll &amp; Richardson Flagworld, said in a statement. Gregory told Guardian Australia the announcement had confused the community. “As far as the flag’s concerned, it’s really business as usual. The only difference is the royalties will be paid to the government, which the government’s already indicated they’re going to use to fund programs for Naidoc, which is perfectly acceptable,” he said. “But what they’ve done is created the illusion that everything’s going to be free”. A Morrison government spokesperson said its media release announcing that the flag design would be freely available did acknowledge Flagworld’s continuing licence for the commercial production of flags and bunting – but this may not have been widely reported. “We appreciate Flagworld’s concern that the details of their continuing world-wide exclusive licence have not been widely reported by the media,” the spokesperson said. But they did not address Flagworld’s claims that the Coalition had misled the public by saying the flag was now “free.” The Monday release quoted the prime minister, Scott Morrison, as saying: “We’ve freed the Aboriginal flag for Australians.” “Throughout the negotiations, we have sought to protect the integrity of the Aboriginal flag, in line with Harold Thomas’ wishes. I thank everyone involved for reaching this outcome, putting the flag in public hands.” It has struck a $20m deal to assume copyright of the design from its creator, Luritja artist Harold Thomas, after two-and-a-half years of “extremely complicated” negotiations. Questions have since been asked about its future custodianship now that copyright rests with the commonwealth, as well as how much of the $20m was paid to the non-Indigenous businesses involved, WAM Clothing and Gifts Mate, both companies associated with Gold Coast businessman Ben Wooster. Wooster’s previous company, Birubi Arts, was fined $2.3m by the federal court after it was found to have breached consumer law by selling fake Aboriginal art. Labor senator Malarndirri McCarthy and Greens senator Lidia Thorpe, who were part of a select committee which examined the status of the Aboriginal flag in 2020, have both said they intend to ask the government for more details about the deal at the next Senate estimates hearings in February. Campaigners who fought to “free” the Aboriginal flag have said previously that while questions remain about its future custodianship, the current arrangement is “as good as we’re going to get in terms of freeing the Aboriginal flag”. “My grandkids, my great-grandkids, will have the Aboriginal flag in their lives, uniting them and supporting their culture and making them feel safe in community,” Laura Thompson, convener of the #freetheflag campaign, said on Tuesday. The #freetheflag movement began after Thompson’s business, Clothing the Gaps, was served with a cease and desist notice from WAM. Thompson said it was a relief that private companies were now “out of the picture” but some questions remained. “The fact that the Aboriginal flag was controlled, and privately owned, is just absurd,” she said. In 1995, the governor general proclaimed it along with the Torres Strait Islander flag. Other claimants came forward asserting they were the artist behind it but in 1997 the federal court officially recognised Thomas as the sole author, giving him the ability to assign licences. By 2019, amid mounting distress and confusion over who was able to use the design freely, a parliamentary inquiry was set up to look into the copyright and licensing arrangements. Its final report labelled WAM Clothing’s actions as “heavy-handed”. The minister for Indigenous Australians, Ken Wyatt, told ABC Radio on Tuesday that “the benefits in the long term far outweigh what we expended”. “It’s about giving back the flag to be freely used,” he said. The image of the flag can be reproduced on websites, on apparel such as sports jerseys and shirts, in paintings and other artworks, used digitally and in any other medium without having to ask for permission or pay a fee. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Gregory said he has already noticed a rise in online merchandise, some of it “shoddy”, featuring the flag design. He is concerned there may be more to come now that the assumption is that the flag is “free”. “Too many things get butchered these days, get pirated, and this flag is far too important to be treated the way many other products are. So we’ve sought to close down as many people as we can who do it,” Gregory said. “But that’s the confusing message and I don’t think the government helped because most of the quotes were all about freeing everything. And that’s … potentially misleading.”Leading climate scientists have ridiculed and criticised comments made by controversial Canadian psychologist and author Jordan Peterson during an interview on Joe Rogan’s podcast. During a new four-hour interview on Spotify’s most popular podcast, Peterson – who is not an expert on climate change – claimed that models used to forecast the future state of the climate couldn’t be relied on. Peterson told Rogan that because the climate was so complex, it couldn’t be accurately modelled. He said: “Another problem that bedevils climate modelling, too, which is that as you stretch out the models across time, the errors increase radically. And so maybe you can predict out a week or three weeks or a month or a year, but the farther out you predict, the more your model is in error. “And that’s a huge problem when you’re trying to model over 100 years because the errors compound just like interest.” Peterson said that if the climate was “about everything” then “your models aren’t right” because they couldn’t include everything. But climate scientists have described Peterson’s comments as “stunningly ignorant” and said he had fundamentally misunderstood the concept of climate modelling. Dr Sarah Perkins-Kirkpatrick, a climate scientist at the University of New South Wales Canberra, said Peterson’s description of how climate models work was fundamentally wrong. While weather forecasts do become less accurate the further out they go, this was a different process to climate modelling. “He seems to think we model the future climate the same way we do the weather. He sounds intelligent, but he’s completely wrong. “He has no frickin’ idea,” she said. The backlash from scientists comes as Spotify removes the music of veteran songwriter Neil Young after the singer issued an ultimatum to the company. Young was furious at what he described as “misinformation” spread on The Joe Rogan Experience podcast about the Covid-19 pandemic. Rogan’s show has previously aired claims by a different guest that hospitals are financially incentivised to falsely diagnose deaths as having been caused by Covid-19 and that world leaders had hypnotised the public into supporting vaccines. “They can have Rogan or Young. Not both,” Young wrote in a letter to his management. According to Spotify, which paid US$100m for exclusive rights to Rogan’s podcast in 2020, the platform has 381 million users and 172 million subscribers. Rogan tops the platform’s podcast charts in the UK, USA and Australia. Dr Gavin Schmidt, a climate modeller and senior adviser at Nasa, said on Twitter: “Guys, for the love of everything holy, please, please, have somebody on who knows what the heck a climate model is!!!” Schmidt told the Guardian he was reminded of a quote from the famous British statistician George Box. “Peterson has managed to absorb the first part of George Box’s famous dictum that ‘all models are wrong’ but appears to have not worked out the second part ‘but some are useful’,” Schmidt said. Prof Steve Sherwood, of the Climate Change Research Centre at the University of New South Wales, said Peterson was “making the ancient climate sceptic error of mixing up weather and climate”. “Anyone who has taken an introductory course in climate or atmospheric science would spot this problem,” he said. “Errors in a weather forecast indeed accumulate such that after a couple of weeks the forecast is useless.” But with climate, Sherwood said, the models work differently to project how the climate will respond to different factors, such as higher levels of CO2. “[Peterson’s] argument is like saying we can’t predict whether a pot of water on a flame will boil, because we decide in advance what variables to put in our model, and can’t predict each bubble.” Sherwood said the “laws of thermodynamics and some basic calculations” are enough to give scientists confidence in projections. Prof Christian Jakob, a climate modelling expert at Monash University, said Peterson’s comments were “ill-informed” and that he’d “mixed up weather prediction with climate projections. “People are entitled to their opinions, but science and climate modelling isn’t about opinion. If you’re not well informed about how something is done then it’s not right to make comments about it on a large platform.” Prof Michael Mann, an atmospheric scientist at Penn State University, said Peterson’s comments – and Rogan’s facilitation of them – was an “almost comedic type of nihilism” that would be funny if it wasn’t so dangerous. Peterson’s claim that the climate was too complicated showed “a total lack of understanding of how science works” and could be used to dismiss physics, chemistry, biology, “and every other field of science where one formulates conceptual models”, according to Mann. “Every great discovery in science – including the physics that allowed Peterson and Rogan to record and broadcast their ridiculous conversation – has arisen through that process,” he said. Prof John Abraham, a climate scientist at the University of St Thomas in Minnesota, said the episode was “a word salad of nonsense spoken by people who have no sense when it comes to climate.” “To say that climate model errors increase like compound interest is laughable. Jordan Peterson displays a near complete misunderstanding of climate change, and the tools climate scientists use to understand what is happening to our planet. “It’s as if someone, with zero expertise and knowledge, made comments about something he knows little about.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Earlier this month 270 experts wrote to Spotify demanding it establish “a clear and public policy to moderate misinformation on its platform” after raising concerns about pandemic misinformation on a different episode of The Joe Rogan Experience podcast. “Mass-misinformation events of this scale have extraordinarily dangerous ramifications,” the experts wrote, saying the podcast had an estimate 11 million listeners.“I put fresh almond leaves in your underwater masks as anti-fogging – a way to avoid using chemicals. You can remove them once in the water, just before diving,” says Salim Vasquez, 14, pushing her dreadlocks away from her mask. She distributes the equipment to her fellow divers, who are aged between 14 and 24, and Ana María Arenas, a group coordinator. It is 8am on a cloudy Sunday morning in Puerto Viejo, a Jamaican-inspired city in the south of Costa Rica. The young conservationists are preparing to dive into the Caribbean water for their weekly reef monitoring. Adir Garrido, Maitén Moore, Anumí Sassaroli, Esteban Gallo and Salim, as well as almost two dozen local divers, are part of the Ambassadors of the Sea Community Diving Centre, a non-profit organisation created in 2014 to provide opportunities for young people to do conservation work, such as seabed cleaning, reef monitoring, water pollution analysis, and underwater archaeology. “I was one of the four founders with my brothers and my neighbour,” remembers Esteban, 24. Now he is setting up his own business: a mechanical workshop to fix diving equipment. “It’s not easy to be young in Puerto Viejo. We don’t have opportunities, most of my classmates are involved in drug dealing and petty crime. The centre took us out of this context and opened doors in sea protection.” The idea for the centre came from María Suárez Toro, a Puerto Rican journalist and fisher who arrived in Costa Rica 50 years ago. Her love of the sea started in childhood when she learned to fish, swim and walk almost at the same age. “Here, scuba diving has always been an activity for tourists, too expensive for locals. Not any more for the youth of the centre, who dive with a purpose,” says Suárez. Supported by the United Nations Office for Project Services (Unops), the centre has so far offered 200 free training courses in open water and rescue diving, underwater archaeology, and coral monitoring to young people. There are some requirements to participate: getting good grades at school, learning to cook a Caribbean meal as a part of cultural preservation, carrying out beach cleaning, becoming a sea ambassador and fully participating in the centre’s activities. “As sea ambassadors, we bring to the earth what’s hidden under the water,” says Anumí, 18. She has just finished high school and has enrolled for an oceanographic university degree. In the future, she hopes to run a project to protect sharks, her favourite animal. “When I was little, I expressed my frustrations to my grandfather. I complained about the selfishness of people who didn’t want to give up their habits that are detrimental to the planet. Then I got involved in the centre, and it became a family to me.” During the pandemic, with schools closed and online lessons not accessible to all, the centre became increasingly important for the young divers. “During the lockdown, when all the activities stopped, we saw more corals and animals than ever: also the seahorses were back,” says Ana María. Through constant coral monitoring, they were able to correct the local misconception that the reef was dead due to pollution. “Saying that the reef was dead was an excuse for not taking care of the ocean,” she says. “Also, companies took advantage of it and proposed projects of oil exploitation or dock constructions that we stopped over the years. Our constant monitoring showed that the reef was alive.” “The pandemic teaches us that the reef is not so fragile, it only needs better waters,” says Isaac Baldizón, a marine biologist, who works with the centre. Today, the team is working fast to avoid the storm looming on the horizon. After a quick 20-metre swim, the reef is under their flippers. Anumí and Ana María analyse the health and whitening of the corals, and Maitén and Salim count the fish, such as the reef cleaner, parrotfish, and the blue-spotted damselfish. Maitén, 14, and her fellow divers are also studying two wrecks, thought to be linked to the slave trade, that sank many years ago in nearby Cahuita bay. “As Afro-descendants, taking care of the sea means also discovering the past hidden in the abyss and giving voice to our roots,” says Maitén, who is interested in submarine archaeology. “The vessels have always been there. Old people considered them as pirate legends,” says Maitén. “In August, Ghana’s Ashanti king came to Puerto Viejo. He did an emotional ritual above the wrecks to honour the memory of enslaved Africans who were shipwrecked off the Caribbean coast more than 300 years ago. I was moved to tears.” The study of the wrecks, thought by some to be the remains of two Danish ships carrying enslaved people in the early 18th century, will continue next spring. In the meantime, the divers dream of having a new headquarters, Casa del Mar [Sea House], to welcome visitors and children from the community. For the moment, they use Esteban’s patio to unload the equipment, as they are doing today when the tropical storm ends the coral monitoring. “Casa del Mar will be the place to bring on land the voice of the sea and the stories of our ancestors,” says Anumí. “Our headquarters will be there for the next generations: we dream about an entire community of sea ambassadors.” Find more age of extinction coverage here, and follow biodiversity reporters Phoebe Weston and Patrick Greenfield on Twitter for all the latest news and featuresWell, what to make of that? An absorbing first day of this solitary Ashes Test match. Ebb, flow, runs, wickets, catches and drops. England had the Aussies on the ropes early doors, two quick wickets and then an almost unheard of failure for Ellyse Perry saw Meg Lanning and Rachael Haynes come together for a rebuild job. England put down a few chances and missed the opportunity to really twist the knife. Australia made them pay, at 211-3 it looked pretty grim for Heather Knight and co. A couple of quick wickets after tea changed things, albeit briefly. Lanning and Haynes missed out on Test centuries but Ash Gardner and Thalia McGrath set about counterattacking magnificently to ram home their sides’ advantage. England roused again at the end to remove both batters just after their fifties but with 327 already on the board and the license for a bit of a swing in the morning it’ll be the antipodean contingent who will sleep sounder this evening. Enough wittering from me. Here’s Geoff Lemon’s more insightful take on the day: Thanks for your company, we’ll be back again tomorrow. Ta ra! When you put it like that... Australia 327 -7 A tempter and McGrath falls into the trap at the end of a long day! She didn’t need to play at that but fancied another carve up through the off side only managing to feather an edge through to Amy Jones, who takes her fifth catch of the innings. And that is it for the day. Still very much Australia in the ascendancy but England will be relieved to see the back of McGrath, who is so clearly a dangerously good player. DROP and FIFTY Gah. McGrath brings up her half century with an uppish cut through backward point that bursts through Dunkley’s hands. She’ll be upset with that effort. Fine knock from McGrath. It’s been Australia’s day. Fo’sho. 96th over: Australia 323-6 (McGrath 48, Sutherland 7) 95th over: Australia 318-6 (McGrath 47, Sutherland 3) Sutherland gets a chunky edge away for four. England would dearly love to sneak one before the close. A couple of overs left in the day. 94th over: Australia 317-6 (McGrath 46, Sutherland 3) Kate Cross into the attack and bish bash bonza! McGrath hits three boundaries off the over. If it wasn’t obvious enough from her performance in the first T20I - McGrath is a serious talent. We may only get a couple more overs in today. It’s been a long one for England’s bowlers and there’s a slight weary feel to their business now. STATS. Now these lot do know their onions numbers 93rd over: Australia 304-6 (McGrath 33, Sutherland 3) 92nd over: Australia 301-6 (McGrath 32, Sutherland 1) Maiden for Shrubsole who is on the moolah with all six. “Hi Jim, Morning Don Linke. “Have loved your work all summer, such sacrifice still in cold pre-dawn temps for our reward” Too kind Don. Nice and warm in Melbourne (YEH YEH), but Mate your maths is screwy.. over 82 &amp; 83 you called 7 runs but the total only increased by 3, are you trying a new ECB scoring method? Ah. Don. He’ll kiss you then he’ll kill you. Apologies for any slight number fuddles, this is my first proper trot out with the OBO tools. If we’ve had one thing drilled into us this last few months it is that WE HAVE TO LEARN FROM OUR MISTAKES AND NOT KEEP MAKING THEM. I’ll sharpen up. 91st over: Australia 301-6 (McGrath 32, Sutherland 1) 90th over: Australia 300-6 (McGrath 32, Sutherland 0) We’ll have ten more overs today. Yes please. England will want to get into the tail this evening and Australia will be happy with 350 on the board by stumps? 89th over: Australia 296-6 (McGrath 28, Sutherland 0) Annabel Sutherland is the new willow wielder. Brunt is fired up. Brunt gets her revenge! A full ball that came back, could have been a ‘wobbler’ - and Gardner is on her way for a very handy 56. 88th over: Australia 292-5 (McGrath 28, Gardner 52) Close but no cigar* for Shrubsole and England. And what’s all this? Gardner crunches a drive back to Brunt, who gathers and has a whang at the stumps, Gardner then pads up and there’s a strangled appeal?! Are they going up for obstruction? Most odd. There’s nothing doing whatever it was. Much ado and all that. Gardner responds by crisply punching Brunt for four through point. Class. *Don’t mention cigars! I mentioned it once but I think I got away with it. McGrath is reprieved. Ball going over. At ease. More prodigious (what else is there?) from Shrubsole and she traps McGrath LBW! GIVEN! Nipped back, could be high, T sign from Thalia, we’re going upstairs. 87th over: Australia 284-5 (McGrath 28, Gardner 52) Ash Gardner now has her highest score in Test cricket. Brunt beats her with a beauty though, there’s swing there with this new ball - it’s a deep cherry red and is hooping about a bit with a bit of cloud cover in Canberra. 86th over: Australia 284-5 (McGrath 27, Gardner 52) It’s Sciver from the other end. England need to break this partnership. That won’t do it. A half volley is dispatched by McGrath. It felt like England had got themselves back into the Test but these two are grappling it back away from them. 85th over: Australia 284-5 (McGrath 22, Gardner 50) FIFTY FOR ASH GARDNER! That is a fine, counter-punching knock. It is Brunt with the shiny new ball and Gardner greets it with a languid drive through the covers for four. Batted. 84th over: Australia 278-5 (McGrath 20, Gardner 39) What do I know. Another old ball over. More runs. Surely now? 83rd over: Australia 271-5 (McGrath 20, Gardner 39) Gardner sweeps Ecclestone away for four and there’s a two and a one. That could be it for this old nut, I can see Brunt loosening up. 82nd over: Australia 268-5 (McGrath 19, Gardner 37) Ecclestone continues and still no sign of the new’n. There’s a couple off it. A headscratcher. 81st over: Australia 266-5 (McGrath 18, Gardner 36) Curiously England have opted not to take the new ball. Hmm. What’s the plan ‘ere then? Charlie Dean is hit for two fours by Gardner in the first over back after drinks. Curious indeed. Max Andrews is on the emails and he’s being a bit cheeky... Morning, Re over 72 and the search for the laptop charger, does the phrase “bare with” suggest this was a naked endeavour? Is this taking the sartorial casualness of WFH to a new level?” I can assure you there is a dressing gown and lots of layers Max. “On a cricketing note... (THANKFULLY) Can’t help but see the parallels with the mens tests here: early inroads by the England bowlers but a match-turning fight back by the Aus batters.” Maybe Max. Maybe. I don’t like to bring the men into it really but I will say that there has already been more moments of promise and energy in this half a day and a bit than I can remember over the past 2 months combined. 80th over: Australia 255-5 (McGrath 16, Gardner 27) Gardner again flashes hard and Ecclestone is smeared away for a boundary. 250 up for Australia. and that’s DRINKS. 79th over: Australia 249-5 (McGrath 15, Gardner 22) Dean is looping them up nicely, nice flight from the young tyro. The box of balls is about to make an appearance. One more to go. 78th over: Australia 248-5 (McGrath 15, Gardner 21) Spin from both ends which is challenging for the clumsy typist to keep up. It’s gone a bit flat out there again for England, the flurry of quick runs has curbed their enthusiasm somewhat. 77th over: Australia 247-5 (McGrath 15, Gardner 20) 76th over: Australia 243-5 (McGrath 11, Gardner 20) Ecclestone is miserly again, just one from it. A breather of sorts but this partnership is still looking quite handy. A point Ali Mitchell makes on the TV just as I was thinking it myself. Promise. 75th over: Australia 240-5 (McGrath 9, Gardner 19) Charlie Dean on debut, a tidy over, just a couple from it. England going with spin from both ends now with just five overs until the new ball is available. Rachel and Hannah from Clifton Hill have been in touch, they are parked up on those lovely looking deckchairs at the Manuka and have sent a picture to prove it. “Sorry you are in London, Jim. What a day!” THANKS GUYS. 74th over: Australia 240-5 (McGrath 9, Gardner 19) 73rd over: Australia 239-5 (McGrath 9, Gardner 18) Kate Cross with a timely, laptop-charger-finding-friendly maiden. Thanks, Kate. 72nd over: Australia 235-5 (McGrath 9, Gardner 18) My laptop has nearly died in and amongst the drama. Bare with whilst I scour for a cable. Keep an eye out everyone. 71st over: Australia 236-5 (McGrath 6, Gardner 18) Gardner slashes Cross away for another boundary down through point! 70th over: Australia 231-5 (McGrath 5, Gardner 14) Bloomin’ eck. Six! for Gardner as she hooks again but boshes this one over the rope at deep mid-wicket. Ooof! She follows up with a sublime straight drive for another boundary off Sciver. Australia are on the counter. It’s compelling viewing. There’s a possible 30 overs left today... 69th over: Australia 215-5 (McGrath 5, Gardner 4) Kate Cross replaces Brunt and McGrath drives her sumpshushly* down the ground for four! This session is carnage compared to the relative sedateness of the afternoon. I’m tapping away, trying to keep up. Tap, tap, tap. *I know. It was sumpshush I tell ya. 68th over: Australia 215-5 (McGrath 0, Gardner 3) Sciver continues and LORDY LORD Ash Gardner has a wild old swipe! Crikes. Its been a coffee splurting few minutes. Gardner then picks up a couple with a more refined stroke through point. 67th over: Australia 213-5 (McGrath 0, Gardner 1) So England remove both set batters to bring Tahlia McGrath and Ash Gardner to the crease. The old “add two wickets to the score” adage ringin’ true and it does feel like a completely different game situation now. The ball from Brunt to get Haynes was an absolute snorter by the way. A glove destroyer. Here we go! But it’s not to be for Lanning! She falls short by 7 runs, poking at a lovely outswinger from Sciver and a fantastic pouch by captain Knight low down to her right in the slips. England have a breakthrough! 65th over: Australia 205-3 (Haynes 86, Lanning 93) None of that unlucky 87 nonsense for Meg Lanning, she deftly glances Brunt for 4 down to the fine leg boundary to move into the 90s. She’s seven away from that elusive first Test ton. It’s been some knock from the skipper. 64th over: Australia 205-3 (Haynes 85 , Lanning 87) Nat Sciver is keeping things tidy from the other end. A mis-hit pull from Lanning plops down safely behind square leg, she gets one run and finds herself on the Aussie bogey number of 87... 63rd over: Australia 204-3 (Haynes 85 , Lanning 86) A single to each batter as Brunt keeps it tight in the first few overs back after tea. Better from England. And still good from Australia tbf. 62nd over: Australia 202-3 (Haynes 84 , Lanning 85) 200 up for Australia. Gulp. 61st over: Australia 199-3 (Haynes 82 , Lanning 84) A maiden first up from Brunt. Tidy stuff. “Morning Jim.” Isn’t it just Adrian Armstrong. 04:08 to be precise on my clock here in the UK. “Your first post sent me down a Springsteen rabbit hole. This session could be summed up from an England perspective as Drive All Night v. Fade Away. Maybe the Boss canon is where a wicket will have to come from? Sadly he didn’t write anything called Tell-Tale Wristband on DRS, or Just Hold Your Catches - both of which may have to join the corpus of lost Half Man Half Biscuit song titles (note to Biscuiteers: new album, The Voltarol Years, out next month). But we can live in hope that somewhere in New Jersey there’s a scrap of notepaper headed Unexpected Extra Yard, or a tape labelled Calamitous Run-Out.” You are ON FIRE Ade. Does Heather Knight feel like she has a freight train running through the middle of her head yet I wonder? Thanks for your emails so far, it’s the dead of night here in London, I’m tapping away while the rest of the postcode sleeps and so it is comforting to know there are some OBO’ers out there in both the UK and Aus. Drop me a line on email or twittwoo @Jimbo_Cricket Cameron Byers is on the line: “This is looking like a pretty imposing partnership now. Has that session alone taking the ashes out of England’s reach?” Crikey Cameron. But yeh, maybe. The players are on there way back out. It’ll be Brunt to start and England could really do with the stalwart seamer pulling a lapin out of the chapeau. 60th over: Australia 199-3 (Haynes 82 , Lanning 84) Australia have dominated that session, it has been a quietly brutal one for England, the runs started to flow and it all went a little flat out there. Props to Lanning and Haynes who have batted quite beautifully so far, balancing attack and defence, showing judgement outside off and jumping on anything loose. Proper criggit. Both batters are within sniffing distance of a maiden Test ton. Will one or both get there? Can England prise their way back into this Test? Join us in a few mins to find out. First, to the kettle! 59th over: Australia 198-3 (Haynes 82 , Lanning 83) Three more off Ecclestone and we’ll have one more before tea. 58th over: Australia 195-3 (Haynes 81 , Lanning 81) Haynes opens up the shoulders and takes Shrubsole (who is back into the attack in place of Kate Cross) for 8 runs, including a meaty pull through mid-wicket. Both batters now firmly eyeing a hundred and England the clattering scoreboard. They would love to snare one before tea, we might have a couple of overs before the break. 57th over: Australia 186-3 (Haynes 73 , Lanning 81) Ecclestone continues and WE HAVE A REVIEW FOR A CATCH - Anya Shrubsole dives forward to scoop one off the turf at leg slip, has she held one here? Umpire soft signal is Not Out but they are taking a look. It stays that way, taken on the half volley. A maiden, and a whiff of a chance for England. 56th over: Australia 186-3 (Haynes 73 , Lanning 81) 55th over: Australia 184-3 (Haynes 72 , Lanning 80) Four to Haynes now as she smears one through mid on. Hmmm... 54th over: Australia 178-3 (Haynes 67 , Lanning 79) Cross is back on it and there’s just a solitary single to Haynes, clipped off the legs. 53rd over: Australia 177-3 (Haynes 66 , Lanning 79) Another four through backward point for Lanning. England have started to leak runs and look a little weary in the last few overs (since I came on shift) Any ideas out there on how to find a wicket? 52nd over: Australia 170-3 (Haynes 64 , Lanning 74) Those dropped catches will be weighing heavier the longer these two continue on their merry way. 51st over: Australia 168-3 (Haynes 63 , Lanning 73) Lanning drives imperiously through the covers for four. She’s looking very comfortable now. 50th over: Australia 162-3 (Haynes 62 , Lanning 68) Gah. Just as I’d given her the big props, Cross is a bit rusty in her first over back and Lanning takes her for three boundaries in a row. The last of which is a dominant cut shot. She’s goes past partner Rachael Haynes, and could be on for her first ever Test ton. Ahem. 49th over: Australia 148-3 (Haynes 62, Lanning 56) A leg slip is put in place for Ecclestone’s over, it’s another tidy one from England’s premier twirler. Just a scampered single from Haynes to mid on. Looks like Kate Cross is coming back into the attack, she bowled a really tight spell in the morning session. England need something to happen. 48th over: Australia 148-3 (Haynes 59, Lanning 55) Tidy from Dean, just a couple of singles off it. England are searching for one here. Digging in. Already feels like a crucial passage in the game. Thanks Geoff, lovely as per. Jim here with you for the rest of the day, in the words of the Boss, Bruce Springsteen rather than Heather Knight in this instance - “Is there anybody out there?!” Drop me a line. 47th over: Australia 146-3 (Haynes 59, Lanning 55) Ecclestone finds her length but loses her line, turning down the leg side for Haynes to deflect away through fine leg for four leg byes. England have let this game slip. A minor cheer-up as Ecclestone hits the pad and gets a good appeal away, but too high. That’s enough for me today. James Wallace will steer the ship from here. 46th over: Australia 141-3 (Haynes 59, Lanning 54) First dance for Haynes, down the wicket to drive Dean over mid-off for a couple. 45th over: Australia 137-3 (Haynes 56, Lanning 53) Ecclestone spins on, driven away by Lanning to point for a single, then the same by Haynes. Still isn’t hitting a consistent length. 44th over: Australia 135-3 (Haynes 55, Lanning 52) It will be double spin. Lots of flight from Dean to Haynes, who drives but straight at cover. Well stopped by Sciver with heat on the ball. Same again next delivery. But wait a while and you’ll get a short one, that’s been the pattern today. Haynes cuts it for one. Lanning sweeps, hit on the pad, and they’ll go upstairs for a DRS after the umpire says no. The deflection was caught at slip, not sure if they were appealing for a catch or an lbw. Looks like it has hit Lanning on the forearm, not the wristband of the glove. So she’s spared from the catch, and ball-tracking shows the lbw shout going over the stumps. Lanning had a good stretch forward, which saves her. That’s drinks. 43rd over: Australia 133-3 (Haynes 54, Lanning 51) Ecclestone comes on having changed ends. Will this be double spin or is Dean out of the attack. One slip and a short leg for the left-arm orthodox spinner, who drops too short to Lanning again and is cut for two. There’s a deep point and a deep square leg to protect the boundaries. Lanning pulls! Fine of the deep square leg for four! That’s Lanning’s 50, and she’s six runs away from her highest Test score. 42nd over: Australia 126-3 (Haynes 53, Lanning 45) Lovely cover drive from Lanning against the off-spinner, out to deep cover for a couple. Sweeps fine for two more. Then slashes a boundary away behind point. 41st over: Australia 117-3 (Haynes 52, Lanning 37) Sciver nearly draws a glove from Lanning down the leg side, but it just misses. Then Jones misses a ball behind the stumps, past her on an awkward bounce for four byes. 40th over: Australia 113-3 (Haynes 52, Lanning 37) Dean gets through a quiet over, hasn’t looked very threatening as yet. 39th over: Australia 112-3 (Haynes 52, Lanning 36) Bit of Desmond Haynes in that shot, as Rachael Haynes leans back and whips a pull shot through the leg side for her eighth boundary. Sciver’s length is just short enough, given that Haynes is adept at pulling length balls. 38th over: Australia 107-3 (Haynes 48, Lanning 35) Charlie Dean gives up three singles, including a drag-down to Haynes. Runs coming easily enough for the Australians. 37th over: Australia 104-3 (Haynes 47, Lanning 33) Sciver comes on to replace Brunt from the shopping centre end. Tries the short ball that brought her first wicket, but Haynes yanks it behind square to the sweeper. Lanning slashes hard at point where Dunkley has to deflect the ball up rather than stopping it clean, giving away a run. 36th over: Australia 102-3 (Haynes 46, Lanning 32) One spinner replaces another - Charlie Dean to bowl on Test debut. Ecclestone taken off after four overs. Created chances but bowled some loose ones as well. Dean is an off-spinner coming around the wicket to the left-hander. Gets some turn away from the bat first ball, driven to cover but no run. Haynes leaves the next, outside off. Haynes cuts a single to get Australia to triple figures. Lanning pushes a single square first ball. A nice breeze is coming across the ground, that might help the spinners get some drift. 35th over: Australia 99-3 (Haynes 44, Lanning 31) Brunt to Lanning now, England’s attack leader into her 10th over. Zeroing in on the stumps. Sciver is kicking the turf at second slip. Knight next to her at first. Beaumont under the lid at short leg. Lanning blocks everything out. 34th over: Australia 99-3 (Haynes 44, Lanning 31) Ecclestone continues, a couple of singles and a leg bye. This must be really deflating for England, creating chances of Lanning and then Haynes, taking neither. 33rd over: Australia 96-3 (Haynes 44, Lanning 29) Brunt carrying on to Haynes, and now Haynes is dropped! At second slip by Sciver this time. Had to fall to her left towards that ball but it was at a decent height from an angled bat, should have been caught. England failing in the slip cordon badly. That might be an awkward conversation tonight when Brunt and Sciver get home. 32nd over: Australia 96-3 (Haynes 44, Lanning 29) Back and forth between Lanning and Ecclestone. Another short ball cut for four, then another edge along the ground that gets Lanning off strike. Haynes turns past short leg, then misses a sweep and hears a loud appeal for lbw. Not out. Hit her on the foot outside off stump. She gets the sweep away next ball. The 50 partnership came up from 99 balls in that over. If you spot any score errors in earlier posts, try refreshing the page, they have probably been corrected. 31st over: Australia 88-3 (Haynes 43, Lanning 22) Haynes drops and runs a single to cover, bringing Lanning on strike to cash in on width from Brunt - not much width but Lanning doesn’t need much to slam a cut shot to the fence. Then plays her trademark straight bat punch through point for one. Lots of miles for the fielders as they swap for between right-hander and left-hander. Tight off-side field, so Haynes tries to pull to leg, not short enough for the shot and she skies it! Lands between mid-on and midwicket. Shrubsole could have done better with that, she ran around the ball rather than really going for the catch. Haynes tried to fetch it from too wide. Haynes gets off strike, then Brunt sends down a sharp bouncer at Lanning who is flinching away from the ball as she pulls. Gets a single but didn’t have eyes on the ball, that was lucky too. 30th over: Australia 80-3 (Haynes 41, Lanning 16) Ecclestone to Lanning, which could be quite a contest. The left-arm spinner turning it away from the bat. Draws another edge from Lanning, a thick one along the ground to silly point. No run from the over. Strap in. 29th over: Australia 80-3 (Haynes 41, Lanning 11) We’re back in action. Brunt with the ball, Lanning playing defensively until she pushes a single down the ground. That would have been categorically England’s session had the last catch been taken. As things stand, it’s more like honours even given how deep Australia’s batting goes. England would be happy with the early wickets from the seamers given their decision to bowl, but had the chance to finish with an exclamation mark. Goodness me. Back with you after the sandwiches. 28th over: Australia 79-3 (Haynes 41, Lanning 15) Ecclestone, tall and talented, drags down her first ball badly and gets pulled away by Haynes for four. The loosener out of the way. Four catchers around the bat, and Haynes inside edges past short leg for a dicey single. But short again from the spinner to Lanning, who cuts four. Then Ecclestone gets her length right and Lanning is dropped! Dropped at slip, outside edge from the forward push, straightforward just to the left of Heather Knight, who gets hands to it and fumbles it away. Bad, bad miss just before lunch. 27th over: Australia 69-3 (Haynes 36, Lanning 10) Cross with the ball in hand, a couple of singles as we approach the lunch break. We’ll have one over of spin before then. 26th over: Australia 66-3 (Haynes 34, Lanning 9) A couple of leg byes as Haynes misses a leg glance, then she takes a single to put Lanning back on strike against Shrubsole. Lanning gets through the last three deliveries. 25th over: Australia 63-3 (Haynes 33, Lanning 9) Cross keeps Lanning becalmed for another over, tight line and Australia’s captain isn’t game to do anything but stay around. 24th over: Australia 63-3 (Haynes 33, Lanning 9) They’re bringing the bat-pad catcher across to the off side for Lanning. I would have thought short leg would be more chance of a catch, but perhaps this is more about putting a player in Lanning’s eyeline and putting her off getting on the front foot. Shrubsole immediately gets the ball coming in and hitting the pad, and England burn a review to a ball hitting about three stumps outside the line of off. Big inswing for Shrubsole throughout the over, and she finds the pads twice more, with some bat involved as Lanning tries to push forward. Lanning finishes the over with a single from an overthrow, sloppy bit of work from England. 23rd over: Australia 62-3 (Haynes 33, Lanning 8) Cross has changed around to the shopping centre end, and bowls a peach that whispers past the off stump as Haynes pushes forward and is beaten. Still two slips, gully and point. Inswing to the left-hander for Cross, the extravagant early movement has gone but the ball is still doing a little bit when pitched up. No run from the over. 22nd over: Australia 62-3 (Haynes 33, Lanning 8) Shrubsole to Haynes, too straight to the left-hander as the slips wait redundantly. Haynes drops a single to leg on the third attempt. Lanning inside edges another one into her pad. Decent contest between these two. Then Shrubsole hits the pad but going down leg. 21st over: Australia 61-3 (Haynes 32, Lanning 8) Too wide from Sciver across the left-hander again, she’s given too many freebies to Haynes today. Cracked for four once again. Haynes follows up with a drop and run to point. “Good cricket,” people mutter around the world. Lanning hops and turns a ball just past the short leg catcher. Then cuts but can’t get past backward point. The one thing missing from Lanning’s extensive cricket CV is a major Test innings, things have never worked out for her in this format. Perhaps today is the day. 20th over: Australia 56-3 (Haynes 27, Lanning 8) Shrubsole back into action. Bowls too short, and Lanning is able to step across her stumps and whip a pull shot for four. Shrubsole corrects, getting a tiny bit of swing away from the angle in, beating Lanning’s outside edge, then taking her inside edge into the pads. There is a short leg in place for Shrubsole, so that is a potential mode of dismissal. Inswing beats Lanning again, a thick inside edge as she tries to drive. Hard into the ground instead of racing through the covers. Good comeback. 19th over: Australia 52-3 (Haynes 27, Lanning 4) Sciver concentrates on bowling a tight line to Haynes, right on the off stump, giving no width. Looks like it will be a patience game against the set player. Two slips, gully, point, cover, mid-off, mid-on, midwicket, long leg. Glorious sunshine washing over the ground. Six dot balls. 18th over: Australia 52-3 (Haynes 27, Lanning 4) Cross is settling into her work now, challenging Lanning on off stump. Making her play into the gully. Then a thick outside edge the same way. Tension building. No run from the over. 17th over: Australia 52-3 (Haynes 27, Lanning 4) Haynes on the cut shot again! She’s playing a lone hand here, laying into some width from Sciver. Four runs. 16th over: Australia 48-3 (Haynes 23, Lanning 4) Edged by Lanning for four! Cross pitches up, Lanning drives, and the edge is dying as it goes between first and second slip. Not sure if that carried well enough to be scooped up, but it was very streaky. This after Cross had a good lbw shout against Haynes turned down, maybe a bit of inside edge. 15th over: Australia 43-3 (Haynes 22, Lanning 0) The captain comes to the crease with a job to do. Haynes looking steady at the other end. That is huge! Bharat Sundaresan tells me that Perry was working on her pull shot for 45 minutes in the nets yesterday. She tries it out against a Sciver short ball, gets a high top edge, and Jones does really well to run around towards backward square leg and take a tumbling catch. Perry is dismissed, something that has been almost unachievable in Test cricket for the last five years. England buoyant. 14th over: Australia 42-2 (Haynes 21, Perry 18) Too short from Cross again, and slashed away by Perry for four. So Cross follows up with a beauty! Pitches up, hits the seam, and it jags past the edge of Perry’s bat. I guess we’d call that... a Cross seam delivery? Drinks break. 13th over: Australia 38-2 (Haynes 21, Perry 14) Brunt gets a break, with Sciver to take over. Bowling her tidy mediums on a straight line. Haynes blocks out the first over. 12th over: Australia 38-2 (Haynes 21, Perry 14) Ominous for England now, as Perry is up and running too. Stands up tall and punches Cross through backward point for four. Crisp timing. 11th over: Australia 34-2 (Haynes 21, Perry 10) A bit of inswing for Brunt to the left-hander now, it bends in but Haynes reads the swing to perfection and drives through cover for four! Lovely shot. She gets beaten by bounce from the next one, aiming a cut shot that goes under the ball, but Haynes gets onto a similar shot a couple of balls later and smokes it for four. Brunt is apparently blaming backward point for that one. Maybe the short wide ball was more the problem? 10th over: Australia 26-2 (Haynes 13, Perry 10) Kate Cross on to bowl, hits a good length early and has Perry pushing away from her body. One sliced shot is well stopped by Winfield-Hill diving in the gully. The next takes a thick edge that flies between gully and Sciver at slip for four. 9th over: Australia 22-2 (Haynes 13, Perry 6) The slip cordon has been reduced for Haynes. Brunt has a deep square leg now, and uses her, dropping in a couple of bouncers. Haynes takes on the second one and pulls it for a run. Perry punches into gaps at cover a couple of times to take singles, Haynes guides away a brace. Runs coming. 8th over: Australia 17-2 (Haynes 10, Perry 4) Perry is starting to work Shrubsole around, off side and then leg side, two here, one there. 7th over: Australia 14-2 (Haynes 10, Perry 1) Perry off the mark with a single pushed to cover. That brings Haynes onto strike to get a thick edge down through deep third for four. Looks like the swing has died away already. 6th over: Australia 9-2 (Haynes 6, Perry 0) First boundary of the day! Shrubsole gets too straight to the left-hander, who clips her away through midwicket with elan. Nice outfield by the look of that, the ball skates away. 5th over: Australia 5-2 (Haynes 2, Perry 0) Brunt fires in the yorker and Haynes ends up flat on her face after digging it out just past short leg. Surprised by that length and just keeps it out of her bootlaces. Pushes a leg-side single to follow. 4th over: Australia 4-2 (Haynes 1, Perry 0) Ellyse Perry into her work early then, and Mooney’s brave injury comeback doesn’t last long, after having clipped two more runs from the first ball of the Shrubsole over. The right-handed Perry covers the line of the swing comfortably while stretching forward and sees out the over. A wicket apiece for the opening bowlers! Shrubsole gets her line right, bit of swing across the left-hander who props forward in an attempted defence. Finds the thick outside edge and Jones pouches it moving across to her left. 3rd over: Australia 2-1 (Haynes 1, Mooney 1) Beth Mooney to the crease early, with her jaw wired shut from that fracture not even two weeks ago. I wonder if they put her up the order so she can get into her work quickly rather than sitting around all day getting more sore. Brunt bowls on her pads first up, clipped for a single. Two left-handers at the crease. That score is the same, whichever country you write it in. First wicket for England! Lovely piece of bowling by Brunt, the ball angling in and then swinging away sharply. Brunt had already beaten a little swish from Healy outside the off stump the previous ball. That doesn’t stop Healy chasing it again. Poor shot but good bowling, and safely taken by the keeper. 2nd over: Australia 1-0 (Haynes 1, Healy 0) Three slips and a gully for the left-handed Haynes as Shubsole commences from the Manuka Pool end. Angling across the lefty, lots of swing away, but taking the ball too wide to encourage Haynes to play. No run. 1st over: Australia 1-0 (Haynes 1, Healy 0) Katherine Brunt starts us off from the Manuka Shops end of the ground. Good line, a little bit of outswing, challenging the right-hander just outside off stump. And we’re away... Interesting selection for Australia too - Megan Schutt misses out, a big call on their great swing bowler. They’ve gone for two spinners with JJ and King on debut, with Darcie Brown the only specialist quick, backed up by the all-round seam of Perry, Sutherland and McGrath. Lanning has dropped herself down to five, with Mooney at first drop. Australia Alyssa Healy + Rachael Haynes Beth Mooney Ellyse Perry Meg Lanning * Tahlia McGrath Ashleigh Gardner Annabel Sutherland Jess Jonassen Alana King Darcie Brown England have not brought in their young quick Lauren Bell, who was included in the squad. They’ve gone for the long-timers in Brunt, Shrubsole and Cross, plus Sciver’s mediums. That relative lack of pace might not help them as the game goes on. Two spinners, with Dean to share the workload with Ecclestone. England Tammy Beaumont Lauren Winfield-Hill Heather Knight * Natalie Sciver Amy Jones + Sophia Dunkley Katherine Brunt Charlie Dean Sophie Ecclestone Anya Shrubsole Kate Cross Interesting call! Heather Knight says that the pitch will be good for batting throughout, and so if there is any help for the bowlers it will be early. Just quickly, Ellyse Perry’s Test average since her double ton in 2017 is 474. You read that right. Five innings, four not outs, two centuries. Ridiculously good when she has time on her side. That will be a great point to watch. Hanging out to see how both these XIs are structured. There are so many ways they could build bowling attacks especially. Wonder if they’ll be bold in that respect. What do have on Tony Greig’s Weatherwall? Fine, it’s just me looking out a window. It is partially sunny. That’s my good news for the day. A warm morning that should become a warmer day, up towards 30 degrees by the end. Lots of scattered cloud around, of an unthreatening type, with some chance of showers at the end of the day. On a side note, the BoM radar station that covers Canberra is called Captains Flat. Which they will be if it rains. Hello from Canberra - the nation’s capital, and a monument to compromise. Let us hope there will be no compromising from the two teams set to take the field today, Australia and England in their centrepiece Ashes Test match. If previous matches in Canberra are any guide, it should be a good batting deck, which means plenty of work for the bowlers if they are to produce incisive spells. But predictions are a fool’s errand, so let’s wait and see. Neither XI has been named before the match, with both captains reserving the right to surprise their opponents. A win here is worth four points in the multiformat series, which Australia leads 4-2 following one T20 win and a couple of washouts. So we’ll have to hope that both teams want to take the game on rather than play it safe with three 50-over matches to follow. These matches are such big occasions. The players in women’s cricket have had to push to have Tests scheduled at all, and even so get the opportunity rarely to don the whites, take up the red or pink ball, and play for four days. The need for a fifth day has been well displayed by every recent match in this format, but for now we’ll have to make do. The teams have had limited preparation, but there are exciting players on both sides and they have plenty to play for. Let’s go.With that, we will wrap up the blog for the night. If you’re stationed amidst one of the nation’s many storms, stay safe and dry. Here were today’s major developments: No decision on the definition of “fully vaccinated” to mean three booster shots was made at today’s national cabinet meeting, with ATAGI advice ongoing. No decision has been made, too, on the retail sector, after the industry urged national cabinet for isolation exemptions to be extended to staff in the sector. A number of severe thunderstorm warnings are in place across SA, NSW and Victoria tonight as parts of SA are hit by flooding and storm damage. Short bursts of snow are possible in some areas alongside hail, torrential rain and flash flooding. Nurses and midwives at Sydney’s Liverpool hospital went on strike this morning, demanding the government take action to address the staffing crisis impacting health care across the state. Seven Network television host Andrew O’Keefe has been arrested in Sydney, accused of grabbing a woman by the throat, punching, kicking and pushing her to the ground. On a trip to Moruya, opposition leader Anthony Albanese pledged Labor would spend $200m a year on disaster preparedness. The south coast of NSW was heavily hit by the 2019/2020 bushfires. It’s beginning to feel a lot like an election year. Victoria recorded 15 Covid deaths and 13,755 cases, NSW recorded 29 Covid deaths and 17,316 new cases and SA recorded 13 deaths, bringing the state’s total to 100 deaths since the pandemic began. Queensland recorded 15 Covid deaths and 11,600 new cases. There has been a 6.3 magnitude earthquake in Fiji. Mask mandates have been extended to a number of regions in Western Australia after 10 local cases were detected in the state today. South Australia’s education union will no longer hold strike action despite a majority of its members voting for industrial intervention. The school year is set to begin for most students on 2 February. Half of the targets set by the New South Wales state government to enhance residents’ quality of life are not on track to be met, despite assurances from the premier, Dominic Perrottet, that the goals “remain core” to his agenda. Education, disability representation and domestic violence are among those falling short in targets set by then premier Gladys Berejiklian following the 2019 state election. These form part of 14 “premier’s priorities” setting benchmarks for progress in key areas. For more on this story, read on: The only surviving member of the Bee Gees, Barry Gibb, has been appointed as an honorary companion in the Order of Australia. The governor-general, David Hurley, announced this afternoon that he had approved six honorary awards in the Order of Australia to individuals who are not Australian citizens or permanent residents. Hurley said: The Order of Australia is our nation’s pre-eminent means of recognising service and achievement. Through Honorary Awards, the system also affords our nation the ability to recognise individuals from other nations where their service has benefited Australia and Australians. I congratulate the six individuals honoured today and thank them for their endeavours and contribution to our nation. The gazette notice says Gibb, a music legend, was recognised “on the basis of his longstanding support and development of the Australian music industry which he helped bring to an international audience and for philanthropy”. The notice says the Bee Gees had “influenced, and made significant contributions to, the Australian music industry and its emerging artists and producers, particularly during the formative years of Australian popular music”. Gibb was recognised with an appointment as an Honorary Companion in the General Division of the Order of Australia (AC). The other five individuals named today were awarded an honorary medal (OAM): Mr Barry Keith Barnes, United Kingdom: For service to commemorating the service of Australian Flying Corps in Tetbury, England, and surrounding areas, during World War One. Mr Gilbert Arthur Brogden, Narrabeen NSW: For service to the community, particularly through volunteering and fundraising for local and national charity organisations. Mrs Shirley Joan Connolly, Grasmere NSW: For service to netball, particularly in the Macarthur region of New South Wales. Mrs Christine Robin Forsyth, Laguna NSW: For service to the Wollombi Valley region, particularly through sporting, arts and community organisations. Mr Wayne Jude Lindsay, Boronia Heights QLD: a veteran of the New Zealand Defence Forces, for service to the Australian and New Zealand veterans community. The governor-general’s office says this process is different from the one used to honour Australian citizens, because these recipients are considered by government rather than by the Council of the Order of Australia. That means the individuals were recommended to the governor-general by the prime minister. No decision has been made about whether to change the definition of full vaccination to require three doses of a Covid-19 jab, AAP reports. The Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation is still considering whether to change its advice. If it does, it would be up to states and territories to amend their respective public health orders. Victorian premier Daniel Andrews earlier suggested national cabinet could agree to update the definition of full vaccination to cover three doses: This is not a two-dose thing (or) two doses and a bonus – it is absolutely critical and essential. International evidence, our own experience, the views of experts … will mean everyone knows and understands this is a three-dose project. Tasmanian premier Peter Gutewin said the ATAGI advice had not been provided to leaders. Opposition leader Anthony Albanese said it was critical the health advice from experts be followed: What is clear is that the booster shot makes a major difference in terms of the Omicron variant in particular. Over a period of time it will be considered you would have to have had a booster in order to be fully vaccinated . we know the protection (of a second dose) reduces over a period of time. Premiers and chief ministers told a meeting of national cabinet today they expected a jump in daily infections when schools returned for the year. They also reported decreased pressure on hospital systems in terms of admissions and intensive care numbers. The definition of who is considered an essential worker remains the same for now. Premiers and chief ministers agreed to consider any recommendations provided by the Australian Health Protection Principal Committee. Australia’s retail sector had urged leaders to extend isolation exemptions to staff in the industry. States and territories did agree to trucking licence changes to be based on competency and skills tests as opposed to only time. New Zealand trucking licences will also be recognised. Ongoing difficulties in lifting Indigenous vaccination rates and problems posed by misinformation were also discussed. The double-dose rate for Indigenous people aged 16 and older is sitting around 75%, compared with more than 93% for Australia’s overall 16-plus population. There are a number of minor flood warnings in place across NSW, as well as a marine wind warning and a severe thunderstorm warning for the Lower Western, Upper Western and parts of North West Slopes and Plains, Central West Slopes and Plains and Riverina Forecast Districts. Following that riotous Australian Open doubles match, Dylan Alcott has just entered Rod Laver Arena for his last ever tennis match. A huge moment for the Australian of the Year. Sad news coming out of Samoa. There have been 27 Covid cases detected after a Brisbane flight arrived on 19 January. Six of the cases have been confirmed to be the Omicron variant. Here is some more detail on those new cases in Western Australia, as per premier Mark McGowan’s Facebook page. Of the 10 new local cases detected, all are linked to the current outbreak. There have also been two travel-related cases up until 8pm last night: Three cases are close contacts linked to the Willagee IGA sub-cluster, five are linked as close contacts of a previously reported case in Rockingham and two other cases are close contacts linked to the Southwest sub-cluster. All cases are now in quarantine and public health continue to investigate and monitor them. Two cases have also been recorded related to travel. All cases are now in quarantine and public health will continue to monitor them. Absolute scenes at Rod Laver Arena. Nick Kyrgrios and Thanasi Kokkinakis have just made it into the Australian Open doubles final to take place on Saturday. Kyrgios says: I’ve played a lot of singles matches around the globe with amazing atmosphere ... but nothing beats this; this is insane. Read our story here: Fallout from the South Australian floods: Across Queensland, some 795 medical interns and graduate nurses will join the frontline to strengthen the state’s public health system in response to the Omicron variant. The health minister, Yvette D’Ath, announced the move today, which will roll out from this month: These junior doctors represent the next generation of frontline health workers. I’m grateful they are joining our health system at a time when Covid-19 is placing immense pressure on our hospitals and workforce. The pandemic has shone a light on the importance of health care workers. It’s a challenging but rewarding job and I have no doubt our newest recruits will thrive under the guidance of our respected clinicians. The junior doctors have been recruited across 20 Queensland hospitals and will compete rotations through three core terms including medicine, surgery and emergency medicine, plus elective terms in other specialised areas. Late to the party but this story from the Townsville Bulletin’s Katie Hall is well worth a read. This bloke is absolutely not messing around: Wielding a thong, an elderly man has fought off a wallaby just days after he was seriously injured from a run-in with the aggressive marsupial. Residents of Carlyle Gardens in Condon are walking on eggshells following the attacks, but George Church, 85, took matters into his own hands on Tuesday after his head was split open from a fall during a wallaby attack last Thursday. “I thought what do I do, I can’t get any (help), and I thought ‘I’ll have to fight my way out of it’, which I did,” Mr Church said. The Bureau of Meteorology has this thunderstorm warning for south-western Victoria: For people in south-west and parts of central and Wimmera forecast districts. Severe thunderstorms with damaging winds, large hail and heavy rainfall [are] becoming more numerous over south-western Victoria. A very moist and unstable airmass is in place across Victoria, ahead of a trough moving eastwards into the state. Winds in the upper atmosphere will strengthen during the day, further assisting in the development of severe thunderstorms. Severe thunderstorms are likely to produce damaging winds, large hailstones and heavy rainfall that may lead to flash flooding in the warning area over the next several hours. Locations which may be affected include Edenhope, Nhill, Kaniva, Hamilton, Warrnambool, Portland, Colac, Apollo Bay, Casterton and Lake Bolac. We are still waiting to hear from the prime minister following today’s national cabinet meeting. The federal government has announced an additional $44m in funding towards headspace services, to reduce wait times and increase access for young people. The health minister, Greg Hunt, said one in four young Australians were affected by mental illness: As we continue to battle Covid-19 it’s more important than ever that we prioritise mental health. The disruption to normal life caused by the Covid-19 pandemic has had profound impacts on young Australians and we are ensuring that they can access the mental health supports they may need to help them get back on track and minimise longer-term impacts. Australia’s headspace centres target young people aged between 12 and 25, as a single-entry point for holistic mental health care. Anyone experiencing distress can seek immediate advice and support through Lifeline (13 11 14), Kids Helpline (1800 55 1800), or Head to Health. In sporting news, Nick Kyrgios and Thanasi Kokkinakis have just kicked off their semi-final match against Horacio Zeballos and Marcel Granollers at Rod Laver Arena. Mere moments into the first game there have already been multiple rounds of “Aussie Aussie Aussie, Oi Oi Oi” followed by “siuuu”. Back in South Australia, and two homes were demolished by storm cells yesterday. Australian pharmacists are calling on the commonwealth to provide more rapid antigen tests and adequate PPE for pharmacy staff as they struggle with “crippling shortages”. Professional Pharmacists Australia say the federal government failed to ensure there was adequate supply of RATs when the became freely available for pensioners and concession holders. The Professional Pharmacists Australia CEO, Jill McCabe, said many were at “breaking point” due to the shortages: Australia’s community pharmacists can’t do their job properly or safely without sufficient supplies of rapid antigen tests and personal protective clothing. Pharmacists urgently require supplies of adequate PPE for the safe administration of vaccines. However, 25% of respondents to our survey indicated they were having to provide their own PPE. Yet again the federal government has failed to adequately plan and organise the supply of essential equipment to prevent the spread of the highly transmissible Omicron variant of Covid-19. Meanwhile, on the Eyre Peninsula in South Australia: Here is more on the $25m commitment to an emergency operations precinct in Moruya, which would be jointly funded by federal and NSW Labor. The precinct would include a single, purpose-built emergency operations centre to prepare the community for future bushfire and flood events. Currently, disaster response in the region is coordinated from separate sites, including a temporary facility in the local RSL hall. It comes in the wake of reviews into the black summer bushfires which recommended a purpose-built precinct. Albanese says: Thousands of Australians who face bushfires, floods and cyclones every year deserve to be protected by a federal government who plans ahead and invests to keep them safe. These investments will literally save lives, not to mention the taxpayers’ funds that have to be spent on recovery and repairs when disasters hit. The marginal seat of Gilmore, which contains Moruya, is currently held by the Labor MP Fiona Phillips. She’s facing a showdown from the NSW Liberal MP for Bega, Andrew Constance, who gained wide popularity over the bushfires and is now running for a seat in federal parliament. Meanwhile, the federal opposition leader, Anthony Albanese, is continuing his tour de Moruya this afternoon, and is touting a $25m commitment to an emergency operations precinct in the regional NSW town if he were to be elected. Moruya was heavily hit by the 2019-20 bushfires, as was much of the state’s south coast. Australia’s resources minister, Keith Pitt, says he’d “like to see the situation de-escalate” between Russia and Ukraine. I’m sure he’s not alone on that one. No formal announcements were made in the press conference, but there will be “continuing dialogue with Russia” over the coming fortnight: As the minister for foreign affairs has said in recent days, as the prime minister has said, and we saw some very encouraging signs this morning, there will be continuing dialogue with Russia over the next couple of weeks. So we’d encourage them to continue that dialogue, to look for a diplomatic solution, to de-escalate tensions. Because simply, destabilisation around the world has a significant impact, particularly on prices like the price of oil, and we’ve seen that impact right here now. Did someone say gas? No formal request for additional gas exports has been made from Europe, but Australia is “ready to support our friends” if the situation in Ukraine escalates and heavy sanctions on Russia come to pass that restrict the nation’s supply of gas to the rest of the region. Taylor says: Australia pioneered the development of LNG shipping facilities to the world. We’ve led the world on this. We’re leading the world on shipping hydrogen, too, we’re sending the first shipment of liquid hydrogen up into Asia, too. We know how to do this. This is a great area of Australian expertise. We’ve got the gas. Australia has the gas and that puts us in extremely strong position to support customers and allies as they need it. The energy minister, Angus Taylor, is fronting the media in Sydney, chatting all things natural gas. “We will always stand ready to provide natural gas support,” he says. We have a lot of gas, enough gas to go around: Australia’s resource sector has performed at an extraordinary level throughout the pandemic and our gas sector in particular has performed extremely well. We’ve seen record levels of ... natural gas, which is helping to supply customers throughout Asia and the world, reducing their emissions, complementing investment in renewables and ensuring affordable and reliable energy there for the customers. But at the same time, it’s been able to provide the gas we need in Australia to complement our record level of investment in renewables ... we stand ready always to support customers and countries around the world, as well as our own domestic customer, provide them with the gas that they need to provide that affordable and reliable energy as they bring down their emissions. We will always stand ready beside our allies and our customers to provide that support ... we’ve seen prices here in Australia domestically running at a quarter what they’re running elsewhere in the world. And that’s a great tribute to the extraordinary work being done to get supply up – to provide the export customers with what they need and at the same time have the affordable, reliable gas that we need here in Australia for industry, for households and for small businesses. Let’s chat weather, why don’t we! In Melbourne, authorities from the SES and the Bureau of Meteorology are providing an update ahead of predicted thunderstorms to come this afternoon. A BoM spokesperson says 69mm of rain was recorded in Mildura yesterday, making it the wettest January day for the regional city on record: It’s not over yet, though, with the risk of heavy falls continuing, with showers and storms today. The focus for today is on the west of the state, where we could see heavy falls to potentially intense rainfall rates, large hail and also the risk of damaging winds. Thunderstorm warnings have already been issued around the Port Campbell area. As we move into the evening and into tomorrow, that focus really becomes the central area, including Melbourne. For the Melbourne area, the greatest risk of those thunderstorms develops from around midday and continues through the afternoon and evening. There’s a risk of central parts of the state tomorrow for those locally to intense rainfall rates, large hail and damaging winds. Moving into the weekend, we’ll start to see cooler conditions, but that risk of heavy falls will continue in the east of the state. Unfortunately, that humidity is here to stay though, with the very muggy conditions continuing until at least the middle part of next week. The hospitality workers union has issued a statement detailing concerns Covid-19 is spreading unabated across venues. The union is calling for free rapid antigen tests and proper income support following eligibility changes to paid pandemic leave. More storms are on the way for my south-west Victorian friends. The BoM says there are “isolated severe thunderstorms with damaging winds, large hail and heavy rainfall developing over south-western Victoria”: A very moist and unstable airmass is in place across Victoria, ahead of a trough moving eastwards into the state. Winds in the upper atmosphere will strengthen during the day, further assisting in the development of severe thunderstorms. Severe thunderstorms are likely to produce damaging winds, large hailstones and heavy rainfall that may lead to flash flooding in the warning area over the next several hours. Locations which may be affected include Colac, Port Campbell, Apollo Bay and Lake Bolac. Australian petroleum exploration and production company Woodside is pulling out of Myanmar after nearly a decade, citing the “deteriorating human rights situation” in the country. Shoutout to any Canberran blog readers who are aged between five and 11 and form part of this good looking statistic (and their parents): If you missed it, the former Seven Network television host Andrew O’Keefe has been arrested in Sydney, accused of grabbing a woman by the throat, punching, kicking and pushing her to the ground. The 50-year-old presenter was arrested early today after getting into an argument with the 38-year-old woman on Tuesday in a Sydney CBD unit, which led to O’Keefe assaulting her, police alleged. The United Australia party MP Craig Kelly has told Guardian Australia when parliament returns he will propose a private member’s bill to limit the ministerial discretion to deport sports stars, citing the need to prevent another Novak Djokovic-style deportation. Djokovic was deported after the immigration minister, Alex Hawke, exercised a personal power to cancel his visa due to his concern the world No 1 tennis player’s presence in Australia might risk “civil unrest” as he was a “talisman of anti-vaccination sentiment”. Kelly said Australia competed to attract international sporting events and its competitors now had “a great attack against our nation – they can say if a sports person has some political views Australia doesn’t like, they risk being thrown out for views they expressed even outside Australia”. He said: Novak Djokovic wasn’t here to attend rallies, or to give speeches. He was here to play tennis. It’s not what the discretion was put there for. Kelly said political views should not be used to exclude people conducting private travel in Australia, citing medical experts with contrarian views holidaying on the Gold Coast as another example where ministerial discretion would be inappropriate. Kelly noted that Liberal MPs including John Alexander had backed Djokovic’s right to stay and play after the first cancellation decision was overturned by the federal circuit court. A quarter of Australians don’t know about the Holocaust, and even less know about Australia’s connections to it, new data has found. Two-thirds of people, however, support compulsory Holocaust education in schools. The largest national survey of its kind – commissioned by the Gandel Foundation in partnership with Deakin University – found 24% of the population aged 18 or older had little to no knowledge of the Holocaust, increasing to 30% among millennials. Prof Steven Cooke, from the Deakin University research team, said there were important lessons to be learned from the Gandel Holocaust Survey: Not many people know about Australia’s hard-line attitude towards Jewish refugees before the second world war. How does knowing that history help us to, for instance, reflect on our attitudes towards asylum seekers today? People tend to see the Holocaust as a tragic European event that happened far away. If we can illuminate Australia’s connections to the Holocaust, both good and bad, it will help enhance our knowledge and understanding of genocide more generally. Ahead of today’s national cabinet meeting, the Australian Council of Social Service (Acoss) has been calling for the commonwealth to address 51 recommendations provided to the government in a letter on 12 January. It is also urging the government to create a Covid Rapid Response Group made up of Acoss, unions, business groups and public health experts to address the spread of the Omicron variant. The Acoss CEO, Dr Cassandra Goldie, said Australia was “still not ready” to deal with Omicron: People with concession cards can’t find RATs on pharmacy shelves even after the government program has commenced. Parents are confused and stressed about what the return to school looks like for their children. People in regional, rural and remote communities remain extremely exposed to the ravages of Covid-19. It’s still a mess, and only decisive and swift government action will remedy it. This pandemic continues to hit people on low incomes, people from diverse backgrounds and with pre-existing vulnerabilities the hardest. It’s been a long, hard slog for people facing the greatest risks of this pandemic, and one month into the new year, nothing has gotten safer for them. There is an urgent need for better forward planning, crisis management and prioritisation of resources to support those most at risk and with the least means to stay safe. The approach to this emergency is totally inadequate. Play is back under way at Canberra’s Manuka Oval after a spot of lunch in the standalone Women’s Ashes Test. Australia, who headed into this match 4-2 up in the multi-format series, were in trouble after England took the early wickets of Alyssa Healy and Beth Mooney to leave them reeling at 4-2. But, despite the further loss of Ellyse Perry – back in the side after being dropped last time out – the experienced heads of Rachael Haynes and captain Meg Lanning have managed to steady the ship and the hosts went in at the lunch break on 79-3. You can follow every ball of the match with the incomparable Geoff Lemon and our liveblog here: Dialling back a bit, and there has been some justified confusion over NSW premier Dominic Perrottet’s assertion today that “from the outset” the health advice was that rapid antigen tests didn’t need to be taken prior to the first day of school. He said instead they were to be used twice a week at the “discretion” of parents. On Sunday, however, the education minister, Sarah Mitchell, said: We’re asking all of our students and staff to test before they come back to school for that first day. And then of course to do those twice weekly surveillance tests for the first four weeks of term. And, a day later, she told Ben Fordham on 2GB: We’re asking everyone to do a test, you know, the morning or the evening before (day one of term) just so that we get all those negative results before the students and staff start coming back on site. If I’m not mistaken, I think I can spot the Guardian’s own Mike Bowers in these pictures. Pulch says Nato is more relevant in the current political climate than it’s been since the fall of the Berlin Wall – more than three decades ago. If conflict were to arise in Ukraine, Pulch says Australia will not be immune from the fallout: Nato is a defence arrangement, not a cold war instrument. It’s guaranteed security for its members for over 70 years, but it’s now probably more relevant than ever since the fall of the Berlin Wall. We very often hear the concept of a ‘sphere of influence’ evoked in Moscow. That’s not a concept for the 21st century. It harks back to dark times of European history, when small countries were at the mercy of their big neighbours. And I think this is not the way forward and we’ve been very clear about that ... A country like Australia will also be affected in some ways if there’s a conflict – even far away as in Ukraine – because it affects the international norms and rules about the territorial integrity of a country. And we’ve seen with the tragedy of loss of Australian lives, with the shooting down of MH17 over separatist forces-held territory in Ukraine, how fast this can go back and have an impact at home. Pulch says Europe is currently looking at the most “biting and efficient sanctions” that could be taken against Russia if it was to invade Ukraine: Our strategy is three-fold. First of all, we are talking to Russia to make it clear we won’t tolerate any violation of international rules and norms. Secondly, we’re supporting Ukraine, to make them more resilient, both by delivering defensive armaments but also to help it secure its cyber-space and critical infrastructure. And we’ve donated also as the European Union financial support to Kyiv to do that. And thirdly, there is an offer on the table. We are offering Russia serious conversations about a reduction of armed forces, an arms control debate, arms export controls, and confidence building measures. So, it is for Russia to choose which way to go. And I think that’s a decision that has to be taken in Moscow, but we have presented a very principled response to that. The EU ambassador to Australia, Michael Pulch, is speaking on ABC News now. He says he is “deeply concerned” about aggressive behaviour and blackmailing he says Russia is displaying: Russia ... has amassed over 100,000 troops and heavy weaponry across the Ukrainian border. And we call on Russia to de-escalate the situation and to return to consultation, diplomatic consultations, to address the crisis. We’ve been very clear at the European level and together with our partners, the US, Nato, other Nato partners, and in fact like-minded international community, that we have to take strong and biting sanctions if Russia in fact would cross the border and would inflict casualties on Ukraine. Thanks as ever to the unparalleled Matilda Boseley. I’ll be with you for the rest of the day, including all that comes from this afternoon’s national cabinet meeting. With that, I shall leave you for the day (and the week) and hand you over to forever fantastic Caitlin Cassidy. See you next week! OK, the federal opposition leader, Anthony Albanese, is speaking now from Moruya in NSW. He says the federal government has not invested enough in disaster preparedness (and I assume will go on to say that Labor would do it better): The federal government established an emergency response fund some three years ago. The emergency response fund took money that was allocated for infrastructure by the former Labor government in the building Australia fund and the education investment fund, and they put it in, $4bn into the emergency response fund. And he said that of the fund, there would be $200m each year, $150m on recovery and $50m on mitigation and disaster preparedness. Of that, no money has been expended on disaster preparedness. Not a single project has been funded and delivered. Indeed, that fund of $4bn is now worth over $4.7bn because it has $750m of interest and just $17m expended. It is just extraordinary and says everything about the failure of this government to be competent, the failure for it to match up its promises with delivery when it comes to this funding. The idea that we don’t need to prepare in this nation of ours for fires, floods, cyclone readiness, it’s just extraordinary. And that’s why we would, with our disaster-ready fund, commit up to $200m each and every year for projects that will make a difference in terms of mitigation, that will prepare for disasters, be they fires or floods or cyclones or other natural disasters, in this country of ours which unfortunately does have this occur from time to time. Here are the latest Covid-19 numbers from around Australia today, as the country records at least 72 deaths from the virus: Victoria Deaths: 15 Cases: 13,755 Hospitalisations: 1,057 (with 117 in ICU) NSW Deaths: 29 Cases: 17,316 Hospitalisations: 2,722 (with 181 in ICU) Queensland Deaths: 15 Cases: 11,600 Hospitalisations: 829 (with 48 in ICU) Tasmania Deaths: 0 Cases: 726 Hospitalisations: 24 (with no patients ICU) ACT Deaths: 0 Cases: 884 Hospitalisations: 73 (with four in ICU) SA Deaths: 13 Cases: 1,953 Hospitalisations: 288 (with 27 in ICU) WA Deaths: 0 Cases: 12 Hospitalisations: 2 A look at some of that flooding in South Australia. The ACT has recorded another 884 new Covid-19 infections with 73 people now in hospital and four in the ICU. Just on that issue arising from the Victorian press conference on if being “fully vaccinated” should be defined as three doses, it seems that the federal government is still somewhat undecided on the issue. The thunder is gone for now in Melbourne, but apparently, it’s likely to come back. Stay safe everyone. NSW Labor has responded to Victoria’s move to turn schools into vaccination hubs, saying they have been urging the government to bring this to their state for weeks. The wonderful Benita Kolovos is at the Victorian press conference today and will be bringing us updates. Coming out of the Victorian Covid-19 update, the premier Daniel Andrews says defining “fully vaccinated” as three doses should be resolved at national cabinet this afternoon. The Australian sharemarket has so far shrugged off turmoil on overseas markets, with the benchmark ASX 200 index jumping 0.9% this morning. Markets in the US and UK seesawed overnight after the US central bank indicated it would raise interest rates soon because inflation is rising. Banks, energy companies and utilities are up this morning while healthcare and retailers are down. Online travel agency Webjet, which has been punished in recent days due to travel restrictions imposed by governments in response to the Omicron variant, rose 4.21% by 11am. Accounting software firm Xero, which has been in a slump all month, lost 4.08%. In New Zealand’s biggest city, the streets were calm. At an Auckland supermarket, shelves of toilet paper, wine, chocolate and flour – metrics of a population hunkering down for a marathon of self-soothing and banana bread – had been quietly restocked from any panic-buying flurries. In an uptown cafe, a barista said things had been a little quieter since the announcement. Then again, she shrugged: “It might just be a Tuesday.” At Unity Books, a bookstore at the heart of the city, people were quietly browsing. “There’s always an element of eerie calm before the storm,” said bookseller Briary Lawry. Read the full report below: One man has been found dead at a property and a second man’s body discovered in a toilet block in an Australia Day shooting in Victoria’s Yarra Valley. You can read the full report below: FYI: Victorian Covid update coming up in about 30 minutes. Tasmania has recorded 726 new Covid infections in the latest reporting period, continuing the state’s downward trend. There are 24 people with Covid in hospital, with 12 of those being treated specifically for the virus – a slight increase from Wednesday’s figure of 11. There are no patients in intensive care, a fall from two reported on Wednesday. All the blog’s non-Victorian readers this morning: Here is the NSW chief health officer Dr Kerry Chant with the Covid update. We have currently had 2,722 people in hospital including 181 people in ICU of whom 72 are ventilated... Sadly, we are reporting the death of 29 people with Covid, 19 men and 10 women. I passed my condolences to the families for the loss of their loved ones. Of the 29 people who died, two people were aged in their 60s, eight people were aged in their 70s, 13 were aged in their 80s, six people aged in their 90s. And four people had received three doses of the Covid vaccine, 16 people had received two doses, two people had received one dose and seven people were reported as not vaccinated. Perrottet: As Dr Kerry Chant outlined earlier in the week, if you have had Covid, you can receive your booster shot within four to six weeks. Again, please make that booking ... boosters are key to keeping you, your friends and family safe. NSW premier Dominic Perrottet is speaking now from Syndey, where he says there is some stability in Covid-19 hospital capacity. Tomorrow we will release the modelling as we do every Friday in relation to where we set in respect of those scenarios that we have put out. Currently operating within capacity and hospitalisations and ICUs remain stable and that’s incredibly ... reassuring. The SA premier has released some preliminary Covid-19 numbers for the day, stating there have been 1,953 new infections in the latest reporting period, with 288 now in hospital. In terms of the damage the storm in Victoria have done so far, the State Emergency Service says they have received over 300 calls in the last day. We should be hearing from the NSW premier with a Covid-19 and return-to-school update in the next couple of minutes. Australia’s retail sector is urging national cabinet for isolation exemptions to be extended to staff in the industry, as the prime minister meets with state and territory leaders, reports AAP. National cabinet will on Thursday discuss the state of the health system, following one of the deadliest days of the pandemic with 87 fatalities on Wednesday. Isolation rules for workers in a number of essential sectors were expanded earlier this month, and now there is a growing push for retail staff to be added to the list. The exemptions would allow workers to go back to their jobs after being at a Covid-exposure site, provided they test negative to the virus on a rapid antigen test. Chief executive of the Australian Retail Association Paul Zahra told ABC Radio businesses in the sector were yet to pass supply chain issues that had been exacerbated by Omicron. We all have to learn to live with Covid ... If you can expand isolation exemptions for certain groups, it makes sense to expand it further to other categories of retail. The Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry has stepped up its push for international tourists to return to the country. The chamber’s chief executive Andrew McKellar said such a move would be a way to boost the post-pandemic economy. We are urging government to get ahead of the curve, start talking to the industry about how quickly it can happen ... We do think in the weeks ahead, as the pressure comes off the health system, then the rationale for keeping these international border restrictions in place can be revisited. And if flooding were enough for the state, at least one SA vaccination hub has been forced to close due to the scorching heat. “I think it’s real,” Curtin University student Tyrone O’Doherty told his supervisors when he spotted the anomaly. And it was real, as it turns out. The object beaming out from space was also “spooky”, and “in our galactic backyard”. An Australian team studying the universe’s radio waves has discovered a new type of beam that comes and goes, one of the brightest radio sources in the sky. The details of the discovery were published in Nature on Thursday. When something in space switches on and off it’s called a “transient”. It might come from a pulsar, which flashes on and off in milliseconds or seconds. Or a supernova that might appear for a few days before disappearing again. You can read the full story below: These warnings from the BoM in Victoria keep getting just a bit more dramatic and scary every 15 minutes. The Morrison government has tipped an extra $2bn into the Northern Australia Infrastructure Facility (Naif) with critics concerned the funds could be spent supporting fossil fuel projects. The northern Australia minister, David Littleproud, when announcing the $2bn cash injection on Tuesday did not rule out Naif using it for the development of the Beetaloo gas basin. The Greens and the Australia Institute have called for rule changes to prevent the Naif being used for fossil fuel projects. Labor has criticised the fund’s track record of having spent less than 10% of its initial $5bn but has not supported changing the rules. Littleproud said $3.2bn had already been committed to projects and the extra $2bn would continue investment “across all sectors, from mining and agriculture to renewable energy, education and tourism”. You can read the full report below: New South Wales has 17,316 new Covid cases and sadly 29 deaths. Victoria has recorded 15 more Covid deaths 13,755 new infections. Pharmacies are losing up to $7.50 on each rapid antigen test under the federal government’s concession card scheme due to a shortage of stock. Under the program 6.6m concession card holders in Australia can access up to 10 free RATs over a three month period, but the Pharmacy Guild of Australia has told the Guardian the scheme leads to a loss for individual chemists. The shortage of tests across the country has driven up wholesale prices. The tests currently cost the pharmacies up to $17.50 each but the government is providing only a $10 reimbursement, the guild said. Prof Trent Twomey, the national president of the Pharmacy Guild of Australia, said while wholesale prices have increased, there hasn’t been a subsequent adjustment to the reimbursement. You can read the full report below: OK, I promise this blog isn’t ONLY going to be lightning footage for the rest of the morning, but trust me this is a good one. Some pretty dramatic lightning footage from Geelong in Victoria this morning. Labor senator Kristina Keneally has been asked about the need for travel industry leaders to kickstart talks to plan for the return of tourism. She told the ABC: You know, it’s extraordinary that three years into this pandemic ... while the borders have been closed since 2020, there has been no planning apparently done. I meet regularly with stakeholders, tourism, airports ... and they really don’t know what the plan is. And if we are going to see an economic recovery, we are going to need planning and we are going to need a healthy population. That means we need free rapid antigen tests. It means we need sensible plans. Mr Morrison has failed to do all of this. He waits until something becomes a crisis and then he acts too little, too late. I think what we might see and I fear again today from national cabinet is Mr Morrison saying this is not his problem, this is not his responsibility. Here’s a cracking story of an unfortunate kind. NSW’s Resource Regulator and national parks officials will sit down with coal miner Centennial today to discuss remediation for cracks caused by its mine in the spectacular Capertee Valley region to Sydney’s north-west. The Mugii Murum-Ban area is a designated “State Conservation Area” for its remarkable rock formations and rare biodiversity. Such attributes, though, don’t guarantee protection when you have an underground coalmine below. Conservationists are worried same cracking of giant boulders and sandstone cliffs will extend beyond Mt Airly to the Genowlan mesa next door when mining starts there. And of course, the Gardens of Stone State Conservation Area to the south, declared at the end of last year, has the same level of protection. Back to the EU ambassador, and he has confirmed the European Union would respond if Russian troops crossed the Ukrainian border. Nurses and midwives at Sydney’s Liverpool hospital are striking today, demanding the government take action to address the staffing crisis impacting health care across the state. Shadow home affairs minister Kristina Keneally is out on the picket line this morning, and told ABC News Breakfast that nurses are “sick” and “tired” after two long years of the pandemic. Some of them are in tears here this morning, just come off a night shift. They are caring for, sometimes, one nurse for eight to 10 people and Covid has made their situation so harrowing. Our hospital system really is at a breaking point and they are asking for ... fair, safe staffing levels here in our hospitals. Here in south-western Sydney, these nurses saw the brunt of the Delta outbreak, a failure of national quarantine, a failure of the vaccine rollout, and now they are seeing with Omicron the failure of the rapid antigen testing. They don’t have enough staff here and really, to see our nurses who are on the frontline suffering because of a failure to plan by a state and a federal Liberal governments, to see them in tears, to see our hospitals at crisis point, it’s clear our nurses are not OK. Speaking of Russia, the EU ambassador to Australia, Michael Pulch, has told ABC radio that the continent is “very concerned about the aggressive stance that the [Russian] government has taken” in relation to Ukraine. We call on the Russian government to de-escalate the current situation and return to diplomatic consultations. China’s new ambassador to Australia has vowed to push to get the troubled relationship “back to the right track”, insisting he will work with the Australian government to “eliminate misunderstanding and suspicion”. Xiao Qian, who landed in Australia yesterday after years of increasing tensions between the two countries, said the relationship was “at a critical juncture” and faced “many difficulties and challenges”. But Xiao, the former Chinese ambassador to Indonesia, was relatively upbeat in his first comments in Sydney, saying the relationship also had “enormous opportunities and potential” and he saw his new diplomatic role “as a noble mission”. Australia and China have been increasingly at odds over the past few years, with Beijing objecting to a range of Australian government policy positions including laws against foreign interference that were seen as targeting China and the ban on Chinese telco Huawei from the 5G network. The Australian government has raised concerns about human rights abuses in Xinjiang, the crackdown on dissent in Hong Kong, and Beijing’s ratcheting up of military pressure against Taiwan. Beijing rolled out trade actions against a range of Australian export sectors and froze high-level talks in 2020, moves that the Australian government branded as “economic coercion”. The Chinese embassy’s release of a so-called “list of grievances” against Australia also triggered a diplomatic storm. Xiao’s predecessor as ambassador, Cheng Jingye, warned in April 2021 that Beijing would respond “in kind” if Australia followed other countries in imposing sanctions against Chinese officials over human rights. In remarks distributed to media by the Chinese embassy last night, Xiao pushed a conciliatory message, saying Beijing believed “a sound and steady China-Australia relationship serves the fundamental interests of the two countries and the two peoples”. Xiao said the relationship would improve “as long as both sides adhere to the principles of mutual respect, equality, inclusiveness and mutual learning”. He said: I look forward to working with the Australian government and friends in all sectors to increase engagement and communication, enhance mutual understanding and trust, eliminate misunderstanding and suspicion, promote mutually beneficial exchanges and cooperation in all areas between the two sides, and jointly push the China-Australia relations back to the right track. Victorians are being warned “very dangerous thunderstorms” that could lead to “life-threatening flash flooding” will lash parts of the state, after an evening of wild weather, AAP’s Emily Woods reports. The Bureau of Meteorology issued a red warning for severe thunderstorms across northern and western Melbourne and the southern Macedon Ranges just before 7am on Thursday. Heavy rainfall is expected to affect people living in the city’s inner-eastern, central, northern, southeastern, outer-eastern, northern and western suburbs. A Watch and Act alert has been issued by the state’s emergency services, warning people in Greater Melbourne to prepare to take shelter and watch for hazards including floodwater, debris, damaged building, trees down and fallen power lines. Very dangerous thunderstorms were detected on the weather radar near Gisborne and Woodend. These thunderstorms are moving from the north of Melbourne towards the south to southeast. Severe weather causing intense rainfall that may lead to dangerous and life-threatening flash flooding is likely. Malmsbury Headwall recorded 56.2mm of rain in the hour to 5:15am, while Trentham Reservoir recorded 38.6mm in the hour to 6am. The Bureau of Meteorology warns that, at 7:05am, severe thunderstorms were detected on the weather radar near Craigieburn, Footscray, Greensborough, Melton, Preston, St Albans and Sunbury. These thunderstorms are moving towards the southeast. They are forecast to affect Caulfield, Glen Waverley, Melbourne City, Ringwood and Werribee by 7:35am and Dandenong, Frankston and Pakenham by 8:05am. We spoke about this a little bit yesterday, but a spike in Covid infections in the Northern Territory has caused some health experts to calls for a region-wide lockdown to protect remote Indigenous communities. This has so far been ruled out by NT health minister Natasha Fyles, but the chief executive of the Central Land Council, Les Turner has told ABC radio this is urgent. The Central Land Council has called for urgent lockdown of remote communities and we believe this will save lives. We need a circuit breaker because the coronavirus is out of control in central Australia. At the moment, there are 80 people in hospital, 90% of those are Aboriginal people. The Northern Territory government has failed central Australia. In terms of addressing the issues that Aboriginal people and key organisations are calling for, we’re talking to a brick wall in some cases. Turner said the council was now considering going over the NT government’s head and asking the commonwealth for assistance. If the Northern Territory was to ask the commonwealth for assistance and have the army or defence to assist with evacuations ... I think that’s a viable alternative for us. I think it’ll save lives. Speaking of wild weather, flooding in central South Australia continues to wreak havoc, cutting off major roads and even creating whirlpools alongside the Stuart highway. Oh! So that’s why I keep hearing thunder! Good morning everyone, it’s Matilda Boseley here with you. Todays is Thursday, which means the state and territory leaders are preparing to meet with the prime minister for national cabinet. Top of the agenda: Australia’s health system capacity. This comes after Australia recorded 87 Covid deaths on Wednesday and more than 50,000 cumulative new infections. The leaders will also receive an update on the vaccine rollout and discuss supply chain issues. We will likely get an update on how that has gone in the afternoon, so stay tuned. Looking internationally, Australia is considering supplying extra liquefied natural gas to Europe if Russia decided to shut off their pipeline due to growing tensions with the west over the Russian military presence on the Ukraine border. The US and the UK have already raised fears the continent’s reliance on Russia makes it vulnerable in a growing standoff with present Vladimir Putin. The US said it was working with allies and partners to prepare financial sanctions “with massive consequence” if the Russian president decided to invade. A senior Biden administration official said the US was also “looking at the global flow” of LNG. Whether it’s from the United States or from Australia or from other places. The conversation is really broad with a lot of companies and countries around the world. The official said Russia had already restricted the flow of gas through the pipeline running through Ukraine from about 100m cubic metres a day to 50m. You can read more of that below, by the way. With that, let’s not delay any further and dive straight into the day.Elia Suleiman’s a man of few words, so we can be sure that the ones he does use have been chosen carefully. “What I am to do in this film, I actually accomplished,” the Palestinian film-maker told Indiewire upon the US release of his debut feature Chronicle of a Disappearance (now streaming on Netflix) in 1997. “Even when they object to the nature of the presentation of the film, a lot of people have delayed questioning. They don’t know how to invent the language that must deal immediately … There is no ready-made rhetoric that they could say, ‘I don’t agree with you on this or that.’ I mean, what can they pick on? My mother walking across the room?” Like so many dissidents before him, Suleiman derives more power from silence than screams. In the breakout that earned him the prize for best first film at the Venice film festival and literally put Palestinian cinema on the map as the nation’s first production to receive a Stateside theatrical run, the writer-director-actor-producer prefers to play his politics close to the vest. He anticipated the controversy part and parcel to any work critical of the Israeli occupation, and pre-empted the pushback by couching his resentments in unremarkable moments. There’s no speechifying, no harrowing depiction of the bitterness or cruelty still festering around the West Bank; Suleiman thumbs his nose at the prospect with a scene that sees his onscreen avatar ES take the podium at a conference, only to be interrupted by whining feedback every time he gears up to speak. He instead articulates the placelessness he feels as a citizen without a country through brief, deadpan sketches in static wide shots oft-likened to the compositional sight gags of Buster Keaton and Jacques Tati. Like his real-life double, the mute ES has returned home following a self-imposed 12-year exile in New York, just as peace talks break down in the wake of Yitzhak Rabin’s assassination and the election of the hawkish Benjamin Netanyahu. Their names are left out of things, however, the atmosphere of acrimony indirectly seeping in through absurd little banalities. In Nazareth, the proprietor of a souvenir shop peddling phony holy water is mocked by a camel figurine that won’t stop tipping over. During the second half, which shifts focus to Jerusalem and a wrier register, a woman gets blackballed from every apartment listing she calls once they learn she’s an Arab. She pops up again later on in what appears to be a terrorist cell, until it’s revealed that their grenade and gun are just novelty lighters. The segments that confront the Israeli-Palestinian friction head-on do so with the most unassuming levity, as in the shot that sees Jerusalem police troopers hustle out of a van, line up to urinate against a wall, and sprint back into the van with a militaristic briskness. Suleiman prefers to let his pricklier remarks sit in tacit ironies of the everyday: kids frolicking in a swimming pool under the watchful gaze of a Yasser Arafat mural, men cheering on two geezers deadlocked in an arm-wrestle, tourists jet-skiing all over the sacred Sea of Galilee. Though these shots have been meticulously constructed, their delivery is matter-of-fact, as if we’re just seeing snapshots of vérité local color. Matching the stony face with which he portrays ES, Suleiman directs from a pose of aloofness that allows him a safe distance from his own subversion. If he seems reluctant to come right out and say what he means, that’s only because his feelings aren’t so easily organized as points to be made, the final stretch steeped in a cloudier ambivalence on Palestinian identity. The film is bookended by two of its few closeup shots, noteworthy for their earnestness as they depict the weathered skin of Suleiman’s actual, slumbering parents. Ultimately, he feels something deeper than mere anger on their behalf, more mournful at all they’ve had to live through. While he doesn’t claim to have all the answers to the planet’s thorniest geopolitical conflict, he does want peace. Any obliqueness in the stoicism of his approach can be ascribed to a pragmatist’s awareness of how the industry operates, knowing that overt statements could potentially turn off distributors or viewers. Netflix currently hosts this film and its follow-up Divine Intervention, but Suleiman’s latest work – the equally inspired It Must Be Heaven, in which he frankly paints a pair of Israeli characters as aggressors and intimidators – still hasn’t been acquired for US exhibition in the nearly three years since its premiere at Cannes. (Amusingly enough, its loose plot mostly concerns Suleiman’s difficulty with selling and promoting his films around the world.) Perhaps his methods have grown more explicit as the region’s body count rises, its deterioration also explaining why buyers aren’t snapping up an Israel/Palestine film. But in his career’s boldly self-assured earliest phase, placing quotidian scare quotes around his quiet rebellion made it more palatable for the global cinema circuit. As he himself asked, what would they have to pick on in a movie that stops to spend a few minutes watching a dog play keepaway with a hapless man’s bucket? Chronicle of a Disappearance is available on Netflix in the US and UK“Giving someone the truth when they don’t want it is a sort of emotional violence,” says Roopa Farooki. “It’s as much an act of aggression as shaking their hands in the Covid era.” She should know. When the pandemic first struck the NHS, the novelist – three times nominated for the Women’s prize for fiction – was also one of its most junior doctors, with barely six months of medicine under her belt. The act of aggression to which she refers is not, however, pandemic-related. Everything Is True, her blistering new Covid memoir, begins in the wake of her sister’s death from breast cancer. When Farooki breaks down in tears at work on her sister’s birthday, she makes the fatal mistake, on being asked by a colleague if she is all right, of giving “an honest answer, like a psychopath”. Her disarming frankness about her dead sister sees the colleague practically sprinting off down the hospital corridor, leaving Farooki to observe wryly that she might as well have coughed in their face with her “snotty, messy tears”. Defiant, uncompromising honesty drives every page of this book. With Do No Harm, retired neurosurgeon Henry Marsh set the trend for doctors confessing, with varying degrees of candour, their own psychological foibles and weaknesses. Yet none have been as ruthless as Farooki. If unwanted truth is emotional violence, then the act of reading her memoir is akin to a 12-round bout with Mike Tyson. Two hundred pages of hard, sinewy, unpalatable truth – the pandemic up close and thumpingly personal. The book charts the first 40 days of the UK’s pandemic lockdown – a nod to the original definition of “quarantine” (quaranta in Italian) as being precisely this period of isolation to prevent the spread of contagious disease. But a brief prologue describes something even more cataclysmic: her sister, Kiron, telling her she has only weeks left to live. Farooki’s response – having been taught at medical school that nobody wants miserable people around them when they’re dying – is a rictus smile: “You’re still smiling like you can’t help it, you must look insane. You can’t help it, like a skin-stripped skull can’t help it.” So begins her harrowing juxtaposition of sweeping, global catastrophe with the intensely personal ruination of grief. For Farooki, the onslaught of patients with Covid coincides with her immersion in “the sad fog, the painful aftermath” of her sister’s funeral. She already knows what it is like to outlive death, and finds herself sleepwalking numbly through the pandemic’s first days, scarcely noticing its unfolding horrors. “You have no idea what is happening … you’re only paying attention to what you’re feeling, to what you’re pushing six feet under, while you dig yourself out of bed and feed the children and march three miles to work and get on with your day.” Farooki finds herself juggling pandemic trauma with domestic banality, Covid deathbed vigils with kitchen-table nit checks. Labouring by day just to put one foot in front of the other, at night she writes alone in a compulsive fury. Regularly falling asleep on top of her keyboard, she produces “fragments of words spat out on to the screen. Emotional vomit. Pollock on the page.” Too skilful a writer to permit incoherence to tarnish her finished manuscript, she chooses nevertheless to preserve something of the disjointed nature of these sessions. Her prose is as fractured as her frame of mind, and her decision to document her experiences in the second person mimics the weird, jarring quality of grief. If anything, the frenetic demands of the hospital are a form of unhealthy solace, allowing Farooki to erase herself completely for the length of each shift. Slowly, numbness gives way to anger. Without realising it – and whether she likes it or not – she no longer works in an A&amp;E but on a military “frontline”. The crass jingoism of journalists and politicians infuriates her. She is not a soldier, this is not a battle, and her patients most definitely do not live or die according to whether they possess a “fighting spirit”. Ironically invoking the unwanted martial imagery, she points out that she is “wrapped in scraps of plastic”, “taking the bullets without proper defence” and “fighting an insidious illness with … a paper mask”. Take that, Boris Johnson – or the “smug mop-headed bastard”, as she prefers to call him. Farooki knows it is predominantly the poor, vulnerable, Black and brown who are dying. So when the “mendacious middle-aged man” goes briefly to ICU for treatment, she is enraged that the country will be distracted by his live-tweeted progress, while the rest of the Covid dead are “buried like bad news”. More than anyone else, though, Farooki reserves her scorn for herself. In painful, poignant dialogues with her dead sister, she lambasts herself for courting risk to gain the high moral ground: “Skydiving. Rock climbing. Bungee jumping. These never appealed to you, so why this? Maybe you like being humourless and pious about helping people. Maybe you have an unhealthy pride in risking your life for others.” It is nonsense, of course. When a nursing colleague dies of Covid, Farooki finally feels fear. She finds her lack of PPE terrifying: “You’ll walk straight into the virus. You’ll soak it up in your hair like a sponge. You’re going to get it, too.” Sure enough, a month into lockdown, she contracts Covid. In her delirium, her sister’s voice attacks her: “For the record, I don’t think you’re a hero. I don’t think you’re brave. I think you’re a mildly talented eccentric who’s stumbled into a stupid time to start medicine.” In the end – the 40th day – Farooki has recovered but death is all around her: “It’s everywhere, and the air is constantly crackling with the expired electricity of it. The sound of breaking hearts is deafening. The new figures today are 40,000.” We are forced to confront the bleakest truth that now there are legions of the newly bereaved, each, like her, enduring shattering pain. Grief, Farooki concludes, is the long shadow cast by love. It hurts just as much as it ought to, as much as the deceased was loved. Beneath it all – the horror, the hypocrisy, the vertiginous death toll – Farooki is lonely. She simply and desperately misses her sister. Her memoir, a memorial of sorts, is startlingly honest and devastatingly good. • Everything Is True by Roopa Farooki is published (Bloomsbury Publishing plc, £14.99). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.The Boy in the Striped Pyjamas may “perpetuate a number of dangerous inaccuracies and fallacies” when used in teaching young people about the Holocaust, an academic report has said. According to research by the Centre for Holocaust Education at University College London, more than a third of teachers in England use the bestselling book and film adaptation in lessons on the Nazi genocide. A study, to be published shortly, builds on research conducted five years ago among secondary school pupils which found that the story by John Boyne regularly elicited misplaced sympathy for Nazis. According to the new survey, 35% of teachers used The Boy in the Striped Pyjamas in lessons about the Holocaust. However, its use occupies a “somewhat contested position as a potential educational resource”, the centre’s report says. Drama and English teachers were more likely to use it than history teachers. Boyne’s book is about a friendship between the son of an Auschwitz commandant and a Jewish boy incarcerated in the Nazi concentration camp. Published in 2006, it has sold more than 11m copies worldwide. A film version was made in 2008. The centre’s report said: “While most young people who took part in the study recognised the narrative as a work of fiction and many were able to identify and critique its most glaring implausibilities and historical inaccuracies, they nonetheless overwhelmingly characterised it as ‘realistic’ and/or ‘truthful’.” It added that many students, after studying the story, reached conclusions that “contributed significantly to one of the most powerful and problematic misconceptions of this history, that ‘ordinary Germans’ held little responsibility and were by and large ‘brainwashed’ or otherwise entirely ignorant of the unfolding atrocities”. Among comments from teachers gathered during the research were, “students come to us and literally think the Holocaust IS The Boy In the Striped Pyjamas”; “They come with … ideas that nobody knew about the Holocaust, that people were completely in the dark about it”; and “They feel sorry for the German guard”. Stuart Foster, the centre’s executive director, said he had no criticism of Boyne for his work of fiction, but using the novel in lessons about a historical event could be problematic. “In an era of fake news and conspiracy theories, it’s very worrying that young people harbour myths and misconceptions about the Holocaust.” Boyne, who has previously defended his work from similar criticism, told the Guardian: “The Boy in the Striped Pyjamas is deliberately sub-titled ‘A Fable’, a work of fiction with a moral at the centre. From the start, I hoped it would inspire young people to begin their own study of the Holocaust, which in my case began at the age of 15 and continued in the decades that followed. “As a novelist, I believe that fiction can play a valuable role in introducing difficult subjects to young readers, but it is the job of the teacher to impress upon their students that there is legitimate space between imagination and reality. By relating to my central characters, however, by caring about them and wanting no harm to come to them, the young reader can learn empathy and kindness. “While no work of fiction is flawless, I remain extremely proud of The Boy in the Striped Pyjamas and grateful to the millions of readers who have embraced it over the last 16 years.”The Special Ks took a selfie with their opponents in the tunnel, walked out on to a heaving centre court, and played their way into an unlikely Australian Open doubles final. Then Nick Kyrgios exercised some rare self-restraint and resisted the urge to “destroy” Michael Venus, one day after the Kiwi called him “an absolute knob” who has the maturity of a 10-year-old. The remarks by Venus, who was one part of the duo beaten by Kyrgios and Thanasi Kokkinakis in the quarter-finals, were left to hang unacknowledged until the pair’s press conference following their 7-6 (4), 6-4 semi-final triumph over Spain’s Marcel Granollers and Horacio Zeballos of Argentina. “As to Michael Venus, I’m not going to destroy him in this media conference room right now,” said Kyrgios. “But Zeballos and Granollers are singles players, they’ve had great careers. I respect them a lot more than I respect Michael Venus. “I think the balance was there today. The quality of tennis was amazing. I think the festival atmosphere was still there. I think they embraced it. They knew it was an incredible atmosphere. Zeballos took a selfie with us before we walked out. “That’s how you embrace an atmosphere. You’re not losing a match and then getting salty about it afterwards. It’s ridiculous … if you asked Zeballos and Granollers, I think they would both say that was probably one of the most entertaining matches they’ve played in front of a crowd.” If the roof had been on Rod Laver Arena it would have blown off as a zealous home crowd roared the Australians into the final. Laver himself was in the house to watch the unseeded pair, who have shocked and awed both their competition and the public, storm past their opponents. They will face Matthew Ebden and Max Purcell in Saturday’s final – the first all-Australian men’s doubles decider since 1980 – after Ebden and Purcell beat second seeds Rajeev Ram and Joe Salisbury of the USA and Great Britain respectively, 6-3, 7-6 (9). The spectators came in higher numbers than for their previous matches at Kia Arena, after Tennis Australia allowed ground-pass holders through the gates. But those in attendance witnessed less showboating and skulduggery than they might have expected. Previously, there was a sense that Kyrgios and Kokkinakis were playing mainly to entertain, but now they were also playing to win – with personality. And win they did, despite a tight first set that stayed on serve all the way to a tie-break. Their opponents, both about a decade the Australians’ seniors, moved in tandem with a smoothness expected of the third seeds and last year’s Wimbledon runners-up, with Granollers targeting Kyrgios at the net. The Australian pair, though, continued unabated, serving 13 aces and sending down 32 winners to 21. These included a Kokkinakis backhand winner down the line and a big Kyrgios second serve of 198km/h to help them to 5-5. It wasn’t until 6-5 that Granollers and Zeballos won more than a single point when receiving, and Kokkinakis, who received a time-violation warning, served an ace en route to setting up a tie-break. Cue the start of the Kyrgios verbals. “Can you be quiet while I serve you numbnut,” Kyrgios barked back to one spectator who yelled something out, before jagging an early mini-break. He utilised a short backswing on more than one occasion to counter Zeballos’s serve and, the Australians raced to a 5-2 lead. They returned for the second set riding the same momentum and won seven consecutive points to take the opening game and raise a crucial early break point. Granollers and Zeballos clawed back to deuce, but eventually Kokkinakis secured the advantage with a deft forehand winner. Things were going to plan until Kyrgios betrayed signs of pressure. Up 4-2 but down 15-40, the 26-year-old gave the chair umpire some lip and then served a fault, before pumping a high-velocity second serve and following it up with such composure it could not be answered. In the next point he set up Kokkinakis for a winner, but still there was tension with the crowd, and again Kyrgios made his feelings known. After going down a break point, the umpire asked for quiet between serves, but it was not enough. Granollers and Zeballos broke back, and Kyrgios’s racket lay smashed on the court. He was given a warning and went to the change of ends still venting his frustrations. “Again, and again, and again,” he said in reference to spectators calling out before serves, “and still you say nothing.” Kokkinakis was a picture of calm amid the mayhem around him, but so were the players up the other end, and their superior experience came to the fore as they levelled at 4-4. Kokkinakis, unflappable, then served out for 5-4 before the pair snatched the decisive break. “I think both of us bring something different, different energy, different sort of charisma on the court,” Kokkinakis said. “But we just enjoy it and we have fun and that shows, and that is why hopefully you guys watch us. But I think we are unpredictable and that is why they enjoy it.” Kyrgios said they would not take Ebden and Purcell lightly in Saturday night’s meeting, again on Rod Laver Arena, following the women’s singles final that will feature another Australian, Ash Barty. “They are obviously playing some good tennis, it is the final,” he said. “I am looking forward to it and is great to see Aussies having success – and obviously Ash on the women’s side is doing her thing.”He said he would live if he did not win, and live Dylan Alcott shall. Without an eighth consecutive Australian Open title but with his nation behind him. On Thursday afternoon, when Alcott lost his quad singles at Rod Laver Arena, he bid farewell to a sporting career matched by few. One featuring 23 grand slam quad titles including 15 in singles, Paralympic gold medals and a revered golden slam. And while the 31-year-old fought but fell short to Sam Schröder of the Netherlands, succumbing 7-5, 6-0, his Australian of the Year predecessor, Grace Tame, watched from the stands. At one point Alcott saw Tame’s face pop up on the big screen, paused his service game and said “I love you Tame-y” before winning the point. At the post-match presentation he came close to tears while saluting the large number of disabled children in attendance. “It’s because of you all watching today that people like me get, not recognition, but are more integrated in society,” Alcott said. “To my community, thanks for always backing me – I hope to make you proud over the next 12 months. Thank you to every single person for changing my life, I appreciate it so much. “I’m really the luckiest guy in the world, and I didn’t need to win today to realise that. It would have been nice to win, to be honest, but I’m still the luckiest person in this country, if not the luckiest person in the world.” Alcott had admitted pre-match he was “fried” after rushing to Canberra for Tuesday night’s Australian of the Year ceremony straight after his semi-final win, absorbing all the associated emotion and publicity and then preparing for his “last dance”. The weariness as Schröder worked him around the court and drawing 31 unforced errors. “First of all, I want to say congrats to Dylan on having an amazing career. You’ve inspired so many people out there to get out and play sport,” Schröder said. “Thank for your all that you’ve done. “It’s always great being back here. I love the weather, I love you guys coming to watch today. It was very special.”Rising tensions on the Russia-Ukraine border have raised fears that Europe’s gas supply crisis could become far more serious. Gas market prices have already surpassed record highs and threaten to saddle European households with a cost of living crisis. Russia is Europe’s largest supplier of gas, of which a third flows through Ukraine’s gas pipelines to countries across the continent. Russian gas flows have been a quarter lower than usual over the past year, but European leaders now fear that a Russian invasion of Ukraine could spell an energy catastrophe if gas exports are cut. White House officials said this week that the Biden administration is preparing to finalise a deal to “ensure Europe is able to make it through the winter and spring” by brokering a deal for major gas producing countries to send liquified natural gas (LNG) by tanker to Europe. It is not a plan without challenges. Where could Europe’s emergency gas supplies come from? US officials have described the search for spare gas cargoes as “global”. But the talks are likely to focus on Qatar, one of the world’s biggest producers of gas and the second largest exporter of liquified natural gas (LNG) behind Australia. Qatar is a strong western ally in the Middle East and has supplied LNG to the UK and other European countries for years, shipped super-chilled via tankers. Libya may also be able to help given its strong gas production and close proximity to the continent. The US itself could play a direct role in bolstering Europe’s gas supplies too. A record number of LNG cargoes left the US destined for European ports over the last month, and the US has a strong long-term incentive to encourage Europe to give up its reliance on Russia – and the Nord Stream 2 pipeline project – in favour of its own shale gas reserves. How much emergency gas does Europe need? The scale of Europe’s gas supply challenge will depend on how far tensions between Russia and Ukraine escalate. Russia sends an estimated 230m cubic metres of gas to Europe every day, of which around a third travels west via Ukraine. But market experts are divided over whether Russia would be likely to disrupt all gas exports to Europe, or only those which rely on Ukraine’s gas pipelines. Others are sceptical over whether the Kremlin would tighten Russia’s gas taps at all. “If Russia weaponised its energy exports how much energy would they disrupt? It’s hard to scenario plan this,” said Helima Croft, the global head of commodities at RBC Capital. But the question is not whether the US could create a backstop for Russian gas supplies but whether it could source gas to help mitigate any disruption, she said. Is there enough spare gas available to fill a gap? The global gas supply crunch which emerged as economies began to rebound following the Covid-19 slump means there is little spare gas to go around, according to analyst Xi Nan from Rystad Energy. The US has said that its conversations are “really broad, with a lot of companies and countries around the world” so that it wouldn’t need “to ask any one individual company or country to surge exports by significant volumes, but rather smaller volumes from a multitude of sources”. “The question,” said Croft, “is whether the US can find any slack in the system”. Qatar currently produces 77m tonnes a year (Mtpa) of LNG, but has contracted around 97Mtpa to buyers in Asia, Europe, Kuwait and major energy companies which can choose where they send each cargo. The US has also committed its 80m tonnes of LNG production to buyers in Asia, Europe and so-called “portfolio players”. But there is a possibility that some contracted cargoes earmarked for Asia could be diverted to Europe instead thanks to mild winter temperatures in the region which has reduced gas demand, said Croft. She added that it would take “delicate” discussions between major gas producers and their Asia buyers to negotiate some gas supply flexibility. Has anything like this been done before? There are plenty of examples of emergency supply measures in the global oil market, but not for gas. During Libya’s civil war Saudi Arabia agreed to increase its oil exports into the global market to make up a shortfall in Libyan crude which drove oil prices to $120 a barrel. More recently Saudi Arabia brokered a deal with members of the Opec oil cartel and its allies to make an unprecedented cut in oil production during the Covid-19 pandemic to avoid oil prices crashing to zero. The gas market lacks the same global cooperation, which has made responding to the global supply crisis more difficult. “Mohammed bin Salman [the Saudi crown prince] sees himself as the central bank for oil. There is no equivalent in the gas market,” said Croft. “Even if Qatar wanted to help they’re not sitting on the kind of dry powder that the Saudis could access through their oil reserves.” Perhaps unprecedented times will call for unprecedented measures.And it all started so well. The England and Wales Cricket Board’s chief executive, Tom Harrison, began his appearance in front of the DCMS select committee with earnest thanks, to the MPs for the opportunity, and to Azeem Rafiq for his testimony, then eased into a well-rehearsed spiel about everything the ECB has been doing. He spoke about Inspiring Generations, the South-Asian Action Plan, the transformed women and girls pathway, his 12-point plan, £25m of new investment, how he had matched funding with broadcast partners, built a burgeoning link with Kick It Out, launched a new anti-discrimination unit, a dressing-room culture review, a game-wide census, and sweeping governance reform. Harrison has a dashboard, a set of KPIs, and five different pillars. “On the talent pathways we want to get at least 30% of young boys and girls from ethnically diverse backgrounds,” Harrison said. “Among boys, in 2018, it was 11%, and now, thanks to our South-Asian Action Plan, it has moved to 28% …” And this was where the committee chair, Julian Knight, interrupted. “28%?” Knight asked, “but your target is 30%?” Harrison hummed. Knight continued. “To be clear, you’ve not just set yourself a target you’ve already reached?” Harrison hawed. Knight continued. “Your target is 30% by the end of this year, and you’re at 28% at the start of the year?” He did some quick sums. “You’ve done 17% in three years, that’s five-and-half per cent a year, you should really be at 35% shouldn’t you?” Knight wasn’t drilling down into Harrison’s plan here, he was only picking at it with his fingernail, and it was starting to crumble. “What we aim to do is to make sure we have a flood of talent coming through,” Harrison explained, the 30% target was going to be country-wide, right across the game by the end of the year, and maybe even through to the England dressing rooms, he said, by 2025 now. “We want to report on over-delivery against those KPIs and not an under-delivery.” Yes, Knight agreed, “because you’ve set yourself such a low target. Our dispute would be that these are targets that you are set up to achieve.” Harrison tried to pick himself up and pull himself together. “That’s the best stat I have to give you,” he said, “but I also want to mention that we have 2,000 South Asian female activators.” Female activators? There might be a good answer to all this, but Harrison didn’t manage to get it out. Knight likes cricket. He has played the club game all his adult life, opened the batting for the Lords and Commons team, and even wrote a book on it, Cricket For Dummies, before he became an MP. My guess is he understands the frustration so many English cricket fans feel towards the ECB because he shares it himself. You could hear it in his tone, which was impatient, and almost scornful, as if, after a lifetime following the game, he’s had about as much as he can stomach of the board’s executive bullshit. Harrison sometimes seems taken aback by this hostility. He shouldn’t be, it’s exactly how a lot of people who love the game feel. Listen to me talk about development, Harrison says, just don’t ask me why the ECB recently sacked 19 development staff. Listen to me talk about funding, he says, just don’t ask me why the ECB spends more on salaries than it does on grassroots cricket. We’ve lost the public’s trust, he says, I want to restore it, he says, but I also want my share of the £2.1m the ECB is paying out in executive bonuses. And no, you can’t ask him about that either “because it’s not appropriate for us to be discussing employment contracts”. After the year English cricket has had, how on earth is he still in his job? It’s hard to listen to the hearings without feeling like we’ve already heard enough from most of the people doing the talking, Harrison, ECB chair Barry O’Brien, Hampshire chair Rod Bransgrove, Middlesex chair Mike O’Farrell, members of an executive class who are desperately unrepresentative of the sport and, in many cases, hopelessly ill-equipped to tackle the problems it is facing. It’s often said that the biggest obstacle to the “sweeping governance reform” Harrison mentioned is that it would require the turkeys to vote for Christmas. Listening to O’Farrell felt like listening to the bird try to explain how to turn on the oven. Presumably O’Farrell could talk eloquently about the problems facing Kodak, where he spent 36 years of his career, or the British Acupuncture Council, which he used to run, or the church in Great Missenden, where he works as a warden, but it felt like an act of satire to put him up in front of a parliamentary committee as the man who’s going to explain how to fix structural racism in the grassroots of English cricket. If you want a proper answer ask the people who work at the Ace Programme. Ask the people who work at Chance to Shine. Ask the people who work at the MCC Foundation. Ask anyone but the men who are actually in charge. There was one ray of hope. The new Yorkshire chair, Kamlesh Patel, was as impressive as he has been right through this process. Patel is plain-talking, has a clear idea of what’s wrong and how to begin to fix it. Which isn’t to say he’s always right, just that he doesn’t talk like he thinks he is. He spoke proudly of the blind-hiring process Yorkshire used to find their new coach, Ottis Gibson. Through that blind process, Patel said: “We’ve gone from people who have been in the club a long, long time who were reasonable, to having one of the best coaches in the world as head coach.” Imagine what the sport would look like if it picked its chief executives and chairs in the same way.Some of our words are missing. Have you noticed? The Labour shadow health secretary, Wes Streeting, has, and he’s angry about it. Earlier this month he gave an impassioned interview for the BBC on Radio 4’s Political Thinking, raising the alarm about missing terms such as “breastfeeding” and “mother”, despite the fact that there is no campaign to remove these terms. Pope Francis has joined the chorus of discontent, warning of attacks on freedom of expression in the name of “cancel culture” and ideological colonisation. Of course, some of us never had our own words to start with. We’ve had to create our own or reclaim terms that have been used against us; we’ve had to find alternatives to the dehumanising language of state and medical institutions. Those of us who are lesbian or gay parents, mothers or fathers, have found new words to help others understand us and make our lives visible and valid: othermothers, gaybies, co-parents, daddy and pappa, MaPa, mummies and mummas. Not bad, considering we weren’t even allowed to exist a few years ago. The erasure of identities and roles is something that LGBTQ+ parents and families are intimately acquainted with. Until section 28 of the Local Government Act was repealed, lesbian and gay families were defined legally as “pretended” families that must never be promoted. Lesbians were often found to be “unfit mothers”, and some had their children removed by the courts. Gay men were regularly branded in the national press as inherent predators and child abusers. Although section 28 was finally repealed in 2003 in England and Wales (2000 in Scotland), some of these attitudes still remain. In 2019, the then Labour MP Roger Godsiff said children of five years old shouldn’t be learning about gay parents. (By this logic, I would need to make sure my own children didn’t know about their parents’ existence until they were at least five years old.) As a non-biological parent, I regularly have to deal with misconceptions and assumptions about what my role is in relation to my children, and how these children came into existence. I’ve sometimes even been asked whether I should have children at all. My wife and I are married and have two children, most recently a new baby. As the law stands, if two women in a same-sex marriage are married when one of them conceives a child via a private sperm donor, at a clinic or using IVF, both women are legally parents to the child, and the child’s birth certificate lists mother and parent. Few people know what to call us, how to refer to our partners, how to invite us to functions, how to talk to us about our children, or how even to start conversation. I’ve been asked whether I mind that my wife presumably had to have sex with a man to get pregnant (she didn’t). We’ve had the awkward looks and conversations with health visitors and midwives about contraception, although this has been a lot easier and more informed with our second child than with our first. Professionals have phoned to congratulate the mother, as if I was completely unrelated to the child. I know health workers are just doing their best in an underfunded and overstretched context. I know fathers are often left out of such conversations too, or services just don’t have time to check in with anyone but the biological mother. It’s an obvious feminist issue that so much pressure and expectation is put on biological mothers, many of whom are left alone and isolated, presumed to naturally know how to care for a newborn, without that same presumption extending to their partner. Partly this is a result of the scant parental leave that co-parents and fathers are entitled to (still only a statutory two weeks). Shared parental leave, first introduced by the coalition government, means parents can take longer leave, yet less than 2% of eligible new parents are using this provision. Less than a third of eligible men now take any paternity leave. Gender stereotypes, macho workplace cultures, poverty pay, precarious work and the gender pay gap are all factors here. It is quite understandable, in the context of a heterosexual couple, why it may be an economic no-brainer for the father to go back to work first. For co-parents, it can be even more confusing. My own workplace is highly inclusive, but the only option I have for listing my leave on my employee record and wage slips is still “paternity leave”. With my first child, I attended numerous social events while on parental leave. At baby groups, my difference stood out. I was usually not included in coffee pre-meets or chats. People looked at me awkwardly and avoided starting conversations altogether, perhaps because they didn’t know what my role was, what to call me, or how to address me or my baby. Women would talk over and around me about night feeding, nappy rash or spare wipes. Once I was asked if I was my baby’s big brother. I’ve even been asked whether the baby is mine. This is what the erasure of words really looks like. It’s weird, embarrassed looks; it’s the feeling of marginalisation, whispers, bigoted remarks just loud enough to be heard. In this case it stems from the erasure of identities and families who fall outside the heterosexual norm. Those of us who were previously denied names and roles, who were imprisoned, medicated or institutionalised for daring to stick out, who were labelled as freaks or perverts – we are now making visible the lives, families and communities we have always built, and always been part of. Finn Mackay is the author of Female Masculinities and the Gender Wars and is a senior lecturer in sociology at the University of the West of England in BristolIt is a shopper’s dream. A $250 coat can be bought for $50, hundreds of dollars of makeup can be sent to your door for just $20. The catch: you will eventually have to pay the full price of the purchase. But for now, only a fraction has to come out of your bank account. So goes the enticing nature of buy now, pay later (BNPL), the payment method that allows consumers to pay for their purchases in installments, largely without interest. But the multi-billion-dollar trend has government officials – and even some consumers – worried. The benefit to consumers is hazier. Consumers report a complicated relationship with BNPL companies, one that is often characterized by an instant high off a purchase, followed by a comedown once the payments are deducted from their paycheck every few weeks. “Emotionally, when I get the package, I’m pretty happy,” said Sandra Lopez, 21, who lives in Atlanta. “Then it gets really stressful because you forget about the purchases. They come back at you. Once it’s payday, you’re again broke because you just feel like you don’t have any money … It’s not healthy.” Lopez said she has accumulated $400 in purchases from Klarna, a Swedish finance company that is one of the leaders in BNPL. Lopez said those were largely impulse buys, and that it is easy to lose control when using BNPL, especially when companies offer enticing deals like free $5 gift cards to consumers. “I know I’m making the purchases, but it’s also enabled my reach to even buy those items. Most of these items I wouldn’t be able to purchase with my credit card,” she said. Nearly every major US retailer is now offering some type of BNPL service to its customers, a change seen only within the last three years. Since 2019, BNPL has grown 300% in the US, reaching 45 million active users in the country by 2021. BNPL accounts for 2.4% of US online retail and is expected to keep growing. The top BNPL companies are some of the most lucrative in the financial tech industry. Square recently acquired Australia-based Afterpay for $29bn last year. Klarna was recently valued at $45.6bn. The soaring rise of BNPL has caught the eye of federal regulators at the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB), which in December started an inquiry into the risks and benefits of BNPL loans. The agency has asked the five largest BNPL servicers – Affirm, Afterpay, Klarna, PayPal and Zip – for their data and policies, citing concerns over a lack of consumer protection regulations. In a letter urging CFPB to take action, a group of US senators from the Senate’s banking committee said that BNPL loans have “the potential to cause consumer harm”. “BNPL providers currently operate without meaningful oversight. They are not generally subject to federal supervision that can spot unfair, deceptive or abusive practices or other violations of federal consumer protection laws,” they wrote. Regulators in other countries such as the UK and Australia, where BNPL has also ballooned in users, are also considering regulation. BNPL represented 2.1% of all global e-commerce transactions in 2020, according to research from FIS, and is expected to double by 2024. At a basic level, BNPL companies appear to have a mutually beneficial relationship with both retailers and consumers, often getting praise from both groups. The payment method is targeted toward those who do not have a credit card as approval for a loan is nearly instant, with a soft check on a consumer’s credit history. BNPL is especially popular among millennial and Gen Z consumers. For retailers, BNPL offers access to consumers who may otherwise not have made purchases. Consumers are also spending more when they use BNPL. Rue21, a clothing retailer, saw a 73% increase in the average purchase amount when the retailer started using Klarna, according to a case study published by the BNPL company. Other retailers have reported similar results. “With Klarna, we continue to see higher spend per visit and increased acquisition of new younger customers. 45% are under 40,” Macy’s CEO Jeff Gennettte told investors last spring. “Our goal is to convert all of these new customers to Macy’s loyal customers, who return for future purchases.” BNPL companies argue that they are offering a more equitable service than credit card companies and are offering consumers a fairer deal since they do not charge interest. Instead, BNPL companies operate on fees they charge retailers, which usually amounts to 1.5% to 7% of a transaction. In comparison, credit companies typically charge retailers 1% to 3% of a transaction. “Credit cards drive inequalities. Those who can afford to pay off their balances each month reap rewards through loyalty schemes while those who can’t afford to simply get more into debt,” Klarna CEO and co-founder Sebastian Siemiatkowski said in a statement to investors. “The credit card model is simply unsustainable for customers.” Siemiatkowski echoed recent reports that lavish credit card rewards are in a way subsidized by lower-income Americans who use cash or debit cards, but consumer advocates say that BNPL can also pose risks to consumers. “If they work as promoted, they may be helpful for consumers to help break down payments into a few smaller chunks without interest and without the long-term debt and interest of credit cards,” said Lauren Saunders, associate director at the National Consumer Law Center. “But there are definitely a lot of potential downsides.” Saunders said it is easier for consumers to take on debt with BNPL, loans are harder to track since they may not be all in one place, some companies charge late fees and consumers lack legal chargeback rights that protect them if they do not get the product they paid for. It is also unclear what using BNPL will mean for consumers’ credit scores. Purchases are not reported to the credit bureaus unless a missed payment ends up going to debt collectors, which could make a report. But all the major credit bureaus have indicated they will begin working with BNPL companies to get BNPL transactions on consumers’ credit reports. “Ultimately, we are concerned about how the product is developing and how the market is developing, and we hope that the CFPB will come up with substantive protections,” Saunders said.Having spent every minute of his decorated career at Bayern Munich, could Germany legend Thomas Müller be ready to muddy his spats in the Premier League? “No,” would seem to be the obvious answer, considering the 32-year-old Raumdeuter is still banging them in for the Bundesliga champions. Nevertheless, that hasn’t stopped British media outlets from pouncing on a story from Bild that claims Newcastle and Everton have both hatched ambitious plans to sign him in the summer. Currently in Ecuador on international duty with Brazil, at various points yesterday Bruno Guimarães was off to Newcastle, then he wasn’t, then he was again. With so much uncertainty the Mill isn’t about to claim to have a clue what the future holds for the Lyon midfielder, but Fabrizio Romano, our man in the know, says a €40m (£33.5m) deal has been agreed between the clubs and “subject to details involving agents and the clubs being finalised, Guimarães will take a medical when he returns to Brazil”. Arsenal and Juventus are monitoring the situation with interest. Contact-haver-in-chief Romano also claims Southampton are ready to offer a club-record £25m to make the loan move of Chelsea striker Armando Broja to St Mary’s a more permanent arrangement, but with Romelu Lukaku having such an indifferent time of things, it seems unlikely that Thomas Tuchel would be willing to let the young Albanian leave Stamford Bridge. The future of Rumour Mill-staple Tanguy Ndombele remains completely up in the air. Unwanted at Tottenham, the French midfielder had been linked with a move to Paris Saint-Germain, who need to get rid of Julian Draxler, Danilo Pereira, Leandro Paredes or Ander Herrera to free up a dressing-room peg and training ground parking space for him. Everton and Valencia are both ready to hijack the deal should PSG fail to shift any deadwood. Having laughed a £9m offer from Newcastle for central defender Dan Burn out of the gate, Brighton would quite like to sign Abel Ruiz from Braga but have had their opening bid for the 21-year-old Spanish striker rejected by the Portuguese club. Left out of Arsenal’s travelling party to Dubai for their warm-weather training camp, Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang has been offered to Sevilla and Barcelona on loan, but neither club is prepared to cover his £300,000 weekly wages. Arsenal, by contrast, are prepared to cover the wages of Douglas Luiz and are ramping up their efforts to sign the combative Aston Villa midfielder before the window closes. And finally, in Cameroon representing Senegal at the Africa Cup of Nations – for whom he scored against Cape Verde on Tuesday – Marseille striker Bamba Dieng is attracting interest from Newcastle, Burnley, Crystal Palace and West Ham. The 21-year-old is reported to be available for £8m from the cash-strapped French club.The UK’s competition watchdog has launched an in-depth study into the booming music streaming market, to assess whether the big record labels and services such as Spotify hold “excessive power”, and whether artists and fans are getting a fair deal. The Competition and Markets Authority (CMA) was asked to launch the study after a scathing report by a cross-party committee of MPs last year called for a “complete reset” of a streaming model it believed only benefited big labels and superstar acts. Music streaming now dominates fans’ listening habits and accounts for 80% of the £1.7bn total UK industry income last year. Spending on subscriptions to services such as Spotify, Apple Music and Amazon Music hit £1.3bn, compared with just £135.6m on vinyl albums, and £150m on CDs. “Whether you’re into Bowie, Beethoven or Beyoncé, most of us now choose to stream our favourite music,” said Andrea Coscelli, the CMA chief executive. “A vibrant and competitive music streaming market not only serves the interests of fans and creators but helps support a diverse and dynamic sector, which is of significant cultural and economic value to the UK.” The CMA said the market study, which will examine the streaming industry from “creator to consumer”, will pay particular attention to the power and influence of record labels and music streaming services. “The CMA will consider whether innovation is being stifled and if firms hold excessive power,” it said. “The CMA will also assess whether any lack of competition between music companies could affect the musicians, singers and songwriters whose interests are intertwined with those of music lovers.” The study will assess whether or not there is a need for a full competition investigation, and if the government should legislate to improve the UK music market, take enforcement action against firms, encourage industry self-regulation or allow it to continue as it does now. “As we examine this complex market, our thinking and conclusions will be guided by the evidence we receive,” said Coscelli. “If the CMA finds problems, it will consider what action may be necessary.” The streaming revolution has given big music labels their mojo back. Last year, Universal Music, the world’s biggest music company and home to artists from Taylor Swift to the Beatles, was floated at a €45bn (£38bn) valuation. Warner Music, bought by Sir Leonard Blavatnik for $3.3bn (£2.5bn) in 2011, is now valued at more than $22bn. The culture select committee report in July looked at the economics of streaming and noted that the world’s three biggest music companies: Universal Music, Sony Music and Warner Music, control about three-quarters of the UK recording market, allowing them to strike increasingly advantageous deals with streaming companies such as Spotify. In contrast, most artists say they do not get a fair share of royalties from streaming deals they have as part of their record contracts. “Streaming has led to an explosion of choice for music fans and creators in the UK,” said a spokesperson for the BPI, the industry body representing the UK recording industry. “The BPI looks forward to engaging closely with the CMA to help it understand the changes that streaming has brought to the music market.” The CMA has until the 26 July to issue an interim report on the provisional findings of the market study, including a decision on whether it believes there may be grounds for a full market investigation. The regulator then has until 26 January next year to publish the full report as well as formally start an in-depth investigation, if it deems one is required.Anna meets Max in a hotel bar in central London. They have both just finished work – Max is a banker and Anna, a trainee opera singer, does jazz sets on the side to pay her rent. Anna is 24, Max 38. Max is wealthy and Anna is not. Anna is single and Max has recently separated from his wife. At the end of the evening he gives her his card. A Very Nice Girl, Imogen Crimp’s debut novel, tracks Anna’s early career and musical studies against their troubled relationship. The roles Anna takes up – Musetta, Zerlina, Rusalka and Manon – are templates for her experiences of passion and power. Her affair with Max is intense but there are clear boundaries: they go for expensive dinners and have sex at his London flat, but she isn’t invited to his home in the country or to meet his friends or family. Max has a sadness that he withholds, and Anna is convinced that he is hiding something. Perhaps he’s still living with his wife or seeing other women. There are children’s films on his Netflix account. She combs his bank statements and searches for his Oxfordshire house on Google Street View. Between dates, Anna continues to train and to audition, but when she gives up her job, she can’t afford the concealed costs of a career in opera, which her more privileged peers’ parents quietly pay. She moves from lodgings to a shared room, then to a subsidised bedsit. Occasionally, she steals cash from Max’s bedside table. More regularly, he gives her money in unmarked envelopes. She keeps a tally of her debt on her phone. She finds it increasingly difficult to sing. A Very Nice Girl is an absorbing novel – the unravelling of Anna’s career and the increasing constriction of her relationship are gripping without feeling mechanically plotted. Anna’s struggle to be successful, loved and financially secure is lonely, but Crimp addresses these troubles, as they are specific to Anna’s generation, with a thin-lipped sense of humour. There’s a particular desperation that is shared by the young women in this novel, whose anxieties are aggravated by mutual accusations of bad politics. Anna’s closest girlfriend, Laurie, describes a lifeless night spent with women who only talk about “which aspects of other people’s weddings they wanted to buy for their own weddings and which they’d thought were shit”. “Women are genuinely pathetic, aren’t they?” says Laurie. “It’s literally no wonder men are still in charge of everything.” Like Raven Leilani’s Luster, Naoise Dolan’s Exciting Times or Sally Rooney’s Conversations With Friends, A Very Nice Girl focuses on a sexual relationship between a twentysomething woman who is struggling for money and an older, considerably richer white man. There are several threads that recur across these novels. Envelopes full of cash are passed to Edie in Luster. An ambivalent reunion between Anna and Max at Christmas recalls the end of Conversations With Friends. Like Edie, or Marianne in Rooney’s Normal People, Anna has a predilection for masochism. After a humiliating audition, she invites Max to hurt her during sex: “I heard my mouth say to him all these things I wasn’t sure I meant, that I wanted him to do anything to me.” What’s going on here? Rooney and Leilani are exceptional writers – distinctive and influential – and it’s possible that the fictional worlds they have created, populated by wise young women who like to be hurt, have set a trend. Like many older people (I’m Max’s age), I have a limited attention span for the pixel-by-pixel portrait of one person’s fluctuating self-worth, as when Anna eschews going to work in favour of taking mournful baths. But it seems reasonable to think that similarities in these stories expose something about the lives of young women now, in the same way that the exit strategies of Emma Bovary and Anna Karenina (Crimp’s Anna mentions both novels), or one of Ibsen’s heroines, are stories about the constraints placed on 19th-century bourgeois wives. Anna’s peers and mentors put the burden of success on her shoulders, which has the effect of concealing how disadvantaged she is. This is as much about her background as about her femininity: niceness and girlishness don’t mean much until they come into play with money. Anna’s own experiences, romantic as well as professional, are narrated back to her by friends and teachers as experiences of empowerment, while reality confronts her with her lack of power. In this, it makes sense for her to feel alienated and for self-harm and self-destruction to be the choice she is empowered to make. After Max hits her during sex, she asks him why he did it and he seems genuinely surprised. “What? You wanted me to.” Anna would like to respond but she loses her voice. “I tried to say something else, but I couldn’t.” • A Very Nice Girl by Imogen Crimp is published by Bloomsbury (£14.99). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.More than one in five of all councils in the UK have no climate action plan, research shows. In 2019, Theresa May’s government committed the UK to reaching net zero carbon emissions by 2050. Since then, hundreds of local authorities have published plans to show how they intend to become carbon neutral. But analysis by the not-for-profit campaigning organisation Climate Emergency UK, shared exclusively with the Guardian, found that of the 409 local authorities across the UK, 84 still did not have climate action plans, while 139 had not committed to reach net zero emissions by a specific date. Climate Emergency UK scored 325 plans according to 28 questions grouped into nine categories, including how well councils’ plans would mitigate the impact of climate change locally, whether climate and ecological emergency was integrated into existing policies, community engagement, climate education, scale of emissions targets and commitments to tackle the ecological emergency. This first year’s scoring was intended to establish a baseline of councils’ plans and scale of ambition. Next year’s will assess to what extent local authorities are on track to reach net zero emissions. Although most local authorities have published climate plans, 38 district councils, three county councils, and 43 other councils in Great Britain and Northern Ireland have none. They include Norfolk county council, Gloucester city council and the London borough of Hackney. Annie Pickering, a campaigns and policy officer at Climate Emergency UK, said: “It’s been three years since the first councils declared climate emergencies and our scorecards show that many councils are still not making action on the climate and ecological emergency a priority. Councils can have a real influence on creating low-carbon communities, and with the warmest new year on record in the UK, we need to see action fast.” Somerset West and Taunton district council topped the league with a score of 91% (see below). Other high-scoring councils included West Midlands Combined Authority (89%), Staffordshire Moorlands (87%) and Solihull (85%). The average score across all UK local authorities was 46%. The analysis revealed significant regional variations, with the average score for Scottish authorities 50%, compared with 46% for England and 45% for Wales. Scotland scored particularly well on measuring and setting emissions targets. Scotland’s public bodies have been legally required since 2011 to reduce emissions and, since 2019, to report on progress. Edinburgh was the highest rated Scottish council, on 83%, and the joint fifth highest-scoring UK local authority. The city’s £1.3bn redevelopment of Granton Waterfront will create a 11 hectare coastal park to protect biodiversity, create up to 3,500 new net zero carbon homes, use lower-emitting offsite construction methods and improve public transport links. Edinburgh has allocated £2.8bn over 10 years to build 10,000 new sustainable and affordable homes by 2027, and to retrofit its 20,000 council houses to make them more energy efficient. And from 2025, all new school and early years buildings will be built to Passivhaus standard. The council has also upgraded all street lighting across the city to energy-efficient LED lights. In contrast, only four of Northern Ireland’s 11 councils had a climate action plan at all, with all four scoring 31% or lower. In Wales, just under a quarter of local authorities have no plan. The highest-scoring authority in Wales was Cardiff (70%), while in Northern Ireland it was Ards and North Down council (31%). “Some councils are clearly taking a strong lead on climate action, but others have much more to do,” said Cara Jenkinson, the cities manager at the sustainable energy charity Ashden. She said cutting emissions and nature restoration must be a priority for every council department “if they are to be carbon neutral by 2050, let alone 2030.” Nottingham is arguably the furthest ahead. The city has reduced its overall CO2 emissions per capita by 52.3% since 2005 and is on track to be carbon neutral by 2028. It has planted nearly 22,000 trees and installed more than 130 public electric vehicle charging points. Just under a third of council vehicles and nearly half of Hackney carriage taxis are ultra low emission vehicles, and the city has one of the UK’s largest fleets of electric buses. A workplace parking levy on employers providing 11 or more parking spaces for staff generates about £8m a year, which is ringfenced for renewable transport schemes. In 2014, Telford and Wrekin council became only the second local authority in the UK to build a publicly owned solar farm. To date it has saved more than 13,000 tonnes of CO2 emissionsand generated £1.3m for the council. Since 2020 the council has cut its carbon emissions by more than 57%. But English planning laws can make it harder to ensure that new developments are zero carbon or carbon neutral. From 2006, authorities were able to insist that houses were built to the highest energy standards, but this regulation was scrapped in 2015. The government’s new future homes standard aims to ensure new homes built from 2025 will produce 75-80% less carbon emissions than those built under current regulations. But councils’ energy efficiency plans remain subject to viability assessments from developers. If a developer can provide a sound viability assessment that proves a policy would make a scheme unaffordable, there is little local authorities can do to counter that. David Renard, the leader of Swindon council and the Local Government Association’s environment and planning spokesperson, said: “Local government has a fundamental role to play in tackling climate change, but net zero can only be achieved if councils are empowered.” The LGA is calling for stronger powers and longterm funding to tackle the climate emergency. A government spokesperson said: “We welcome this research, which shows four in five councils are supporting our ambitions to deliver net zero by setting out climate action plans, with more expected to follow. Councils have an integral part to play and we will continue to work very closely with local partners to meet our climate change commitments.” How Somerset turned green Somerset West and Taunton was the only council to score above 90% and was one of only 21 to get top marks for its plans to improve biodiversity and combat the ecological emergency. It has declared its area a fracking-free zone, pledged to manage council services, buildings and land in a biodiversity-friendly manner, embed ecological initiatives alongside climate action in all work areas, and ensure that addressing both emergencies are strategic priorities for planning policies and design guides for new development. It has developed a climate-positive planning policy and is building zero-carbon council houses, as well as retrofitting existing housing stock. The council’s entire pool car fleet will be electric by the end of 2022. Dixie Darch, the executive member for climate change at Somerset West and Taunton council, said local authorities should lead by example. “We are committed to putting the climate emergency and environmental responsibility at the heart of what we do. The challenge has never been greater for local councils: it is essential we rise to that challenge,” she said. In addition to its own plan to make the district net zero by 2030, Somerset West has joined with the county council and three other district councils to create a climate emergency strategy for the whole county. This strategy includes developing wind and solar energy on councils’ land, improving public transport and electric vehicle use, and the creation of a nature partnership to improve biodiversity and restore nature. A campaign promoting recycling has led recycling rates to increase to more than 50%, among the highest in England. Meanwhile, at Somerset county council, the highest-scoring county, initiatives include a £1.5m climate emergency fund for community projects that help the county become more resilient to climate change.Stock markets in Asia have tumbled to their lowest in nearly 15 months after America’s central bank chief confirmed widely expected plans to tackle higher inflation with an increase in interest rates this year, beginning in March. With investors also concerned about political tensions between Russia and Ukraine, supply chain problems and rising oil prices, the prospect of sustained increases in the cost of borrowing by the world’s most powerful economy sent a spasm of anxiety through financial markets on Thursday. “The Fed’s gone from being the market’s best friend, to a possible enemy,” said Kyle Rodda, analyst at the online trading platform IG in Sydney, adding that the Fed wasset on “bringing inflation down, rather than protecting asset prices”. The Nikkei in Japan led the way as it closed down more than 3% while the Kospi in Seoul found itself losing 3.5% of its value in a turbulent session. The market in Hong Kong finished off by 2.42% and Sydney shed nearly 2% to enter a technical correction. after shedding 10% from its most recent high. MSCI’s broad gauge of regional markets outside Japan fell 2.7% to its lowest level since November 2020. The drop echoed a sharp reversal in US shares on Wednesday. The S&amp;P 500 closed 0.14% lower and the Nasdaq Composite finished barely higher, erasing a rise of more than 3.4%. The Dow Jones average slipped 0.38%. The FTSE100 is set to fall nearly 2% when it opens on Thursday morning, according to futures trade, with the Wall Street markets also heading for a hefty loss. Mike Kelly, head of global multi-asset at PineBridge Investments in the US, said it was a sign to “get the heck out” of US stocks. “It’s all about selling longer duration assets,” he said, “so we are underexposed to US equities.” In its latest policy update on Wednesday, the US Federal Reserve chairman, Jerome Powell, indicated the central bank was likely to raise interest rates in March, and reaffirmed plans to end its Covid-emergency bond purchases that month before launching a significant reduction in its asset holdings. But in the follow-up press conference, Powell warned that inflation – which has hit levels not seen for decades – remains above the Fed’s long-run goal and supply chain issues may be more persistent than previously thought. “There was a marked shift in terms of a relatively dovish statement and then a relatively hawkish press conference,” said David Chao, global market strategist, Asia Pacific at Invesco. “Powell is not committing to the size or the frequency of rate hikes and also the timing of the balance sheet reduction. I think that buys him a bit of wriggle room as to how quickly and with what velocity he wants to normalise monetary policy in the US.” Chao said, however, that any further rise in inflation in the US, which is now running at 7%, could lead to “a more aggressive monetary policy tightening” meaning more US rate hikes. A tougher stance by the Fed is expected to see other central banks drop into line or continue to increase rates, such as in the Bank of England’s case, which increased borrowing costs in December to curb rising consumer prices. The central bank in South Korea has already hiked rates three times in six months “With the somewhat hawkish signals by the Fed … there may be greater pressure for central banks to act on curbing inflationary pressures as well,” wrote Yeap Jun Rong, market strategist at IG. Earlier this week, Singapore’s central bank surprised markets by tightening its monetary policy settings in its first out-of-cycle move in seven years. The US dollar rose on Thursday on the back of higher US bond yields, lifting the dollar index – which measures the greenback against major peers – to 96.604, near five-week highs. The pound slipped to $1.343. The global benchmark Brent crude fell 0.64% on profit-taking to $89.38 per barrel.Last Sunday’s epic between the Chiefs and Bills was about more than an individual game. It redefined what is possible in a playoff game, and what is now expected for a team to compete at the top of the AFC. Twenty-five points in the final two minutes. One haymaker after another. The Mahomes-Allen Show made one thing clear: Having a great quarterback used to be the league’s greatest advantage in making a deep playoff run. Now it is a prerequisite. The AFC is Mahomes’ conference for now, but Josh Allen is right there. Over the past fortnight, Allen has delivered one of the most impressive postseasons runs in modern history. No quarterback can do much better than lead his team to a touchdown on 75% of his drives against a Bill Belichick-led defense (the second-ranked scoring defense in the NFL) and a feisty Chiefs defense that has been No 1 in scoring defense since week six. And still, it wasn’t enough: Allen and the Bills were dumped from proceedings before they could reach a championship game thanks to the flip of a coin and some Mahomes magic. This is the state of the AFC, then. The race is on to find a quarterback who can pilot an offense that can keep pace with Mahomes and Allen, the Chiefs and the Bills. But it’s not just that pair. The league’s top, young quarterbacks are concentrated in the same conference. True, the AFC runs through Mahomes and Allen. But it also runs through Joe Burrow and the Bengals. It runs through Justin Herbert and the Chargers, Lamar Jackson and the Ravens. All are former MVPs or current MVP contenders. All typify the changing nature of the sport. They are no longer the game’s future generation, but its current stars. The median age of that group: 25. That’s meaningful. If all five play until they’re 38 – the current age of Aaron Rodgers, the reigning MVP – that’s another 13 seasons on average. Thirteen seasons of slogging through an AFC playoff picture featuring the kind of all-world matchups we saw on Sunday in Kansas City. It means, more than likely, going through Arrowhead each and every year, with trips to Cincinnati, Baltimore, Buffalo or Los Angeles along the way. What does that do to the calculations of the disgruntled quarterback of your choice? The upcoming quarterback carousel will feature some of the game’s biggest names. Aaron Rodgers, Russell Wilson, and Deshaun Watson have all teased (or demanded) trades. Denver? Cleveland? Pittsburgh? Tennessee? All have either historical relevance, a championship backbone to the roster, smart personnel czars, or high-level, proven coaches. All have been linked to taking a big swing for a veteran quarterback to try to play catchup in the QB Arms Race this offseason. Yet each of those teams is stuck in the AFC. Would Rodgers or Wilson really trade in Green Bay or Seattle to join Denver and do battle with Mahomes and Herbert in the AFC West for the next five years? Over in the NFC, the picture is clearer. There are seven quarterbacks in the NFC who have been the league MVP or have, at some point, been a frontrunner for the award. Tom Brady, Aaron Rodgers, Russell Wilson, Kyler Murray, Dak Prescott, Matt Ryan and Matthew Stafford. The median age of that group: 33. There is a dearth of superstar-caliber quarterbacks in the prime of their careers in the NFC. Already, Brady is musing about retiring. The end may soon come for Wilson (33) or Ryan (soon to be 37). Both may be trade targets for the maybe-nearly bunch in the AFC, too. Rodgers represents the most interesting case of the lot. Denver has always felt like the right choice. The culture. The current roster. The cap space. The assets. The chance for Rodgers to bring a coach of his choice along for the ride. The Broncos have the means (picks and cap space) to try to pull off a Rodgers-Davante Adams double swoop, and on Thursday news emerged they are set to appoint Green Bay’s offensive coordinator, Nathaniel Hackett, as their new head coach. But moving to Denver would not merely mean setting up a potential postseason run against five upper-tier quarterbacks all moving into the prime of their careers, but jumping into a division with both Mahomes and Herbert. And not only that, but jumping into that division instead of sticking in one with the retooling Bears, the resetting Vikings, and the Fighting Dan Campbells – loveable upstarts still a ways away from competing for the division crown. That’s … less than ideal. We may soon be looking at an AFC-NFC quarterback swap that has one or two of Kirk Cousins, Russell Wilson, or Matt Ryan plying their trade in Cleveland or Tennessee or Denver, while Teddy Bridgewater, Baker Mayfield, or Rookie Quarterback X take up spots in Seattle or Minnesota or Carolina. Really? That’s the conference that Rodgers would be happy to leave to go to try to fight through the Mahomesification of the AFC for the final 24 months or whatever of his career? What if Trevor Lawrence or Zach Wilson (don’t laugh) or Mac Jones live up to their billing over the next two seasons? Moving within the NFC would make more sense for Rodgers as he nears 40 – if the Packers are willing to sanction a move within the conference. The Saints were a logical fit before the announcement that Sean Payton was stepping away on Tuesday. Could Tampa become the quarterback outpost, the place the veterans go to win one more Lombardi before they retire? If Brady walks away, few teams will have a better overall situation to offer veteran quarterbacks, even as they lose some of the essential pieces from the championship team. What the Bucs will lose in talent with Brady stepping away, perhaps they will make up for in the cache of their all-in, let’s-please-the-legend moves. Other legends will take note. If not there, where? Would Rodgers want to walk into the Anchorman stand-off that is the NFC West? Does Washington or Philadelphia or the dregs of a Giants organization really inspire a burning in the football loins? And do any of those spots represent a tangible on-field upgrade over whatever semblance of a core the Packers are able to keep together this offseason? It’s doubtful. You can make the same case for Wilson in Seattle, or Ryan in Atlanta. Mahomes, Allen, Herbert, Burrow, and Jackson have changed the game. If the final stage of his career is to be about winning championships, Rodgers should steer clear of the AFC’s young pups, try to orchestrate a move within the NFC, or patch things up in Green Bay.Greencore, the sandwich supplier to grocers including M&amp;S, Sainsbury’s and the Co-op, is the latest company to face criticism for offering bonuses to bosses while failing to repay government Covid support. We take a look at some of the other UK firms that have handed bonuses to executives or payouts to shareholders despite refusing to refund taxpayers for support, including business rates relief and the furlough job retention scheme. WH Smith The retailer was a big beneficiary of taxpayer funds throughout the pandemic, having taken £40m in business rates relief and £11m in payments from furlough schemes in the UK and elsewhere in the year to September 2021. That was on top of £20m in business rates relief in 2020. The move prompted a shareholder rebellion earlier this month, with more than half its investors failing to back a £550,000 bonus payment for the retailer’s chief executive, Carl Cowling, as a result. Homebase Restructuring group Hilco took a £25m dividend payment from the DIY chain Homebase in 2020, despite receiving business rates relief for the chain, which it bought for £1 in 2018. It also accepted at least £10.6m in government aid through furlough payments and grants for its Bathstore chain, which was forced to close for many weeks under government high street lockdowns. JD Sports The retailer JD Sports restarted dividend payments to shareholders in April 2021, after profits were shored up by bumper lockdown demand for trainers and hoodies. However, JD said it was not going to return either furlough money or business rates relief, which was worth £38m to company according to property advisers Altus Group. Vertu Motors Vertu Motors, the Gateshead-based car dealership group, relaunched its interim dividend in October despite receiving significant government support, including £22.8m from the furlough scheme and £4.3m in business rates during the first half of 2020. It has claimed a further £5.2m in business rates relief and £400,000 in job support payments since. The company defended the move, saying it had held off from offering shareholder payouts over the past two financial years “in acknowledgement of the level of government support received”. John Lewis The John Lewis Partnership has been criticised for failing to repay more than £190m in business rates relief and furlough support. While the company has not offered bonuses or dividends, it has faced criticism for the fact its Waitrose supermarket chain took at least £85m of that relief at a time when grocers were still able to stay open and serve customers even during Covid lockdowns. Chair Dame Sharon White said the group would hold on to the government cash, which had “helped to keep us running and avoid more severe restructuring”. Greencore Ireland-based Greencore tapped the UK’s state furlough programme for £21.3m in 2020, and a further £8.7m in 2021. While none of that taxpayer-funded cash has been repaid, Greencore paid €343,000 (£286,000) in share-based bonuses to its chief financial officer, Emma Hynes, for 2021, bringing her total pay to £895,000. The company, which is billed as the world’s largest sandwich maker, has defended its use of government funding, noting the severe drop in profits it suffered at the height of the pandemic, when lockdown orders hit food-to-go sales at some of its biggest customers, including the supermarkets M&amp;S, Sainsbury’s and the Co-op. Greencore swung to a £10.8m loss in 2020, from a £56.4m profit a year earlier.GWS Giants midfielder Haneen Zreika will sit out the club’s AFLW clash with the Western Bulldogs after deciding she could not wear the new pride jumper due to her faith. Zreika, 22, grew up in Western Sydney and was the first Muslim AFLW player when she debuted in 2019, coming to Australian rules football from a rugby league background. This is the first year that the Giants have had a purpose-designed jumper for pride round which supports inclusion and diversity – particularly for the LGBTQ+ community. While pride round was officially celebrated last week, the club decided to debut the jumper at Friday’s first home game of the 2022 season at Henson Park against the Western Bulldogs. Zreika played in the pride round last year and in the official 2022 pride round match last week. She also ran through the banner with her teammates on the weekend which read: “Pride round: an inclusive game for all. Everyone is welcome.” Guardian Australia understands the club undertook extensive consultation with the Muslim community in the lead-up to Zrieka’s decision. Zreika spoke openly with the playing group about the tension between her support for pride round as well as her LGBTQ+ teammates and her faith. It’s understood she is comfortable with her decision but did not make it lightly and that it was a matter of balancing her personal faith, her support for the principles of pride and her teammates, and the expectations of her community. While she has been targeted by some commentators on social media for the decision, she is said to have the support and respect of her teammates. Zreika is expected to attend Friday night’s match and support her teammates from the sidelines. The Giants declined to comment. The team for the Bulldogs game, which was announced on Thursday evening, lists Zreika as not playing for personal reasons. The selection includes two debut players – Casidhe Simmons and Brodee Mowbray – and also sees defenders Louise Stephenson and Libby Graham on the field. Rebecca Privitelli, Chloe Dalton, Pepa Randall and Katie Loynes will not play due to the AFL’s health and safety protocols.A group of vaccine-sceptic writers are generating revenues of at least $2.5m (£1.85m) a year from publishing newsletters for tens of thousands of followers on the online publishing platform Substack, according to new research. Prominent figures in the anti-vaccine movement including Dr Joseph Mercola and Alex Berenson have large followings on Substack, which has more than 1 million paying subscribers who sign up for individual newsletters from an array of authors who include novelist Salman Rushdie, the writer musician Patti Smith and former Downing Street adviser Dominic Cummings. Mercola, a US alternative medicine doctor and prolific producer of anti-vaccine content, and Alex Berenson, a journalist banned from Twitter last year after questioning the efficacy of Covid-19 vaccines, are among five vaccine sceptics on the platform who earn themselves and Substack a minimum of $2.5m a year from their newsletters. Under Substack’s business model, writers keep about 90% of the subscription income, with the platform taking 10% and payment company Stripe charging the writers 3% of their take. Research by the Center for Countering Digital Hate, a campaign group, showed that Mercola’s newsletters made a minimum of $1m a year from charging subscribers an annual fee of $50, with Berenson making at least $1.2m from charging people $60. Three other vaccine sceptic newsletters, from tech entrepreneur Steven Kirsch, virologist Robert Malone and anonymous writer Eugyppius, generate about $300,000 between them. Imran Ahmed, chief executive of CCDH, said companies like Substack were under “no obligation” to amplify vaccine scepticism and make money from it. “They could just say no. This isn’t about freedom; this is about profiting from lies … Substack should immediately stop profiting from medical misinformation that can seriously harm readers.” Newsletters cited by CCDH research include: a piece authored by Mercola headlined “More Children Have Died From Covid Shot Than From Covid”; a Berenson substack questioning whether mRNA vaccines have contributed to, rather than stopped, the spread of Covid; a Kirsch newsletter stating that “vaccines kill more far more people than they might save from Covid”; a newsletter from Malone warning that mRNA vaccines could lead to permanent damage of children’s organs; and a Eugyppius Substack claiming that “vaccines don’t suppress case rates at all.” A Substack spokesperson referred the Guardian to an essay published on Wednesday by the platform’s co-founders, Chris Best, Hamish McKenzie and Jairaj Sethi, in which they said silencing vaccine sceptics would not work. “As we face growing pressure to censor content published on Substack that to some seems dubious or objectionable, our answer remains the same: we make decisions based on principles not PR, we will defend free expression, and we will stick to our hands-off approach to content moderation,” they said. Substack’s content guidelines state that “critique and discussion of controversial issues are part of robust discourse, so we work to find a reasonable balance between these two priorities”. The platform bars content that “promotes harmful or illegal activities” but also expects writers to moderate and manage their own communities. The statement came as Spotify began removing Neil Young’s music after the streaming service refused to take down Joe Rogan’s podcast despite the musician’s objections that it spread vaccine misinformation. CCDH said the $2.5m was a minimum amount of revenue that vaccine-sceptic writers are generating and that the figure could be as high as $12.5m. Substack does not give exact subscriber numbers for individual newsletter publishers and only reveals followings in broad terms such as “thousands” and “tens of thousands.” Because Mercola and Berenson have “tens of thousands” of followers, CCDH calculated the lowest estimate of their earnings on the assumption that they had 20,000 each, with Kirsch, Eugyppius and Malone presumed to have a minimum of 2,000 followers owing to Substack stating they have“thousands” of subscribers.In the next seven days, Concacaf teams will play three matches that will go a long way to deciding who clinches a spot at Qatar 2022. With six games to go, Canada, the US and Mexico occupy the three automatic qualifying places in the table. Here’s what to look out for in the coming days. Can the United States qualify in this window? The short answer is, yes. Doing so would certainly make the USMNT’s final three matches in qualification – which take place at the end of March and include two formidable away matches against Mexico and Costa Rica – a lot less stressful. First, they’ll need to win their next three matches. Beating an ascendant Canada in Hamilton won’t be an easy task. And US Soccer may have kneecapped itself by hosting El Salvador and Honduras in frigid temperatures, something that could nullify any advantage the USMNT hold. If the Americans do take all nine points, the performance of their nearest contenders – Mexico, Canada and Panama – comes into play. Qualification in this window requires one or two of those teams to have an abysmal run, as in, losing all three games. It would also require the teams in fifth and sixth – Jamaica (seven points) and Costa Rica (nine points) – to have one or two stumbles themselves. Will Canada prove to be Concacaf’s top dog? Canada have had a meteoric rise to become a Concacaf contender. Their coach, John Herdman, may very well be the most compelling manager in the region. Herdman has worked diligently to develop a competitive, passionate soccer culture in Canada. Despite not making a World Cup since 1986, Canada look poised to not just qualify, but do so in first place. But they have a few hurdles to navigate first. One is maintaining their performance on the road. Canada played five of their first eight matches in this round of qualification at home, meaning four of their final six games will be on the road – a tough proposition in a confederation known for its grueling away trips. That said, Canada’s two toughest away matches – on paper at least – have already been played: they drew in the US and Mexico. The major test in this window is their home match against the US. They will be without their best player, Bayern Munich’s Alphonso Davies, due to Covid and the US will be out for revenge after conceding points in Nashville. A win or draw would put Canada firmly on the path to Qatar. A loss though, would be a major stumble with a number of tough away trips to come. Concacaf adds VAR to remaining qualifiers The first eight rounds of matches of this qualification cycle were played without VAR. After overcoming issues related to personnel, training, infrastructure, and Covid, Concacaf announced on 19 January the region was (finally) prepared to implement VAR in qualifying. Concacaf said VAR will also be used at other tournaments including the men’s and women’s U20 Championships and more importantly, this summer’s Concacaf Women’s Championship which will decide Olympic and World Cup places. The story of this qualification campaign might have looked different if VAR had been introduced from the start. Jamaica had what many believed was a perfectly good goal ruled out in the 84th minute of the USMNT’s last qualifier. If it had stood, the Jamaicans would have been set for an upset win. Tactical shifts since first qualification window With more experience under their belt – and the evolution of tactics and roster since then – it will be interesting to see what changes Gregg Berhalter implements for his squad’s rematches with El Salvador, Canada and Honduras. One of the starkest changes is the shift in who is in the roster to begin with. John Brooks, once a stalwart of the team, has been left out. Walker Zimmerman and Miles Robinson now seem to be the choice at center-back. Berhalter’s deployment of players will also be of interest. The September window featured numerous players playing out of their expected position, to the exasperation of fans particularly in a disastrous first-half against Honduras. One hopes lessons have been learned. But there are positional deficiencies in the roster suggesting more experimentation could be in store. Environmental impacts This qualification cycle was delayed and adjusted due to Covid. That shift provides fans the unique opportunity to watch their teams attempt to qualify amid frigid January weather. Of course, Concacaf covers a huge geographical expanse and Costa Rica, for example, isn’t quite as cold as Canada in late January. And while there are plenty of warm weather venues in the US at this time of year, US Soccer elected to play its January and February matches in Columbus, Ohio and Saint Paul, Minnesota, which have daily mean temperatures of 32F (0C) and 16.3F (-8.7C) respectively at this time of year. US Soccer says it has chosen those venues because they reduce the amount of travel back and forth to the match in Canada. They are also away from coastal cities as part of the federation’s goal of choosing venues with “home atmospheres”. Those supposed plus points could be outweighed by weather that turns any USMNT technical advantage into a brutal battle for survival.There’s nothing older generations enjoy more than complaining about the young. Their childhoods are too coddled and full of non-dangerous toys, then they get to school where they are not beaten with sticks and therefore do not build character, then they go to university where they bully statues and either have too much or not enough sex. Now, as millennials have aged into their uncool middle-manager era, and Gen Z enter the workforce, they have inspired a number of books and articles and speeches about how kids these days don’t know the value of a hard day’s work. As many columnists, business book authors, and upper managers would often have it, the younger set are simply terrible workers. They ask for too much, they do too little, they do not respect hierarchies, they don’t want to pay their dues, they say “like” too much, they have tattoos on their arms, they’re always looking at their phones, and they quit their jobs instead of miserably sticking it out. Snowflakes! This was what a friend of mine was once called by her own uncle, in fact, when she decided to quit a job just a few weeks in, because the boss was horrible and abusive. He was also drunk at work much of the time. Why would leaving such a job draw such an insult, suggesting she should have toughed it out in a terrible situation? She was, to his mind, entitled and too sensitive. But it isn’t actually true that young people work less hard than their elders. And even if it were – why shouldn’t we aspire to a future with less work? Last year, a New York Times headline declared that “The 37-year-olds are afraid of the 23-year-olds who work for them”. It gestured to a division between anxious, conscientious millennials, many of whom had entered the workplace in the shadow of the 2008 crash; and their Gen Z counterparts, who feel comfortable “delegating to their boss”. The Harvard Business Review has similarly written about the “work martydom” of millennials, citing American studies that find young people feel more shame about taking time off for holidays and are more likely to forfeit unused vacation days. The author Malcolm Harris describes millennials not as overly rebellious but rather as “servile, anxious [and] afraid”. In a precarious economy marked by historic inequality, the importance of getting and maintaining a good job is more acute than ever. And for those who entered the workforce after the double whammy of the recession and the invention of the iPhone, we are never really able to not be at work. Nevertheless, young people are critiqued for their attempts to set boundaries at work. One young woman in the New York Times piece about Gen Z workers shocked her bosses by asking if she could leave work after finishing her tasks for the day, rather than sticking around in the name of the traditional 9 to 5. Maybe she’s on to something. For the millions who have quit their jobs in the “great resignation”, the pandemic and a tight labour market have made once radical propositions – such as not sticking out a miserable job – feel more possible. Why put up with abuse, discrimination and poor pay when you could just go get another job? While the pandemic has opened up such possibilities, it also laid bare the extreme divides between those workers who could work from home and those who had to show up and risk their lives. It showed how many businesses were willing to put their employees at risk in the name of profits, and how many privileged people were unwilling to sacrifice their creature comforts for another person’s safety. At both ends of this divided economy of work, though, we are seeing a newly invigorated labour movement – even in the generally union-unfriendly United States – and young people are playing a central role. A 2018 Pew Research survey found that American adults under 30 are the only group in which a larger share hold a favourable view of labour unions than feel the same way about corporations. The United Auto Workers union wrote in 2019 about the momentum of unionisation in unexpected places – at nonprofits, coffee shops, and digital media outfits. Meanwhile, workers at places like Amazon fulfilment centres are also seeking to form unions for the first time. Wherever you find them, though, workers who demand better conditions meet with similar-sounding scrutiny. They are told that they are asking for too much, and that they should be grateful, that actually a company is like a family and they are better off without a union, which would just get in between the company and the employees. This is what I was told in my previous digital media job when we attempted (and failed) to gain union recognition. This is also exactly what Amazon warehouse workers were told when they attempted to form a union in Alabama. In my own experience, I saw the ways in which problems at work could be pinned on employees’ lack of character, fortitude and work ethic, rather than structural faults of the company. We brought up concerns about pay gaps along gender and racial lines, lack of transparency in raises and promotions and lack of support for mental health. In response, we were given subscriptions to an app to sort out our mental health, but were expected to do it on our own time. If management can successfully dismiss employees’ demands as those of spoiled, narcissistic young people – of snowflakes – then they may save themselves the trouble and the cost of creating a fair workplace. But the problem of modern work is not that young people lack character. Their only crime is a disinclination to make themselves miserable in the name of making the rich richer. Is that so unreasonable? Hannah Jewell is the author of We Need Snowflakes and 100 Nasty Women of HistoryIn 2011, Sayeeda Warsi, then a co-chair of the Conservative party, implored her government to take action over the rising tide of anti-Muslim bigotry, which she said had become socially acceptable enough to pass “the dinner-table test”. A decade later, it seems too little has changed. Last week, Nusrat Ghani, the Tory MP for Wealden, told the Sunday Times that when she was dismissed from her ministerial post in 2020, she was told by a whip that her “Muslimness” had been an issue. The chief whip, Mark Spencer, identified himself as the person who spoke to her, but strongly denied her allegations. So what is it like to be a Muslim politician today? Rosena Allin-Khan Labour MP and shadow cabinet minister for mental health During a Commons debate about Islamophobia in November last year I spoke out about how, when I was a child and in the park with my little brother, I was attacked by a racist gang with dogs; how at medical school a senior consultant advised me to tell my family to stop being terrorists; and about being half-Polish and half-Pakistani, and seeing my white, blond mum spat at in the street. Throughout my life people have told me to lose my Muslimness, that I should give my children anglicised names, that I could become Rosie Allin and have an easier life. But I’m proud of my heritage, and my family of many religions. I’ve been told by people in politics that I shouldn’t have stood to be deputy leader because no Muslim had ever made it on to a leadership ballot paper – that the country just wasn’t ready to vote for a Muslim. I’m glad I didn’t listen. Then there are the rude and racist people in my inbox, on my Twitter – usually making unprompted comments about terrorism or saying: “What about grooming gangs?” And there have been other issues, such as Muslim politicians or activists having to go through extra security checks at Labour conference, myself included. It was a local police issue and we had to raise it with them. This is daily life for Muslims. It has become so normalised to spout Islamophobic hate. It rose by 375% in the week after Boris Johnson compared veiled Muslims to letterboxes. As a doctor, I’ll never forget having a patient who said they didn’t want to be treated by a [P-word]. When I was running to be a councillor I knocked on someone’s door who told me that she thought the Muslims were coming to take over Tooting, and that she was going to vote Ukip. But after finding some common ground (both our babies had the same onesie) she realised that there was a connection. I often think that the way to beat this sort of anti-Muslim hate is to rise above it, focus on the positives and keep being that positive role model. It’s sad there are politicians who have to make a point of not seeming Muslim because they’re worried it will upset their party or voters. Ultimately, I now say: “I’m a woman with many labels: proudly British, Polish, Pakistani, Muslim, a Liverpool supporter. I love clubbing. I love tea.” I’m my own person. I don’t need to fit into anybody’s box. Hina Bokhari Lib Dem councillor and London assembly member I had never experienced racism until 9/11: I was walking home when someone shouted: “[P-word] go home” not far from my doorstep. After that it got more frequent. During the 2018 World Cup, a drunk man got right in my face saying: “Listen [P-word], go the fuck home.” I’ve had problems on the job, too. When I was campaigning I would hear those same phrases about going home. And there would be micro-aggressions such as: “Your name is too difficult” or supposed banter about immigrants taking our jobs. Brexit was a particularly bad time. Sometimes Islamophobia is a lack of understanding. So, in 2020, I wanted to get people within the Liberal Democrats to experience Ramadan for a day. People – including Layla Moran and Ed Davey – fasted for a day and tweeted throughout. Streams of hatred came back in response. People were asking Ed if he wanted four wives – and saying far worse to Layla. Ed and Layla felt not just the experience of fasting, but the hatred too. I was shocked that I was the first Muslim woman elected in Merton council – and one of the London assembly’s first Muslim women. Are Muslim women less likely to be elected? Or less likely to put themselves forward? When I talk to Muslim women, there’s a fear of being abused. People have said in the past I should change my name. But I would never do that. When Michael Fabricant said that Nus Ghani wasn’t obviously Muslim, I tweeted: “Yeah – coz all us Muslims look the same!” I think what he meant was that she was the kind of Muslim that didn’t make him feel uncomfortable. In the London assembly we’ve got a very good understanding of Islamophobia. It helps having a Muslim mayor. But there is still inconsistency. Whether you are Jewish, Muslim or from any minority group, you should be heard, respected and, if there’s an incident, action must be taken. Our struggle is a shared struggle. Naz Shah Labour MP for Bradford West Before 2017, I was familiar with Islamophobia, but that year it went up a notch. I coordinated an open letter with more than 100 cross-party MPs about a Trevor Kavanagh article in the Sun, which referred to “the Muslim problem”. Now the abuse spikes whenever there’s a terrorist attack, or a grooming gang conviction. They call me a grooming apologist, even though I’ve been doing work around grooming for decades. With the guy from Blackburn who took hostages, they’re like: “Naz Shah, bet you haven’t got anything to say about this.” And I’m sure some attacks are coordinated because they spike when nothing has happened. I’ll just find my Twitter blowing up with comments such as: “Muslims are paedophiles.” When I was on the home affairs select committee, research was conducted into the amount of abuse MPs received. Diane Abbott was the most abused MP. But they had a category for abuse called “toxic abuse”. Abbott got 8%, I got 15%. I never found out what made certain abuse “toxic” but I remember being shocked. My political colleagues have tried to support me, but if they retweet me, it opens the floodgates to them, too. So they stop retweeting. People have said that in certain places, it’s best to tone down any Muslimness. Years ago, I wanted to set something up around Muslims in the Labour party, and was told: “The party is already seen to be too Muslim.” It was meant in a supportive way. But you can’t escape Islamophobia. Look at the health secretary, Sajid Javid: he says he has no religion, but he still didn’t get an invite to the top table when Donald Trump came to the UK, even though he was chancellor. Nor did the London mayor, Sadiq Khan. So your self-identification doesn’t matter. That’s why one of the most important pieces of work I’ve done is the all-party parliamentary group on the definition of Islamophobia. Because I’ve always said that your Muslimness is a private matter between you and your maker, but this definition includes perceived Muslimness. For instance, the Sikh man who was killed in the US because he was perceived as Muslim. It’s not easy working with politicians who have said or done Islamophobic things – such as the three Tory MPs who tweeted a doctored video from a far-right, anti-Islam account – but you’ve got to work with people. And my faith requires me to be the best that I can be. It’s a requirement of my faith for fairness, and for justice. Natasha Asghar Conservative member of the Senedd I first realised Islamophobia was a big issue when I was working for my father and member of the Welsh assembly, the late Mohammad Asghar. That was a big turning point for me – to see that racism still existed in the 20th century. There was an incident, which I think haunted him till the day he passed away. Another politician (not a Conservative) used truly horrific racial slurs towards him at a Welsh assembly event. It was brushed under the carpet by everyone present – and those who were told about it afterwards. Nothing happened. It really affected him, though he kept it quiet and never publicised it. He didn’t want people to be put off entering politics if they knew. The Welsh Tory leader at the time, now Lord Bourne, was absolutely fantastic. Since I’ve been a member of the Conservatives, they have been the most open-minded and genuinely decent people that I’ve had the privilege to work with. No one has ever, ever uttered a bad word towards our race, towards our religion. In fact, they celebrated it. I’ve never experienced any Islamophobia personally in politics – except for one incident on the doorstep last year. We went to one house and there were four or five men standing outside, and one of them said: “I didn’t know Margaret Thatcher was black.” I believe prejudice does exist and people do experience Islamophobia. If [Nusrat Ghani] has experienced racism, I would never invalidate what she has gone through. But I know the party believes in meritocracy. You can see the level of diversity that’s surrounding Boris Johnson. I’m confident that the investigation that will happen will shed light on what happened. And if anyone should be reprimanded, if anyone needs training, I’m sure they’ll receive it. Zarah Sultana Labour MP for Coventry When I got elected, I knew that it wasn’t going to be an easy ride. I had seen the Islamophobia that Sadiq Khan had experienced with his mayoral campaign, and I had seen how much abuse Diane Abbott received. Lisa Nandy discussed decades of neoliberalism and no one batted an eyelid, but when I essentially said the same thing in my maiden speech – discussing “40 years of Thatcherism” – I was attacked in the press, including the Guardian, and on Twitter. That’s when I realised there were double standards. People thought I should be grateful to be in this position. It set the tone. Since then, whether it’s speaking up on issues such as Black Lives Matter, or for migrants’ rights, I get abused, on social media, in the post or through my email. And often it’s related to my faith – they talk about Muslim invaders. I’ve been confused with pretty much every other Asian MP; I had one of the deputy speakers mistake me for a member of staff a year into the job. The police outside chambers like to check my pass, while a group of white female MPs goes through unchecked. But I’ve always said the problem is structural. There are policies in this country that have caused immense pain within Muslim communities, whether it’ s Prevent or the hostile environment. The worst effects of Islamophobia aren’t words, but those decisions such as the Iraq war, pushing the trope of Muslims as terrorists. People want diversity from their MPs. But when you bring that experience, and talk about issues affecting communities, that’s too much. There are so many incidents that show Muslim communities are not being treated with dignity and respect and fairly by the Labour party: Trevor Phillips called Muslims “a nation within a nation” and then was quietly readmitted into the party. But I’ve refused to stay in my box. I have to think about whether I can speak up about a certain issue without being labelled a terrorist sympathiser. I’ve been talking about Islamophobia for two years. Because my political beliefs are deeply shaped by faith. Because I look at the world we live in – rife with injustice and poverty – and imagine the world we could create. Because I know I’m not alone, and that there is solidarity – Angela Rayner and other shadow ministers have shown it, and my colleagues such as Bell Ribeiro-Addy and Diane Abbott. They get it. That’s a sisterhood.CBeebies’ Bedtime Stories is perhaps the most star-studded show on all of television. Since its humble beginnings a decade and a half ago – intended as a low-key update of Jackanory, where children could have a gentle story read to them before going to bed – it has slowly attracted a stream of increasingly big names, each of them realising the value of an easy, wholesome win. The latest is Reese Witherspoon. Witherspoon will be the first best actress Oscar winner to host Bedtime Stories. Her chosen story will be Penny Harrison’s Extraordinary, which is said to celebrate “the best moments in life: the ones we share with friends and family”. But if she thinks she can simply waltz in and become everyone’s favourite Bedtime Stories host, Witherspoon has another thing coming. To prove it, here are the 10 most impressive Bedtime Stories so far. Reese, this is your competition. 10. Matt Berry – The Busy Beaver Have there been Bedtime Stories hosts more famous than Matt Berry? Certainly. But have any of them been better at reading their chosen books? Not a chance. Pound for pound, Matt Berry is the most entertaining host in history, turbo-charging all his stories with the monumental power of his voice. If there’s an heir to Rik Mayall’s legendary Jackanory turn, it’s him. There isn’t a children’s author on Earth who wouldn’t kill to have their book read by Matt Berry. 9. Terry Wogan – Bare Bear Again, in terms of sheer global celebrity, Terry Wogan is wildly outpaced by subsequent hosts. But good God, that voice. That twinkle. That fully present engagement. Wogan was born to read bedtime stories for children. For all the hoopla about the A listers lining up to take part, this is proof that you don’t need star power to be an A lister to be truly charismatic. 8. Ryan Reynolds – Where the Wild Things Are Ryan Reynolds has two qualities that the Bedtime Stories bookers appear to hold dear: he’s a movie star, and he has a tendency to make mums blush. So why isn’t he higher on this list? That’s simple. His chosen book was Where the Wild Things Are by Maurice Sendak. It’s a classic, sure, but Bedtime Stories is supposed to be about contemporary books. You can’t just let actors pick the books they liked as kids. That seems impossibly vain. 7. Chris Evans – Goodnight, Goodnight Construction Site This is more like it. A proper hunky movie star, who played an integral role in the biggest film of all time, reading a book that isn’t half a century old. It’s all very impressive, but – if I’m honest – a little too impersonal for my liking. A very important part of Bedtime Stories is how the star signs off. By now, the best of them should have forged a connection with their young audience. Evans, meanwhile, says goodbye like he’s seeing off an acquaintance at an airport. 6. Dave Grohl - Octopus’s Garden Tricky one, this. Dave Grohl is clearly a big kid at heart, so is instantly suited to the Bedtime Stories format. And he’s a drummer, so it only makes sense that he’d choose Ringo Starr’s 2014 novelisation of his song Octopus’s Garden. However, I don’t know if you’ve read Octopus’s Garden, but it’s literally just the song Octopus’s Garden typed out into a book. This is less a bedtime story and more Shatner-level beat poetry. Still good, though. 5. Stephen Graham – The Yoga Ogre This, meanwhile, is just delightful. In recent years Stephen Graham has developed a reputation as one of this country’s most intense performers; an actor who can harness the steely focus of a young Pacino like no other. But nine years ago, he was a Bedtime Stories host. And a fantastic one at that; warm and funny and kind. You could argue that he was the prototypical Bedtime Stories A-lister. You shouldn’t, but you could. 4. Rosamund Pike – Spaghetti With the Yeti Part of Bedtime Stories’ appeal is that guests are seemingly chosen for their abilities to disable mums with lust. Dads, on the other hand, are a little overlooked. The closest it has ever come is probably Rosamund Pike, who rocked up in 2014 – right at the pinnacle of her Gone Girl fame – and absolutely charmed the pants off everyone. 3. Tom Hiddleston – Supertato With one notable exception, who we will come to soon, Tom Hiddleston represents the very peak of what Bedtime Stories can do. Is he famous? Yes. Is he handsome? Of course. Does he rock some impressive knitwear? You bet. But the key to Hiddleston’s success here is his choice of book. Sue Hendra and Paul Linnet’s Supertato is an absolute juggernaut of a book, beloved by kids to the point of hysteria. And Hiddleston gives it everything he’s got. A near perfect achievement. 2. Dolly Parton – Dog Loves Books Nobody deserves to appear on Bedtime Stories more than Dolly Parton. On top of just being a spectacular person all round, she has done more – via her Imagination Library organisation – to promote children’s literacy than almost anyone alive. Honestly, she could have turned up on Bedtime Stories and just done a bunch of fart noises for five minutes and she’d have made this list. I should point out that she didn’t do that, though. 1. Tom Hardy – There’s a Tiger in the Garden Who else could it have been? Tom Hardy’s first appearance on Bedtime Stories was nothing short of revelatory, not just with mums who wanted something nice to look at, but with kids who genuinely connected with his easy charm. If it wasn’t for Tom Hardy, there would be far fewer celebrities clamouring to take part on the show. And, if it wasn’t for Tom Hardy, there wouldn’t be so many TikToks of women flinging themselves into bed on his command. But that probably isn’t the point. Bedtime Stories with Reese Witherspoon will air on Friday 28 January, 6.50pm, CBeebies.A surge in heat-related deaths amid record-breaking summer temperatures offers a “glimpse into the future” and a stark warning that one of America’s largest cities is already unlivable for some, according to its new heat tsar. Almost 200 people died from extreme heat in Phoenix in 2020 – the hottest, driest and deadliest summer on record with 53 days topping 110F (43C) compared with a previous high of 33 days. Last year there were fewer scorching days, but the death toll remained staggeringly high, with people experiencing homelessness and addictions dying disproportionately. Phoenix, the capital of Arizona, is accustomed to a hot desert climate, but day and night temperatures have been rising due to global heating and the city’s unchecked development, which has created a sprawling urban heat island. Scorching temperatures have made summers increasingly perilous for the city’s 1.4 million people, with mortality and morbidity rates creeping up over the past two decades, but 2020 was a gamechanger when heat related deaths jumped by about 60%. Last year, after another deadly summer, the mayor announced the region’s first dedicated unit to tackle the growing hazard of urban heat, which also threatens the city’s economic viability. “Phoenix is already unlivable in summer for far too many of our residents, who literally didn’t live because it was too hot. Every death is preventable and shows that there’s much much more for us to do to make the city livable and comfortable for everyone,” said David Hondula, the recently appointed director of Phoenix’s heat response and mitigation office. “2020 was a glimpse into the future – it’s the type of summer that could be normal by 2050 or 2080, so that’s what we need to be prepared for so that Phoenix is livable and thriving.” Phoenix is the country’s hottest and fifth most populous city, where businesses and people began flocking when affordable air conditioning became available in the 1950s. The population growth has led to a huge expansion in concrete infrastructure (buildings, roads and carparks) and a reduction in green areas, which has created heat islands – dangerously hot urban areas that absorb and re-emit the sun’s heat more than natural landscapes. Between 95% and 99% of homes in Phoenix have air conditioning, yet in some surveys, as many as a third of residents in the larger metro area, more than a million people, have reported experiencing adverse effects from the heat – suggesting many cannot afford to power or repair their cooling units. Hondula will lead a four-person team with two broad goals: protecting residents when it’s very hot (the heat response part), and coming up with long-term strategies to cool the city and make it more comfortable (the mitigation part). Both require better data, better coordination across government, and money. For instance, the local health department has a highly-rated surveillance system but even then, the final tally and details of summer heat related fatalities are published the following February or March. “That leaves a very short window to plan for the next hot season, and deaths represent only the tip of a big iceberg … We have almost no knowledge about what conditions people experience in their homes,” said Hondula, a climate and health scientist who has spent more than a decade investigating the risks and vulnerabilities associated with heat. The team’s success will be measured in deaths and illness numbers, but the problems and solutions are interconnected: saving lives will require redesigning the city’s heat-trapping concrete landscape, as well as improving access to cooling centers, hydration stations and paramedics. There are quick fire changes, or low-hanging fruit as Hondula puts it, which he thinks could have some immediate impact. For example, too many people have trouble accessing cooling centers when they need them; more signs and longer opening hours would help, as would public health campaigns asking residents who call 911 to stay with the person until first responders arrive. But it will take much broader changes to tackle the root causes driving deaths in the most vulnerable group: middle-aged men experiencing homelessness and substance misuse problems. “To reduce deaths, we need to be thinking way upstream and take steps to ease the housing affordability crisis and improve access to substance abuse and recovery services.” Hondula recently submitted the 2022 heat response plan to city hall, in an attempt to coordinate the existing patchwork of services. “I’m impressed by the number of programs but the death and illness numbers are moving in the wrong direction, so there’s a disconnect we need to address,” he said. “If we mean to take a hazard seriously, relying on good fortune, luck and happenstance is not the best model.” Mitigation will be focused on trees and infrastructure, which will be led by an urban forester and a built environment expert who are yet to be hired. Planting trees is broadly popular and has been touted as a relatively painless fix to combating climate change by world leaders including Donald Trump, Britain’s Boris Johnson and Turkish president Recep Erdoğan. In Phoenix, the city published a tree master plan in 2010, pledging to increase canopy cover to 25% by 2030 (from an estimated 11% to 13% at the time). The city is not on track to meet that goal, and the target may eventually be revised to reflect the city’s broader sustainability and equity goals such as targeting under-shaded neighborhoods and public transit routes where people walk and wait. “Trees are an important part of the plan which residents have been asking for for years, but they aren’t a cure-all for the city,” Hondula said. “But if we could have 30% of a 20-min walking path shaded, it would provide health protection for most summer days,” said Hondula. Money is an issue. So far, the unit doesn’t have a budget for programs but there are options. The heat unit has bid for a slice of the city’s second American rescue plan installment, due in May, to fund a residential tree planting program targeting 25 neighborhoods with the least shade. Engineered shade such as cool pavement – a reflective compound painted over asphalt that reduces the amount of sun absorbed – is being piloted across the city. The results are encouraging, but again Hondula warns against clinging to this as an easy fix. “I don’t think we can go all-in on cool pavement because that commits us to hard infrastructure in places where there might be better uses,” he said. “Our office needs additional land for tree planting that might be land that is currently streets … but any talk about lane reduction or lane removal is a sensitive conversation.” Another sensitive and critical area is the city’s property development gravy train, which for years has been forging ahead faster than its ad hoc mitigation efforts. Hondula acknowledges that getting to grips with the gaps and loopholes in every part of the building process – from zoning and permitting to shade requirements and enforcement – will take time. “There’s a very fast train moving ahead with respect to development and it may be too late for the heat mitigation office to intervene in existing plans. It could be three years down the road before our fingerprint shows up, but we have to accept that these are longer term processes and get working as quickly as we can.” Climate disasters such as deadly heatwaves, wildfires, drought and torrential rain storms are increasingly frequent, costly and deadly and experts agree that slashing greenhouse gas emissions is the only way to limit global heating. But towns and cities are not helpless. In fact, Hondula argues, tackling urban heating could help turn around the city’s livability decline. “All cities have tiny hands on the big lever [of global heating] but the dominant driver of regional climate change has been urbanization, and that’s a lever we do have in our hands as local governments. “Some modeling suggests with widespread deployment of cooling technologies like trees and reflective surfaces, we could end up with a city in the future that is cooler than we have today even with continued global scale warming, which is a very encouraging sign.”According to a number of polls and surveys, significant majorities of Republican-aligned voters seem to believe the big lie that Trump was the rightful winner of the 2020 US presidential election and, consequently, the Biden administration is illegitimate. Taking these data at face value, a growing chorus insists that we’re living in a “post-truth” era, where members of one political party, the Republican party, can no longer tell facts from falsehood. As a result of the Republican party becoming unmoored from reality, the narratives typically continue, America is drifting headlong into a fascist takeover or a civil war. Fortunately for all of us, these dire predictions are almost certainly overblown. We are not living in a “post-truth” world. We are not on the brink of a civil war. The perception that we are is almost purely an artifact of people taking poll and survey data at face value despite overwhelming evidence that we probably shouldn’t. For instance, in the wake of the 2016 election, Trump claimed to have had higher turnout at his inauguration than Barack Obama did. Subsequent polls and surveys presented people with pictures of Obama and Trump’s inauguration crowds and asked which was bigger. Republicans consistently identified the visibly smaller (Trump) crowd as being larger than the other. A narrative quickly emerged that Trump supporters literally couldn’t identify the correct answer; they were so brainwashed that they actually believed that the obviously smaller crowd was, in fact, larger. Of course, a far more obvious and empirically plausible explanation is that respondents knew perfectly well what the correct answer was. However, they also had a sense of how that answer would be used in the media (“Even Trump’s supporters don’t believe his nonsense!”), so they simply declined to give pollsters the response they seemed to be looking for. As a matter of fact, respondents regularly troll researchers in polling and surveys – especially when they are asked whether or not they subscribe to absurd or fringe beliefs, such as birtherism (a conspiracy that held that Barack Obama was born outside of the US and was legally ineligible to serve as president of the United States). However, many academics and pundits do not seem to be in on the joke. Instead, post-2016, a consensus quickly emerged from credulous readings of polls and surveys that America is facing an epidemic of “fake news”, which was leading people to believe things that were obviously false, and to vote for unsavory political candidates. Some of the initial studies on this topic were blatantly prejudicial in their design; other widely shared studies were ultimately retracted. As more reliable data began to emerge, it turned out that, contrary to the initial hysteria, “fake news” stories were viewed by a relatively small number of voters, and infrequently at that. Most of those served pro-Trump or anti-Clinton “fake news” by social media sites already seemed firmly committed to voting for Trump, or intractably resolved against voting for Clinton (which is why the algorithms served them this niche content to begin with). That is, “fake news” is unlikely to have changed many, if any, votes. It is not a plausible explanation for the 2016 electoral outcome nor Trump’s support more broadly. Even people who share “fake news” stories typically never read (or even click on) them. That is, people are not sharing the content because they read the stories, grew convinced of their factual accuracy, and are genuinely trying to inform others. Instead, people typically share these stories based on their headlines, for a whole host of social reasons, while recognizing them to be of questionable accuracy (see here, here, here, here and here for more on this). It should not be surprising, then, that correcting misinformation seems to have virtually no effect on political preferences or voting behavior; misperceptions are generally not driving political alignments to begin with – nor are they driving political polarization. Contrary to narratives that have grown especially ubiquitous in recent years, Americans are actually not very far apart in terms of most empirical facts. We do not live in separate realities. Instead, people begin to polarize on their public positions on factual matters only after those issues have become politicized. And even then, polarized answers on polls and surveys often fail to reflect participants’ genuine views. Indeed, when respondents are provided with incentives to answer questions accurately (instead of engaging in partisan cheerleading), the difference between Democrats and Republicans on factual matters often collapses. In other cases, apparent disagreements about factual matters often turn out to be, at bottom, debates about how various facts are framed and interpreted, or disputes about the policies that are held to flow from the facts. That is, even in cases of genuine disagreement, there is typically less dispute about the facts themselves than about what the facts mean – morally or practically speaking. All said, measuring misperceptions is a fraught enterprise – even when it comes to banal and politically uncontested facts. Attempting to draw inferences about “incorrect” views on matters tied political, moral and/or identity struggles is a far more complicated endeavor. These are not data that lend themselves to being taken at face value. Similar realities hold for the data that purportedly show we’re on the brink of a new civil war. There is strong evidence that many of the surveys and polls indicating support for, or openness towards, political violence hugely overstate actual levels of support in the American public. Likewise, data that purport to show high levels of partisan vitriol may be misleading. In general, behaviors are often a stronger indicator than attitudinal data for understanding how sincere or committed people are to a cause or idea. The number of people who are willing to rhetorically endorse some extraordinary belief tends to be much, much higher than the subset who meaningfully behave as if that claim is true. The number of people who profess commitment to some cause tends to be much, much higher than the share who are willing to make sacrifices or life adjustments in order to advance that cause. The big lie is no exception. Both the low levels of turnout and the relatively low levels of violence are extraordinary if we take the polls and surveys at face value. Event organizers were expecting, “hundreds of thousands, if not millions” to take part in the January 6 uprising. This would be reasonable to expect in a world where tens of millions of Americans literally believed that an apparently high-stakes election was stolen out from under them. Even if just 1% of those who purportedly believe in the big lie had bothered to show up, the demonstrations would have been hundreds of thousands strong. Instead, they only mustered 2,500 participants (according to US government estimates). The lack of casualties was also striking, even when one considers injuries and indirect fatalities. After all, the former president also enjoyed strong support among people who are armed and formally trained in combat, such as active duty and veteran military and law enforcement. A large number of other Trump supporters participate in militias, or are private gun owners. Yet most January 6 participants did not bring firearms, and those who were armed did not discharge their weapons – not even in the heat of the violence that broke out. The only person shot in the entire uprising, Ashli Babbitt, was killed by a law enforcement officer. In fact, Babbitt was actually the only homicide to occur on that day. Two other rioters died from heart problems, another from a drug overdose. Police officer Brian Sicknick died from strokes on 7 January; the medical examiner ultimately concluded that this was unrelated to any injuries sustained during January 6. In the months that followed, four other police officers would perish by suicide. All said, then, a total of nine deaths have been associated with the events of January 6 (directly or indirectly). Not one person, however, was actually killed by the rioters. Nor is a single bullet alleged to have been fired by the rioters, despite many participants allegedly possessing guns. In a world where 74 million voted for Trump, and more than two-thirds of these (ie more than 50 million people, roughly one out of every five adults in the US) actually believed that the other party had illegally seized power and now plan to use that power to harm people like themselves, the events of January 6 would likely have played out much, much differently. Indeed, had even the 2,500 people who assembled on the Capitol arrived armed to the hilt, with a plan to seize power by force, committed to violence as “needed” to achieve their goals – things would have gone much, much differently. Instead, most participants showed up expecting Trump would provide them with definitive evidence for his claims of electoral malfeasance, and then unveil some master plan to take the country back. This didn’t happen. Those gathered seemed to have no idea what to do after that. Most of what followed was spontaneous, not planned. Even when they breached the Capitol, most had no information about the layout of the building, little knowledge about the proceedings they were ostensibly striving to disrupt, and no clear agenda of what to do once they got inside. There was a small number, dozens perhaps, who showed up to the Capitol with a clear intent to forcibly overturn the election – who equipped themselves for violence, researched the congressional proceedings and the layout of the building, developed and executed a plan, etc. These are behaviors consistent with a sincere belief in the big lie, and a strong commitment to doing something “about” it. Yet, critically, even these actors were operating independently of Trump, motivated in part by frustration with the former president’s apparent inaction. In their telling, Trump himself wasn’t acting like he believed his own rhetoric. There was no urgency. There was no “fire”. There was no focus. There was no plan. The Oath Keepers hoped to engage in a radical act that would push the president to actually behave as if the election was stolen and the republic was on the line. As their leader (currently arrested on sedition charges) put it: “All I see Trump doing is complaining. I see no intent by him to do anything. So the patriots are taking it into their own hands. They’ve had enough. We’re going to defend the president, the duly elected president, and we call on him to do what needs to be done to save our country.” Of course, even tiny numbers of genuine extremists like these can be extremely destabilizing under the right circumstances. Had Oath Keepers breached the Capitol instead of being repelled (even as Q-Shaman, Confederate Flag Guy et al wandered the building aimlessly) … January 6 could have played out much differently. Nonetheless, there is a huge difference in talking about identifying and disrupting small numbers of highly committed individuals willing to engage in revolutionary political violence v tens of millions of Americans genuinely believing the election was fraudulent and being open to violence as a means of rectifying the situation. Those are very different problems. Orders of magnitude different. The good news is that the second problem, the tens-of-millions-of-Americans problem, is not real. It is an artifact of politicized polling design and survey responses, followed by overly credulous interpretations of those results by academics and pundits who are committed to a narrative that half the electorate is evil, ignorant, stupid, deranged and otherwise dangerous. In fact, rather than January 6 serving as a prelude to a civil war, the US saw lower levels of death from political violence in 2021 than in any other year since the turn of the century. Even as violent crime approached record highs across much of the country, fatalities from political violence dropped. This is not an outcome that seems consistent with large and growing shares of the population supposedly leaning towards settling the culture wars with bullets instead of ballots. This turn of events does not seem consistent with the notion that tens of millions of Americans – including large numbers of military, law enforcement and militia members – literally believe the presidency was stolen, elections can no longer be trusted, and the fate of the country is on the line. Indeed, far from giving up on elections, Republican voters are reveling in the prospect of taking back one or both chambers of Congress at the end of this year; they are eagerly awaiting the midterms (likely for good reason). In truth, most Republican voters likely don’t believe in the big lie. But many would nonetheless profess to believe it in polls and surveys – just as they’d support politicians who make similar professions (according to one estimate, Republican candidates who embrace the big lie enjoy a 6 percentage point electoral boost as compared to Republicans who publicly affirm the 2020 electoral results). Within contemporary rightwing circles, a rhetorical embrace of the big lie is perceived as an act of defiance against prevailing elites. It is recognized as a surefire means to “trigger” people on the other team. A demonstrated willingness to endure blowback (from Democrats, media, academics, social media companies et al) for publicly striking this “defiant” position is interpreted as evidence of solidarity with, and commitment to, “the people” instead of special interests; it’s taken as a sign that one is not beholden to “the Establishment” and its rules. That is, the big lie seems to be more about social posturing than making sincere truth claims. For many reasons, this situation is also far from ideal. But it’s a very different (and much smaller) problem than partisans actually inhabiting different epistemic worlds and lurching towards a civil war. Glass half full. Musa al-Gharbi is a Paul F Lazarsfeld fellow in sociology at Columbia UniversityAustralia’s expert immunisation advisers are still considering whether to expand the definition of “fully vaccinated” to mean three Covid jabs, while some state and territory leaders have indicated they may be approaching the peak of their Omicron waves. National cabinet met for the 65th time on Thursday, with the capacity of the health system, the vaccine rollout and supply chains topping the agenda. As he did prior to last week’s meeting, Daniel Andrews raised his support for mandating a third or booster dose in order for an Australian to be considered fully vaccinated. “This is not a two-dose thing, of two doses and a bonus,” he told reporters on Thursday as Victoria recorded 15 deaths and 13,755 new infections. “International evidence, our own experience, the views of experts and hopefully the confirmation of both Atagi and national cabinet later today will mean that everyone knows and understands that this is a three-dose project.” Andrews said he believed it “will be very soon be three doses to get the green tick” to enter restaurants, bars, cafes, hairdressers and beauty services. But the Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation (Atagi) is still considering its stance, with federal government sources indicating that advice will be finalised soon. In a written statement issued on Thursday night, Morrison said national cabinet had discussed “approaches to test, trace, isolate and quarantine, including the use of rapid antigen tests (RATs) and the vaccine rollout and booster programme”. Morrison said more than 7.1m booster doses had been administered to date. “More than 61% of Australians aged 70 years of age and over have had a booster in the last 12 weeks since the booster program commenced,” he said. New South Wales health minister Brad Hazzard had earlier in the day pleaded with people to get a booster, saying the state’s rate of only 36% of eligible people getting a third dose was “ridiculous”. National cabinet also discussed difficulties in encouraging vaccination among Indigenous Australians, including misinformation in some communities. Speaking in Moruya during a campaign visit on Thursday, the federal Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, also expressed support for a three-dose threshold to be considered fully vaccinated. “We need to follow the health advice. And I have no doubt that over a period of time, it will be considered that you have to have a booster in order to be considered fully vaccinated,” he told reporters. “We know that the protection reduces over a period of time. And I just encourage everyone who’s eligible to do so.” After last week’s meeting, Morrison said the change had been an item of national cabinet discussion for some time, but would only be taken “on the basis of medical advice”. While encouraging all Australians to get a booster, the prime minister said the “practical implications” of mandating three doses would be “limited”, and the federal government only supported booster mandates in certain health, disability and aged care settings. “At this stage we’re not seeing … any lack of demand for getting boosters, quite the opposite. And so whether it became a third dose or a booster, I think you’d continue to see people turning up and getting it, and that’s the outcome we want,” Morrison said. At Thursday’s national cabinet, states and territories reported that pressure on hospital and intensive care admissions was slowly decreasing. However, health experts have warned of an increase in Covid cases with the onset of winter, and the states also expect a rise in case numbers when surveillance testing of school students with the return to classrooms in coming weeks. Australia recorded another 46,000 cases in the past 24 hours, including 17,316 in New South Wales, 11,600 in Queensland, and 1,953 in South Australia. While case numbers are decreasing from peaks over the holiday season, Covid deaths remain relatively high in some states, with 73 recorded nationwide on Thursday. South Australia logged its equal-highest daily death toll with 13, while 29 fatalities were recorded in NSW. In a statement after national cabinet, Australian Capital Territory chief minister Andrew Barr said his jurisdiction “has likely now reached the peak of this outbreak and should start to see a gradual decrease in hospitalisation in coming weeks”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Barr also said he expected the ACT to add 16- and 17-year-olds to the booster program “shortly”. The federal health department said Atagi was “not currently recommending booster doses for people aged under 18”. National cabinet reached in-principle agreement on truck licensing arrangements amid concerns about supply chain disruptions. Morrison said that “as an immediate priority” all states and territories would enact measures to allow New Zealand citizens to use their equivalent New Zealand heavy vehicle licence in Australia for 12 months, before being required to obtain an Australian licence. He said the states and territories would also extend similar arrangements to interstate Australian drivers “to ensure Australian drivers are not disadvantaged”. He characterised it as a “temporary Covid-19 response measure” to be reviewed after 12 months. There are also plans to allow truck licence progression to occur on the basis of passing competency and skills tests rather than purely being based on time. The federal government believes this will make truck licensing safer and faster, but this measure is not due to be in force until about mid-2022. Morrison said national cabinet “noted that recent changes in isolation requirements for essential transport workers have significantly eased the pressure points for transport operators”. National cabinet is due to meet again in two weeks’ time.Neil Young’s music is in the process of being removed from Spotify after the music streaming platform refused to take down Joe Rogan’s podcast, after the musician objected to it spreading vaccine misinformation. In an open letter to his manager that was later taken down, Young called on the company to remove Rogan’s podcast or his music. He said: “I want you to let Spotify know immediately TODAY that I want all my music off their platform … They can have Rogan or Young. Not both.” We would like to hear your reaction to Spotify removing Young’s music and deciding not to take down Rogan’s podcast. Share your thoughts You can get in touch by filling in the form below. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.The sandwich-maker Greencore could face a shareholder rebellion on Thursday over plans to pay out hundreds of thousands of pounds in executive bonuses despite failing to refund any of the near-£30m it received in government Covid support during the pandemic. Investors voting at Greencore’s annual general meeting may heed warnings from the shareholder adviser firms Glass Lewis and ISS, which have suggested they reject Greencore’s remuneration report. Both advisers have raised concerns over the “appropriateness” of Greencore’s bonus payments given its reliance on cash from the government furlough scheme, which subsidised staff salaries with state funds during the Covid outbreak. The company has defended its use of government funding, noting the severe drop in profits it suffered at the height of the pandemic, when lockdown orders hit food-to-go sales at some of its biggest customers, including the supermarkets M&amp;S, Sainsbury’s and the Co-op. Greencore, which is headquartered in Ireland, swung to a £10.8m loss in 2020, from a £56.4m profit a year earlier. Greencore subsequently tapped the state furlough programme for £21.3m in 2020, and a further £8.7m in 2021. While none of that taxpayer-funded cash has been repaid, Greencore paid €343,000 (£286,000) in share-based bonuses to its chief financial officer, Emma Hynes, for 2021, bringing her total pay to €895,000. The company also granted a £600,000 bonus to its chief executive, Patrick Coveney, but he will not receive his payout given he plans to leave the company to lead the travel caterer SSP by March this year. Glass Lewis said it was concerned about Greencore’s decision-making in light of the Covid-19 pandemic, “particularly the payment of a deferred bonus award to the executives in the context of the stakeholder experience, and the company’s receipt of furlough money from the UK government”. “We are unable to recommend that shareholders support this proposal,” the Glass Lewis shareholder report explained. Investors who heed its recommendations could embarrass the company by voting against its remuneration report at Thursday morning’s annual shareholder meeting. In a statement, the company said the pandemic had a “significant and prolonged impact” on the profitability of the business and that no bonuses were paid in 2020, when its board also took a temporary cut in fees and salaries. However, it said that improving finances in 2021 and the “outstanding contribution of the management team” meant that the executive bonuses were “considered by the board to be appropriate”. “We are hugely grateful for the liquidity support that we have received from our investors, and for the UK government’s furlough scheme which helped us navigate our way through this challenging period with minimal redundancies,” Greencore said in its statement. It stressed the bonuses were only paid out in deferred shares, rather than cash, that will only be distributed after a total of five years and said it would conduct a review before doing so. “Greencore has consulted extensively with its shareholders on its remuneration policy, and is pleased with the level of support that it has received,” it said. Greencore, which grew out of Ireland’s former state-owned sugar beet industry and has nine facilities in the UK, claims to be the largest sandwich-maker in the world.Xiomara Castro has been sworn in as the first female president of Honduras on Thursday, marking the culmination of a remarkable rise to power that began just over 12 years ago when she led a massive protest movement in response to the ousting of her husband, former president Manuel “Mel” Zelaya, in a military-backed coup. Castro’s resounding victory in the 28 November election has generated hope for a new era for women in the country with the highest rate of femicide in Latin America and some of the region’s most draconian laws with regards to reproductive rights. “In her plan for government she took us into account,” said Regina Fonseca, director of the Centre for the Rights of Women in Honduras. “That gives us enormous hope to return to life.” Activists are optimistic that Castro, of the center-left Libre party, will not only take actions that help improve conditions for women in the immediate, but also accelerate broader changes in the country’s culture. “This small break in the patriarchy that her win represents can become bigger and bigger, in the sense that it can open even more spaces for participation in government and political participation in general for women in the country,” said Carmen Haydée, a human rights lawyer and representative of the feminist group Luchemos. Among the first order of business, Castro is expected to undo a prohibition against emergency contraceptives enacted in the wake of the coup. Honduras is the only country in Latin America with absolute bans on both abortion and emergency contraceptives. As a result, women who have been raped have been forced to seek out emergency contraceptives on the black market. Since emergency contraceptives were outlawed by decree, Castro will be able to act unilaterally to undo the ban. When it comes to abortion, however, the situation is much more complex. In her plan for government Castro included a proposal to legalize abortion in the case of rape, when the mother’s life is at risk and when the fetus is not viable. But last year, conservative legislators approved a constitutional reform that raised the threshold needed to modify the country’s total abortion ban to 75% of congress. When a measure similar to Castro’s proposal was placed before congress in 2017, only eight of the 128 legislators voted in favor. Although Castro’s party has made gains in congress since then, the legislature remains controlled by conservatives – including many from her own party. “It seems to me that our fight will continue to be within the judiciary to achieve that change,” said Fonseca. “With this congress as it is, it will not be possible.” Castro’s proposal – the first such proposal from a president in Honduras – is nonetheless significant. “I do believe that Xiomara’s openness to that possibility does allow us to generate spaces for dialogue, reflection, awareness and discussion,” said Fonseca. On the issue of femicide, there is much more political will to act, but the challenge is no less daunting. “We know that it will not be resolved in four years, but we are also certain that much can be sown and fertilized so that a future free of violence for girls and women flourishes,” said Fonseca. Women’s rights groups have been working with members of Castro’s transition team to draft a violence against women law that will address deficiencies in the justice system that have led to disturbingly high levels of impunity. Castro has also proposed the establishment of shelters for women who are survivors of domestic violence, more inclusive economic development and the implementation of an integral sexual education program in schools. “It’s a question of reinforcing in schools the values of respect, values of equality, values of positive identities for girls, that it is understood that women are also human, nothing more and nothing less,” said Fonseca. In that regard, Castro’s mere existence as president of the nation could have a positive effect. As the presidential sash is placed across her shoulders, countless girls and young women will be watching from across the country. “I think that inevitably what girls are going to be thinking is that I can also be her, eventually I can also aspire to that, and that opens up a whole world of possibilities regarding your place in society,” said Haydée.A 1,600-hectare (4,000-acre) gated community, dubbed El Paraíso Verde, or the Green Paradise, is being carved out of the fertile red earth of Caazapá, one of Paraguay’s poorest regions. The community’s population – consisting mainly of German, Austrian and Swiss immigrants – will eventually swell from 150 to 3,000, according to the owners. The project’s website bills it as “by far the largest urbanization and settlement project in South America”, describing the colony as a refuge from “socialist trends of current economic and political situations worldwide” – as well as “5G, chemtrails, fluoridated water, mandatory vaccinations and healthcare mandates”. Immigration to the colony has stepped up since the start of the Covid-19 pandemic, with residents interviewed on its YouTube channel attributing their move to scepticism about the virus and vaccines. Caazapá, a rural region dominated by cattle ranching in the heart of lush eastern Paraguay, saw a jump from four new German residents in 2019 to 101 in 2021, according to official figures. “Anti-vaxxer” immigrants have also been reported settling in other parts of Paraguay. One German citizen who lives nearby and who does business with Paraíso Verde, cited discredited conspiracy theories about coronavirus vaccines to explain the surge. They claimed that Paraguay’s accommodating immigration laws have proved attractive to Germans who want to “escape the matrix” and flee the “deep state and one world order”. “Many older people are coming. They understand that many people are dying in care homes [after vaccination],” said the German, who asked not to be named. “And the others, in their 40s, are trying to bring their children over here to escape.” But the appearance of an insular colony of Europeans has been watched with concern by some in the nearby the regional capital, also named Caazapá. “Why are they here? We don’t know, but we want to find out,” said Rodney Mereles, a former municipal councillor. On its YouTube channel, Paraíso Verde shares videos describing the pandemic which has killed some 5.5 million people as “non-existent”, promoting false, dangerous Covid “miracle cures”, and advertising Paraguay as a country without pandemic restrictions – despite the government’s clear health protocols. Even as Paraguay recorded the world’s highest Covid death rate per capita in June 2021, the colony shared videos of large parties in violation of restrictions. In Germany, sections of society radicalised by the refugee crisis of 2015 have proved a fertile ground for disinformation and conspiracy theories about the pandemic. The far-right Alternative für Deutschland party has tried to revive its waning electoral fortunes by railing against lockdown measures, mask mandates and vaccines. And a small minority of those sceptics have decided to head abroad, with Bulgaria reported as another popular destination. The presence in Caazapá of a large group of Covid skeptics worries local health authorities. Dr Nadia Riveros, Caazapá’s head of public health, said the pandemic had been devastating for the region, which has no ICU beds and only one fully equipped ambulance. “We don’t want to go through that again. I think foreigners, wherever they’re from, should have to get vaccinated before entering the country,” she said. And as Paraguay faces a quickly escalating third wave of Covid while struggling to improve on the second-lowest vaccination rate in South America, the health ministry announced this month that non-resident foreigners entering the country must now present vaccination certificates. At least six German nationals without vaccination certificates have been refused entry since this new regulation came into force. Paraguay has a long and sometimes troubled history of inward-looking immigrant colonies driven by ideological and religious zeal. Settlement projects by Mennonites, Australian socialists and the Unification church among others have all left marks on the country. Paraguay’s most notorious settlement was Nueva Germania, the proto-fascist colony set up in 1886 by Elizabeth Nietzsche – the philosopher’s sister – and her husband Bernhard Förster. Förster died, probably by suicide, as Nueva Germania sank under the weight of financial problems, internal conflict and settlers’ lack of agricultural knowledge. While Nietzsche and Förster envisioned an Aryan colony untouched by Jewish influence, El Paraíso Verde’s founder and leader Erwin Annau has spoken of preserving Germanic peoples from the presence of Islam and – on a website that was recently taken offline – questioned the blame allocated to Germany for the second world war. In a 2017 speech given before members of the Paraguayan government, Annau said: “Islam is not part of Germany. We are enlightened Christians, and we are concerned about our daughters. We see the Qur’an as [containing] an ideology of political domination, which is not compatible with democratic and Christian values.” Paraguay itself has a small but well-established Muslim community in several major cities. Abdun Nur Baten, missionary for the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community of Paraguay, highlighted the apparent contradiction in Annau’s comments. “They say Muslim immigrants don’t integrate, that they don’t adopt German culture or German norms, that they’re not assimilating. So it’s very hypocritical to go to another land and do exactly what you are accusing Muslims of doing: it’s beyond funny how hypocritical it is,” Nur Baten said. He said his community would welcome peaceful dialogue with Paraíso Verde. But despite concerns in the local community, Paraíso Verde is backed by increasing political and economic power. The group has frequently met with local and national officials, and claims to have held meetings with Paraguayan health authorities to lobby against tighter Covid regulations. Gladys Rojas, a former president of Caazapá town council, claimed that Paraíso Verde was protected by links to the political faction of the former Paraguayan president Horacio Cartes. Cartes is a controversial businessman who has repeatedly contested allegations he is linked to cigarette smuggling, but is considered Paraguay’s richest and most powerful person. Two members of the Cartes family have been board members of Reljuv, a company owned by Paraíso Verde, and in recent municipal elections, the company’s president, Juan Buker, was heavily involved in election campaigns for candidates backed by Cartes. “They’ve got politicians and money on their side,” said Rojas, adding that many in Caazapá, the region with the highest rate of extreme poverty in Paraguay, were reluctant to ask questions as the colony has become the area’s biggest employer. Rojas currently faces trespass charges over protests to protect Isla Susu, a nature reserve that experienced heavy environmental damage during construction works at Paraíso Verde. The settlement later paid a fine for the damage. On a recent afternoon, the Guardian travelled along the dirt road from the town of Caazapá to Paraíso Verde. Close to the long perimeter fence, groups of residents strolled along the track in the slowly softening sun. At the entrance gate, a Reljuv employee emerged, flanked by guards armed with long guns. After rejecting the possibility of entry or an interview, the employee aggressively demanded to examine identity documents of all present, even as the reporter attempted to leave. “You know what to do,” the employee repeated, confusingly. Paraíso Verde did not respond to repeated requests for comment.A cabinet minister has argued that the national insurance rise should go ahead as planned despite Tory rebels reportedly pushing for it to be scrapped as the price for their support of Boris Johnson’s leadership. Thérèse Coffey, the work and pensions secretary, said there were no “dissenting voices” in government pushing for the increase to be ditched, or pushed back, ahead of its introduction on 6 April. With Johnson under intense pressure over two investigations into alleged rule-breaking parties in Downing Street and Whitehall, the prime minister has reportedly been urged to U-turn on the tax rise by MPs he is meeting for one-to-one chats in his Commons office. Critical MPs have felt emboldened to make demands of Johnson given his tenuous position, while he waits for the findings of a civil service inquiry led by Sue Gray – expected within days – and a separate Metropolitan police inquiry. Despite some backbench Tories clamouring for the national insurance rise not to go ahead, only five of the party’s MPs voted against it in September. Coffey said she “genuinely” did not know when the long-awaited Gray report would be released, but suggested there was not expected to be any change to the introduction of the levy, which is being used to clear the NHS backlog due to Covid before it will be spent on social care. “It should go ahead. That’s what’s been decided,” she told Times Radio. She added: “Parliament voted for the levy, it’s designed to support the NHS and future NHS support as well. It’s set to be happening in April, I see no reason why that will change.” After some cabinet ministers were said to be nervous about the tax hike’s introduction at a time of sharply rising inflation and when the energy price cap is increased, Coffey denied there was any government split. “I’m not aware of any dissenting voices,” she said. Johnson’s position could become even more precarious after new evidence appeared to contradict his claim it was “complete nonsense” he had anything to do with approving the evacuation of animals from Afghanistan looked after by the charity Nowzad. Fresh emails from the Foreign Office showed officials confirmed on 25 August 2021 “the PM has just authorised their staff and animals to be evacuated” – despite thousands of people being left behind during the frantic military withdrawal from Kabul. Coffey dismissed the revelation, saying Johnson “didn’t make any individual decisions about evacuations”. She added: “A lot of people will claim that the PM is involved in supporting their particular pet projects but the PM said he wasn’t involved in individual decisions, that is what the defence secretary, who was in charge of Operation Pitting overall, has said as well.” New rules for unemployed workers receiving state benefits are due to come into force – cutting the time they can spend looking purely for work similar to their previous job from three months to four weeks. Coffey told LBC: “We know there are plenty of jobs and we have plenty of people who receive benefits every week while they are looking for work, and we’re intensifying our approach.” She added: “There are over a million jobs to be filled and we’re going to help people get into those.” Despite the mounting pressure on Johnson and Labour accusing him of having been caught lying again, it emerged overnight that he could have been given a significant political reprieve. The Times reported that the executive of the 1922 Committee, which would oversee a vote of no confidence, decided against cutting the length of time a leader is immune to facing another ballot from 12 months to six. It means if 54 Tory MPs submit a letter declaring no confidence in Johnson, a vote of the whole party will be held – but another cannot be called for at least a year.Ukrainian police have detained a national guard soldier who is suspected of shooting security guards at a military factory for unknown reasons, killing five people and injuring five others, the interior minister has said. The shooting took place in the early hours of Thursday in Dnipro at the Pivdenmash missile factory during the issuance of weapons to the guards, the ministry said in a statement. Police said four servicemen and one civilian woman were among the victims. The suspect “has been detained by police”, the interior minister, Denys Monastyrsky, said on Facebook, after the soldier was reported to have fled the scene in possession of a weapon. Monastyrsky added that five people were injured in the shooting and “doctors are fighting to save their lives”. “Following my order, a commission will be set up to study the circumstances that led to these actions being taken by a 21-year-old soldier, who had been called to defend his country and be responsible for security – and not to shoot his colleagues,” said Monastyrsky. Ukraine’s deputy interior minister, Anton Gerashchenko, said on Facebook investigators would look into how the soldier, Artem Ryabchuk, passed a medical commission that allowed him access to weapons. “In any case, he will suffer the most severe punishment for the mass murder. Now the most important thing is to find and detain Artem Ryabchuk as soon as possible before he has time to commit new crimes,” Gerashchenko said. The incident occurred at about 3.40am local time (1.40am UK), the ministry said, when the shooter was being issued the weapon at the beginning of a shift. The Yuzhmash facility is an aerospace factory that produces and tests material related to defence, aeronautics and agriculture, according to its website. The ministry’s statement said the shooter was born in 2001 and there was an ongoing operation to locate him. “The motives for the crime are not yet known,” it said, adding that a commander of the national guard, Nikolai Balan, had been sent to the scene. Bullying rituals plagued militaries of former Soviet countries in the 1990s – a trend that rights groups say has improved, but regularly results in suicides and murders.Today (Thursday 27 January) marks the 2,500th instalment of the Guardian’s Politics Live blog with Andrew Sparrow, with over a decade bringing Guardian readers all over the world the day’s political stories live from Westminster. Beginning as a daily general election blog in March 2010 before launching as Politics Live with Andrew Sparrow in May 2010, the first edition covered the Tory-Lib Dem coalition and news of George Osborne’s plans to cut public spending. The hugely popular blog has amassed over 1 billion page views in its lifetime, and now regularly attracts more than 10,000 comments a day. The blog has published over 17 million words since 2016 alone – the equivalent of around 250 novels or 30 copies of War and Peace. Most of that has come from Andrew although, now the blog is such a permanent feature on the website, other Guardian journalists contribute too. Andrew Sparrow, political correspondent, Guardian News &amp; Media says: “In late 2009, the Guardian website led with my Iraq inquiry blog for days, as opposed to a conventional news story. This was a breakthrough moment and showed a huge appetite from readers wanting instant news and reaction in a growing digital world. I then ran a daily general election blog in 2010 and after the election was over it just kept going as Politics Live. Now I am 2,500 editions in and the blog has reached over 1 billion page views – it’s astounding! “I have always thought of blogging as the first draft of journalism. It may not be the final word, but it’s deeply rewarding, especially in politics with round-the-clock breaking news and reader appetite for snap verdicts. Live blogging offers the space to tell these stories quickly and differently and in great detail, and to engage with readers about it on a minute by minute basis.” Katharine Viner, editor-in-chief, Guardian News &amp; Media says: “Andrew Sparrow’s live blog has played an essential part in Guardian readers’ lives for a generation, offering commentary and analysis from Britain’s best political blogger. Andrew’s blog is a real Guardian success story – we’ve never had so many readers to it and it’s great to see his reporting continuing to capture peoples’ attention over a decade on.” The 2,500th edition of Politics Live follows an award-winning year for Guardian and Observer journalism, including the news website of the year award at the Press Awards and news provider of the year at the British Journalism Awards. Notes to editors About Guardian News &amp; Media Guardian News &amp; Media (GNM) publishes theguardian.com, one of the world’s leading English-language news websites. Traffic from outside of the UK now represents around two-thirds of the Guardian’s total digital audience. In the UK, GNM publishes the Guardian newspaper six days a week, first published in 1821, and the world’s oldest Sunday newspaper, The Observer.The death of a five-year-old boy whose family had had previous contact with authorities is to be reviewed by child safeguarding experts. Dylan Scanlon, a “happy, funny and cheeky little boy”, was pronounced dead by emergency services who responded to an incident at his home in Oldham on New Year’s Eve. Greater Manchester police (GMP) said its investigation into how Dylan died was still ongoing. Dylan’s death will now be the focus of a child safeguarding review, expected to be launched in the coming days, following previous contact between his family and the authorities. GMP said it had referred itself to the Independent Office for Police Conduct because its officers had been in contact with the family before the incident. Officers were called by the ambulance service to the property in the Limeside area of Oldham, at 6.20pm on 31 December. Dylan was pronounced dead at the scene and a woman in her 30s was detained under the Mental Health Act. A spokesperson for Oldham council said: “A review of Dylan’s case is currently under way. We expect this to progress to a full child safeguarding practice review, the findings of which will be published in due course. “That child safeguarding practice review will be carried out by an independent author, with the full cooperation of Oldham council and other partners. “It will examine the circumstances around Dylan’s death and look into how organisations, including the council, were involved with Dylan during his life.” In a statement released by GMP, Dylan’s father said: “Dylan was my best mate. “He was a happy, funny and cheeky little boy, who was full of excitement – especially about doing new things. “Dylan loved going to school, playing with his friends and dogs and going for drives with me to parks and lakes. He loved being at the lake but not walking around it – he was there for the ice-cream, a ride on Daddy’s shoulders and a McDonald’s on the way home. “His favourite times of year were Christmas and his birthday – he knew he’d be spoiled.” He added: “I’ve been looking through memories on my phone – videos of him crawling and learning how to walk. I will always remember his face when I got home from work – he was always happy to see me and I loved spending any time with him that I could. “Dylan will be sadly missed by all family and friends, especially his brother, who he loved and absolutely adored. I loved watching them playing with each other, looking after each other and just doing what brothers do.”Good morning. With the news yesterday that Justice Stephen Breyer will retire from the supreme court, Joe Biden now has the opportunity to not only fulfil a campaign promise, but to solidify his legacy. CNN is reporting that Biden and Breyer are set to make a public appearance today to formally announce Breyer’s retirement. At 83, Breyer is the oldest member of the highest court in the country, one of the three liberals outnumbered by six conservatives. Biden had promised to make sure there would be a Black woman on the supreme court if he was elected president. Court watchers have already thrown out a number of possibilities of who Biden could nominate to take Breyer’s place, including several US court of appeals judges and US district court judges, an associate supreme court justice of California and Sherrilyn Ifill, president and director-counsel of the Legal Defense and Educational Fund at the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People US says Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline won’t open if Russia invades Ukraine As tensions continue to rise at the Ukraine border, the US has strengthen its stance on the strategically vital gas supply between Russia and Germany, the Nord Stream 2, saying it won’t open if Russia invades Ukraine. Emily Haber, Germany’s ambassador to Washington, appeared to endorse a hardening of the position, saying on Twitter that “the US and Germany jointly declared last summer: if Russia uses energy as a weapon or if there is another violation of Ukraine’s sovereignty, Russia will have to pay a high price”. Tennessee school board bans Pulitzer prize-winning Holocaust novel The graphic novel, Maus: A Survivor’s Tale, uses hand-drawn illustrations of mice and cats to depict how the author’s parents survived Auschwitz during the Holocaust. Ten school board members in McMinn county, Tennessee have cited the eight curse words and an illustration of a naked cartoon mouse in the novel as reason enough to ban it. Art Spiegelman, the author, said he was baffled by the decision. “I’ve met so many young people who … have learned things from my book,” Spiegelman said. “I also understand that Tennessee is obviously demented. There’s something going on very, very haywire there.” Spotify removes Neil Young music in feud over Joe Rogan’s false Covid claims In an open letter to his manager and record label, Neil Young accused music streaming platform Spotify of allowing the propagation of vaccine misinformation by Joe Rogan’s podcast, The Joe Rogan Experience. In 2020, Rogan signed a $100m deal that gave the streaming giant exclusive rights to his show. “I want you to let Spotify know immediately TODAY that I want all my music off their platform,” Young wrote. “They can have Rogan or Young. Not both.” In other news … The first female president of Honduras, Xiomara Castro, is set to be sworn in today, making history as she faces daunting challenges before her. Tesla sees record profits in what it called a “breakthrough year”, with demand for the electric car soaring despite supply chain struggles. Amy Schneider’s 40-win Jeopardy streak has been broken by a new champion, but Schneider, the game’s second-longest running champion, remains a history-maker as a transgender woman becoming a visible symbol of achievement for often-marginalized people. Officials have cleared a homeless encampment ahead of the Super Bowl near the California stadium where the game is set to take place in a few weeks, inciting accusations of trying to disappear the poor. Stat of the day: reports of hate crimes against Asian Americans in San Francisco rose by 567% in the last year Preliminary data from the San Francisco police department showed that reports of hate crimes against Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders increased dramatically, from 2020 t0 2021, as across the US, reports of hate incidents against Asian Americans have jumped during the pandemic. Police warn that the figures in San Francisco are probably an undercount because hate crime incidents are underreported. Don’t miss this: anti-vaxxers making bank on Substack Vaccine skeptics are making at least $2.5m a year publishing newsletters on Substack for their hundreds of thousands of followers, according to new research by the Center for Countering Digital Hate. Climate check: too hot to handle Phoenix, the capital of Arizona and home of 1.4 million people, is America’s hottest city and is nearly unlivable for some in the summer. Almost 200 people died from extreme heat in 2020 – the hottest, driest and deadliest summer on record with 53 days topping 110F (43C) – with people experiencing homelessness and addictions dying disproportionately. Want more environmental stories delivered to your inbox? Sign up to our new newsletter Down to Earth to get original and essential reporting on the climate crisis every week Last Thing: West Elm Caleb Author and writer Nancy Jo Sales explores the latest dating app phenomenon of “West Elm Caleb” – and how West Elm Caleb is merely a consequence of the misogyny and womanizing that comes with dating apps giving unvetted straight men unfettered access to women. Sign up First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comWinning tip: Winding lanes, Northamptonshire I recommend a Northamptonshire countryside route that combines winding lanes bordered by fields, chocolate-box villages, manor houses and the execution spot of Mary Queen of Scots, Fotheringhay Castle. I like to make a circular route starting in Fotheringhay up to Nassington, on to Yarwell and Kingscliff, then head back via Apethorpe Palace and Woodnewton. This route is about 14 miles, but you can lengthen and shorten the route depending on your energy level by adding in or taking out villages. I like to rely on the signposts to navigate, rather than my phone. Make sure to look out for hares, red kites and fallow deer along the route, and post-ride there are some lovely local pubs with open fires. Imogen Chappelow Epping Forest, with refreshments There is a route through Epping Forest from Epping to Loughton that is wide, well-marked and has enough flat and hilly terrain to keep all skill levels happy. Aside from that, it is well served for refreshments by the Forest Gate Inn at one end and the Victoria Tavern at the other. The flora and fauna is always stunning, but in winter the quieter runs and stark beauty means any encounter with wildlife is accentuated. Keiran Ice-free along the Thames As a cyclist in London, I spend most of my summer weekends escaping to the delights of the North Downs or the Surrey Hills. However, in winter, the higher roads can stay icy, even when those in town are clear. So to avoid the winter road roulette, I take to the Thames cycle path. This runs from source to sea, but for a lunchtime or post-work training ride I tend to take in the sections between Tower Bridge and Woolwich. They are flat and well paved and tend to stay ice-free, with plenty of warm drink and snack options to keep those winter miles fuelled! You also get to admire a world heritage site in Greenwich as well as some spectacular engineering as you roll past the Thames flood barrier. Dan Lord of the Rings in Snowdonia My local “round the block” ride takes in the glorious Dyffryn Ogwen (Ogwen valley), Dyffryn Mymbyr (Mymbyr valley) and Pen-Y-Pass, towards Llanberis village. Setting out in winter is like heading into Mordor, with snow-capped peaks, moody purple-grey clouds, and the sight of Tryfan ridge, like a dragon’s back. As it opens out, you can enjoy the lovely, steady descent to Capel Curig village, hanging a right, you pass the Mymbyr lakes with the Snowdon Horseshoe ahead, before coming up and over the side of Yr Wyddfa (Snowdon), and the exhilarating soar down the other side. With drama and mountains at every turn, this ride never gets any less breathtaking. Marieke Hofsteede A winter whirl around Lake Maggiore, Italy The best cycling of my life was done a few years ago ago when I retired, packing my bags and a bike to cycle around Italy, top-to-toe. The most energising, invigorating route was a winter whirl around Lake Maggiore. The microclimate and sparkling January sunshine – glimmering on the lake on one side and bouncing off snow-topped Alpine peaks on the other – were an inspiration to keep pedalling. Start at Arona on the Piedmont side, then head up to Stresa, with its lovely belle époque hotels – feel free to stop for a warming cappuccino or grappa, as I did! You can then bike round the lake, passing though Locarno in Switzerland, or put your bike on a ferry to the Lombard side. Bill Gorgeous sea views, Dundee to Montrose Blow the cobwebs away on a sunny winter’s day. Starting from the V&amp;A Dundee (schedule a visit before or after your ride), watch the winter sunrise over the Tay Estuary before taking the coastal path north on Sustrans Route 1. The 35 miles to Montrose include a mix of dedicated cycle paths and quiet country lanes with gorgeous sea views keeping you company the whole way. Have a picnic lunch sheltered in the dunes on the expansive sandy beach of Lunan Bay before finishing at the Montrose Basin reserve, where in October, around 80,000 pink-footed geese arrive for winter. Admire the sea views once again on the return journey by train from Montrose to Dundee. Naomi Clarke Bicycles across the Bosphorus, Istanbul Istanbul is a scenic location for a winter bike ride and you can now travel 80 miles of designated cycle paths there. The city itself has an expansive cycling route on its Asian side. Starting in Kadıköy, with views over to Europe, there is a nearly uninterrupted landscaped path along the coast of the Bosphorus and Marmara Sea that takes cyclists through Caddebostan, Bostancı, and up to Pendik. In winter the smog lifts to become sparkling sunshine and you can stop for a warming tea and sesame-seed bread along the route. I rented a bike from Isbike and put it on a ferry to the car-free Princes Islands, for calm, easy cycling with views over two continents. Nick Lancashire hotspot Less than a third of the Bay Cycle Way’s 81-mile route is traffic-free, but the 16-mile section between Carnforth and Glasson Dock is mostly off-road. It follows a canal towpath, Morecambe promenade and disused railway tracks, and offers the best views across Morecambe Bay. There are plenty of convenient places to park, including at Glasson Dock, Conder Green and in Morecambe. There is also an abundance of refreshment stops, though not all the cafes are open during winter (you’ll always find something in Lancaster and Morecambe). As Morecambe promenade has been very busy during the last two summers due to an influx of visitors, the ride will be much more pleasant in winter. Graham Dean East Midlands meander The power station at Ratcliffe-on-Soar may seem an unlikely focus for a beautiful winter cycling route but the network of nearby lanes make for stunning views. I start in the Derbyshire town of Long Eaton, heading south across the River Trent into Leicestershire, where a look over the shoulder early in the morning will see the sun rising over the cooling towers. From there the choices are limitless, but why not make a three-counties of it? Head east and you’re soon across the Soar and into Nottinghamshire, where snaking lanes and wooded hillsides await. The return westwards takes in some picturesque villages with tempting cafe stops, before the turrets of Ratcliffe beckon the weary cyclist home. Michael Pedalling with persimmons, Spain Not your usual bike trip. Me, an OAP with my secondhand e-bike, on an epic ride: four weeks travelling westward ahead of the encroaching winter, through awe-inspiring landscapes, from the sun-baked, Mediterranean-fringed mountains of the Cabo de Gata, high over the snow-capped Sierra Nevada, and down through the Serranía de Ronda’s vast cork forests to the Atlantic coast. Initially you’ll find cactus and thyme-edged tracks, then Alpujarran ways with windfall treats of almonds, avocados, and persimmons, and finally vultures circling over thick rainforest. Blue skies, great food, and red wine – soul enriching. John MartinIt is a very special themed version of the Thursday quiz today, because quite unbelievably it is the 40th edition – and it is yet to be shut down. The task ahead of you is 15 questions on topical news, general knowledge, and various other gubbins that has caught the quizmaster’s eye this week, many of them mentioning rubies or the number 40. Exciting, huh? There is also the timely return of one particular question category which is sure to prove hugely popular. There are no prizes. It is just for fun. Do let us know how you get on in the comments! The Thursday quiz, No 40 If you do think there has been an egregious error in one of the questions or answers, please feel free to email martin.belam@theguardian.com but remember, the quizmaster’s word is always final, and never ever prise the rubies out of the eyes of a statue when playing Dungeons &amp; Dragons – it is always a trap!Families have reacted with elation to the government’s announcement that English care homes will allow unlimited visitors for residents from next week. “It’s absolutely fantastic news,” said Penny Hutchinson, whose mother, Yvonne Williamson, 81, lives in Summerfield House care home in Halifax. “Everyone is delighted. It means we are being listened to.” The rule change, placing no limits on the number of visitors, means Williamson will be able to see her grandchildren, Lucy, 23, and Kristian, 18, for the first time in two years. While there was a limit of three named visitors, those roles went to her three children. However, the reunion will have to be delayed because, in common with hundreds of other care homes, Summerfield House is tackling an outbreak of Omicron, which means visitors are limited to a single pre-nominated essential caregiver. Care homes will still have to follow outbreak management rules after next week’s rule changes, albeit for 14 rather than 28 days, as has been the case. “We are still pushing for a law so we can’t lock care home residents away without at least one visitor,” Williamson said. Campaign groups such as Rights for Residents have been calling for the government to enshrine the status of “essential caregiver” in law so care homes can never again go into full lockdown. They argue that what would be known as “Gloria’s law” – named after the mother of the care visits campaigner and actor Ruthie Henshall – is a basic human right and say isolation has caused misery as care homes locked their doors to prevent infection spread. It has left families only able to talk to loved ones through plastic screens or bedroom windows. Birgit Clark, whose daughter Franziska, 26, has severe learning difficulties and lives in a care home in Cheshire, said there would be “fireworks going off” if she was allowed back into her daughter’s home. She has not been inside the home for close to two years, although she has seen her daughter outdoors and taken her on trips. But while the guidelines say there is no limit to the number of visitors from Monday, the reality is the home must consult with the local authority health protection team, she says. “They want to open up,” said Clark. “They understand how important it is to have family life. The mental health of the residents has suffered badly. It is loneliness. So I am hoping we are going to get there.” A key problem has been rolling isolation periods for the home, which keep restarting when another Covid case emerges. Care operators are urging families to be patient, indicating that open visits will not be possible in all cases. “It is being introduced from Monday which gives care settings precious little time to prepare,” said Mike Padgham, the chair of the Independent Care Group, which represents some care home operators. “Care and nursing homes are going through their worst ever staffing crisis and, in some cases, might struggle to accommodate a sudden big influx of visitors. It will be down to individual homes to decide but I urge people to be patient with homes and I expect many, like mine for example, will want to retain an appointment system and of course continue to follow the guidance on negative tests, social distancing, personal protective equipment and hygiene.”If you’ve managed to live your life so that you’ve somehow avoided the “West Elm Caleb” saga that’s unfolded over the last week, then you’re probably a happier, less perplexed person because of it. And if you’re a single straight woman who uses dating apps and have never dated a young man who resembles West Elm Caleb, then that is nothing less than a miracle. In brief: West Elm Caleb is a guy, 25, who got outed on TikTok for allegedly dating multiple women he met on dating apps, all at the same time, leading them on and then ghosting them. “Back in my day we just called that a fuckboy,” said my friend Amelia, 29. Yes, I know. Back in 2015, I wrote a story for Vanity Fair entitled Tinder and the Dawn of the Dating Apocalypse in which I reported: “A ‘fuckboy’ is a young man who sleeps with women without any intention of having a relationship with them or perhaps even walking them to the door post-sex.” That story caused an infamously crazy reaction on the part of Tinder, which tweeted at me more than 30 times in one night, so offended were they that I had talked to actual users about their dissatisfaction with the newly launched, now multibillion-dollar app. Tinder was mad because, among other things, I dared to suggest that dating apps (including Bumble and Hinge, where West Elm Caleb met his matches) were exacerbating bad behavior on the part of straight men. Which is what is missing in the many think pieces that have come out about West Elm Caleb: the problem is the design of the technology itself. No, dating apps didn’t invent misogyny or womanizers. But they did give straight men – unvetted men – unfettered access to women. They gave them a new sense of boldness through a seemingly endless set of options. They gave them the ability to decide with the flick of a finger whether a woman was “hot or not” enough for them to date or have sex with. They gave them the ability to create false identities who can’t be held accountable. The effect of all this on straight male psychology is something I’ve discussed with psychologists, feminists, evolutionary biologists and other experts throughout the making of a documentary film and the reporting of several more articles and a book. But you don’t have to have a PhD to see that dating apps privilege the male gaze and give straight men an outsized idea of their power in their dealings with women. In the opinion of another young woman friend: “They have ruined men.” No, I don’t think West Elm Caleb deserved to be doxed or harassed by the people who sought to take revenge on his behavior – no one deserves that. It is wrong. But I’m not surprised that some women rose up against this character, using him as a scapegoat for what they have been enduring in the realm of dating now for years; I’m just surprised it took this long. “West Elm Caleb is a pandemic,” said Molly, 34. “He’s everywhere. Except there’s no vaccine.” Without any change in the toxic dating culture being created by these apps – or the men they’re turning into fuckboys – women have been turning to each other for solidarity online. “What I’m seeing more and more on TikTok is women finding out they’re being cheated on or dating the same guy,” said Lana, 28, “and then pushing back. I have seen girls post, like, ‘If your husband is named Joe with blond hair and tattoos and was just on a business trip in Vegas, he’s cheating on you.’ I also saw a girl who found out her boyfriend of like six months was dating two other girls, and they all ambushed him at the same place. They all looked the same too, ugh.” “Honestly, women should boycott these apps,” said Breanna, 30. “I don’t know what benefit they bring – other than make us more accessible to trash men with bad intentions. I’m telling everyone I know to delete the apps. They’re not worth it and no one I know has met anyone worth a damn on them anyway.” Nancy Jo Sales is a New York-based writer. Her latest book is Nothing Personal: My Secret Life in the Dating App InfernoIndian tech company Ola has announced plans to invest £100m in the UK to open a research and development facility for a planned electric car, in a significant boost to the British automotive industry. Ola launched its taxi app that rivals Uber in cities including London, Birmingham and Cardiff in 2018, but it is pushing into electric vehicles with a recently launched road-going scooter and a planned electric car. The new facility will be based in Coventry, the traditional West Midlands centre of the UK automotive industry. It will create 200 jobs in design and engineering. Workers at the plant will also research battery technology. Ola was founded in India in 2010 by Bhavish Aggarwal, and it now claims to be the world’s third-largest ride-hailing app. This week its electric vehicle arm, Ola Electric, raised $200m in funding at a reported $5bn (£3.7bn) valuation – previous backers include Softbank, the major Japanese technology investor. It is also reportedly planning a stock market float to raise as much as $2bn. The scooters are currently designed and manufactured in Bengaluru, but Ola said the new UK facility, dubbed its “Futurefoundry”, will work closely with the headquarters. The company did not detail where it would build its electric cars, although wage costs are significantly lower in India than in the UK. The investment will likely be seen as a vote of confidence in the UK automotive industry, which has seen a recent jump in investment following years of underperformance as big firms awaited clarity on the crucial trading arrangement with the EU. Traditional carmakers such as Volkswagen are racing against newer companies led by America’s Tesla to invest in facilities to build new battery electric vehicles (EVs). However, EVs still only accounted for about 12% of UK sales in 2021. The alliance between Renault, Nissan and Mitsubishi became the latest traditional carmaker to outline plans on Thursday for major investments. The alliance said it would spend €23bn (£19.2bn) over the next five years to launch new electric models, including a new Nissan compact car in Europe – built at a Renault factory in northern France – to replace the Micra. Ola would be a relatively late entrant to the electric car market, but its scooters have initially targeted its home market which is dominated by cheaper models. Ola’s Aggarwal said: “Ola Futurefoundry will enable us to tap into the fantastic automotive design and engineering talent in the UK to create the next generation of electric vehicles. Futurefoundry will work in close collaboration with our headquarters in Bangalore, India, to help us build the future of mobility as we make electric vehicles affordable across the world.” The company last year recruited Wayne Burgess, a former Jaguar and Geely designer, to lead the UK vehicle design efforts. Burgess said Ola wanted to create a “world-class design and R&amp;D team with global sensibilities”. He added that the company will look at “two-wheeler, four-wheeler and other form factors.”And here’s Emma Kemp’s match report from AAMI Park: So, a comfortable win in the end, one that the Socceroos desperately needed. They’re back to winning form and, however briefly, they are back into second place - Japan, at half-time in their game against China, are leading 2-0. There were plenty of positives to take - some well-taken goals headlining - but also some possible cause for concern, given the way they allowed Vietnam to get back into the game after the break before the third went in. Still, a 4-0 win cannot be sniffed at, and Australia will head to Muscat for next week’s game against Oman in good spirits. That’s all from me for now. Stay tuned for Emma Kemp’s match report, coming right up. Cheerio. René Meulensteen: “Can’t be more pleased. We knew it was going to be a challenge but [I was] pleased with the quality we showed at times. Most importantly [we got] the three points. We knew we needed to keep going. “We were on constant touch with [Graham Arnold]. I know he would have been sat there and enjoyed the performance.” Craig Goodwin speaks: “Very rewarding, kind of lost for words to be honest. For me personally, it’s a great moment [to score] but there’s a lot of emotion in it. Its a very rewarding feeling for me and my family as well. All credit to Vietnam. The second half they came out and created some chances.” 90+4 mins: There it is! All over in Melbourne and the Socceroos get the job done with what proved to be a comfortable victory. 90+3 mins: Ooh! So close to a debut goal for Tilio who shoots on the slide across the face of goal! The keeper is beaten, but it rolls the wrong side of the far post! 90+2 mins: Sainsbury gets the better of Nguyen Cong Phuong, and that could be the last Vietnam attack of the night. 90 mins: Three minutes of added time to be played. 89 mins: Nothing comes of that corner, but Australia win another soon after. Goodwin, with hair slick from the rain, takes it. Bui Tan Truong is there to punch clear. 86 mins: Karacic fancies his chances from range as a section of the crowd attempts to get. a Mexican wave going. It’s deflected wide of the mark and there will be a late corner. 85 mins: Lovely quick feet from McGree before he sends Tilio away on his first proper run in international football. But he’s stopped in his tracks by an excellent tackle and the move breaks down. 83 mins: Ryan comes out to claim the corner without any fuss and he can launch an Australian counter attack. 82 mins: Tran Minh Vuong fires on target for Vietnam, but again it bounces off a gold shirt and behind for a corner. 81 mins: Good to see the exciting Marco Tilio get a chance. Let’s hope he sees some of the ball in the remaining 10 minutes or so. 80 mins: Here come Jeggo and Tilio, the latter to make his international debut. Off go Mooy and Martin Boyle. 78 mins: The official crowd number comes through - it’s a very healthy 27,740. 77 mins: McGree looks to the skies, which are offering forth buckets of rain. Job done off the bench by both McGree and Goodwin - a tactical masterstroke rang in by Graham Arnold in isolation? 76 mins: What a strike from McGree! The new Middlesbrough man finds the bottom corner with a fierce low drive, having been fed by fellow substitute Goodwin! 74 mins: That really was a wonderfully composed finish from the in-form Goodwin, who has given Australia the cushion they may well have needed, if only to avoid any unwanted late drama tonight. 73 mins: Time for Rogic to head off. The playmaker is replaced by Riley McGree. 72 mins: There it is! Ryan pumps a long ball upfield which somehow finds its way through to Goodwin, who runs onto it and executes a lovely dinked finish over the onrushing keeper! Three-nil to Australia and they should be home and dry now. 71 mins: Vietnam make yet another change - Do Hung Dung, the captian, is brought off and Tran Minh Vuong comes on to replace him. 70 mins: Twenty minutes remaining and the Socceroos still lead 2-0, but Vietnam are edging back into this one. Another goal would not go amiss in the Australian camp at the moment. 68 mins: The No 10, Nguyen Cong Phuong, is posing a real threat to the Socceroos since he came on. He’s comfortable on the ball and causing a few problems. 67 mins: Meanwhile, it’s time for Australia to make a change. Maclaren and Leckie are replaced by Duke and Goodwin. 66 mins: More good play from Vietnam as Nguyen Hoang Duc heads back for Nguyen Thanh Chung who is wide of the mark! 66 mins: Vietnam come again! This time Nguyen Quand Hai sees his effort deflected behind for a corner as the rain comes down and the pressure builds on the Socceroos backline. 65 mins: Looks like Goodwin might be coming on - he’s stripped on the sideline and ready to go. 64 mins: All of a sudden, Vietnam have the wind in their sails and their more attacking intentions since the break and those changes are paying dividends. 63 mins: Ooh! Best chance of the night for Vietnam so far! It’s a cracking hit by another of those half-time substitutes, Nguyen Cong Phuong, who is only denied by a brilliant save by Maty Ryan! 61 mins: Before the corner is taken, the visitors make another change - Nguyen Phong Hong Duy comes on. 60 mins: One of the Vietnam substitutes, Nguyen Hoang Duc, has a crack, and it’s diverted behind for a corner. 59 mins: Ooh! Pham Tuan Hai nearly gets a boot on a near-post cross, but Ryan is there first and clears the danger! 58 mins: Mooy is dispossessed in the middle of park and Vietnam come forward. They’re playing it around quite nicely here. 56 mins: Mooy swings over another Socceroos corner... Sainsbury is in the mixer but the ball evades all and sundry and goes out of play on the other side. 53 mins: Again, Pham Tuan Hai causes some consternation in the Australian defence. Nothing doing this time, but this has been a far brighter start for the visitors. 52 mins: A warning shot there from Vietnam; they have started the second period in a different frame of mind. 51 mins: Lovely stuff from Vietnam! Pham Tuan Hai smashes wide after some neat interplay with captain Do Hung Dung to fashion another shooting chance! 50 mins: Leckie! He gets to another ball into the box, but the onrushing keeper does enough to put him off and the chance goes begging. 49 mins: The Socceroos win an early corner. Mooy takes it, but it’s easily headed clear. 47 mins: Vietnam have made three changes at the break, in a bid to shake things up. 46 mins: The rain has started coming down during the break as we get things under way once again. Australia are good for their two-goal lead, it has to be said. Going forward Vietnam have offered little, although they have largely defended stoutly - the reason the Socceroos haven’t already run away with this one. Time for a comfort break, and we’ll be back for the second shortly. 45+3 mins: And that is that for the half. A great way to finish the opening period as Rogic adds to Maclaren’s headed opener and the Socceroos head in at the break 2-0 up. 45+2 mins: Rogic won’t be denied a goal! He finishes with aplomb after Leckie slips him through with a neat little pass. 44 mins: Leckie has his name taken for a cynical foul on Nguyen Quand Hai, who he brings down just as he looks to break. 43 mins: Ooh, you can sense the anticipation as Rogic shapes under a high clearance... he connects well, but it’s straight into a red shirt. 42 mins: Nice from the visitors, as they fashion a shooting chance, their first of the night. But Phan Van Duc’s effort is weak and easy for Ryan to deal with. Still, a rare shot on target for Vietnam! 40 mins: Karacic again makes inroads going forward. The right-back is having a decent game. How’s Ash Barty going across the road? She’s won and will contest Saturday’s Australian Open final! 38 mins: Here we go... .Boyle does well to get to Maclaren’s deep cross and play the ball back across the face of goal for Leckie, who controls, spins and fires! Well blocked! 37 mins: Boyle thinks he’s won a corner, but the flag is up and he’s offside. Goal kick it is instead. 36 mins: Rogic, so comfortable on the ball, brings it down expertly and lays off. What a player, when he’s in good touch. 35 mins: We’ve just been told on the telly that Graham Arnold, absent from the stadium tonight due to a positive Covid test, is on the blower to the dugout, barking orders down a direct telephone line. 34 mins: Oof, that’s a cynical challenge by Phan Van Duc on Boyle, as the forward skipped past him on the touchline. Amazingly, there’s no yellow card produced. 33 mins: Boyle looks to scamper onto a through ball now, hoping to double the lead, but it’s just out of his reach and the ball runs all the way through to Bui Tan Truong. 31 mins: That was clinical from the Melbourne City striker, and you can’t say that it hadn’t been coming. A well deserved lead. 30 mins: This one will count! Maclaren rises, all alone, to meet a pinpoint cross from the left boot of Rogic with a thumping header that hits the back of the net! The Socceroos have their lead, finally! 29 mins: Here’s Mooy now in the middle of the park, but he’s got little to aim at up ahead of him. He plays the ball back. 28 mins: Leckie and King link up on the left, but Rogic’s touch lets him down when the ball arrives at his feet in the middle. Still goalless as we approach the half-hour mark. 27 mins: The Socceroos are being a bit more patient with their build up here. It doesn’t work out though, as Degenek eventually opts for a long ball forward that doesn’t reach a gold shirt. In fact, there’s no one near that pass. 25 mins: Hard to disagree with this sentiment. 24 mins: Here’s the first yellow card of the night, brandished in the direction of Pham Xuan Manh, who over-stretches on a tackle and catches Rogic. 22 mins: Well, just over 20 minutes gone, and it’s been a fairly hectic opening, with the Socceroos well on top, but still with no goal to their name. 21 mins: Worth noting that Vietnam have some pretty vocal support inside AAMI Park tonight. Each foray forward is met with excited noise from the stands. 20 mins: The corner is easily cleared and now it’s the Socceroos’ turn to break at pace. Maclaren makes a mess of his pass though and the move breaks down just as quickly as it was created. 19 mins: Here come Vietnam, on the counter with Nguyen Quand Hai, who bursts away from Mooy in midfield. And the visitors win a corner. 17 mins: Oooh! Leckie goes agonisingly close with a glancing header from debutant Joel King’s cross in from the left! The ball bounces just wide of the upright, and Vietnam survive again. 16 mins: Much of Australia’s forward play is coming down the flanks, with Leckie and Karacic heavily involved so far. 15 mins: Karacic again gets forward well as the Socceroos press forward once again. He gets to the byline and puts over a cross, but again, nothing comes from it. 14 mins: Maclaren creeps up on Pham Xuan Manh and forces the defender into giving away possession. He gets away with it this time though, but will be well advised not to dawdle on the ball quite so much next time. 12 mins: And another penalty shout! Again it’s Vu Van Tahn and Leckie involved, but this time it appears to be more a case of Leckie running into his man. Play on, says the ref. 11 mins: Rogic with a bit of impromptu juggling which draws some oohs from the crowd but is rather ineffective in terms of fashioning any chance. 10 mins: The one-way traffic continues as Leckie takes on Vu Van Tahn and goes down in the box! He wants a penalty, and there does seem to be a bit of a shirt tug there, but the ref’s having none of it. 8 mins: Karacic now gets forward, as he does so well. He pings a low ball into the middle, but it’s well cleared this time. 7 mins: The ball is in the Australian half, but the Socceroos have possession and are just playing it around the back. Some brief respite for the visitors. 6 mins: Leckie advances in menacing fashion on the left now. The ball finds its way across the pitch to Boyle, but his cross comes to naught. Still, the pressure is intense. 5 mins: Ooh! Another chance for the home side. This time it’s Leckie who’s put through on goal. His first touch is good, but he fires straight at Bui Tan Truong and the keeper’s legs do the rest! 3 mins: Still the Socceroos push forward, they’re camped in the Vietnam half. 2 mins: Well, well, well. What a start to the game. Irvine is called for being in an offside position, and he’s ruled to have obstructed the view of the keeper, Bui Tan Truong. Fair call, but unlucky for the Socceroos. No! Wait! The referee has a look at the screen on the side of the pitch, and that won’t count! It’s ruled out. Early drama! 1 min: What a start! Australia take the lead after just seconds! A poor ball out of defence is picked up by Mooy... Boyle crosses in, Maclaren lays off and bang! Rogic finishes! 1 min: And we’re off! Sounds like a decent atmosphere at AAMI Park as Vietnam’s Pham Tuan Hai kicks off, going right to left as I look at it. Pitch looks beautiful. And the anthems. Well done, well done. And now for the football. Here’s the Welcome to Country ceremony, narrated byAunty Joy Murphy. Beautiful and poignant, on the day after 26 January. The players are lining up in the tunnel... and. here they come to a rapturous reception. Australia, of course, in gold shirts and socks with green shorts; Vietnam in all red, with yellow trim. Is this the hottest ticket in town tonight? It’s hot, but so is Ash Barty’s Australian Open semi-final across the way from AAMI Park at Melbourne Park. The world No 1 is looking to book her place in Saturday’s final. She broke Madison Keys’ serve in the opening game, and leads as I type. Join John Brewin for all that, if tennis is your thing. Hot off the press before kick-off: Socceroos great Mark Schwarzer, Matildas legends Kate Gill and Heather Garriock, and Tasmanian football icon Joseph (Joe) Huxley Honeysett have today been inducted into Football Australia’s Hall of Fame. “The Football Australia Hall of Fame celebrates legends, and the people behind the legends, in our game,” FA chair Chris Nikou said. “Through their respective inductions into the Football Australia Hall of Fame, Kate, Heather, Mark, and Joe will forever be recognised as greats of Australian football – people that on and off the pitch showed their class and toiled for the sport to reach new heights.” As the crowd files into AAMI Park, support is coming all the way from India, where the Matildas are entering the final preparations for their Asian Cup group match against Thailand, kicking off at 1am AEDT. The Socceroos haven’t had it easy this qualification campaign given the impact of Covid and they’ve played just one game on home soil in their last 10 outings. Tonight, they return to Melbourne for the first time for ages - since September 2017 to be exact - and will be able to call on the support of a home crowd for a second time in three matches, after November’s draw with Saudi Arabia in western Sydney. During the week, Craig Goodwin, who starts on the bench tonight, told the Socceroos’ website: “I think it’s going to be massive,” he said. “Obviously with the importance of the two games, to have a full crowd will hopefully give us the edge. We can’t wait to play in front of that atmosphere and in front of a packed stadium again.” The team will, however, be without Graham Arnold, who has tested positive for Covid, in a bizarre nod to the challenges already thrown up during this campaign. Rene Meulensteen, former assistant to aforementioned coaching great, will be in charge tonight. Team news: Sydney FC defender Joel King makes his international debut after first-choice left-back Aziz Behich (blizzard) was ruled out. Rene Meulensteen said on Wednesday: “Joel has come in and deserves the right to be selected. He’s played a lot of important games and he’s done well, so if we decide to give Joel his debut we are confident he’s ready for it.” Creative sparks Aaron Mooy and Tom Rogic return, while Adjin Hrustic is suspended and misses out. At the back, Milos Degenek takes the place of the injured Harry Souttar. As one great manager once put it, “it’s squeaky bum time”. Sir Alex Ferguson is attributed with first coining the phrase way back in 2003 as a tense Premier League title race approached a climax, but it also perfectly encapsulates the perilous situation the Socceroos find themselves in as the road to Qatar 2022 draws towards an end. With four matches remaining, put simply, Australia must win against Vietnam at AAMI Park. Heading into this latest international window, the Socceroos occupy third place in Group B, a point off Japan in the second of two automatic qualification spots. Saudi Arabia, in top spot and a further four points ahead, hold the other. The Socceroos are hoping to get back to winning ways, following a 1-1 draw against China last time out, a draw against Saudi Arabia and defeat in Japan. After tonight’s game, they face Oman in Muscat before two tough games to finish at home to Japan and away to Saudi Arabia. Any slip-up so late in the piece could have major ramifications for Australian hopes of reaching the tournament in Qatar later this year, and against bottom side Vietnam (form guide: six defeats from six) anything but all three points for Graham Arnold’s side in Melbourne tonight will be unpalatable, nay unthinkable. Kick-off is 8:10pm AEDT. I’ll have the line-ups to you shortly. In the meantime, feel free to get in touch via email or tweet @mike_hytner.Book now Short stories are a funny thing. While technically shorter in length than novels or novellas, they have the power to hold just as much detail, world and story as their larger counterparts. This can make them tricky to construct, as they need to communicate character, tension, conflict and resolution. If you enjoy reading short stories, or have turned your hand at writing them but would value some expert guidance, this course with Shelley Weiner is your tonic. Over four intense and stimulating virtual sessions, she will draw on her wealth of experience as an author, mentor and creative writing tutor, to guide and inspire you through the process. Through close examination of a selection of both classic and contemporary short stories, paired with practical exercises, you will identify - and demystify - the techniques used by great exponents of the genre, and learn how to craft your own stories. You’ll see your ideas through from generation to conception, building your structure, finding and amplifying your voice, and shaping your plot. During each live lesson, selected texts will be used as springboards to guide you through the aspect of craft under discussion. In week one, you’ll be given a jumping off point for a new story and will grow and develop it over the course. Week 1: Origins What is a story? From Aesop’s Fables to Cat Person, there are distinctive features that bind and also distinguish them. Discover the concept of story ideas and where to find them, with an introduction to character as the driving force in fiction. Week 2: Invention A deeper dive into character and dialogue, and how - and why - these components are core to story development. Week 3: Construction Looking into plot and momentum, including causality, structure, the pressure of time and more. Week 4: Performance Who tells the story? Viewpoints and voice will be looked at, as well as how to get your words onto the page, and how to find your readers. Over the course of four weeks, you’ll have the opportunity to explore - from a writer’s perspective - classic works from the likes of Chekov, Hemingway, Alice Munro, Toni Morrison, Miranda July, Zadie Smith, Courttia Newland and Eley Williams. These selected texts will be used as springboards to guide you through the aspect of craft under discussion. You will have plenty of opportunity to develop your own short story and receive feedback from your fellow writers via our dedicated online workspace. Here you will be able to engage in constructive discussions and exchange ideas with your peers. Stretching your capacity for giving and receiving productive feedback will not only equip you with a deeper understanding of the art of short fiction, but also means you will leave the course with a unique and supportive writing community to guide you in your next steps. This course will help you to build your structure, find and amplify your voice and shape the plot of your short story, with expert guidance and advice from both Shelley and your new-found community of writers. For an additional fee of £125, you have the option to book a-30 minute personal mentoring session with Shelley at the end of the course. These are limited to 10 places so early booking is advised. This course is for … Aspiring, beginner and intermediate writers looking to hone their craft Established writers with a desire to revisit the short story and sharpen their skills You will be sent a link to the webinar 2hrs before the start time of 2pm (BST). Tutor profile Shelley Weiner is the author of five novels, and a renowned creative writing tutor/mentor with a passion for nurturing and guiding writers at all levels. Her short stories have appeared in numerous anthologies in print and online, and have been produced for BBC Radio 4. Shelley has taught and run masterclasses for, among others, the Guardian, Faber Academy, The Literary Consultancy, Gold Dust Mentoring Scheme, The Art of Writing (Florence), and Skyros Writers’ Lab. She has lectured on the Creative Writing MA at Anglia Ruskin University, as well as for Birkbeck College, the Open University, the Taliesin Trust, the British Council in Israel, and Durham University. Details Book now Dates: Saturday 23 April – Saturday 14 May 2022 over four consecutive Saturdays Times: 2pm-4pm (BST) Price: £495 (+ £6.83 booking fee); £620 (+ £6.83 booking fee) for course &amp; one-to-one mentoring with Shelley Event capacity: 20 This masterclass is available globally. If you are joining us from outside the United Kingdom, please use this time zone converter to check your local live streaming time. 2pm BST | 3pm CEST | 6am PDT | 9am EDT Sign up to our newsletter and you’ll be among the first to find out about our latest courses and special offers. You can also follow us on Twitter, and read our latest articles and interviews on our blog. Information on Guardian Masterclasses To contact us, click here. Terms and conditions can be found here. By enrolling on this masterclass, you’re helping to support the Guardian, and this allows us to keep our quality reporting open to all. All Guardian Masterclasses are fully accessible - but please contact us if you have any queries or concerns. Returns policy Once a purchase is complete we will not be able to refund you where you do not attend or if you cancel your event booking. Please see our terms and conditions for more information on our refund policy.Covid rules in care homes in England are to be relaxed on Monday as restrictions to tackle with the Omicron variant are eased. Residents will be able to receive unlimited visitors, while self-isolation periods for residents who test positive will shorten from 14 to 10 days. We would like to hear from people affected by the rule change about their views. Are you planning to reunite with a loved one following the lifting of restrictions on visitors? Do you have any concerns? We would also like to hear from care home staff and managers about how the changes will affect them. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.As the 2000s turned into the 2010s, Anaïs Mitchell seemed an easy artist to peg. Her career was plodding along in unassuming style, somewhere in the region where country and folk meet alt-rock. She had well-reviewed albums released on her own label, sessions for the Bob Harris show on Radio 2 and NPR’s Tiny Desk, support slots with Bon Iver. That was before she developed a Greek mythology-themed song from her 2007 album The Brightness into a small-scale musical called Hadestown, which turned into an album featuring Justin Vernon and Ani DiFranco – a sort of Pitchfork-friendly equivalent of the all-star concept albums that Andrew Lloyd Webber and Tim Rice used to drum up interest in Jesus Christ Superstar and Evita. That begat an off-Broadway production, which in turn begat a Broadway production, which won eight Tony awards. Its unexpected success leaves Mitchell in a curious position. A feted Broadway writer, she is apparently planning another musical, but her eponymous seventh solo album – her first of original material in 10 years – sees her picking up where she left off as a singer-songwriter. Or more-or-less: the success of Hadestown means there’s substantially more media interest than before, and her cottage industry label Wilderland has been junked for a deal with BMG. But that notwithstanding, Anaïs Mitchell is an album for which the adjective “unassuming” might have been invented. The sound is gently polished and the songs richly melodic enough to bear comparison with Taylor Swift in downhome mode (both Mitchell and Swift contributed vocals to Justin Vernon and Aaron Dessner’s last album as Big Red Machine), but the whole enterprise is noticeably low-key. Around Mitchell’s acoustic guitar are delicate shimmers of tremolo-heavy guitar or electric piano; little smears of electronics so subtly placed you barely notice them first time around; the occasional sax solo courtesy of Bon Iver sideman Michael Lewis, sprawling gracefully in a way that recalls the same instrument’s use on Nick Drake’s Bryter Layter, as well as Lewis’s work on Gayngs’ small-hours soft rock-inspired album Relayted. Even the drums are gently tapped: rimshots rather than snares; brushes and soft mallets rather than drumsticks. That the musical scenery is shot in soft focus draws the listener’s attention to Mitchell’s distinctive voice – as you might be keen to do if you’d spent the past decade concentrating on other people singing your songs. Meanwhile, the songs are evidently personal, which also might appeal if you’d spent the past decade concentrating on telling a story for the stage. The opening track, Brooklyn Bridge, explores the perennial thrill of approaching Manhattan by car at night. But the rest of the album shifts its gaze to Mitchell’s home town in Vermont, and is suffused with childhood memories. On the gently insistent Revenant, she rummages through a deceased relation’s box of keepsakes. Backroads is filled with hazy recollections of teenage parties and old romances. Even when it isn’t specifically about Mitchell’s home town – to which she relocated when Covid hit – the album feels nostalgic: On Your Way recounts a fellow musician’s passing, smartly turning the title into a reflection on both the start of his career and his death. These are concise, tightly written songs, skilfully decked out with sharp lines and unexpected key changes. The whole album is over and done in barely half an hour. A couple of weak spots – Now You Know, and the put-down-your-smartphone whinge of Real World – shoot by so fast you barely notice them. Her voice flits from breathy to tough, which fits her lyrical style perfectly. Too smart to wallow in sentimentality, Mitchell has a habit of suddenly shifting emotional gear mid-song. Backroads goes from Nashville-esque stuff about small town life (where even the stars at night “seem to say you’re one of us”) to sharply contrasting the treatment her friends received from the police when they were nicked for underage drinking with that meted out to another acquaintance pulled in for a minor driving offence: “Somebody thought he didn’t look right / They might as well have said that he didn’t look white”. Little Big Girl turns from an examination of ageing (“You grew up by mistake, you grew up by surprise”) into a withering condemnation of the male gaze. And it happens again on closer The Words, which starts out fretting about life going on outside when you’re trapped indoors working, and ends with Mitchell apologising to her husband for thinking about lyrics when she should be in the moment. Clearly a lot of thought gone into this album. It isn’t a strident statement built to sweep the boards at awards ceremonies but, in its own way, it’s as striking a demonstration of its author’s songwriting abilities as Hadestown. It’s the work of an artist who has succeeded on a big stage now working in miniature, sweating the small stuff with utterly charming results. This week Alexis listened to Pearl Charles – Givin’ It Up After last year’s attention-grabbing Abba homage Only for Tonight, the LA singer-songwriter returns to the 70s to stunning effect, this time with a slow-motion disco ballad.It had been a while since Tom Rogic has been seen as an answer to Australia’s problems. Long a talisman for his club, Celtic, the playmaker has long been associated with the word “potential” when it comes to the national team. It is a potential that diminishes with each year he ages, as if he is destined never to fulfil it before his career is out. And yet, at 29, something is stirring within Rogic. Not just in Scotland, where he is experiencing a reawakening under Ange Postecoglou. But also, it seems, with the Socceroos, for whom he was a standout at a time his team really need a standout. After last month’s setbacks against Saudi Arabia and China a place at the 2022 World Cup is well and truly on the line for Graham Arnold’s side. Alex Ferguson would call this “squeaky bum time”, and it was incidental that his former Manchester United assistant René Muelensteen was head honcho in the dugout at AAMI Park (Arnold has Covid-19) as the Socceroos set about rectifying their precarious situation. Specifically Rogic, who had an assist and a goal before half-time and was in pleasing touch throughout a 4-0 result over 90 minutes during which Joel King and Marco Tilio made their international debuts and Fran Karačić was impressive. “We knew the significance of the game in terms of qualification and the performance of the team,” Rogic said afterwards. “We maybe got a bit sloppy in the second half but overall it was a good day’s work. “I am enjoying my life on and off the pitch. We have got a bit of work to do regarding qualification but we are on the right track. I think we were in control the whole match ... I don’t think the scoreline flattered us.” Muelensteen, who described Rogic as an “enormous driving force for us”, said he “can’t be more pleased”. “We knew it was going to be a challenge but [I was] pleased with the quality we showed at times,” he said. “Most importantly [we got] the three points. We knew we needed to keep going. “We were in constant touch with [Graham Arnold]. I know he would have been sat there and enjoyed the performance.” In truth the goals could have been even more plentiful against a Vietnam side who are now none from seven in this stage of qualifying and have conceded 12 goals. Here the visitors set up to defend stoutly and threw in the odd heart-fluttering transition and grew in confidence as the contest entered the final half-hour, during which half-time substitute Nguyễn Công Phượng would certainly have scored but not for Mat Ryan’s lightening-quick reflexes. In the end, despite some vocal Vietnamese support among the 27,740 in attendance, the home side held firm. Which was just as well, because they must beat Oman next Tuesday in Muscat to avoid the significantly more challenging play-off route to Qatar. A hamstring injury has kept Rogic out of action for Australia since last October’s 2-1 loss to Japan, but he clearly knew what was at stake from stake from the kick-off, when he prodded home a cute team transition after 20 seconds played only for the goal to be disallowed after Jackson Irvine was deemed by the VAR to have impeded the goalkeeper. The 30th minute marked the moment the scoreboard first flicked over, after Rogic popped a lovely ball to an unmarked Jamie Maclaren at the far post. Maclaren’s head enjoyed the glory that time, but Rogic had his own in first-half stoppage-time when Mathew Leckie slipped him a neat pass. The intensity picked up after the break as thunder and lightning overhead sparked something in Vietnam, with Nguyễn Quang Hải particularly lively. Though he and side tried, any glimmer of hope it might come to something was snuffed by Australia’s third. A long ball upfield from Ryan found Craig Goodwin, who hurtled onto it and dinked over the head of the onrushing Bùi Tấn Trường for his first international goal. “Very rewarding, kind of lost for words to be honest,” Goodwin said afterwards. “For me personally, it’s a great moment but there’s a lot of emotion in it. It’s a very rewarding feeling for me and my family as well. All credit to Vietnam. The second half they came out and created some chances.” Goodwin then helped fellow substitute Riley McGree seal the deal, feeding him the ball for a forceful low strike. Tilio almost scored himself at the death in a half-shot, half-slide that washed across the face of goal but did not quite tuck inside the far post.Barry Cryer, a legend of British comedy, has died at the age of 86. Cryer’s family said he “died peacefully, in good spirits and with his family around him”. The news prompted tributes posted on social media. Stephen Fry wrote: “Such sad news, one of the absolute greats of British comedy, Barry Cryer, is no more. A glorious, gorgeous, hilarious and gifted writer and performer who straddled all the comic traditions. Universally beloved … farewell, Baz.” Cryer worked with other stars of British entertainment including Spike Milligan, Tommy Cooper, Les Dawson, the Two Ronnies and Morecambe and Wise. Born in Yorkshire in 1935, his career started as the bottom billing act at the Windmill theatre in London’s West End, which put on comedy acts between the risque performances for which it was better known. Cryer was initially spotted by David Frost, who invited him to write for The Frost Report, which first aired in 1966. His writing team included a collection of future comedy heavyweights, including John Cleese, Ronnie Barker and Graham Chapman. Cryer’s writing was often in partnership with other comedians. He and John Junkin wrote material for The Morecambe and Wise Show in its heyday in the 1970s, and he was also a regular panellist on the BBC radio comedy programme I’m Sorry I Haven’t a Clue. Cryer said in 1998: “I haven’t had a career, just a series of incidents. I’ve been dogged by good luck all my life.” Gyles Brandreth tweeted: “Baz was just the loveliest guy: funny &amp; generous. He’d worked with everybody &amp; everybody he worked with liked him. I shall miss his happy company so much – &amp; his regular phone calls: he gave you a gem of a joke with each one.” He added: “Wherever Barry went he brought laughter with him – even to memorial services. And he went to lots because he’d worked with everyone! He was generous about everyone: a great mentor &amp; friend.” The novelist Jonathan Coe tweeted: “Every single thing he did was in the name of laughter, and lifting our spirits. That’s what I call a life well lived.” The boxer Frank Bruno wrote: “RIP Barry Cryer a brilliant funny man … He said to me ‘if your timing with punchlines was like the timing when U fight I could make a comedian out of U’ I could never remember the jokes!!” Cryer’s family said in a statement on Thursday: “It is our sad duty to inform you that our dear dad Barry (or Baz to his mates) died on Tuesday afternoon at Northwick Park hospital, in Harrow. However, we’re pleased to say that he died peacefully, in good spirits and with his family around him. He was 86. “Dad was a talented comedy writer and comedian in a particularly golden vintage. Incidentally he never really liked the terms ‘comedy writer’ or ‘comedian’ instead preferring hack and entertainer, and always thought the term ‘national treasure’ meant he’d just been dug up. He was, in his words, arrogant in his humility … “Baz was, firstly, a loving husband to Terry for nearly 60 years and a gentle father to Tony, David, Jack, Bob. He was a friend to their partners Jayne, Matt, Garry and Suzannah. As a grandfather Ruby, Tom, Evan, Archie, Hope, Martha and Connie all loved him and more recently, Ruby’s daughter, Isobel, had the good fortune to spend time with him as a great-grandfather.” Among the comedians that Cryer wrote for were Mike Yarwood, Billy Connolly, Russ Abbot, Bobby Davro, Jasper Carrott, Stanley Baxter, Dick Emery, Dave Allen and Frankie Howerd. In 2013, Cryer was asked by the Yorkshire Post for his favourite joke. He answered: “A man drives down a country lane and runs over a cockerel. He knocks at a nearby farmhouse door and a woman answers. “‘I appear to have killed your cockerel,’ he says. ‘I’d like to replace it.’ The woman replies: ‘Please yourself – the hens are round the back.’”Here’s Tumaini Carayol’s report, live from Melbourne. It will be a final of firsts, with Barty in the final of her home slam and Collins in the final of her first slam. The women’s final sorted, we go to the men’s semis tomorrow: Nadal v Berrettini and Tsitsipas v Medvedev. Some quotes here from Rafa Nadal’s press call. The 21st slam is in sight. I am just enjoying playing tennis. Of course I want to keep winning, but more than because I want to achieve or I want to have more than the others, it’s because I love what I am doing. I want to keep doing this as long as possible. Of course the last six months there have been a lot of doubts if I would be able to keep going. But now I feel good. We are in a position that we won a tournament, we are in the semi-finals of the Australian Open, so that’s amazing for me. In terms of what can happen in the future, honestly I really don’t care that much. I don’t believe that my future happiness is going to depend on if I achieve one more grand slam than the others or if the others achieve more grand slams than me.” This is how Danielle Collins got the job completed. That was a powerful display. Swiatek’s guile found little place in the match and Collins’s backhand was all-conquering. Jelena Dokic speak to Australian Open finalist Danielle Collins. It feels amazing, it’s been such a journey, and it doesn’t happen overnight, so many years of hard work. It’s incredible to be on this stage, especially with the health challenges. I added a little bit more variety over the last two years but this is my Plan A. In this tournament, I don’t feel like I have time to sit down, I have been standing up when I sleep at night. [on Barty] We’ve had some incredible battles over the years, and to play the number one on her home territory, and after Covid with people there, I am just excited. It’s done, and done in style. Collins’ backhand has been a no-go area but Swiatek keeps aiming for it. She tries to amp things up but then goes long and it’s 15-30, and a brilliant service return sets up match point, two of them. And just when it looks as if the day is done, Swiatek scrambles a winner for safety. But there’ll be another. And this one is seized on, and she will meet Ash Barty in the final. *Collins 6-4 5-1 Swiatek Just one game from glory now. Collins begins with an ace, she’s served well. Then for 30-0, she takes the point with a backhand from mid-court. Then comes a miss that’s been uncharacteristic of her performance so far. Then an ace on second serve down that middle line again, her third second serve ace. Then a smash to follow up a huge serve and the final is in sight. Collins 6-4 4-1 Swiatek* Swiatek has to go for it now. But a double for 30-15 is not much use. Mind you, the second serve usually produces the same result. Collins produces a looping winner from downtown for 30-30. Did she mean that? Her next shot, a lob, is dealt with far easier. And Swiatek goes to 4-1 down, just as she was in the first set. And that ended up being a close call. *Collins 6-4 4-0 Swiatek Swiatek finds her own range with a lovely return for 15-15. But Collins’ power soon takes it to 30-15. Then a skidding, looping ace right down the centre takes it to 40-15. Swiatek’s speed around the court saves the next one. Then a decent return takes it to deuce. Good first serve from Collins takes an advantage, one she claims at the net with an overhead. Up in the stands, her Ruud boyfriend claps in approval. Collins 6-4 3-0 Swiatek* The American’s eye is in, and the second serve is being gobbled up. 0-30 and a punch of the air. 0-40 arrives next and again on that Swiatek second serve. Three double break points. The first is taken with a huge return. The comeback becomes ever more distant a prospect. *Collins 6-4 2-0 Swiatek Two big serves from Collins and Swiatek goes to swap her racquet in an attempt to change things up. It doesn’t work. Make that three big serves. And four. She has control of this match and there’s a really long way back now for her opponent. Collins 6-4 1-0 Swiatek* Another break of the Swiatek serve. She was playing well towards the end of the first set, now can she make use of that momentum? Seems not. Collins seems to be feeling more confident, and it goes to 15-30 after some fierce returning of service. Then comes a step forward and a crashing backhand to land two more break points, and brutalises a Swiatek serve to take it A good serve for 15-0 up, an even better one for 30-up. A dance and a jig before the third point from Collins, and then an ace for three set points. Surely now? No, a double fault. The yips setting in? No, she finally gets it done. Just when Swiatek looked favourite in a rally, the Pole nets and Collins can breathe a sigh of relief. Collins 5-4 Swiatek* A roar from Collins towards her boyfriend/trainer, who looks a bit like Ruud Van Nistelrooy, and she goes to 30-15 up, only to be levelled by some fine speed from Swiatek. Then Collins is forced into an error for 40-30, as Swiatek serves out and has won four from the last five games. Collins, now looking antsy, must serve for the set. *Collins 5-3 Swiatek Heck of a save from Swiatek, two set points averted. A first ace for the American makes it 15-15, and all while her serve has seemed pretty dominant. The next serve is not an ace but can’t be returned, either. 30-15. The next one is an ace and here come two set points. Swiatek saves the first on a long rally, and the second with a fine return and angled stop-volley. Deuce. Good serve hands over another set point but then comes a double fault. Collins misses a winner to hand over a break point. Then comes another double. Game back on, and both players’ serve struggling. Collins 5-2 Swiatek* The second serve faulty again as Collins gets to 0-15. Then a winner is clattered home for 0-30. Swiatek wins on second serve for the first time as Collins thwacks the ball into the net cord. But two break points are soon offered up, the first averted by Swiatek chasing all over the court. The second goes Collins’ way, and on that second serve. She will serve for the set after a third break. Collins* 4-2 Swiatek Break back! The comeback on? Signs of struggle as Collins clanks a low-lying shot out of bounds. Then she wins a rally by booming to the net as Swiatek misses the chance for a passing shot. The Collins first serve is imperious, the second less so. 30-30 after a fine Swiatek serve. Swiatek suddenly shows off her power in whipping the ball from the baseline and setting up an enforced error and break point. Collins saves that for deuce. An untimely double hands over a second break point. That’s gobbled up with a roar from Swiatek. Collins 4-1 Swiatek* The Pole gets on the board at last. Swiatek feels the brunt of Collins’ returning once more but also deals in some speed herself, but then her second serve fails her again and it’s 30-30. She follows up her serve by pacing down the court to go to 40-30, but then double faults. That’s a shame. Collins’ winner attempt goes long to hand her opponent the advantage, and that’s one seized on. Collins* 4-0 Swiatek Swiatek has to fight back here, and fast. And Collins is not quite so dominant, but her power wins a baseline rally to reach 40-15. A skidding serve gets the job done. Collins 3-0 Swiatek* Danger signs for Swiatek, whose second serve is swatted aside by Collins for 0-30. Then, a backhand bludgeon takes two break points for a double break. The first is saved by Swiatek’s guile, the second is missed, and Collins has full command of the set. Collins* 2-0 Swiatek Powerful serving from Collins, and a crashing backhand winner takes her to 40-0. She’s set off at quite a rate. Swiatek shows off her own power with a winner on 40-15, but a double-handed backhand winner takes the game. The American has started like an Amtrak. Collins 1-0 Swiatek* Collins starts with some real power off her service return, swiftly going 30-0 up, then a double fault presents two break points. And that’s claimed at the second opportunity. An early break, well claimed. And without much further ado, we go again with Collins v Swiatek, with the final against Barty the prize. Swiatek, will serve first. Barty, speaking to Eurosport’s Babsi Schett, says he will not be watching the second semi-final, Collins v Swiątek, but will not be having a beer either, choosing to stay professional. She’s dropped just two service games all tournament and was only taken to one break point by Keys there. It was a hugely impressive win. Here’s how she gets the job done. Ash Barty speaks to chino-ed tech bro Jim Courier. It’s unreal, it’s just incredible. I love this tournament, I love coming here and playing in Australia and as an Aussie we are spoiled that we are a grand slam nation and get to play at home. I get the chance to play for a title, it’s unreal. This is Brisbane weather, it was humid. I tried to keep Maddy under the pump as she can take it away from you. She’s a great person, looks you in the eye, a lot of the girls love her. Dylan [Alcott, Australian of the year] has inspired me, he’s inspired the whole globe. We were watching his match, and we were crying and saying “shit”, I need get my own game together. Keys will be going down fighting, and finds yet another winner for 0-15. Barty levels with a big serve before Keys gets excited and wafts one out for 30-15. Then comes another mighty serve and two match points. The noise is huge, and it’s even louder when a serve sets up a passing shot. Barty becomes the first Australian finalist for 45 years, when Kerry Melville Reid defeated her fellow Aussie Dianne Fromholtz. Barty 6-1 5-3 Keys* Gutsy hold from Keys when all seems lost. The first point sees Barty clatter a winner, the second sees more of the same. 0-30, but an oddly bouncing ball keeps her guessing for 15-30. Then Keys pulls off a mighty winner, right down the line. And another! And then Barty misses to hand over the hold. The thunder has started in Victoria, too. Barty* 6-1 5-2 Keys Almost there. Having opened the door with a break, Barty slams it shut on Keys, who takes a deep breath. One of resignation as Barty, with a love hold, is one game away from the final. Barty 6-1 4-2 *Keys The break is on. Barty can see victory. Keys need to take advantage of Barty’s wobbles but goes long on a winner that was very achievable. Then does the same on a basic mid-rally baseline shot. That hands over two break points. The first is saved, then comes a missed first serve. Barty misses to go back to deuce. But follows up by an oblique backhand that sets Keys chasing down the court, break point again and one seized with some powerful hitting. Barty* 6-1 3-2 Keys Some wobbles from Barty? A very winnable smash is missed to gasps from the home crowd, the tension getting to everyone. Sighs of relief as she gets to 30-15 up. The first break point is offered up to Keys but closed off with a far better smash. Then Keys regrets a missed forehand, and Barty bludgeons her way to a hold that was far from easy. Barty 6-1 2-2 Keys* Keys is playing better. This game is held after a deuce or two and there are signs Barty is not quite at the levels of before. A crashing winner takes the game for a good hold. Barty* 6-1 2-1 Keys The door remains closed on the Barty serve, and it’s 40-0 after an ace. The game is claimed to love with net-cord shot that puts Keys to the back of the court. Barty 6-1 1-1 Keys* Keys looks to really struggling here but produces a gritty hold. Barty’s game is just too strong and there are signs of despondency setting in. Still, she manages to send her opponent in the wrong direction to win a point, and then another for 30-30. And then a backhand from the back of the court forces a Barty error. Better from Keys. Much better. Barty* 6-1 1-0 Keys Back on court, and the dominance continues, with a game served out with ease. Nice photo of the scene and that cloudy sky from PA Media’s reporter out there. Barty 6-1 Keys* Keys seems to have expended all her energy on that previous game. A double fault hands over two break and set points. That’s taken with aplomb from Barty with a clubbing winner. Barty* 5-1 Keys A very long service game to hold. The surge is on, and Barty takes it to 30-0 with just three shots played. A glimmer at 30-15 and then Barty overdoes one down the line . 30-30 feels like a small victory for Keys, but she messes up the chance for a winner on her return. But Barty tightens up, too, and overdoes it once more for deuce. Then a skidding ball hands over a break point, as Barty clatters the ball high and out. A speeding ace saves that, and then some athleticism forces Keys into an error. Still, we go back to deuce again as Keys finds her way into the match. It’s saved by two good serves but we have a match on her hands. Barty 4-1 Keys* The double break is claimed. Keys gets all keyed up, sorry, and whacks a gettable winner into the net cord for 30-30. Then a backhand return sets up another break point, one claimed with ease by Barty. Barty* 3-1 Keys In the blink of an eye, Barty serves to love. Keys has a real job on her hands to tame that service game. Barty 2-1 Keys* Better from Keys, far better. Keys wins a point for 15-15 and looks relieved, following up with going 30-15 up with a powerful top-spun volley. Then comes a winner to the right of the court. Then a fine serve. Barty* 2-0 Keys Barty clatters an early ace, and Keys then fails to convert a second second for 30-0. Keys misses the next one to, and Barty already has command of the first set. The second serve crashes home. Barty 1-0 Keys* A lengthy opening game sees Keys broken. We begin with an ace, but 30-30 comes around pretty quickly, but Barty nets to hand over a 40-30 lead. But an overhit slice from Keys leads to deuce. She serves well to claim advantage, and is then forced into hitting wide for another deuce. Another advantage to Keys, but she nets on the next point. It’s nervous out there. Barty’s forehand winner seizes the first break point, and a winner from mid-court after a drop shot takes it. So then, it’s been all smiles in the buildup, two players who have enjoyed good form in this tournament. Off we go, and the crowd makes some noise as Keys gets ready to throw first. Looks like a fuller crowd in the Rod Laver Arena, the numbers still reduced by Covid restrictions, and the players take the coin toss, with Keys choosing to serve first. The knock-up begins. Interesting warm-up technique. Bad news for the Australian of the year, whose post-match interviews have been a highlight of the tournament. The home contingent already have something to celebrate. Here comes the home favourite, and she’s here in straight sets. Can Barty get past the semis for the first time? She lost at this stage in 2020 to Sofia Kenin, and last year to Karolina Muchova in the semi-finals. Madison Keys is also at her furthest stage of this tournament, having got here in 2015. She’s looking for her second ever Grand Slam final, having reached the US Open final in 2017 and lost to Sloane Stephens. Barty is the overriding favourite, and would seem to have too strong a game for her opponent, though the experts say she might be vulnerable to Key’s forehand. This match will be followed by the second semi, where Danielle Collins takes on Iga Swiątek. The business end of the tournament is here, and the weather is thundery in Melbourne. It’s likely the tennis will be much the same.After 84 minutes and 39 seconds of Liverpool’s win at Crystal Palace on Sunday, Diogo Jota ran on to the ball, chested it, miskicked it, planted his leg into the path of Vicente Guaita and went down. Three seconds of action which Kevin Friend apparently watched 17 times before deciding to give a penalty. Those three seconds were of course repeated and analysed by Sky Sports, and by Sky Sports News, by Match of the Day and all over social media – the moment has been viewed almost 400,000 times on Sky Sports’ Twitter from just after the game. If you add all the posts, fan pages and every account that uploaded it to every platform, it amounts to millions of us repeatedly watching a man sliding into another man and falling on the ground. “An absolutely disgraceful decision” was Alan Shearer’s verdict. “Can you tell I’m angry?” he continued. “It’s a nonsense,” said Glenn Hoddle. “An absolute nonsense.” Neil Warnock added an agenda to proceedings: “They get away with murder, the top clubs.” Mark Clattenburg and Keith Hackett used their national newspaper columns to talk about it. Phone-ins, YouTube channels, podcasts devoting hours to this moment. By contrast, the three preceding seconds of the match were a thing of total beauty. Trent Alexander‑Arnold intercepted the ball, and played a raking, arrow-like 50-yard pass into Jota’s path. It was such an exceptional piece of skill, to decide in a split second to attempt it, to execute the perfect technique – to just kick it so absolutely perfectly. And this highlights the absurdity of how we consume football – and how little time we spend talking about the bit where players kick the ball, which ultimately feels like quite an important part of the whole affair. Far be it from me to suggest replacing articles about how much injury time Jon Moss played at the King Power or whether Craig Pawson has VAR nightmares about Ryan Fraser with the 10 best kicks of the weekend, but there is a question about what we value in the game and what we want from it. Before attempting to claim any sort of moral high ground in all of this, I’m equally guilty. Monday’s Football Weekly podcast began with a five-minute deconstruction of Jotagate, then a throwaway mention of Alexander-Arnold’s pass before moving on to talking about the match itself. And there is clearly merit in discussing game-changing decisions, VAR and the humans behind VAR. Very occasionally there is a kick of such astounding beauty that football stops to appreciate it. Thiago Alcântara’s half-volley against Porto in the Champions League – the one that skimmed like a stone – was so perfect it was art. It was so utterly non-fungible – hang that up and put it in a museum, download it and get John Terry to pawn it off as a crypto-meme. I still can’t work out if it grazed the turf before taking off like a low-flying fighter jet. How does someone manage to swing their foot at an inflated round butyl rubber bladder with such effortless timing and grace that it forces someone miles away to let out an involuntary scream of joy from their sofa? Of course different fans want different things, but nothing gives me more pleasure than watching Tom Huddlestone stroke the ball around the pitch with either foot like he’s fizzing a five-iron down the fairway. That’s my ultimate clickbait. There are those who just want us to talk about the football, but it turns out it’s harder to do that than to press the buttons of perceived injustice, agendas and outrage at a refereeing decision or a player’s haircut. There’s no debate about Thiago’s strike. Roy Keane and Graeme Souness can’t have a row about Youssef M’Changama’s free-kick for Comoros against Cameroon, or Gabadinho Mhango’s opener for Malawi in their defeat by Morocco. They were just brilliant strikes. Once you’ve said that, what more can you add? And (genuine) disagreements make for more interesting analysis. It’s much easier to create debate about the need for common sense and consistency, to hold Mike Riley responsible for all the ills in the game. I do wonder how many of us actually want every decision to be correct, or do we subconsciously want to feel like the world is against us? There’s a real sense that some fans are determined to find conclusive “proof” that there really is an agenda against [insert whoever you support here]. And the opportunity to feel wronged brings fans together. It unifies us. I’m still slightly annoyed that David O’Leary wasn’t sent off for pulling Cambridge’s John Taylor down when he was clean through in the 1991 FA Cup quarter-final at Highbury. And in the hierarchy of things that actually matter, the art of kicking a ball is quite a long way behind the other aspects of the game that receive minimal coverage compared with VAR and referees. We haven’t got the balance right when it comes to discussing the easy things, and covering the corruption, human rights abuses, racism and misogyny. It’s a depressing and increasing list. But when it comes to those easy things, whenever we analyse a football match, regardless of whether it’s in a TV studio or in the pub, we’re all making editorial decisions. Which bit of that game interested us the most? What are the biggest moments? Which bits did we enjoy? What made us angry? What made us laugh? What made us cry? Every part of it is valid. I enjoy talking about all of it. I just sometimes wonder if we should spend a little more time admiring how good these people are at kicking footballs – because that is where it all starts and ends.‘OK, Dad, this is an incredible essay on the effects of grief and grey morality in a postapocalyptic society,” says the eldest child, AKA the millennial. “It’s got proper female characters, progressive takes on sexuality and tonnes of rain.” “They’ve made a video game of The Handmaid’s Tale?” “No, Dad. It’s The Last of Us. Don’t worry. It’s still a zombie shooter. And both games have the best ending ever.” Now she has my interest. Video game endings fascinate me, because my generation started out with arcade games that didn’t have them. Pac-Man kept eating dots and chasing ghosts and the Space Invaders kept coming, wave after incessant wave. The first arcade game that had an actual ending was Dragon’s Lair and nobody actually saw that because it was so hard to complete. I have a tough start with The Last of Us because I hate games where you search for stuff in every room of a house. I spend my normal life doing that with car keys and headphones. I want games where you walk into a room and all the objects get sucked into a magic pocket. But that isn’t realistic, I hear you cry. Well, neither is only being able to carry three shivs in a world where, despite the zombie apocalypse, cargo pants clearly still exist. I also hate any form of crafting, because that was what my generation had to do for “fun” as kids before we had video games. Whether it’s smoke bombs from sugar and explosives or a set of Action Man drawers from matchboxes, it’s all boring to me. “Keep going,” I tell myself. “The millennial says it’s got the best ending ever.” Throughout the first chapter of Joel and Ellie’s jaunt across a post-infected US I keep trying to guess what this great ending will be. Maybe Ellie isn’t immune to infection after all? Maybe Joel is her real father? Maybe they’re both unwitting participants in some reality TV show, I’m Infected Get Me Out of Here? As you will all know by now – and if you’ve yet to play The Last of Us then please stop reading – the ending has Joel murder a perfectly innocent and well-intentioned doctor who wants to cut Ellie open to find a cure that will save humanity. But Joel has no truck with utilitarian philosophy, because Ellie has now become a replacement for the daughter he lost. So, he disregards mankind’s future and, by stopping the operation, effectively murders the entire human race (alongside a whole hospital’s worth of doctors). “Why does he do that?” I asked the millennial, in one of many fantastic discussions we had about the game. “Because he’s a white male,” came the answer, because it’s 2022 and she’s in her 20s. And maybe she’s right. Either way it is a jaw-dropping, supremely brave ending and the terrific Left Behind side-story also brought the feels. So, when it came to The Last of Us Part 2, I was beyond excited. Fifty million hours later I was beyond disappointed. Don’t get me wrong, the millennial nailed it when she said it was a great exploration of the effects of grief and grey morality. But after spending the whole game switching between two strong female characters (literally, have you seen Abby’s arms?) and contrasting factional creeds, you have the final confrontation. They fight. And … they both live. And go their separate ways. The only real damage is Ellie losing a couple of fingers, and the game portrays the worst consequence of this as not being able to play guitar any more. Seriously? That’s the biggest drawback to being fingerless in a zombie apocalypse? The first game ended with Joel murdering an entire civilisation, the second ends with Ellie murdering one song on a guitar. It’s a scene you might have found in The Secret of Monkey Island. It’s hilarious. The Last of Us Part 2 leaves us with exactly the same non-ending as those original arcade games. Ellie and Abby will go on killing to keep their respective postapocalyptic factions going, both driven by the grief of murdered loved ones. They are both trapped, endlessly chasing ghosts. Sounds familiar… The millennial says this shows there are no winners when it comes to revenge. I say they want both protagonists alive for The Last of Us 3. It’s a cynical cop out. But then, The Last of Us Part 2 is a game that features the most cynical scene ever, where apropos of nothing, after genuinely bravura portrayals of women, transgender and gay characters, alpha female Abby suddenly gets rogered from behind by some guy. It happens out of nowhere. The game spends umpteen hours portraying progressive sexuality, and then it’s like some marketing man decided they needed to toss the incels a piece of red meat to stop them hate-bombing all over 4chan (which didn’t work). It is easily the most gratuitous bit of nudity I have ever seen in games, and I have played The Witcher 3. The rogerer in question even has a girlfriend. Who is pregnant. Way to shit on a sister, Abby. “It’s basically Pac-Man with gratuitous boobs,” I say to my eldest, who sighs and pours herself a large cup of coffee. This will be another long discussion.Hi, Keith … What’s your favourite English expression? ClassicMacGruber I’m sure they meant to say Kief? Or maybe not? I get called Kief in England more than any other place. I met some young parents in about 2001 who had named their son Kiefer, but I’ve never met anyone called Kiefer that is my age. As for my favourite British expression, there’s “bit and bobs”, which is really sweet and reminds me of my grandma, and “Oi!” which is not technically British, but any time I go “Oi!” it stops the room. Does your twin sister have as many middle names as you? emzsam I’m Kiefer William Frederick Dempsey George Rufus Sutherland. She’s Rachel Elizabeth Maria Teresa Dorothy Isabelle Sutherland. We’ve never gotten a straight answer from our father as to why he was so generous. I’ve always joked that he must have been in real debt and told people: “If you feed us on Tuesday, I’ll name my son after you”, and then extended the offer to my sister. How does being British affect your outlook on life? LarboIreland I have an innate desire to conquer the world. During your first appearance in The Simpsons, as an army colonel in the 18th season, Homer says: “Man, you’ve got an awesome voice!” Do you agree? francolfc I’m very grateful for my voice. I have benefitted genetically from my father who has got one of the most awesome voices of all time. He was doing the voiceover for these Volvo commercials and getting paid a lot more money than I originally thought. So, as a joke, I told his agent that I could do a really good Donald Sutherland for half the money. I don’t think my father thought it was very funny, but I thought it was hysterical. Has your father influenced your acting career choices? evandane It’s hard to think of another actor who’s been as prolific and made films as diverse as Ordinary People, Don’t Look Now, Fellini’s Casanova, Bertolucci’s 1900 and The Hunger Games. His influence was to make my career as diversified and interesting as possible, which he taught me by doing, not by saying, which was really cool. What do you remember of your grandfather, politician Tommy Douglas, who moved from Falkirk in Scotland and helped to bring universal healthcare to Canada? Haigin88 From when I was six or seven, my sister and I would spend six weeks in the summer with my mother’s parents, my grandma and grandpa. I have incredibly fond memories of sitting in the gallery at the House of Commons in Ottawa, watching him give these great speeches. When he was finished, he would sneak up to the gallery and bring us a hotdog. I was aware of how important he was in Canadian politics, but he was also my grandpa. He was incredibly supportive. I was scholastically challenged and he told me not to get down on myself. When I was 14, he taught me to drive in a car park. He was one of the kindest people in my life. He died when I was 18, so I miss him very much. Do you feel more comfortable as a musician than an actor? sey_more_j No. You inhabit two very different things. As an actor, I’m inhabiting a character, so innately, it’s not comfortable because it’s not you. If I’m on stage and explaining to a room full of strangers that I wrote this song because I had a broken heart, and people start laughing … what’s plan B? You’re relying on the good faith of others, so that’s not very comfortable, either. I think it’s safe to say I’m pretty uncomfortable doing both. You’ve said you dislike watching your own movies and TV shows. How about your singing? emzsam When you’ve got 40, or 50 songs, at some point you’re going to start listening to your own stuff, just to remember it. When I’m watching a movie or a television show I’m in … it’s not that I hate it, but I have a very strong image of what I’m trying to create, and sometimes I don’t see what was in my imagination. Stand By Me was a perfect example. I really felt that I had not played that character properly. But people would come up to me and say otherwise, so I realised what is blocking me from enjoying my characters – and I know this sounds moronic – is that they look and sound like me. I read that Stand By Me worked so well because you genuinely intimidated the four younger actors. Was that conscious? Hoppo I don’t know where that story comes from. I was 18, they were 12, so we didn’t hang out together. We were shooting in Oregon, and I was off in Portland doing … whatever I did at night. I remember running lines with River Phoenix. If their only contact with me was in the scenes, I understand why they might have felt a little threatened. But I certainly wasn’t going to bully a bunch of little children for a film. Did you ever meet that muscly singer who plays the saxophone in the beach party rock band in The Lost Boys? JSpicoli Yeah – Tim Cappello. He was Tina Turner’s saxophone player. The Lost Boys had this great, deliberate, rock’n’roll soundtrack with Echo and the Bunnymen, Roger Daltrey … all these cool acts of the time. And he was one of them. How often do you pull out: “Maggots, Michael. You’re eating maggots” when you’re at a Chinese restaurant with friends? TamaIti It hasn’t occurred to me but now I might. You were very funny in 1992’s Twin Peaks: Fire Walk With Me Haigin88 Not on purpose! Do I get offered much comedy? No, I do not. It’s not that I can’t read the joke and find the punchline. I just get so nervous that nobody’s going to laugh that comedy is something that I’ve never coveted, and it’s avoided me, too. Would I like to be funny? My God, yeah. Whether or not I’m capable on cue might forever remain to be seen. What prompted you to move to TV when Netflix didn’t even exist? Istanbul_78 Some television shows were already better than the movies. ER, NYPD Blue, The Sopranos, The West Wing, Sex and the City … 24 was right in there, so I got incredibly lucky. Stephen Hopkins, who directed the first season of 24, was a really good friend of mine, and helped convince me. Plus, the films I was being offered weren’t very good. Did you take on the role of Tom Kirkman in Designated Survivor just so Jack Bauer could finally get into the Oval Office? TheOracleNo1 I wish I were that clever. I liked the idea of someone becoming president who didn’t go through the process. If you’re willing to put yourself through that process of becoming president, you’re probably not the person for the job. I liked the idea that – very much like in 1939’s Mr Smith Goes to Washington – someone is just pulled out of the crowd to become president who will approach politics purely from common sense. So, that’s the serious answer. It would’ve been very different if Jack Bauer had shown up, I would have let him in the Oval Office, and we would have talked about how much we thought we looked like each other. I’ve gotta ask, any chance of more Jack Bauer? TheSableHoundReturns I’ve learned to say: never say never. But if the writers are going come up with a good idea, they better do it quick, because I’m slowing down. Time is catching up and the bones are getting brittle. Maybe they should reboot it with new characters and Jack Bauer somehow gets out of China and that storyline’s resolved. I’m open to all of it. 24 was one of my great experiences in life and if there’s a smart, intelligent way to finish it – or at least finish my involvement – I’m open to that. I’ve also had to learn how to respond to the name Jack, because, like the reader in the first question who got my name wrong, people just go: Jack! I was just settling in my seat on a plane and this lady leaned over and said: “I feel much safer now that you’re sitting next to me.” I took a beat and said: “I don’t know why. Everyone who sits next to me dies.” I was joking, but I’m not sure she knew how to take it. Why doesn’t Jack ever say goodbye to Chloe on the phone? Haigin88 Everything’s way too urgent. With Jack Bauer, everything’s vocal. As Kiefer, I would say [takes sips of water]: “Ooh, I really would like that glass of water.” Jack Bauer would say [swigs water]: “I need that glass of water.” He never says goodbye but you will notice that he does say please and thank you, which was never written into the script. I don’t know what it is about television people, but they are incredibly impolite. So that was my big contribution. What’s your favourite item from Greggs? prometheus3 Plain sausage roll. I have people in the band and crew who get all complicated with steak this and bacon that … Ugh! Sausage roll, easy, done, in and out. The great thing is that it doesn’t matter if it’s been sitting there for six hours, it still tastes the same. Get the sausage roll, there will be zero disappointment. As proud owner of a 24 tattoo on my back, has a fan ever displayed any ink that has terrified you? Ajyates33 No, not terrifying. I mean, I’ve got Mickey Mouse with a machine gun reading a book called How to Kill on my arm, but I think that’s cute and funny. Every tour, I get a tattoo at the end. I can’t think of a tattoo shop I’ve been in that hasn’t had The Lost Boys on the wall. If people have got a tattoo because they’ve enjoyed something I did: thank you very much. • This article was amended on 1 February 2022 because an earlier version incorrectly said that Sutherland’s new album was out on Pheromone Recordings. In fact it’s on Cooking Vinyl. Kiefer Sutherland’s new album Bloor Street is out now on Cooking Vinyl.Elza Soares, who has died aged 91, was one of the finest, best-loved singers in Brazil, a glamorous, spirited performer who triumphed over personal tragedy and never forgot her hungry childhood in the favelas of Rio de Janeiro. She was an exponent of the many different forms of samba, Brazil’s most enduring and ever-evolving style, and constantly on the lookout for new experiments and fusions. And she was a bravely outspoken campaigner for women’s rights, and against racism. As a black musician she experienced racism in the industry first-hand – despite her remarkable talent, record companies were slow to sign her. Two albums, recorded 54 years apart, demonstrate her extraordinary range. She began recording in the early 1960s, just as João Gilberto, Antônio Carlos Jobim and Vinicius de Moraes were pioneering the cool new fusion of samba cançao, jazz and classical styles known as bossa nova. Soares had very different ideas. On her second album, A Bossa Negra (The Black Bossa, 1961) she matched sensual, delicate and husky vocals against swinging big band brass backing in songs that would suddenly change direction as she switched to furious growled scat singing worthy of Louis Armstrong on Perdäo (Forgiveness), or an ecstatic scream at the end of Beija-Me (Kiss Me). These were fresh, exciting songs to match the optimism of Brazil in the early 60s, and established Soares as a major force. Spool forward to 2015, and there was a very different Brazilian music scene. São Paulo had now taken over from Rio as the creative music centre, and on the extraordinary A Mulher Do Fim Do Mundo (The Woman at the End of the World) she was joined by members of the punk, candomblé and jazz-influenced Méta Méta and Afrobeat-inspired Bixiga 70 for a set that mixed samba with distorted rock and jazz influences. There were edgy, unnerving songs about domestic violence or the death of a crack addict, and Soares dominated the set with her often harsh-edged, powerful vocals. It was the Brazilian album of the year, and rightly won her a Latin Grammy award. She loved to experiment, but stayed in touch with her musical roots. The samba schools that compete at the Rio carnival with their music and flamboyant costumes are also social centres with strong links with the local community. Soares supported the Mocidade school, in the neighbourhood where she grew up, and on a hot Saturday night in 2007 she gave a thrilling performance there, filmed for the BBC series Brasil, Brasil. She sang from a balcony overlooking the large, packed dancefloor, wearing a short black dress, a black wig with a red flower, looking decades younger than her age. She began with a rousing, emotional tribute to the school, Salve A Mocidade (Save Mocidade), which she had first recorded in the 70s, and told me: “I love this school. I love this community. It’s my heart”. Soares was born in the Padre Miguel neighbourhood of Rio de Janeiro, the daughter of a samba-loving, guitar-playing factory worker, Avelino Gomes, and a washer woman, Rosária Maria da Conceição. When she was 12 her father forced her to marry Lourdes Antônio Soares, and a year later she gave birth to her first child. Desperately poor, but already a music lover, she entered a singing contest hosted by the musician Ary Barroso on the popular station Rádio Tupi, wearing a dress borrowed from her mother. When asked where she came from, the teenager replied “planet hunger”. She won the contest, and money to feed her growing family. She was inspired to keep singing, but problems continued. Her husband died of tuberculosis when she was 21, and she worked in a soap factory and said she stole food to survive. She was now a widow with five children to support. But she persevered, built up a reputation singing in the Copacabana clubs, and toured Argentina before finally recording her debut album, Se Acaso Você Chegasse (If By Chance You Came), in 1960, introducing scat singing to samba. She became a bestselling celebrity, travelling to Chile when Brazil played in the Fifa World Cup, meeting Armstrong, and working with the singer Miltinho and the virtuoso percussionist Wilson Das Neves. In 2007 he described her to me as “unprecedented. No-one equals her as a performer.” But her personal life now brought scandal and yet more tragedy. In 1968 she married the soccer star Manuel Francisco dos Santos, better known by his nickname Mané Garrincha, who was a national hero in Brazil. She was accused of breaking up his earlier marriage, their house was attacked, and for several years the couple were forced to leave Rio for São Paulo and then Italy. Garrincha was a heavy drinker, and was driving drunk when Soares’ mother was killed in a car crash in 1969. Soares tried to help him, touring the bars trying to stop them serving her husband, but this made her all the more unpopular with his friends. Garrincha died of cirrhosis in 1983, by which time the couple were separated, but she was said to be devastated. Three years later their only son, who was named after his father, was killed in another car accident. Depressed, Soares left Brazil, travelling to Europe and Los Angeles, trying to start an international career. She returned after encouragement from the Tropicália star Caetano Veloso, who had asked her to sing on his 1984 album, Velô, and gradually regained her success. In 1999 she appeared at the celebrity-packed Since Samba Has Been Samba show at London’s Royal Albert Hall, alongside a cast that included Veloso, Gilberto Gil, Chico Buarque and Georgie Fame. But her most experimental years were still to come, as she began to explore samba sujo (“dirty samba”), influenced by the hip hop and funk styles that were becoming popular in the favelas. Do Cóccix Até o Pescoço (From Top to Tail, 2002) included a Veloso song and a human beatbox artist and was nominated for a Latin Grammy, while Vivo Feliz (I Live Happily, 2004) included rap and heavy bass lines. Performing the songs at the Jazz Cafe in London that year she bounded on stage making mewing and growling noises before stomping through a new anthem, Rio De Janeiro, with the rapper Anderson Lugão. Following the groundbreaking A Mulher Do Fim Do Mundo she recorded two further highly praised albums, Deus É Mulher (God and Woman) in 2018 and Planeta Fome (Planet Hunger) in 2019. Both were nominated for Latin Grammys, with the title of her final and 35th album providing a reminder of that now-legendary comment she made as a teenager. She is survived by four of the children from her first marriage, João Carlos, Gerson, Dilma and Sara. • Elza Soares, singer, born 23 June 1930; died 20 January 2022‘This show is very much about paleoclimatology – how scientists are studying the past climate partly to understand what happened but also partly to help them predict what will happen in future and how we can plan for it,” says Noémie Goudal. “It’s by looking at the past, at changes in heat and the elements, that we can apprehend what will happen.” We’re discussing her exhibition Post Atlantica, which opens at London’s Edel Assanti gallery on this week. Including film, photography, a monumental sculptural installation and a series of ceramics, it’s a show united by the French artist’s ongoing fascination with the history of Earth, its climate and its geology. The title refers to Atlantica, an ancient continent that formed about 2bn years ago then divided to form parts of present-day Africa and South America; paleoclimatologists take a deep dive into that past and more, and Goudal has spent years researching their work. Take Camille Dusséaux, for example, who has been studying ancient drops of water found underground. She has worked with 300m-year-old fluids found in the Armorican Massif, a rumpled section of the Earth’s crust in north-west France, and by analysing those drops was able to pinpoint the top of a mountain that once stood in Brittany. By analysing drops found in sharks’ teeth fossils, she was then able to find the contemporary sea level, and therefore the mountain’s height. “It’s like Sherlock Holmes!” says Goudal, who met with Dusséaux and was inspired to make a photographic triptych titled Plongée [or “Diving”]. The large-scale images show a snow-topped mountain cut off by what looks like a right-angle of smooth rock; they evoke diving down through the layers of history of our 4.5-bn-year-old planet, and cut-away diagrams of its interior. But on closer inspection these smooth sections of rock are pieces of cardboard, painstakingly shot at the scene. The images are an optical illusion, albeit one that shows its own workings, because Post Atlantica also probes the limits of our perceptions and understanding. A video installation shows ocean waves crashing into rocks, projected onto three photographs of the same scene. It’s a meditation on the way water erodes the landscape so slowly it’s imperceptible to the human eye, and the different rates of human and geological change. “We apprehend the world as fixed – we have borders, and we have atlases that show the world as it is,” Goudal comments. “But even the Alps are moving, three or four centimetres per year.” Similarly Goudal’s four-metre sculpture shows palm trees, a reference to the Phoenix atlantica, a rare species of palm found in South America and western Africa which helped prove the one-time existence of the Atlantica continent. The installation is comprised of life-size photographic strips of the same scene, which both assemble and split up the view; stand in the right place and one of Goudal’s artworks, Phoenix VI, hoves into view. Goudal worked with similar set-ups on location when she created the Phoenix series, taking a huge printer so she could instantly print off a 1:1 photograph of the trees, cut it into strips, pin up these strips over the scene, then shoot the whole lot together. The result is a series of mind-bending trompe d’oeil images, which recall collages or digital glitches but are shot for real; Goudal deliberately shows some of her workings, including bulldog clips and poles in the frame. “There’s a link with the lab. It’s always about experimentation because you never know what you’re going to get,” she explains. “I’m very much working with the elements. I can’t control the wind, the rain, the sun that suddenly comes through the clouds. It’s about adapting. I think that’s what humans are good at.” And that’s interesting, because although Goudal’s work poses fascinating questions about our perceptions, it’s far from pure formalist play. And though she’s a fast-emerging artist – the 38-year-old is showing Post Atlantica at the prestigious Les Rencontres d’Arles photography festival in summer – her ideas raise crucial concerns. At London’s 2021 Frieze art fair she exhibited a film titled Below the Deep South, for example, footage of flames ripping through a scene made of photographic backdrops; destroying layer after layer, the fire only stopped when it reached reality. Inevitably, it suggested the climate emergency. Similarly, paleoclimatologists research changes that evolved over millennia. In future, those changes will happen much faster, making their outcomes hard to anticipate. “When I talk to scientists they say, ‘Yes, we know what will happen if the carbon dioxide rate changes and the heat rises, but we don’t know how this will happen at such a fast rate’,” Goudal points out. “That’s why they’re so worried.” And though “like every other person in our generation” Goudal is deeply worried about those changes, Post Atlantica deals with a more fundamental philosophical shift. This exhibition isn’t about climate change per se, she says, it’s about how we perceive the world and our place in it – and how that has to evolve if we are to avert disaster. “We feel that we know the universe, we know the moon, we know our bodies, we know our viruses, we know everything. But actually, we have to be more humble,” she says. “It’s about re-finding our place. If you just tell people ‘Stop using plastic bags, don’t travel’, it’s very abrupt and it becomes much more difficult [to follow]. But if we do a lot of thinking, some deeper philosophical thinking, we can grow into something so much richer and more positive.” Noémie Goudal: Post Atlantica is on show from 27 January – 12 March at Edel Assanti, LondonAs a professional actor living with dwarfism, all I could do when I read Peter Dinklage’s critical comments about Disney’s forthcoming live-action remake of Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs was nod in agreement. Peter is a much more famous actor than I am, but my disability politics are very similar to his. I am very aware of the importance of representation, and of how few genuine and humanising representations there are of people with dwarfism on our screens and on our stages. I am so careful about the roles I pick because I know that, if I get it wrong, there will be repercussions for some innocent person with dwarfism just minding their own business. I don’t want what I create as an artist to be used to bring a random person down in the middle of their day. I had “Mini-Me” yelled at me by strangers for years after Austin Powers came out. “Hi-ho, hi-ho,” is regularly hummed or sung at me by passersby. I am filmed and photographed by strangers for who knows what on social media. Most insults are simply regurgitated rubbish that people have picked up from somewhere in the social repertoire of negative and dehumanising media portrayals. Most people have never met a person with dwarfism. It is a rare condition. People only have a very few reference points: pantomime, Disney’s 1937 animated film, something ridiculing that they saw in the press or on TV, the punchline to a comedian’s joke, a dehumanised character such as Mini-Me in a film. The recurring “Hippo Eats Dwarf” fake news article is the kind of degrading swill that circulates every few years. On the other hand, I don’t have a problem with Tolkien’s fantasy Lord of the Rings. His Hobbits and Dwarves are clearly stylised fairy folk. It is so disappointing that I am still more likely to be a mum, lover, secretary, lawyer, teacher or doctor in real life than to play one in a Disney film. It worries me that Disney hasn’t even reached the basic milestone of representing disabled bodies in ordinary ways, yet are now undertaking the creatively fraught challenge of humanising their seven most famous disability tropes. A live-action version of Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs will remove the safety net that animation provided. These cute, dehumanised, infantilised, animalistic creatures known in the 1937 film only by their labels, Dopey, Happy, Doc, etc, are not fully people. Nor are they fully fairytale creatures. Interestingly, their naming did not originate from the original Brothers Grimm tale but was a Disney invention. But as a cartoon, it is “pretend”, more forgivable. It is still problematic but with more distance from me, in the real world. The dated nature of the animation also reduces the hurt it causes because it was from another time, predating the disability rights movement. And before you question me: yes, I do identify as disabled. At 3-feet-something-secret tall, I can only drive an adapted car and cook safely in an adapted kitchen. My life requires modifications and adaptations. I am disabled on the street by negative attitudes and prejudice I meet in the community and broader society. If you need more information to understand what I mean, Google “the social model of disability”. I simply cannot see how Disney can make a live action version of its 1937 film without falling into disablist stereotypes of people with dwarfism. It will have to involve disabled creatives, and empower people with dwarfism to forge their own representations, steer their own roles in the story and give space to their voices. Disney will have to listen. Which means being open to awkward conversations and the workshopping of ideas from a minority community. Disney has responded to concerns in a statement: “To avoid reinforcing stereotypes from the original animated film, we are taking a different approach with these seven characters and have been consulting with members of the dwarfism community. We look forward to sharing more as the film heads into production after a lengthy development period.” But in general, this is not something film production is renowned for doing well, or at all. And it is a process that is often glossed over with a tokenistic wave of the hand. I have too often been the only disabled person in the rehearsal room on a shoot. And as an actor, there is a fine line between “advocating bravely” and being “emotionally frigid and just not open to their ideas”. You aren’t the director, but you are the only one who knows the experience and how you are seen in the world. This leads me to doubt that Disney is currently capable of making the massive ideological leap needed to create a film in which the seven dwarfs are the fully fledged humans they should be. With real names, rounded characters and having some kind of agency. Here’s an idea, though: the seven dwarfs could live in a house that is only accessible to people 4ft 2in tall. With an adapted kitchen and adapted vehicles. So all the average height people in their world are forced to bend over for 40% of the film, sit in little chairs and stoop to use the stove. Maybe back pain destroys the evil queen, and the perils of bad ergonomic design are really and truly explored. That would be an interesting take on Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs. Let the average-height people be disabled by design and attitude for once.The music streaming platform Spotify is in the process of removing Neil Young’s music after the company refused to take down Joe Rogan’s podcast amid the musician’s objections that it spread vaccine misinformation. Rogan has been described by the New York Times as “one of the most consumed media products on the planet”. His podcast, The Joe Rogan Experience, is Spotify’s most popular. In 2020, Rogan signed a $100m deal that gave the streaming company exclusive rights to the show. But this week, Young posted an open letter to his manager and record label that was later taken down in which he said: “With an estimated 11 million listeners per episode, [The Joe Rogan Experience], which is hosted exclusively on Spotify, is the world’s largest podcast and has tremendous influence. Spotify has a responsibility to mitigate the spread of misinformation on its platform, though the company presently has no misinformation policy.” The musician added: “I want you to let Spotify know immediately TODAY that I want all my music off their platform … They can have Rogan or Young. Not both.” A Spotify spokesperson confirmed to the Hollywood Reporter on Wednesday that the platform was taking down Young’s music. “We want all the world’s music and audio content to be available to Spotify users. With that comes great responsibility in balancing both safety for listeners and freedom for creators. We have detailed content policies in place and we’ve removed over 20,000 podcast episodes related to Covid since the start of the pandemic. We regret Neil’s decision to remove his music from Spotify, but hope to welcome him back soon,” the spokesperson said. Since the pandemic, Rogan, who has legions of devoted followers, has repeatedly spread misleading and false claims. This month, 270 doctors, scientists, healthcare professionals and professors wrote an open letter to Spotify, expressing concern about medical misinformation on Rogan’s podcast. The letter highlighted a highly controversial episode from December that features Robert Malone, a virologist who was involved in the mRNA vaccine technology that led to some of the leading Covid-19 vaccines but has since been criticised for spreading vaccine misinformation. “This is not only a scientific or medical concern; it is a sociological issue of devastating proportions and Spotify is responsible for allowing this activity to thrive on its platform,” the letter read. In the wake of the catalogue deletion announcement, Young posted a new message on his website further castigating Spotify as “the home of life-threatening Covid misinformation. Selling lies for money.” He said he made the decision because of worries that young Spotify users were “impressionable and easy to swing to the wrong side of the truth. These people believe Spotify would never present grossly unfactual information. They unfortunately are wrong. I knew I had to try to point that out.” Various figures – including Donald Trump Jr – had pointed out that Young no longer had control over his master recordings after he sold a 50% stake to the publishing company Hipgnosis in January 2021. Young admitted he was “reminded by my own legal forces that contractually I did not have control of my music”, and acknowledged that his record label, Reprise, owned by Warner Music Group, allowed the music to be removed. “Thank you Warner Brothers for standing with me and taking the hit – losing 60% of my worldwide streaming income in the name of the truth,” he wrote. He pointed fans towards rivals such as Amazon Music and Apple Music while criticising Spotify for “continuing to peddle the lowest quality in music reproduction”, and thanked those who had praised his stand against the company: “I have never felt so much love coming from so many.” Alongside snark from rightwing commentators, there was public support for Young’s decision, including from another Canadian musician, the rapper Cadence Weapon, who said: “Thank you Neil Young for your leadership. It will take principled sacrifice by the bigger artists who can afford to take the hit for things to start improving for the rest of us.” The Republican Kentucky senator Rand Paul reworked lyrics to Young’s song Hey Hey, My My (Into the Black) in a tweet criticising him – though it could easily be read as praise. “Bye Bye, Hey Hey / Neil Young is gone today / It’s better to boycott / Than to just obey,” Paul wrote. “Even though [Neil Young’s] Ohio is one of the greatest protest songs of all time, free speech is kinda important also.”Many people, even those with no more than a passing interest in sport, have heard of Jesse Owens, the American athlete who ruined Adolf Hitler’s moment in the sun. For there can be no question that Hitler saw the 1936 Olympic Games in Berlin as the ideal platform from which to amplify Nazi propaganda and demonstrate his white supremacist ideology. But Owens, the grandchild of a slave, shattered that illusion. Owens became the first US track and field athlete to win four gold medals at a single Olympiad. For most of the watching world, his dominance in the 100m, 200m, long jump, and 4x100m relay was a powerful repudiation of Hitler’s myth of a superior race of humans, the Aryans. So stung were the Nazis by Owens’ exploits in their own backyard that their chief propagandist, Joseph Goebbels, would later write in his diary that “white humanity should be ashamed of itself”. By this he meant that it had been a mistake to allow black athletes to compete at the world’s grandest sporting event. While antisemitism was at the core of the Nazis’ ideology of hate, black people, Roma and Sinti people, gay people, physically and mentally disabled people – among other groups – were also under severe persecution. Owens’ spectacular achievements did little to change Nazi perceptions about black people. Policies directed against them – many of whom had come from Germany’s colonies in Africa – were cruel and inhumane. Seen as subhuman, black people were marginalised socially and economically. But even with the shadow of Nazism hanging over them like a dark cloud, many found expression in art and music. All the same, Nazis condemned the influence of “Negro culture” on German art and music, calling it “degenerate” and “racially alien”. Although no exact figures exist, it is known that a significant number of black people were detained in concentration camps and forced labour camps during the Nazi reign, and that many were murdered. Nonetheless, there seems to be little interest in Hitler’s black victims. Their plight is not talked about enough. This is partly because unlike Jews, Roma and Sinti, black people were not marked for destruction. But they were denied their human rights, sterilised, persecuted, experimented upon and murdered in camps. This racist philosophy underpinned the decision to deny German citizenship to people of African descent, thus complicating their employment prospects and their ability to get by in society. Being born in Germany did not make the slightest difference. Nazi fears of “racial pollution” led to the traumatic break-up of many mixed-race families. The derogatory term Rheinlandbastard (Rhineland bastard) was used to describe children from interracial relationships. They were viewed as symbols of racial “disgrace”, and many were forcibly sterilised to prevent “alien blood” from being passed on. Nazis were virulent racists. In 1935, after the enactment of the notorious Nuremberg racial laws, which designated black people as a minority with “alien blood”, many left Germany. Those who remained were isolated and suffered horrendous racial abuse. And while the exclusion of black children from public schools became official policy in 1941, it is a matter of record that they had long suffered racist abuse in their classrooms. In reflecting upon the fate of black people during the Nazi reign of terror, it is clear that any honest dialogue about racism must include Nazi treatment of black people. Black people’s pain and suffering should not be reduced to a footnote in the history of Nazism. Their pain and suffering should not be marginalised because they were not also targeted for annihilation. Understanding the full extent of Nazi anti-black racism is important for everyone whose ancestors were targeted by the Nazi regime, just as it is for all communities in general in contemporary society. Today is Holocaust Memorial Day. On this day we remember 6 million Jewish people murdered by the Nazis and the millions of people, including black people, who suffered and were murdered under Nazi persecution, as well as those murdered in genocides that took place in the decades that followed. At the Holocaust Memorial Day Trust, we ask those commemorating to light candles in their windows at 8pm as a tribute to those who were murdered for who they were – and to symbolise a stand against racism, prejudice and hatred in the world today. Tonight, we will be lighting ours. Olivia Marks-Woldman is the chief executive and Farayi Mungazi is the senior communications officer at the Holocaust Memorial Day TrustNeal, 59, Isle of Man Occupation Retired IT consultant Voting record Neal’s first vote was for the SDP in 1983, since when he has usually voted Labour. He describes himself as “a hardcore remainiac” Amuse bouche He has raced in the Isle of Man TT Jørgen, 58, Isle of Man Occupation Dentist Voting record Jørgen is from Denmark and lived in Germany for many years. He voted for liberal democrat parties in both countries. He has been on the Isle of Man for only six months, and describes himself as centre-right Amuse bouche He appeared in the magazine Billed-Bladet – roughly like Denmark’s Hello! – because he was at a wedding of a semi-famous friend, and his wife was wearing a kimono For starters Neal We were both prepared to be friendly, and stayed friendly the whole time. It was a pretty convivial evening. Jørgen I wouldn’t say it was love at first sight, but we had a good bond. We talked about face masks. I think the rules stray into the personal rights of people. The blue and white masks were designed against bacteria. Those masks last for roughly half an hour, because they get wet and the pores get bigger. So they don’t work that well against bacteria – and viruses are so small they can get through. Neal I was surprised about someone who works in a medical area seeming to suggest the holes in the masks are bigger than the virus. The virus isn’t a free-floating thing: it resides in water droplets, and the masks stop the droplets. The big beef Neal The climate does change over geological time, but the changes we have seen in the last 100, 200 years have to be down to human activity. Jørgen There is too much consensus, no opposing views. The climate is changing, but I’m doubting it is man-made. In hindsight, we often see that 20, 40 years ago we were wrong. A bit like cholesterol and butter and all those things; 20 years ago, they were the most dangerous things you could put into your body; now the same scientists are saying: “Sorry, we miscalculated, it’s good for you.” Neal Neither of us is a climate scientist, so our perspectives have to come from an emotional response to what we read and what is in the culture. Jørgen I’m sceptical. I rethink, and doubt, even my own actions. And I’m in favour of personal freedom. I want to have my thoughts: drive my car, eat my meat, make bad jokes about certain groups of people. I don’t want to offend people, but I want the right to offend. Sharing plate Neal You see on a daily basis how the UK has become smaller and less influential because of what it has done to itself. Brexit is a national tragedy. Jørgen We agreed about Brexit. I’m in favour of the European Union. It’s a big bureaucratic monster where it is difficult to have influence, but it is a good rallying point for Europe. But … For afters Jørgen … countries should have the right to control immigration, and you should only be able to go to a foreign country if you have a job there. The European Union is too lenient. Neal Europe needs an influx of people because of the demographic situation. I would say Jørgen is a “Fortress Europe” person. His issue is European culture and values compared with Africa and the Middle East. Jørgen I see us in Europe with a more Christian background and heritage, and if you come to Europe from outside you should accept these values, like equality of men and women, freedom of religion. I see some who don’t want to agree with those values. Neal That sounded to me like quite old-school racist talk, tarring people who are non-European with a pretty broad brush. Takeaways Jørgen Without discussion, without different opinions, there would be no progress. You need disagreement, because you are forced to defend your opinions, and maybe form new ones. It was a very nice evening, but too short. Neal People mostly don’t like confrontation. So it’s unusual to deliberately focus on those things, which was healthy. It was also good to be able to separate these existential political matters from the human being you are sharing a glass of wine with. But because we really exposed ourselves by the end, I was thinking: “Yeah, there are some aspects of you I am not comfortable with.” Additional reporting: Naomi Larsson • Neal and Jørgen ate at Épernay in Douglas. Want to meet someone from across the divide? Click here to find out moreBook now It goes without saying: social media is a busy space. With brands, influencers, media outlets and even your friends and family planting their feet in interactive technologies, it can be difficult to make yourself heard. This applies even more so if you want to communicate your brand identity and mission to the world. Whether you are using social media in a professional role, for your own business, for a side hustle, or to build and grow a personal brand, it’s crucial that you are strategic and organised. You also need to know how to track and measure the success of your efforts, but before rushing to set up campaigns and spend money on advertising, it’s important to take a step back. In this masterclass with marketing leader Edwina Mullins, you will learn how to reflect patiently on your strategy, how to gather audience insights to better position your marketing, and how to harness the opportunity. You will learn how to use tools that are available for the major social media platforms, including Facebook, Instagram and Twitter; how to determine budgets and set spending; and be introduced to campaign measuring tools. As this is a small-sized class, you will have plenty of opportunity to ask Edwina questions that are specific to your needs, and will leave with a solid plan ready to start your next social media campaign with complete confidence. This course is for … Anyone who wants to learn how to better understand how advertising on social media works, and to ensure they are setting up their paid campaigns properly to achieve ROI Course content Strategy: Seven key steps of the campaign process Settling campaign objectives and the goals you want to achieve The customer journey - how and where to reach your target audience Identify the best social media platforms for you Determining budgets and campaign spending Creative: Developing your key campaign messages The essentials of visual content for the best customer experience The best tools for creating content Implementing your campaign: The value of a content calendar and how to create one Creating a campaign delivery timeline to keep your campaign on track Measurement: The campaign measuring tools you can use Metrics that matter - knowing what you should be measuring and why Analysing campaign performance and ROI Examples of successful campaigns You will be sent a link to the webinar 2hrs before the start time of 2pm (BST). Tutor profile Edwina Mullins is marketing leader, consultant and trainer covering all industries but with a passion for B2Bs and NGOs. Edwina advises clients in the best direction for their marketing, digital &amp; social media strategies and helps them to build a sustainable suite of digital assets for both external and internal communications. She leads a marketing team that concentrates on delivering growth and change within the tech innovation community through effective communications strategies, go-to-market insights, and capability development. Outside of her head of marketing role and freelance training for SocialB, Edwina has a passion for food and farming; she supports sustainable and regenerative agriculture and is acting vice president for a rural charity. She is also on the board of directors for Turtle Doves, a CIC that empowers young women to gain confidence and experience in the workplace, through work placements, mentoring and training. You will be sent a link to the webinar 2hrs before the start time of 2pm (BST). Details Book now Dates: Wednesday 30 March 2022 Times: 2pm-5pm (BST) Price: £149 (plus £6.47 booking fee) Event capacity: 24 This masterclass is available globally. If you are joining us from outside the United Kingdom, please use this time zone converter to check your local live streaming time. 2pm BST | 3pm CEST | 6am PDT | 9am EDT Information on Guardian Masterclasses To contact us, click here. Terms and conditions can be found here. All Guardian Masterclasses are fully accessible - but please contact us if you have any queries or concerns. Returns policy Once a purchase is complete we will not be able to refund you where you do not attend or if you cancel your event booking. Please see our terms and conditions for more information on our refund policy.Travel companies are reporting a bounce-back in bookings, with easyJet and Saga predicting a summer surge as the impact of Omicron on consumer confidence wanes, and the government’s move to lift testing and travel restrictions pushes capacity back to near pre-pandemic levels. Beach bookings are in high demand, according to easyJet, the UK’s biggest airline, which said it would have almost a third more capacity heading to seaside destinations this summer than it did in 2019, a rise led by Greece and Turkey. Overall, flight capacity would be near pre-pandemic levels in the fourth quarter, Johan Lundgren, the chief executive of easyJet, said. “We see a strong summer ahead, with pent-up demand that will see easyJet returning to near 2019 levels of capacity, with UK beach and leisure routes performing particularly well,” said Lundgren. He said that booking volumes had leapt since the government reduced travel restrictions. “The UK is leading in bookings versus the rest of Europe for the first time since 2020.” Pointing to an EU recommendation that member states should lift restrictions, Lundgren said business should receive a further boost: “We believe testing for travel across our network should soon become a thing of the past.” EasyJet said that while the final three months of last year showed a dramatic improvement on 2020 – easyJet operated 85.6m flights compared with 23.4m – the company missed its load factor forecast as Christmas travel plans were once again disrupted due to the impact of Omicron. Easyjet said it expected the Covid variant to continue to have an impact over its short-term performance in the second quarter, the three months to the end of March. However, the airline said that customers looked to rebook, rather than cancel, which will help boost its performance this year. In addition, the company said it had seen a “sustained step-change” in bookings after the government’s announcement earlier this month to remove pre-departure testing, and a further boost following the news that restriction-free travel will commence from 11 February. Saga, the travel and insurance group specialising in products and holidays for over-50s, said it had seen strong bookings for its cruises in the period from 1 August to 26 January. The company said that for this 2022-2023 financial year, which runs from 27 January, cruises have a booking load factor of 86% in its first half and 73% for the full year. “While Omicron has impacted travel bookings through December and January, our outlook for cruises in 2022/2023 and beyond is positive,” said Euan Sutherland, chief executive of Saga. The company said that the cruises operation produced profits on an adjusted basis in the period to 26 January, but a pre-tax loss of £45m to £50m. EasyJet said that the loss in the first quarter of its financial year almost halved to £213m, compared with £423m in the same quarter in 2020. Group revenues were £805m, compared with £165m the previous year. Overall, easyJet flew at 64% of pre-pandemic capacity in the final three months of last year, broadly in line with guidance, and a significant increase on the 18% capacity level in the same period in 2020. Passenger numbers were 11.89 million in the final three months of 2021, up from just 2.8 million in 2020. “We remain confident that easyJet will continue to win customers and are excited about our plans for the summer as we identify further opportunities at our key bases which will deliver strong, sustainable shareholder returns,” said Lundgren.A Scottish court has ruled that a soldier raped a woman he met in a Dundee nightclub, after she sued him in a landmark civil action which she says proves that “justice will always be done, no matter how long and bitter the journey”. In what is only the second ruling of its kind in recent Scottish legal history, a sheriff in Edinburgh found on Thursday that Sean Diamond, 28, a serving soldier in the British army, raped the woman after she fell asleep fully clothed on a friend’s sofa on 14 July 2015. She was awarded damages of £119,250. Diamond, who was stationed at Leuchars at the time, was prosecuted for rape in October 2017 but a high court jury found the charges against him not proven, a controversial Scottish verdict which acquits an accused person but stops short of finding them not guilty. Speaking to the Guardian as the judgment was made public, Ms AB said: “The last six and a half years have been so emotionally wrenching and it felt like it was never going to end. The fact that I can now read a judgment saying ‘Yes, he raped you’, in black and white and from the facts, is a closure that I never thought I would ever feel.” In his judgment, Sheriff KJ Campbell QC praised the “quality and consistency” of Ms AB’s testimony, adding that “the consistent evidence” of her distress immediately after the attack was “difficult to reconcile with the defender’s account of consensual sexual activity”. He said he was satisfied on the balance of probabilities – a lower standard of proof than required at a criminal court – that the defender raped the pursuer. Ms AB was on a night out with a female friend when she met Diamond. The pair danced together and kissed before returning to the friend’s flat, along with Diamond’s male friend, between 2.30am and 3am. The judgment found that their friends went to bed together, leaving Ms AB and Diamond in the sitting room. She fell asleep on the sofa but woke around half an hour later, on her front, being raped by Diamond. She was prevented from getting up and although she told Diamond to stop and get off her, he did not. Ms AB then lost consciousness and when she regained it, shortly after, had pain in her vagina and anus. In a state of extreme distress, Ms AB woke up her friend, who told the men to leave and immediately called the police. Her experience of the criminal trial was devastating: “The way you’re treated is literally like you’ve committed a crime.” She said she was “infuriated” by the not proven verdict and that “the jury were told to think about the impact their verdict would have on his military career”. Then a family friend suggested the civil alternative. At the outset of those proceedings, in 2018, a finding was made for Ms AB because Diamond did not defend the action, but he subsequently applied to have the decree recalled, claiming he had not understood the consequences of not responding. After a number of delays, some relating to the pandemic, the hearing finally took place last September. During the civil case, Ms AB – who attempted suicide a year after the assault and has since been diagnosed with post-traumatic stress disorder – moved to Morocco, where she now works and where she met her husband, who she describes as her “guardian angel”. Sexual violence campaigners say they believe the availability of not proven verdicts – which leaves the accused innocent in the eyes of the law – have a disproportionate impact on rape and sexual assault cases, leading to markedly lower conviction rates. Last month the Scottish government opened a consultation on the verdict with a view to reforming it. In October 2018, a former St Andrews University student, Miss M, successfully sued her attacker, Stephen Coxen. The court found he had raped her while she was too drunk to consent, after they met at a nightclub during freshers’ week in 2013. Coxen was previously prosecuted for rape but the verdict was not proven. Ms AB said: “No amount of money would remove the memory and the trauma that I’ve lived with over the last six and a half years. “Money will never replace that feeling of if he had been found guilty in the criminal trial.” She said she would like to see reform of the justice system, not just in Scotland but across the UK, whether that is the not proven verdict, the treatment of women giving evidence, or “pathetic” sentences. Her message to other women struggling with the justice system was simple: “Never give up. Don’t be silent, because your voice is the most powerful thing you have.” Diamond has been approached for comment. An army spokesperson said they were aware of the judgment and that “soldiers and officers at all levels of the British army are held to the highest standards. If individuals fail to meet these standards then appropriate action is taken.” Paying tribute to the “courage and perseverance” of Ms AB, the chief executive of Rape Crisis Scotland, Sandy Brindley, said: “This civil case – and the many criminal cases that have come before – highlight just how urgent action is to reform the justice system. We have to address the issues that make the process so unbearable for those who report sexual crimes and ensure that the system is robust.”A long-awaited report on the extent of Covid rule-breaking at parties in Downing Street and across government was expected to be published this week. Boris Johnson’s premiership could hang on its findings; Tory MPs have said they want to see what evidence of wrongdoing is dug up by Sue Gray – a senior civil servant known as a ruthless Whitehall enforcer – before deciding whether to call for him to quit. But despite speculation reaching fever pitch on Tuesday that the report would be released imminently, its contents remain shrouded in mystery. Has Sue Gray finished her report? Government sources have indicated Gray has finished the report, but pushed back on the suggestion there has been a “delay” because, they say, there was no previously announced date for its publication. Undoubtedly, the handling of the report’s release has been thrown into chaos by the announcement – also on Tuesday – that Scotland Yard was opening its own investigation into the party allegations. It would make sense to assume that the timing is not coincidental; Gray is unlikely to have shared her findings with the Metropolitan police unless she was nearing the end of her own investigation. Because Gray is working with the Cabinet Office’s propriety and ethics team, No 10 has been unable to provide any updates on the report’s status besides confirming it has not yet been sent the final version. What are the roadblocks preventing publication? Little is known about why there seems to be so much wrangling over the report, but it is thought that lawyers and human resources officials are inspecting its contents and deciding what can and cannot be published. If there is a risk of prejudicing the Met’s own investigation, then it is possible parts of Gray’s report may have to be redacted or held back. However, that would probably prompt accusations of a cover-up. The Met has reportedly been briefing that it is not asking for Gray’s report to be held back. Unions are also apparently pushing for junior civil servants to have their names redacted before the document is released. A former No 10 adviser, who has been involved in publishing similar reports, said that when such sought-after documents are officially submitted to No 10 it is very difficult to avoid leaks. “Informally agreeing when it is sent is best practice,” they said, noting that “as close to the weekend as possible is always a good idea” for decreasing the level of attention paid to the report. What might eventually emerge? Johnson’s spokesperson has committed to publishing the “findings” of Gray’s report. This has prompted concern that only the conclusions will be made public rather than the full report. However, No 10 has said this is because they do not know what format Gray’s report will take, and are adamant “it remains our intention to publish it as received”. What will happen when the report is released? Gray expects that when her final version is delivered to Downing Street it will be published within a matter of hours. Johnson has previously promised to place a copy in the House of Commons library for all MPs to see, and to answer questions in parliament at the earliest opportunity. But even if the report is published this week, the chance of it getting much scrutiny by MPs is diminishing. Most MPs are already back home in their constituencies for the weekend, and No 10 does not want to rile Tory backbenchers further by being seen to publish the report while they are away from Westminster, meaning Johnson may not have to face questions in parliament until next week. When the report is finally released, MPs will pore over it closely; dozens have said they will consider submitting a letter expressing no confidence in Johnson if there is any evidence he misled the Commons, or if there is evidence of criminality. MPs could also decide that even if Johnson is found not to have done anything wrong, the political pain of a prime minister not being able to control the office where workers broke the very Covid rules they wrote is enough to push Johnson out. What would happen in a vote of no confidence – triggered if 54 Tory MPs submit letters calling for one – is even less certain. Some ministers could vote against him, but Johnson’s supporters have been running a shadow whipping operation to prepare for such an eventuality and are confident he would convincingly win such a ballot. It is also possible the pressure on Johnson recedes. His allies are known to be planning to give assurances he will overhaul his Downing Street team and other key parts of the government machine. That may be enough to win MPs over, and let Johnson escape a vote of no confidence through the eye of a needle. • This article was amended on 27 January 2022 to remove an incorrect statement that the House of Commons was not sitting on Friday.Joe Pera is strolling through New York, patiently enduring the sort of technical calamities that cause interviewers to wake up in a cold sweat. I apologise and apologise again, but he is unfazed. “It’s OK,” he reassures me in his familiar soft, halting voice. “I’m looking at a beautiful sunset.” It’s a perfect response. Since his first Adult Swim special Joe Pera Talks You to Sleep in 2016, Pera has been carefully crafting a comedy unlike anything else. His series Joe Pera Talks With You – which is just about to return for a third season on All 4 – is a thing of hushed, burnished wonder. Pera, playing a fictionalised version of himself, leads the viewer through some of his favourite subjects; they’re mundane on the surface, but presented with an air of awestruck quiet. There is an episode called Joe Pera Takes You on a Fall Drive, and another called Joe Pera Watches Internet Videos With You. The second season, which broadcast just before the pandemic struck, contained an extended arc about growing and maintaining a bean arch. A show like this, where a New York comedian indulges in smalltown life, always has the potential for the comic to engage in snobbery. But what’s incredible about Joe Pera Talks to You is that it never loses sight of the dignity of its subjects, and this is down to Pera himself. His commitment to the character is total, to the extent that when you Google him, one of the first questions you’ll find is “What is Joe Pera like in real life?”. It’s a hard one to answer. Pera is protective of his persona, not revealing his age (although Wikipedia puts him at 33) or much about his personal life. Speaking to him, you sense that the television version of Joe Pera is merely an extension, rather than a total invention, of the real Joe Pera. His careful and polite cadences are exactly the same and, in a recent podcast interview, the writer Jo Firestone – who plays Pera’s doomsday prepper love interest – suggested that episodes are often borne from Pera’s real-life obsessions. So where’s the line between character and performer? “I didn’t want to make a show about another comedian doing standup in New York,” he explains. “There’s already Seinfeld and a million other shows for that. I thought about the guys I went to school with, who went on to become music teachers, and thought I could have become that as well. So I followed that line of, ‘What if I had done that instead?’. I don’t know, I think there ought to be more shows about middle-school choir teachers.” But what if you did make a series about you as a New York comedian, I ask. Would the character on that show be wildly different to the one we watch now? Pera laughs – a chuckle, then three seconds of silence, then another chuckle, then another three seconds of silence, then another chuckle – before slowly wrapping himself in knots. “I don’t know,” he shrugs. “I think I’ve met some wonderful people doing comedy, and I also think there are a lot of people at open mics who are real characters that deserve a show of their own. I don’t think it’s been fully treated properly.” He then goes on a long, careful tangent about a documentary he once watched. Eventually, crisis averted, the question is so far in the distance that we can proceed down a new avenue. I was sent three episodes of the new season to watch and, with the exception of Joe Pera Sits With You – an episode about buying a chair so beautiful it almost brought me to tears – Pera himself is a peripheral figure. One episode centres on Mike Melsky, a troubled character played by I Think You Should Leave’s Connor O’Malley; the other involves Pera listening to his girlfriend tell a drunk story. Is he deliberately sidelining himself? “Yeah,” replies Pera. “Maybe it’s me getting bored with myself, but also I think even in the small town where it’s set, there are so many other people to explore. I’m fascinated with other types of humour, and different characters, and different viewpoints, and wanting to grow the show in that way.” The new series is very slightly darker than before, too. At one point, a character is very careful to announce that it is still 2018 and everything is great, and later Firestone’s character begins to mutter darkly about unseen terrors looming on the horizon. Joe Pera Talks With You is such a sweet show, and you end up feeling protective of the characters, to the point that the thought of anything bad happening to them is too much to bear. I ask Pera, more out of concern than curiosity, whether the season will end in disaster. “I don’t know,” he demurs. “I don’t want to spoil anything.” The newfound world-building also hints at a slight change in Pera’s sensibility. “I don’t know about you, but in the past year, I’ve been wanting to watch TV and movies that are a little bit less dry,” he says of his burgeoning love of broader comedy. “Found a lot of pleasure in Dumb and Dumber.” Here I have to disagree, because Joe Pera Talks With You was the perfect lockdown show. It’s so small and shy and full of decency that it’s incredibly easy to wrap yourself up in it. When things are bad, it acts as a forcefield against the real world. This is, in part, down to Ryan Dann’s soundtrack. “It’s the soul of the show,” says Pera. “Ryan inspires me to write better stuff to match his music” – but it’s equally due to the soothing presence of Pera himself. I quote another review to him, describing the show as “comedy ASMR”. “I appreciate that,” Pera says, sounding as close to frustrated as he will get, which is still barely frustrated at all, “but ASMR is about something else. I feel it’s about relaxation and being cozy. I don’t ever want to forget, as a standup comedian who has to keep a live audience in mind, I never want the jokes to be anything less than sharp. It’s easy to do comfortable nowadays. Just play some good music and show some nice images. But it’s also a comedy show, and I take that very seriously.” He also seems to take crafts very seriously. The comedian recently made a video with Townsends, an 18th-century revival YouTube channel where you can learn how to dye fabric according to old American techniques or make an inkwell with clay. Like Joe Pera, the channel is slow and tactile and earnest. Pera’s video, in which he creates a three-legged stool using old iron instruments, is essentially a bonus episode of Joe Pera Talks With You. I’m impressed with how adept he is at woodwork, so I ask if he had any prior furniture-making experience, but for some reason this causes him to clam up. “I don’t want to spoil the end of the season,”, he stammers. “But yeah, I know how to make a chair.” Perhaps Pera is right to be so protective of himself. Part of the reason why people feel so attached to him and his work is that his fanbase largely grows through word of mouth. People tend to discover him because a likeminded friend has recommended him, and they in turn pass his work on to their friends. As a result, he still feels like a discovery. When people fall for Pera, they fall hard. “People watched the last season of my show and they started sending me photographs of bean arches that they built,” he reveals, sounding genuinely amazed. “That was the best thing that could have happened. And the best real world response to any kind of art is to have people build bean arches and get the experience of how fun that is. And it’s growing your own beans. If you do that, you do anything.” As the conversation wraps up, long after our agreed cutoff point, I apologise again and wish Pera a good evening. “You too,” he says, “Although it’s getting late where you are, probably.” It’s 10pm, I tell him. As soon as this call is over, I’m going to bed. “Perfect,” he replies with a warm, familiar chuckle. “I think my main audience is people who go to bed at 10pm.” • Joe Pera Talks With You returns to All 4 on 28 January.A few months ahead of bringing “Rooster” Byron’s band of outsiders back to the stage in a revival of Jez Butterworth’s Jerusalem, Mark Rylance breathes life into a very different kind of anti-establishment figure: Dr Ignaz Semmelweis, a pioneer too ahead of his own time. Based on an original idea by Rylance and written with Stephen Brown, this play explores the life of the Hungarian doctor who worked in 19th-century Vienna’s maternity wards. Semmelweis’s groundbreaking practices in antiseptic procedure saved thousands of lives – particularly those of impoverished mothers – and might have saved more had his findings been recognised by the medical community. But he was doubted and disbelieved, and died in an asylum without due recognition and, in a final twist of bad fate, of sepsis, from which he had battled to save his patients. His story becomes a tragedy of almost Shakespearean proportions in the hands of Rylance, who appears plaintive, hollow-eyed, by turns diffident and absolute in his unbending sense of right. But the cast around him keep up, from Thalissa Teixeira as his wife Maria to, as Semmelweis’s medical allies, Jackie Clune, Sandy Grierson, Felix Hayes and Enyi Okoronkwo among others, each as good as the next. Under the direction of Tom Morris, the production is almost as much a dance as it is a play, with expressionist movement (choreography by Antonia Franceschi) and music (by Adrian Sutton) that take us inside Semmelweis’s mind, from his bursts of anger to his final unravelling. A chorus of ghostly dancers – the women he has been unable to save – enact anguish while violins and the cello weep. These elements together run the risk of an overwrought atmosphere but the production steers clear of that. Instead there is intensity, and the drama feels drawn out in its pain. It paints a picture of a thwarted life but also, more obliquely, explores why some people are lauded as pioneers, their theories welcomed and their genius immortalised, while others are cast as outsiders. Semmelweis made breakthroughs long before Joseph Lister and Louis Pasteur’s work in germ theory. But in his exacting nature, his single-minded zeal to save lives and his gruff manner, he reveals medical science to be governed by – of course – its own politics of personality when it comes to toppling old paradigms for new. Two time frames are navigated with magnificent fluidity on Ti Green’s set (spare yet dramatic, an oculus above, a revolve below and an almost eerie blackness from which characters emerge). In these switches of time, we get a keen sense of Semmelweis’s inner fracturing: he seems involuntarily pulled into the past, which is enacted on stage, with his present world simultaneously observing it. Richard Howell’s lighting works within this duality – warm and sepia-tinted in the domestic present but a starkly spotlit past which throngs with shadows in the backdrop. Death is all around the maternity ward at which Semmelweis works and every loss has an emotional impact, even when it happens in passing. Meanwhile there is a visceral edge to the scenes of autopsies and childbirths, which are gestured in dance or mimed. Although this is its own specific story, and emphatically a period piece, there is a relevance to the themes of new science and distrust that chimes in our Covid era. The play was conceived before the pandemic but Semmelweis’s pleas for fellow doctors to “wash your hands” makes it feel, uncannily, as if the past is haunting our present too. Dr Semmelweis is at Bristol Old Vic until 12 FebruaryFrom snatching sea lions off beaches to stunning fish with a strike of their tails, orcas are renowned for their highly specialised hunting techniques passed down over generations. Now, for the first time, killer whales have been recorded hunting the planet’s largest animal – the blue whale – in coordinated and brutal attacks. Female-led pods of killer whales, also known as orcas, have been recorded killing and eating blue whales in three separate attacks off the coast of Australia since 2019, according to a paper published in Marine Mammal Science. Previously there were reports of these apex predators “chasing” blue whales – which grow up to 33 metres long – but authenticated attacks are extremely rare. This research is the first to officially document these killings, including details about how orcas swim inside the mouth of the blue whale to eat its tongue just before it dies. “Here we provide the first documentation of killer whales killing and eating blue whales: two individuals killed, 16 days apart in 2019, and a third in 2021,” researchers wrote in the paper. “Notably, the first whale taken appeared to be a healthy adult.” All the attacks happened off Bremer Bay in Western Australia, within 40 miles (60km) of the shore, and were observed from commercial whale-watching vessels. Many individual females were involved in all three attacks. The attack in March 2019 was on a healthy adult whale, between 18 and 22 metres long. It was coordinated by at least 12 orcas, led by eight adult females and one male, with younger ones watching. By the time observers reached the site, large chunks of skin and blubber had been stripped off the adult blue whale and most of the dorsal fin had been bitten off. After an hour of relentless attacks, three female killer whales lined up side-by-side and rammed the blue whale on its side, pushing it underwater, while two others attacked its head. The last one swam inside its mouth and started eating its tongue, which is nutritionally dense. In the next six hours, 50 more orcas joined in the feeding, as well as at least 200 flesh-footed shearwaters, more than 20 storm petrels and at least one albatross. Several dozen birds continued to feed on scraps for days afterwards. “We visited the kill site for six days after the attack, and for the first few days there was a large slick on the surface where oil was emanating from the carcass on the seafloor,” the researchers wrote. The killer whales were not seen on site again. The next attack a few weeks later was on a blue whale calf between 10 and 12 metres long. It was led by 25 orcas, including 22 females, around 25 miles from the first attack. Towards the end of the attack, an adult female again put her head inside the blue whale’s mouth to feed on its tongue. For the next three and a half hours, about 50 killer whales fed off the carcass, bringing large chunks of flesh to the surface, which were torn apart and fed on by various members of the group. There was no evidence of aggression or frenzied feeding, researchers said. The third attack was on a yearling, about 12 to 14 metres long, which was chased for 15 miles for 90 minutes. The killing involved the same strategy of lining up and pushing the whale below the surface, while also attacking its mouth. The attack was started by 12 orcas, including six females. At least 50 turned up to feed on the carcass. Killer whale pods are matriarchies, led by the oldest female, and any male offspring are descendants of the matriarch. Previously, it had been assumed that for killer whale attacks on large whales to be successful, adult males need to be involved, but all three of these attacks were led by females, which are about 20% smaller. Females need to feed young and may need to feed more often than males, which possibly makes them more likely to initiate attacks, researchers said. Killer whales are known for hunting down large prey, similar to wolf packs, successfully predating on gray whales, sea lions, dolphins and even great white sharks. This study adds the planet’s largest creature to that list, suggesting the only baleen whale impervious to attack from these apex predators is the adult humpback. Most killer whale populations specialise in a certain type of prey, but killer whales off Bremer Bay have a particularly diverse diet. They have also been observed attacking deep-diving beaked whales, Antarctic minke whales and yearling humpback whales, using similar pack strategies to hunt. Killer whales tend to be opportunists when it comes to feeding on mammals, said one of the authors, Robert Pitman from Oregon State University, so this could be a return to normal as blue whale populations recover after centuries of whaling. “Maybe what we’re starting to see now is how the ocean used to be before we took out most of the large whales … As some of these populations continue to recover, we have a better chance to see how normal marine ecosystems function,” he said. Scientists say these discoveries are important for understanding how killer whales shape marine communities, and also how they may affect blue whale populations recovering from historical whaling. There were estimated to have been 300,000 blue whales before whaling and now there may be 15,000 to 20,000, with numbers believed to be increasing. Erich Hoyt, a research fellow at Whale and Dolphin Conservation, said the “excellent” paper confirmed what was known about killer whales and how they attacked, including going for the tongue, which has been recorded on other whale species. “But the excellent photographs in the paper and the extraordinary detail provided by the scientists give us a real insight into how it happens. “This paper is the first to really confirm a blue whale kill and at the same time it provides firm confirmation that killer whales will even go after mature healthy blue whales,” he said. The orca behaviour of feeding on large whales has been found in other parts of the world such as the north Pacific but it is not common, and most killer whale pods would not see large whales as food, said Hoyt. “These particular orcas off South Australia subsist on an unusually diverse diet,” he said. “This is strange because elsewhere in the world, killer whales are fussy eaters and tend to learn from their pod how to catch food, and what is food, and they stay with that, whether it’s salmon around Vancouver Island or sea lion pups at Punta Norte in southern Argentina.” Dr Peter Richardson, head of ocean recovery at the Marine Conservation Society UK, said: “This fascinating paper expands our knowledge of the prey species of orca. However, the small sample size limits the insights we can take. This behaviour has perhaps been going on for centuries out in the open ocean where it’s difficult to study.” Find more age of extinction coverage here, and follow biodiversity reporters Phoebe Weston and Patrick Greenfield on Twitter for all the latest news and featuresA feat of detective work – plus the chance discovery of dozens of well-preserved documents at a wrestling club in Wigan – has unlocked a remarkable secret that rewrites more than 100 years of British Olympic history, the Guardian can reveal. The sprinter Harry Edward, who won two bronze medals at the 1920 Antwerp Games, has long been lauded as Britain’s first black Olympian. But now a team of researchers has found that Edward’s achievement was beaten by 12 years by a long forgotten black heavyweight wrestler named Louis Bruce, who reached the second round of the 1908 Olympics in London. Bruce, who was born in Edinburgh in December 1875, is already known to transport historians as one of the first black tram drivers in Britain. Last year he was celebrated by the London Transport Museum and appeared on its Black History tube map. Until now, however, his sporting claim to fame has been ignored. That will change with the British Olympic Association acknowledging the significance of the findings. Scott Field, the BOA’s director of communications, told the Guardian: “This is a fascinating new body of research and we’re excited to learn of Louis Bruce’s story in being the first reported black British Olympian. The diversity of British Olympians is to be celebrated and something we are incredibly proud of.” The discovery also establishes Bruce as the sixth earliest known black athlete to compete at an Olympics. The first was Constantin Henriquez, who played rugby for France in 1900. The US hurdler George Poage and two South African marathon runners, Len Tauyane and Jan Mashiani, competed in 1904, while the American 400m runner John Baxter Taylor Jr first raced on 21 July 1908, two days before Bruce wrestled in the 73kg catch-as-catch-can wrestling division. The seeds of the tale were sown last year when the Canadian researchers Connor Mah and Rob Gilmore, who contribute to the Olympedia.org website, the most comprehensive database about the Olympic Games, began to clean up official athlete records from London 1908. The first hurdle they faced is that many competitors’ full names were not included in the official records. In Bruce’s case there was a further complication as he was erroneously identified in some history books as “Lawrence Bruce”. “A major problem we had is that many official Olympic reports, along with newspaper coverage, rarely used more than a first initial and a surname for the athletes,” said Gilmore, who worked at the Provincial Archives of New Brunswick for nearly 40 years. “This also seemed almost an iron-clad rule in sports journalism at the time, especially with amateur athletics.” However during their research Mah began to wonder if Bruce had been misnamed, and also noticed from census archives that a Louis Bruce was in Hammersmith around the same time as the 1908 London Games. Meanwhile Gilmore found a wrestling advertisement in the newspaper archives a year later for a bout featuring Ernest Nixson and a “Darkey” Bruce, as well as multiple clippings describing him as “coloured” which further piqued their interest. But the breakthrough came when it was suggested to Mah that the Snake Pit wrestling club in Wigan had a collection of old wrestling documents and memorabilia, which had been passed from person to person down the years and might be worth exploring. It proved a eureka moment. When Mah contacted the club, he found it had a set of 1908 Olympic wrestling documents, including entry forms and lists, which included the full names and addresses of all 53 British wrestlers in the competition. That allowed him and Gilmore to establish that L Bruce’s first name was Louis, not Lawrence. And, shortly thereafter, that his address, 76 Princes Road in Teddington, was the same as the tram driver Louis Bruce listed in the 1911 UK census. Mah said: “All we knew about him before we started our research was that a ‘Lawrence Bruce’ was affiliated with Hammersmith Amateur Wrestling Club and that he competed in the heavyweight division of the 1908 Olympics, defeating Alfred Banbrook in the first round, but losing his next bout to Ernest Nixson. “Over the few months of digging we were able to make significant progress, but it was the set of documents at the Snake Pit club that provided the breakthrough. Especially as they provided the full names of every single competitor, in their original handwriting and the street address of each competitor. “The person there sent photos of all the documents they had via WhatsApp after I vaguely described what I was looking for. I had no idea that they had everything – it was a huge stroke of luck.” That was far from the end of the story. The pair were then helped by the sports historian Andy Mitchell, who discovered further details about Bruce’s extraordinary life – including his birth certificate and a photograph of Bruce on a tram from 1906, confirming beyond doubt that he was black. In the picture Bruce – who got his licence to drive trams in 1900 and was later promoted to inspector, a notable achievement for the time – stands alongside the mayor of Kingston upon Thames, Henry Charles Minnitt, as he ceremonially takes the controls of the first London United Tramways electric tram to cross the Kingston Bridge over the River Thames as a part of a new route to Tolworth and Surbiton. As well as his regular duties, Bruce was the personal driver for the managing director of the company, Sir James Clifton Robinson, who had a private tram at his house for commuting to work. In 2021 Transport for London and Black Cultural Archives celebrated Bruce’s achievements, calling him “one of London’s first Black tram drivers” – although they too got his first name wrong, calling him Lewis not Louis. “Unfortunately, little further is known of Lewis’s story,” they wrote. Since then, the researchers have uncovered far more about Bruce’s life, including the fact he frequently performed in entertainment acts as a dancer, ragtime singer and comedian in tramway social events and concerts. During that period he married Ethel Elizabeth Dunn in September 1911, and the couple later had a son, Dennis. Bruce may have worked on the trams as late as 1922, but by the 1930s he owned a newsagent shop in Epsom Road, Sutton. Meanwhile Bruce’s sporting achievements continued after the 1908 Olympics. In January 1913 one report noted that “the well-known coloured boxer” Inspector Bruce had won the London United Tramways heavyweight title, while a year later he also claimed victory in a one-mile walking handicap race at Griffin Park. The Olympic historian and statistician Hilary Evans, who helped with the research, said Bruce’s story was highly significant: “In this day and age it’s very unusual to find a motherlode of documents that haven’t been examined by historians.” Bruce died, aged 82, in 1958 with an estate valued at £5,897. One mystery remains. His birth certificate states that Louis Bruce McAvoy Mortimore Doney was born in Edinburgh to Jane Elizabeth Doney, who is believed to have been white. However, his father is not named. Intriguingly, Doney was a widow who had six daughters in Plymouth before giving birth to Bruce in Scotland – yet she was back in the south-west and remarried by the time of the 1881 census. Bruce then grew up in Plympton, Plymouth, with his grandmother and two aunts. On his marriage certificate, Bruce listed his father as a medical practitioner named William King Bruce, but researchers are yet to find him. “The only thing missing, frustratingly, is the identity of his father,” says Mitchell. “That discovery will go some way to explaining why a 33-year-old widow from Plymouth with six daughters ended up having an illegitimate child in Edinburgh.” It all makes for a remarkable tale, which adds to the rich tapestry of British achievements since the modern Games began in 1896. Next month at the Winter Games in Beijing, 50 Team GB athletes will seek to write their own chapters in Olympic history. Now, at last, Bruce’s story is also being heard.Danielle Collins has reflected on the long journey she has taken to reach her first grand slam final at the age of 28. The American beat Iga Swiatek 6-4, 6-1 at the Australian Open on Thursday to set up a final with home favourite and world No 1 Ash Barty. “It feels amazing. It has been such a journey. It is so many years of hard work. Yesterday I spoke about all the early mornings my Dad would get up and practise with me before school,” she said. Collins has a 1-3 career record against Barty but won their most recent meeting at the 2021 Adelaide International. “We’ve had some incredible battles over the years. To play the world number one in her home country will be spectacular,” she said. Collins has enjoyed success in Melbourne before, reaching the Australian Open semi-final in 2019. However, she believes she is now a more complete player. “I have added more variety to my game over the last couple of years but this is my Plan A. It was working for me really well today so I just had to stick with it,” she said. The world No 30 has links with Australia: the former Australian rules footballer Tom Couch is her trainer and boyfriend. However, she acknowledged the crowd at Saturday’s final will firmly be in Barty’s camp. “The energy the crowd will bring, whether it’s for me or against me, it will be incredible. I look forward to a great match,” she said. The Floridian has fought health problems to get to this stage. In April she underwent emergency surgery for endometriosis. “It is incredible to be on this stage, especially after all the health challenges. I couldn’t be happier,” she said. Endometriosis, a chronic inflammatory condition that affects one in 10 women globally, can cause debilitating pain. In August, Collins spoke about the toll the condition took on her career. “Had I not had the surgery, I just couldn’t keep living my life like that. The agony that I experienced from my menstrual cycles and from the endometriosis is some of the worst pain I’ve ever had,” she said.Most people won’t have heard of Tony Lyons. Indeed, the US publisher has built an independent press – Skyhorse Publishing – that to some degree delights in defying the mainstream. Skyhorse’s basic business model is to pick up backlisted books and profitably reissue them. Back to Basics, a book that “will help you dye your own wool with plant pigments, graft trees, raise chickens, craft a hutch table with hand tools, and make treats such as blueberry peach jam and cheddar cheese”, is one that perennially helps to keeps the company’s lights on. But that’s not why Lyons agrees to talk during a walk around Central Park’s reservoir. We’re here, fighting the bitter wind, to discuss those in his stable of authors from whom bigger publishing houses have distanced themselves, for reasons ranging from allegations of sexual harassment to claims of misinformation. Skyhorse’s recent slate of published works include the Woody Allen memoir Apropos of Nothing, dropped by Hachette imprint Grand Central Publishing after a staff walkout, a Philip Roth biography, withdrawn by WW Norton after a series of allegations about its author Blake Bailey, and a posthumous collection of essays by Norman Mailer that the author’s longtime publisher Random House declined. Another of Skyhorse’s controversial authors is the anti-vaccine crusader Robert F Kennedy. His book The Real Anthony Fauci, which questions the White House health advisor’s links to the pharmaceutical industry, has sold 750,000 copies in eight weeks and has a #1 rating on Amazon. Last weekend, Kennedy fronted an anti-vaccine rally in Washington DC, which the official memorial of Auschwitz said was a sign of “moral and intellectual decay”, after Kennedy compared US vaccine mandates to laws in Hitler’s Germany. Some of these titles have been held up as evidence that publishers are wilting under internal or external pressures. “I’ve seen it with the Roth biography, with Allen and with Kennedy,” says Lyons. “All you hear is the takedown of the author and no analysis of the book itself. Or the analysis gets obscured by the discussion of the author.” On Apropos of Nothing, he says “whether you like Allen or not, it’s an interesting book and he’s had an interesting and culturally significant life. That should have been addressed. And that’s true for any of these books, even if you have a concern about the author or their perspective.” Naturally, there are economic reasons for not publishing certain titles as well as moral ones. Books and authors accompanied by controversy may no longer make financial sense for big publishing houses, but can do for niche players such as Skyhorse, which has around 20 editors . The publisher hasn’t always been the house of last resort. It began life in 2006 with outdoorsy titles (Lyons’ father Nick is a well-known author of fly-fishing books). Its transformation is in part due to Lyons’ assertion that: “there’s some audacity to the idea that all the main issues are clear.” He says he gives a pass to staff working on titles to which they object. “I don’t begrudge people for anything they believe. But at the same time I’m not willing to make my decisions on what to publish based on what other people would like me to publish, whomever they are,” Lyons says. Whether that’s opportunism, a sound business decision, principle, or perhaps all three, is up for debate. It’s true that Skyhorse doesn’t always take an ideological stance: it has, for example, published two books simultaneously that argue for and against wearing masks. There was also Disloyal, a memoir by former Trump lawyer Michael Cohen; Plague of Corruption, co-authored by Covid conspiracy slinger Dr Judy Mikovits; and The Lake Wobegon Virus by Garrison Keillor, who was fired by Minnesota Public Radio over allegations of inappropriate behaviour. Skyhorse itself has not been immune from internal criticism. Two years ago, Vanity Fair published a profile of the publisher, quoting alleged former employees who wrote of harassment, burnout, and the company’s emphasis on quantity over quality. “You’ll have the potential to meet good people as you miserably ride together in cattle class on this dystopian cruise ship,” one said. Certainly, a commitment to publishing a high volume of books while keeping a relatively small staff meant that by the end of the company’s third year, revenue had already hit $5 million. And Lyons concedes it is inexpensive to pick up titles that, in many cases, have already been paid for before the previous publisher washed its hands of it. After passing up Mailer’s collection, Random House said it had waived any reprint fees. “The question is, should we even care about what anybody does in their private life or should we care about what they create?” says Lyons. “If you go down the path of let’s investigate people and care less about what they said or wrote, then I think you can get to de-platforming too much.” The argument, of course, is readily political, and any discussion of it inevitably slips into that realm. “De-platforming Trump seemed a natural, historic breakthrough, because you didn’t have to wake up and worry about what he’s tweeting,” Lyons acknowledges. “But if Twitter can de-platform a president, it becomes a question of access to information, and of who – a private company, an algorithm or a government body – decides that it’s dangerous.” The invocation of free speech protections is sometimes a defence for positions that are already badly flawed. But free speech does not necessarily require a book deal, and Skyhorse has been described by critics as “a libertarianism of convenience”. Publishers, Lyons counters, have a responsibility to seek out new and interesting voices, “but that doesn’t mean you have to destroy the past, or the desire of people to hear those (old) voices.” “I feel strongly it’s important for arguments to be made, for there to be a free-flow of ideas and have the stronger arguments win,” he adds. The alternative, “is we decide it’s too dangerous to allow a whole range of people and perspectives to be heard by a public that isn’t smart enough to know what’s true and what isn’t.” Lyons goes further, voicing that permitting a plurality of views, however obnoxious to some, is fundamental to a functioning society. “Maybe the role of publishers is to bring people closer,” he says. “To encourage them to read things they disagree with, that make them angry, but ultimately to learn things that help them bridge the gap to what they thought they hated but may find some nuance in.”A motorist who says he was trying to prevent a woman from being stabbed to death when he drove his car into her attacker has urged the police to reverse a decision to arrest him on suspicion of murder. Yasmine Chkaifi, 43, was repeatedly and fatally stabbed by her ex-husband Leon McCaskre, 41, on a pavement in London’s Maida Vale on Monday morning. The motorist drove his blue Renault Clio into McCaskre, killing him. The 26-year-old driver, who identified himself only as Abraham, issued a statement through his solicitor saying he had no intention of killing McCaskre and was only trying to stop him attacking Chkaifi. He urged the police to treat him as a witness rather than a suspect. “I do not see why I, as the person who tried to assist in the defence of other human beings, remain arrested and on bail under suspicion of murder,” he said. “I’ve asked my solicitor to contact the Metropolitan police to request that they consider de-arresting me and begin treating me as a witness to a tragic event rather than as a criminal. “My instant thought was to protect the woman who had been stabbed and the public who were also being threatened. The vehicles ahead of me moved off which gave me the opportunity to intervene. I drove my vehicle towards the attacker in order to get him away from the woman he was attacking. I did not intend to harm the attacker, only intended to protect those being attacked.” He added: “I have since learned that both the young lady and the attacker have died. I am deeply sorry that the man I tried to stop from attacking other people has died. It was never my intention to harm him.” More than 26,000 people have signed a petition calling for the driver not to face criminal charges and describing him as a hero. Members of Chkaifi’s family have also reportedly praised him for his attempt to save her life. A neighbour who said she used to hear McCaskre beating Chkaifi in the flat they used to share together also praised the driver. She said: “I think that man deserves a medal. It would be an absolute farce if that man got charged with anything. He saw a woman being attacked and he tried to do the best thing he could to help her. He didn’t know it was too late.” More details have emerged about McCaskre’s violence towards Chkaifi. Speaking to a friend two years ago, she reportedly said: “I think he will kill me.” Adele-Sara Richards, who knew her as Yaz, said that in April 2020 Chkaifi messaged her to say: “He’s had cameras in my house recording me for months. He’s stolen my mail, my phone, has access to all my personal data. I think he will kill me. I’ve tried everything.” One of Chkaifi’s sons told MailOnline she had been continually harassed by her ex-husband, who he said had made her life “hell”. He said: “It was a very abusive relationship which got worse after the divorce. My mother was continually being harassed and intimidated by this man. I was always in touch with the police but they did nothing to help her. There was even a panic alarm installed in our flat, that’s how scared she was of this man. He was a monster.”As a writer, comedian, radio quiz panellist, chatshow guest and occasional actor, Barry Cryer, who has died aged 86, was part of the backbone of British television and radio comedy for more than 60 years. He wrote for performers including Morecambe and Wise, the Two Ronnies, Tommy Cooper, Jack Benny, Bob Hope, George Burns, Frankie Howerd, Kenny Everett and Les Dawson, and was a member of the ramshackle but hilarious BBC radio show I’m Sorry I Haven’t a Clue from its inception in 1972. In the 1960s and 70s comedy writing was, with a few notable exceptions, dominated by men, often working in pairs, and Cryer’s partners included John Junkin, Marty Feldman, Graeme Garden, David Nobbs and Graham Chapman. Lacking a developed attention span (he called his 2009 autobiography Butterfly Brain), he left the basic idea, plot and structure to his partner, then funnied everything up, providing punchlines, gags and retorts. This is known as being a “line man” and Cryer was generally regarded as the best line man in the business. In looks and offstage manner, Cryer was the kind of nondescript bloke you might find behind the counter at your local DIY centre. He told the story of how, when his face had become familiar through TV appearances, someone came up to him in the street and asked: “Can I have your autograph, Bal?” “Of course.” “Leave it out,” said the man. “You didn’t think I was serious?” Cryer got into a taxi and recounted the story. “Oh dear,” the driver chuckled. “Imagine that happening to someone well known!” This self-deprecation – almost all the stories Cryer told were against himself – began early in his performing career in the late 50s, when he was hospitalised several times for chronic eczema, and retreated from the spotlight into the more anonymous craft of scriptwriting. He was born in Leeds, to John Cryer, an accountant, who died when Barry was five, and his wife, Jean, and educated at Leeds grammar school. “I’ve been in touch with three of my schoolmates,” he said in 2019, “and it seems that when we were growing up I was the one who tried to make the bully laugh, and to entertain people, even though I never thought of doing it for a living then.” Cryer went on to study English literature at Leeds University, where an appearance in a revue led to his being offered a week’s work at Leeds City Varieties theatre. He began to think comedy might be a viable career choice, and after doing badly in his first year left university and moved to London, hoping a quick wit and inventiveness would compensate for an almost complete lack of experience. It did – he passed an audition for the Windmill theatre in Soho, which had comedy acts in between nude shows, and started his career as a bottom-of-the-bill comic. In 1957 he was in the hit stage show Expresso Bongo with Susan Hampshire, Millicent Martin and Paul Scofield. The same year he recorded the novelty song Purple People Eater, a big success for the American actor and singer Sheb Wooley. Cryer later claimed that his version reached No 1 in the Finnish charts, because contractual difficulties meant Wooley’s version could not be released in Scandinavia. Such chart details as are available now suggest that the story may have grown somewhat in the retelling. Though his performing career was blossoming, his skin condition made further stage appearances problematical. “Eczema hospitalised me 12 times in eight years,” he told Reader’s Digest. “In those days we were caked in makeup as performers. I thought, ‘I’ve had it, I’ll concentrate on writing’.” He began writing, mostly for Danny La Rue at the drag star’s nightclub. “I was contentedly employed in the noble and honourable task of writing gags about men’s genitalia,” he said. “That is what I did: I was a cock-joke writer. I was not ashamed of it and I was happy doing it.” At La Rue’s he came to the attention of David Frost, who hired him to join a writing team that included Chapman, Feldman and John Cleese, for The Frost Report (BBC TV, 1966-67). Swiftly established as a valuable talent, Cryer wrote several BBC Morecambe and Wise shows with Junkin, including the 1972 and 1976 Christmas specials. He went back to performing, but on radio, in I’m Sorry I Haven’t a Clue and the sketch show Hello Cheeky (BBC, 1973-79), on which he and Junkin were joined by Tim Brooke-Taylor. There was a TV version in 1976. In 1962 he married the singer Theresa Donovan, known as Terry, and the couple moved to Hatch End, Middlesex, where they had four children. Cryer explained the secret of this happiest of partnerships: “The key is we’ve never understood each other. We don’t row, but we argue all the time.” Professionally, his most comfortable partnership was with Chapman, in pre-Python days. They wrote about 50 television shows together, including Doctor in the House (ITV, 1969-70), and several for Ronnie Corbett: No, That’s Me Over Here! (ITV, 1968-70), Now Look Here (BBC, 1971-73) and The Prince of Denmark (BBC, 1974). With other writers he contributed to The Ronnie Corbett Show (BBC, 1987) and Ronnie Corbett in Bed (BBC, 1971), and was also part of the Two Ronnies (1971-87) team. The other performer he became most associated with was the anarchic DJ turned comedian Kenny Everett. With Ray Cameron he wrote 35 episodes of The Kenny Everett Video Cassette (ITV, 1978-81) and, with Everett himself, 44 episodes of The Kenny Everett Television Show (BBC, 1981-88). In the 70s and 80s he wrote material for Russ Abbot, Stanley Baxter, Bruce Forsyth, Max Bygraves, Jasper Carrott, Tommy Cooper, the Carry On team, Dawson, Ken Dodd, Dick Emery, Bob Monkhouse, Howerd and Mike Yarwood, and for American stars visiting the UK. Cryer’s greatest professional triumph, this time as a performer, came when he joined Garden, Brooke-Taylor and Willie Rushton in the Radio 4 parody panel show I’m Sorry I Haven’t a Clue, chaired by Humphrey Lyttelton from 1972. The show survived Lyttelton’s death in 2008 and has more recently been chaired by Jack Dee. With Garden, Cryer also starred in a radio spin-off, You’ll Have Had Your Tea (2002-07), based around two Scots characters from the show, Hamish and Dougal. Another spin-off was a stage show with Rushton, Two Old Farts in the Night, which toured to great acclaim until Rushton’s death in 1996. Cryer was appointed OBE in 2001 and in 2017 received an honorary degree of Doctor of Letters at the University of Leeds. He is survived by Terry, their daughter, Jackie, and sons, Bob, Dave and Tony, seven grandchildren and a great-granddaughter. • Barry Cryer, writer and comedian, born 23 March 1935; died 25 January 2022 • This article was amended on 11 February 2022 to add further context to the section regarding Cryer’s recording of Purple People Eater.”There are always moments in a comedy which you’re convinced are going to bring the house down,” says actor and director Mark Bell. “Then, on the first night, it gets nothing.” Bell has made his name from things not going to plan. Director of the riotous The Play That Goes Wrong, he has created a career out of mishap and mayhem. When the tech breaks down during our Zoom call, he jokes about this being his trademark. Now Bell is directing a stage play of Cluedo, which even after more than 70 years remains one of the world’s most popular board games. Written by Sandy Rustin and starring the former EastEnders actor Michelle Collins, this comedy-thriller adaptation is based on Jonathan Lynn’s 1985 film Clue, about a group of strangers invited to a manor house on a stormy night. On arrival, they are given aliases – Professor Plum, Colonel Mustard, the characters we all know and love to suspect – and are told not to reveal who they really are. Growing up, Bell would watch TV with his dad every Saturday lunchtime. “There were only three TV channels, remember,” he says, “but there would always be a Laurel and Hardy short and a Tom and Jerry cartoon. Or Harold Lloyd, or Buster Keaton.” Years later, he could see how much these shows informed his own comedy. “Monty Python, This Is Spinal Tap,” he continues, listing his favourites. “Those characters take themselves very seriously in completely preposterous situations. All of those things have fed into the kind of theatre I make.” The trick to being funny, Bell says, is to not try to be funny. “However ludicrous things get, play it straight.” Take Cluedo. “For the audience, this is funny, but for the people this is happening to, it’s a tragedy. They have to be real people.” The danger with any show that has things going off the rails at an increasing speed, he says, is that it’s very easy to veer into parody or cartoon. “It’s hard on stage to find the balance between absolute nonsense and utter truthfulness.” How do you retain a sense of authenticity with comedy as broad as that based on a board game? “You have to construct the character with the same kind of detail as you would a dramatic character,” he says. In rehearsal, Bell will get his actors to improvise outside the world of the play: what if Mrs Peacock and Miss Scarlett went for a drink? “You’re not trying to make those things funny,” he insists. “You’re thinking: how do those characters interact? What’s their backstory? You find the details.” Once you’ve got that grounding, that’s when you can start to create comedic chaos. The Play That Goes Wrong was drawn from the clown classes he was teaching at London Academy of Music and Dramatic Art (Lamda). “I don’t mean circus clown,” he clarifies. “It’s character comedy. It’s Laurel and Hardy.” Bell trained with Jacques Lecoq, the actor and coach famed for his physical theatre, including the arts of mime and clowning. Other alumni of Lecoq’s school in Paris include Toby Jones and Complicité’s Simon McBurney. “Clown was the last thing we did,” Bell says, “and I remember completely failing in it.” He kept going until he cracked it; he started getting laughs once he stopped trying for them. The Play That Goes Wrong has been a commercial and critical success (it was described as a “gut-busting hit” by the New York Times), and has toured all around the world. Recently Bell has been to see it in London, Brighton and Budapest. Now, his attention is focused on a new set of chaotic events, this time with a murderous edge. When Bell first came on board with Cluedo, he bought an original game on eBay. “It was cheap because all of the pieces were a little bit broken,” he explains. “You can get intact versions for thousands of pounds. Much as I loved the idea of the show, I didn’t love it that much.” When he opened the box, among the pistols and daggers, he found decades-old guesses and accusations. “People have been playing this game since the late 40s,” he says, “and we’re still playing it now. I think the attraction is in the whodunnit. It’s something that taps into us.” The play was originally set in Washington DC, but Bell has changed it to a manor house outside London, so that references to American politicians become MPs in Westminster. He has also shifted the time period from the mid-50s to 1949, the year Cluedo was first released in Britain. “In the American version, they were using the McCarthyite witch-hunts as a backdrop, so the characters have this sense of foreboding, this sense that people could be after you. It felt to me that for the UK, it was better set in a more Agatha Christie-esque period.” He has also embedded the 1949 Lynskey scandal, in which a peer who had been commissioned to look into the corruption around rationing was found to have been involved in dodgy dealings himself, within the show. “One of the characters is meant to be the wife of a very corrupt politician,” Bell says. “It just felt right.” He talks about his Cluedo adaptation with obvious excitement, particularly when it comes to outsmarting the audience. “Part of the fun is working out whodunnit. But if you don’t know the film, you won’t be able to figure it out.” He references Keaton again. “He used to talk about the fact that you have to double-cross the audience. You have to let them think they know exactly what’s going to happen, and then pull the rug out from underneath them.” He describes a famous scene from Keaton’s debut film, One Week, where a couple lugging a house across a train track prepare for it to be smashed to pieces, only for the approaching train to whiz past on the track behind them. Then, when they’re in relief mode, another train comes from the other direction and slams straight into their home. “So he double-crosses you twice,” Bell says delightedly about the 1920 film. “He makes you think you know what’s going to happen, and then it doesn’t, and there’s a relief. Then he hits you with something bigger. That is brilliant storytelling. I’m going to try to play tricks like that.” But this desire for silliness is grounded in something deeper, he says: a shared desire for connection through laughter. “Every culture around the world has a form of clown, which is basically someone who falls over to make people laugh. But it’s not a laugh of cruelty, it’s a laugh of empathy. We all live our lives getting things catastrophically wrong all the time, and then we pretend it didn’t happen. When we see the clowns – we see Charlie Chaplin, we see Laurel and Hardy, we see Keaton, we see Ricky Gervais in The Office – and we know that we are as foolish as them.” “I don’t want to make claims for it being a profound experience,” Bell continues, “because it is entertainment. But that entertainment provides such an important part of our cultural life.” Comedy, he argues, “is the hardest thing to do well. You’ve got to both have a dramatic truthful character and be funny at the same time.” There’s a glint in his eye as he says it. “Chekhov’s a walk in the park in comparison.” Cluedo is at the Churchill theatre, Bromley, to 5 February; touring to 30 July.About £111m of taxpayers’ money has been wasted by the government over a decade on empty secure children’s home beds across England and Wales, Labour has said after an analysis of official statistics. Data released by the Ministry of Justice between 2010 and 2021 shows growing discrepancies between the number of secure children’s home beds procured, compared with the number of young people placed in them by the Youth Custody Service. This is despite secure children’s homes being deemed as providing the “highest standards of care and rehabilitation” and despite the crisis of conditions in residential arrangements for young people, which inspectors have warned are deteriorating to “unacceptable” levels. Secure children’s homes are described by the government as a safe, locked environment for children who “could not be placed safely elsewhere”. In 2021, more than 48% of beds procured by the MoJ stood empty at a cost to the taxpayer of £14.1m, while HM Inspectorate of Prisons simultaneously reported an increase of violence and self-harm in young offender institutions (HMYOIs), with a 70% increase in violence at HMYOI Cookham Wood in Kent. An analysis by Labour has examined statistics showing the number of children accommodated in secure children’s homes over 10 years. Calculations of the amount of money spent on each empty bed were an estimation based on the number of empty beds each year versus the cost of each contracted individual place. Between 2010 and 2021, there were 515 empty secure children’s home beds for the 1,563 places allocated. Labour says the government must rethink its approach to secure centres for children. Anna McMorrin, the shadow minister for victims and youth justice, said: “Money poured down the drain by this government on empty secure home beds could have been better spent on driving down youth reoffending, improving custody conditions and keeping our communities safe. “Instead, we are seeing young offenders’ institutions descend into chaos and violence, reoffending rates higher than 10 years ago, and young people getting sucked into more criminal behaviour.” According to the latest published monthly statistics, there were 2,697 children and young people placed in the youth secure estate at the end of November 2009. At the end of November 2021, there were 515 children in secure children’s homes. Whitehall sources said the government was obliged to secure extra beds to ensure the welfare of children in its care. Responding to Labour’s analysis, a Ministry of Justice spokesperson said: “There are 70% fewer children held in custody under this government, saving taxpayers hundreds of millions of pounds.” “We need to ensure beds are available in secure children’s homes to meet the needs of the most vulnerable and complex children in custody. Additionally, we are investing £18.5m to help divert more vulnerable children from a life of crime – putting education, healthcare and rehabilitation at the heart of our efforts.”He sits there silently on the frontbench, the man with nothing to say about the great swirl of chaos all around him. What is Rishi Sunak thinking? “There is a tide in the affairs of men. Which, taken at the flood, leads on to fortune.” Miss it, warns Brutus the conspirator, and all his life will be “bound in shallows and in miseries”. Indeed, this chancellor may never get another chance to shoot through to No 10. But when exactly is that damned tide at the flood? When Gray’s anatomy of No 10 parties is published, perhaps. Or when those notoriously dilatory plods report? Boris Johnson hopes that delaying the partygate reckoning will allow him to fortify his dam against that flood. His backers try to frighten Tory MPs by threatening that a new leader means a general election. Sunak sees Ladbrokes’ latest betting odds showing his chances of succession at 11/8, while the foreign secretary, Liz Truss, trails at 6/1. The old Tory superstition says the hand that wields the dagger never wears the crown, but this is a time of broken Tory traditions. Sunak rides high as a small-state, low-tax, fiscal austerian – always a true Brexiter. But when to strike? Former political adviser Dominic Cummings has been his promoter, engineering the resignation of Sajid Javid from the Treasury to make way for Sunak as his protege. But that’s not a great calling card right now. Doubts about him in his party focus on his slender political experience – such a thin record fails to reveal if he has the stuff of leadership in him. His meteoric rise has left little trail behind him. All that we know is that he has glided effortlessly upwards, from Winchester to PPE at Oxford to a Fulbright scholarship at Stanford; then onwards to Goldman Sachs and hedge fund management, making his fortune. He danced into one of the very safest Tory seats, with a majority of 23,000. Along the way he married into a billionaire family. Last year he was challenged on a possible failure to declare his wife’s shareholding in Infosys, which has held contracts with government ministries and public bodies; the sums involved were so vast that she was revealed to be richer than the Queen. Burnishing his memories of a summer vacation once working as a waiter in the restaurant of a family friend looks as absurd as most attempts to deny privilege. Why should a high-flying Tory need to? The doubts are about his untested character, his fortitude, daring, imagination, political nous and agility; whether he can balance an instinctive feel for his party’s and the public’s mood while still steering the ship of state in a purposeful political direction – the ingredients of good leadership. Some or almost all of those have been missing from recent Tory leaders, and he would be their fourth in just six years. Tory MPs and members have not been good choosers. He sits there, as invisible as possible, waiting for the premiership to drop, ripe and ready, into his lap – like everything else in his life. But waiting for his party to bring it to him on a silver platter is not the look of a leader, especially while so many of his colleagues are humiliating themselves defending Johnson’s indefensible behaviour and preposterous lies. Sunak neither defends nor attacks, but to use Johnson’s metaphor, waits at the back of the scrum for the ball to come loose. One of the valiant is Truss, out there proclaiming, mendaciously, her “hundred per cent support of the prime minister”, dutifully listing his Brexit and vaccine rollout triumphs. Hers is the better part of valour, not his silent discretion. Anyone who stays in the cabinet, or indeed any Tory MP waiting without declaring, is complicit in everything that has been revealed so far about the nature of Johnson and his regime. As long as ministers draw their salaries they should back their leader, at least in public. (Truss’s “fizz with Liz” private wooing of MPs for when that ball finally emerges is another matter.) If Sunak resigned, Johnson would be done for, as Theresa May was when Johnson resigned as foreign secretary. If the chancellor wants to prove his leadership qualities, he should refuse to be party to all this dishonesty, be brave, and make his pitch as a clean pair of hands. Otherwise that silver platter may pass to someone willing to fight for it. If Johnson clings on, possibly surviving a confidence vote, he will bow to blackmail from the rightwing MPs now filing in to see him, demanding he “be a real Conservative”. He already flails around for totemic rightist acts as they urge more culture wars, more curbing unemployment benefits, assaulting the BBC, pushing back migrant boats, getting rid of “green crap” policies for net zero targets, cutting spending and not raising national insurance – even as the NHS and schools flounder. These true believers ignore Johnson’s clever “levelling up” electoral trick, which attracted voters with false promises of a spending bonanza. If Sunak vacillates now, the brutal results of all the above will soon bequeath him an angry electorate drowning in bills, with inflation rising above their falling pay. The halcyon days of “eat out to help out” will be long obliterated by his austerity years. If he does seize the crown, calling a general election now might be his best chance. Labour hopes a lame Johnson limps on. Polly Toynbee is a Guardian columnistThat sound you hear is Democrats in Washington and across the country letting out a sigh of profound relief: Associate Justice Stephen Breyer is retiring in June, at the end of the US supreme court’s current term. News of the 83-year-old’s choice to step down broke on Wednesday – evidently a little earlier than the man himself would have liked – giving Joe Biden his first opportunity to fill a vacancy on the nation’s highest court. The decision from Breyer ends months of speculation and a determined pressure campaign to convince the ageing liberal justice to retire while Democrats still held both the White House and the Senate, that rare and precarious circumstance that is now required for any Democratic president to see his federal court nominees confirmed. Breyer’s decision to step down this summer gives the Democrats a narrow window to appoint his replacement before they are expected to lose control of the Senate in the November midterms. Breyer’s retirement, after nearly 30 years as a justice, will not change the balance of power on the supreme court, which has heaved dramatically rightward since Justice Anthony Kennedy chose to retire under Donald Trump in 2018. Nor will his exit mitigate what are likely to be ruinous outcomes in this term’s major rulings, which include the hateful Dobbs v Jackson, the case that is almost certain to overturn Roe v Wade. The benefits of his timely exit aren’t so much ameliorative as preventive: because he has retired under a Democratic trifecta, he has ensured that the supreme court’s conservative 6-3 supermajority will at least stay 6-3, and not become and insurmountable 7-2. But the extremist makeup of an increasingly maximalist rightwing court will continue. What his retirement does bring to an end is a long legal and political career of the kind that has since become unfeasible. Breyer’s early career was marked by the industrious bipartisanship of the latter 20th century, and he helped shape that era’s neoliberal consensus. When he was young, Breyer was a legal academic at Harvard – read any biography of a federal courts judge and the words “legal academic at Harvard” are likely to appear –and he wrote inventively about the prerogatives of executive agencies, a field known as administrative law. He favored deregulation, and took several leaves of absence from teaching throughout the 1970s to work as a special counsel to Democrats in the US Senate; among his accomplishments there was shepherding the deregulation of the airline industry. He gained a reputation for friendliness and a willingness to negotiate, and as this was in keeping with the social norms of Washington at the time, he was close with a number of Republicans. His children played with the children of the segregationist Republican senator Strom Thurmond. This closeness with men on the other side of the aisle paid off: when President Clinton nominated Breyer to the supreme court in 1994, he was confirmed 87 to 9. On the court itself, Breyer exerted his influence primarily in conference, attempting to extract compromises from his conservative colleagues and to cultivate their more moderate impulses. His colleagues on the left, Ruth Bader Ginsburg and later Sonia Sotomayor, took up the role first crafted by Thurgood Marshall, and wrote passionate dissents to conservative rulings that were meant to sway the public as much as the legal community. This was not Breyer’s style; he was nearly always speaking to other lawyers, not to lay people. We don’t know how much this worked – the justice’s conferences are confidential – but it is entirely possible that as the court shifted right over the course of his tenure, it was Breyer whose private arguments helped slow its lurch. But as the court and the nation became more polarized, Breyer had come to seem out of place. His commitment to persuasion was no match for a 6-3 court packed with conservative ideologues; his passionate belief in legislative power did not fit with the realities of a deadlocked and dysfunctional Congress that increasingly delegated policymaking power to the judiciary. His questions – always famous for their long-windedness and convoluted structure – devolved into meandering soliloquies, and on the audio broadcasts of the court’s oral arguments, his liberal colleagues Elena Kagan and Sonia Sotomayor could often be heard trying to nudge him towards conclusion or clarify his point. It was obvious that he was from another time, and that time has now ended. The best thing he could have done for the country was go, and it is to his credit that he did. What comes next? On the campaign trail, candidate Biden promised to appoint a Black woman to the court, and the likeliest candidate is Ketanji Brown Jackson, a former Breyer clerk who has the justice’s blessing and whose promotion to the DC circuit court of appeals last June was seen as a stepping stone to succeed her former boss. She is 51, and could serve on the court for decades. But, if she is appointed, the institution that awaits Judge Brown Jackson is less collegial and less dignified than the one that welcomed Breyer. Despite the increasingly laughable protestations of its conservative wing, the supreme court has become an all but nakedly political body, frequently warping the law in bizarre and inventive ways to ensure outcomes that align with Republican priorities. They are going to dispose of abortion rights this year. Affirmative action is set to be dismantled. Voting rights have already been shockingly eroded, and the conservatives seem intent on interpreting religious freedom rights for Christians in whichever way can secure the maximum injury and indignity for everybody else. Increasingly, the impression left by the justices themselves is one of vain and petty figures, fixated on their own PR, attempting to maintain the solemn mystique of an institution that has long since lost it. Who would want to join such a workplace? Perhaps Judge Brown Jackson, if she does indeed become the nominee, deserves not only our congratulations, but also our condolences. Moira Donegan is a Guardian US columnistThe Nord Stream 2 pipeline between Russia and Germany will not move forward if Russia invades Ukraine, the US state department has said, in a significant strengthening of the west’s previous position on the strategically vital gas supply. As tension ratcheted up over Russia’s military buildup on its neighbour’s eastern border, state department spokesperson Ned Price said on Wednesday night that the Biden administration was “working with Germany” to ensure it could withstand the loss of the pipeline. “I want to be very clear: if Russia invades Ukraine one way or another, Nord Stream 2 will not move forward,” Price told National Public Radio. “I’m not going to get into the specifics. We will work with Germany to ensure it does not move forward.” Germany’s foreign minister, Annalena Baerbock, who has previously argued in favour of imposing energy sanctions in response to aggression from Moscow, said the future of Nord Stream 2 could be up for discussion as part of a “broad range” of possible responses to Russian aggression. “In the case of a new act of aggression, we have a broad bandwidth of responses at our disposal, including Nord Stream 2,” she told the Bundestag on Thursday. She stressed that she would prefer to “continue the dialogue” with Russia – because “if you’re talking, you’re not shooting” – but not at any price. “We need to make it completely clear that renewed military aggression against Ukraine would have massive consequences for Russia,” she said. Emily Haber, Germany’s ambassador to Washington, appeared to endorse a hardening of the position in comments on Thursday. She noted on Twitter that “the US and Germany jointly declared last summer: if Russia uses energy as a weapon or if there is another violation of Ukraine’s sovereignty, Russia will have to pay a high price”. The German chancellor, Olaf Scholz and Baerbock had also made this clear, she said. “Nothing will be off the table, including Nord Stream 2,” Haber said. The comments came after a day of intense diplomatic activity, with the US saying that it had set out a path to address Russian demands in eastern Europe, as Moscow held security talks with western countries and continued its military buildup. In a written response delivered in person by its ambassador in Moscow, the US repeated its commitment to upholding Nato’s “open-door” policy while offering a “principled and pragmatic evaluation” of the Kremlin’s concerns, said the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken. Russia has demanded Nato pull back troops and weapons from eastern Europe and bar its neighbour Ukraine, a former Soviet state, from ever joining. Washington and its Nato allies, such as the UK and France, reject that position but say they are ready to discuss other topics such as arms control and confidence-building measures. “Putting things in writing is … a good way to make sure we’re as precise as possible, and the Russians understand our positions, our ideas, as clearly as possible. Right now, the document is with them and the ball is in their court,” Blinken said. The Nato secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, said: “While we are hoping for and working for a good solution – de-escalation – we are also prepared for the worst.” China’s foreign minister, Wang Yi, said on Thursday that all parties involved in the Ukraine issue should remain calm and refrain from actions that stir tension and hype up the crisis, as he held talks with Blinken. Europe’s most divisive energy project, Nord Stream 2 is designed to double the amount of gas flowing from Russia straight to Germany, bypassing the traditional transit route through Ukraine via a pipeline along the bed of the Baltic Sea. It has faced resistance within the EU, from the US as well as Ukraine on the grounds it increases Europe’s energy dependence on Russia and denies Ukraine transit fees, at a time of Moscow’s broader standoff with the west. The $11bn (£8.3bn) pipeline was first announced in 2015. Angela Merkel, who stepped down as German chancellor in 2021, was an enthusiastic backer as it promised to supply cheap fuel to 26m German homes. But she admitted in 2018 it could not be viewed as an “just economic project” but was also a political one that threatened the integrity of Ukraine by bypassing it as a transit country. Longstanding fears that it could give Vladimir Putin more leverage over Germany and other European countries have been amplified significantly by the Ukraine standoff. The pipeline’s construction was completed in September but its owner, the Russian gas company Gazprom, is waiting for final legal permission from German regulators to open the valves and send gas westwards. The federal Network Agency has been accused of dragging its heels over the certification process, though there are some who believe this is a deliberate tactic and it has earned support from some US officials. In contrast to his foreign minister, Scholz had until recently been adamant that the pipeline should not face sanctions, referring to it as a “private business initiative” that had nothing to do with the Ukraine crisis. His shift puts him at odds with some in his Social Democratic party who have backed the pipeline as good for German industry and for maintaining a relationship with Moscow. The prospect of Russia cutting off supplies in the event of a conflict has led the Biden administration to begin talks with gas producing nations across the world to secure supplies for Europe. A senior US official said this week that “contingency” plans were being drawn up, and the White House said that Joe Biden would host the emir of Qatar, Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad al-Thani, on Sunday, with their agenda including “ensuring the stability of global energy supplies”. When asked about reports that industry had little or no capacity to provide the required supplies, the White House press secretary, Jen Psaki, said on Wednesday that the US faced logistical challenges, especially around moving natural gas. “That’s part of our discussions with a lot of companies and countries,” Psaki said. “But again, these conversations are ongoing and we don’t intend to fail.” On Thursday, Australia’s resources minister, Keith Pitt, refused to confirm whether Australian officials were in active discussions with the Europeans about gas supply. He said Australia had been one of the most reliable suppliers of liquefied natural gas throughout the pandemic. “We will of course continue to meet our existing contracts but where there is a shortfall Australia will always look to support our friends,” Pitt told Sky News Australia. Whether any shortfalls would provide Australian exporters with a long-term opportunity or just become a short-term fix was “a matter for exporters to determine”, he said. Baerbock defended Germany’s decision to send 5000 military helmets to Ukraine, which has been widely ridiculed, including by the mayor of Kiev, Vitali Klitschko, who called it “an absolute joke” and has led to accusations Germany is not offering the country adequate support.”This followed a specific request from Ukraine,” she said, adding that Germany was also involved in the refurbishment of a protective bunker near Odessa and in the training of Ukrainian soldiers. But she stressed that Germany would stand by its refusal to deliver lethal weapons, saying that “progress in the negotiating process is the priority of this government”. She said she “did not want to close doors that that have just started to open albeit tentatively but that might lead to a deescalation,” referring to the talks in the so-called ‘Normandy Format’ which had taken place between Russia, Ukraine, Germany and France on Wednesday. Klitschko, a former boxer, said the delivery of helmets had left him “speechless”. He told the tabloid Bild: “What will German send next to support us? Pillows?” Since 2014 when Russia invaded and annexed the Crimean Peninsula from Ukraine, it has always refused the request for weapons, but has provided its military with bullet proof vests, helmets and communication equipment. Its reluctance to deliver lethal weapons is mainly linked to acute awareness of the murderous havoc Germany wrought in the region during the second world war, guilt about which regional leaders, especially Vladimir Putin, have been keen to play on.Boris Johnson has decided that one of his key routes to survival is to convince his backbenchers that Labour want him gone. But if Labour MPs had a vote in the secret ballot in the vote of no confidence in Boris Johnson, there are some who might pause with their pencil. The overwhelming emotion among them is relief – mainly not to be the ones in the spotlight whose party is riven with internal division. Had things taken a different course since September, it is not difficult to imagine Labour being the ones considering their leader’s future. But there is disagreement as Labour MPs chew over the possible worlds that could emerge in the coming weeks. Labour has raced ahead in the polls as partygate dominates the headlines and MPs’ inboxes fill with angry complaints from voters. Much of that is at the feet of Johnson himself, and his possible successors – Rishi Sunak, Liz Truss, Sajid Javid – are not yet tainted. Many pondering the data in Labour HQ say it is too early to fully understand the public mood. Keir Starmer’s own ratings have been rising, as well as metrics that party chiefs watch closely, including how Labour is trusted on the economy. But there is also a sense that the Conservatives’ previous lead was vastly inflated by a vaccine bounce and that the polls are likely to even out within the next few months and settle into a more predictable pattern that might be expected at this point for a government mid-term. Some of those advising Starmer quietly say there might be some electoral merit to a wounded prime minister limping on, especially one who narrowly wins a no-confidence vote. Preoccupied by restive and rebellious backbenchers, neutered by his chancellor in terms of domestic policies and with no political capital to make major changes, Johnson could quickly become a lame duck prime minister in the eyes of the public. Plus, they argue, the longer Johnson goes on, the more the Conservative brand is tarnished, his MPs making laughable statements of support about cake ambushes. Starmer, they argue, is the perfect counterweight to Johnson – with a serious, slightly boring demeanour, and a lifetime of public service. One shadow minister, mulling over what timing would suit them, said a departure after the local elections might be the most beneficial to the party. “Not only do they lose seats, but then the Tories look even more self-serving, they only ditched him not for moral reasons but for poor results. And then there is the wider good that the country gets rid of him too.” Starmer himself would never suggest it was better for Johnson to continue. His team decided it was inconceivable they could not call for Johnson’s resignation two weeks ago at PMQs. Any more calls for inquiries, explanations, apologies would obviously not wash. “There’s always an argument that once you’ve gone that far, there’s nowhere to go, it’s sixth gear,” one of them said. “But the email [from Martin Reynolds inviting staff to a party] meant we took that choice. Anything less would look pathetic.” But ask any of the party’s northern MPs with experience of fighting battles in the red wall and many will say Labour’s chances are enhanced with Johnson gone. It is the message Johnson is drilling into his backbenchers. “Of course he wants me out of the way,” he told PMQs. “He does, and – I will not deny it – for all sorts of reasons, many people may want me out of the way, but the reason he wants me out of the way is that he knows that this government can be trusted to deliver, and we did.” Some will privately agree with that, having observed Johnson take selfies on the streets in a way few others could. “I think in the long run we don’t want to take the chance he can recover,” one said. Another said Sunak or Truss would be far less likely to keep lots of the seats that Johnson had taken – or may yet win. “I don’t know if that’s what the polls say or not, but my instinct is he still has some personal appeal and my voters just don’t know who Liz Truss is.”As the hollering frontman of Pixies, Black Francis has long been one of the best and most instantly recognisable voices in rock – and as the band release an expansive new live album, he will answer your questions about his life and career. Also known by his other stage name Frank Black, Charles Thompson IV was raised by an itinerant and religious family, insulated from the wildness of punk and other 1970s innovations – his musical diet mostly consisted of Christian music and pop oldies. But after meeting guitarist Joey Santiago at university in Massachusetts, his purview opened up, and in 1986 the pair formed what would be one of the truly great alt-rock bands. With Kim Deal on bass, David Lovering on drums and university degree discarded, Pixies debuted with the Come on Pilgrim mini-album the following year – and Francis’s voice, sweetly cooing and angrily howling often in the space of a single verse, set them apart. Melody was there from the start – listen to the jolly Santiago line on The Holiday Song – but the poppy quality of the songs, almost all of them written solely by Francis, kept ratcheting up. Here Comes Your Man, Debaser, Velouria, Dig for Fire, Monkey Gone to Heaven, Wave of Mutilation – these all had the sweetest of tunes even if the subject matter was phantasmagoric, and all became indie-disco classics. Francis and Deal had an infamously irritable bandmate relationship, which prompted a hiatus after major label breakthrough Doolittle, and was a factor in the eventual breakup of the band in 1993. Francis released a more than a dozen acclaimed solo albums, including with new backing band the Catholics, before Pixies reformed in 2004 – that return is the subject of a new box set, documenting four Brixton Academy concerts across 16 sides of vinyl. Their fanbase had stayed with them, and new ones had been added – Where Is My Mind? helped to earn them a new audience after it iconically soundtracked the bleak ending of Fight Club – allowing them to consistently tour ever since. Deal left at the outset of sessions for their recorded comeback, 2014 album Indie Cindy, but Pixies have endured – they will start touring again post-pandemic, including with a headline slot at this year’s End of the Road festival. It’s a bumpy but consistently creative journey for Black Francis, who will answer questions right across it. Post them in the comments below before the end of 31 January, and his answers will be published in the 4 February edition of the Guardian’s Film &amp; Music section, as well as online.40. Baby Blue (1979) You have to tread carefully when it comes to the Beach Boys’ late-70s albums: patchy is putting it mildly. But Baby Blue – a refugee from Dennis Wilson’s unfinished second solo album, Bamboo, parachuted on to the largely awful LA (Light Album) – is fantastic: fragile, ethereal, alternately romantic and pained. 39. The Lonely Sea (1963) An overlooked anomaly amid the Surfin’ USA album’s twangy instrumentals and paeans to catching a wave, The Lonely Sea is slow, shimmering and eerie. It makes the sea sound faintly sinister – a reminder of life’s transience – rather than a source of fun, its dreamy ache a sign of where Brian Wilson was headed. 38. Disney Girls (1957) (1971) Bruce Johnston’s songwriting could tend to schmaltz: see the ghastly Deirdre, from Sunflower. But the gentle, descending melody on his contribution to Surf’s Up – an evocation of 50s America that couldn’t have been less fashionable in 1971, decorated with wah-wah guitar or not – is disarmingly charming. 37. Wind Chimes (1967) LSD didn’t make Brian Wilson relax and float downstream: it scared the shit out of him. You can hear the fear in Smile’s supine, compelling but distinctly creepy Wind Chimes. It’s creepier and more compelling still in the ragged re-recording on Smiley Smile, and nothing like anything else the Beach Boys recorded. 36. Little Honda (1964) Brian and brother Carl had a row in the studio over Brian’s insistence that Little Honda needed a distorted guitar. Brian won, and the result was as close as the Beach Boys came to garage-rock toughness: nothing to scare the Shadows of Knight, but its vague hint of pounding aggression is really thrilling. 35. It’s About Time (1970) The Beach Boys seldom rocked out convincingly – it just wasn’t their forte – which makes It’s About Time, a collaborative effort involving Dennis and Carl Wilson and Al Jardine, a truly rare pleasure: Dennis’s vocal is raw and powerful, the guitar solo stings, the Santana-inspired Latin percussion rattles along. 34. Be True To Your School (1963) He’s an understandably controversial figure among Beach Boys fans, but Mike Love nevertheless makes Be True to Your School as exciting as it is: his lyrics are weirdly belligerent, and he sings them with a punkish snarl at odds with its perky cheerleader chants and ra-ra backing vocals, as if intent on provoking a punch-up rather than lauding his alma mater. 33. Wendy (1964) Wendy was intended as a homage to the Beach Boys’ east coast competitors the Four Seasons: you can definitely hear the influence of their then-current hit single Ronnie, particularly in its intro. But the Four Seasons’ overcast Newark toughness is replaced by dreamy melancholy that feels sunlit even as it ponders a future that looks “awful dim”. 32. Cuddle Up (1972) The overlooked Carl and the Passions – So Tough feels distantly related to 1965’s Beach Boys Today! Both albums feature a second side consumed by ballads, but here they’re darker, wearier, the sound of a band horribly bruised by the excesses of the late 60s. The highpoint is the wonderful Cuddle Up: Dennis in gorgeous battered romantic mode. 31. Help Me, Rhonda (1965) For a man supposedly hopelessly square – his LA hipster friends tended to snigger behind his back at his terrible taste – Brian was a serious risk-taker: Help Me, Rhonda’s original version spends its final minute inexplicably fading in and out. Even without that coda, the single version is great: the lyrical misery at odds with the melody. 30. Summer’s Gone (2012) That’s Why God Made the Radio is deeply uneven, but the final track on what’s likely to be the final Beach Boys album is a perfect way of bidding farewell. Based around a keyboard figure that recalls the intro to California Girls, it repurposes Brian’s trademark melancholy. 29. Little Deuce Coupe (1963) The tune is one of Brian’s more simplistic, and the lyrics are effectively someone wanging on about their car like a bore in the pub on a Sunday lunchtime – you get everything from the clutch to its registration documents. The end result is 1:44 of life-affirming joy, such were the Beach Boys’ mysterious alchemical powers in 1963. 28. Time to Get Alone (1969) 20:20, released in 1969, variously featured old outtakes, covers, a recording of Dennis having sex and – uh-oh – the songwriting talents of Charles Manson. Among the former category lurked Time to Get Alone: a Brian song longing for escape, “safe from the people”, airily delightful, blessed with a heavenly sigh of a chorus. 27. 4th of July (1971) Dennis emerged as a major songwriting force with Sunflower’s Forever, but 4th of July is even better: an epic, deeply troubled meditation on Vietnam utterly at odds with the Beach Boys’ old image as America’s Band. “Band politics” got it elbowed from Surf’s Up – it remained unreleased until 1993. 26. Dance, Dance, Dance (1964) It says something about the company it kept that Dance, Dance, Dance feels undervalued among the Beach Boys’ run of classic singles. Carl’s riff is great, its 12-string guitar and frantic solo bear the influence of the Beatles’ A Hard Day’s Night, but the sudden key change midway through the third verse is pure Brian. 25. The Warmth of the Sun (1964) Its writing apparently fuelled by the assassination of President John F Kennedy, The Warmth of the Sun is extraordinarily luscious and incredibly sad. It’s also a perfect example of the subtly increasing richness of Brian’s writing: no one else in pop in 1964 was writing chord sequences and melodies like this. 24. Darlin’ (1967) The Beach Boys were in trouble by the time of Wild Honey’s December 1967 release: Brian’s mental health had collapsed, tastemakers were deriding them as unhip. You wouldn’t know from Darlin’, a heart-swelling triumph with a great Carl vocal: in its own way, its pared-back R&amp;B-infused sound fitted the rootsy post-psychedelic mood. 23. Feel Flows (1971) The most angelically voiced Beach Boy of all, Carl was a late developing, sporadic and patchy songwriter, but Feel Flows was a total delight, a hazily psychedelic take on laid-back 70s west coast rock with a fantastic, surprisingly stinging guitar solo. Its use in Almost Famous deservedly brought it to a wider audience. 22. This Whole World (1970) Legend has it that Brian wrote This Whole World while “stoned and confused”, which seems remarkable given the song’s plethora of changes and its mood of spiralling elation. Its a cappella coda – Carl’s falsetto soaring over a wall of backing vocals – is as spine-tingling as anything in the Beach Boys’ catalogue. 21. I’m Waiting For the Day (1966) Pet Sounds is so consistently fantastic that picking its highlights swiftly becomes about personal preference. Is I’m Waiting For the Day “better” than I Guess I Just Wasn’t Made For These Times or Here Today? Not really, but the point at 0:52 when the drums kick in might be the album’s most exciting, exuberant moment. 20. Let Him Run Wild (1965) A wonderful song and another signpost to Pet Sounds that stirs the influence of Burt Bacharach into a saga of heartbreak and optimism. The writing and arrangements are ever-more ornate, but the real genius of Brian might not be all the musical twists and turns but how effortless the finished product feels. 19. Sail On Sailor (1973) The demo of Sail On Sailor features Brian pleading with co-writer Van Dyke Parks to “convince me that I’m not insane”. That such an optimistic, joy-bringing song came out of such turmoil seems almost beyond belief: the lyrics might feel like Parks’s message to his troubled partner, but Brian’s strident, punchy music matches it. 18. Fun, Fun, Fun (1964) Fun, Fun, Fun must have sounded like a description of another planet in early 60s Britain: a world of drive-in restaurants and unimaginable plenty, where a teenager could take possession of a Ford Thunderbird. No wonder it sounded so exuberant, from its Chuck Berry guitar intro to its final, life-affirming explosion of harmonies. 17. All I Wanna Do (1970) Invariably overshadowed by its successor Surf’s Up, Sunflower is the real jewel in the Beach Boys’ 70s catalogue: more of a band effort than Pet Sounds, packed with amazing songs, not least All I Wanna Do, a blissful, reverb-drenched dream that some have claimed as a precursor to chillwave. A little bafflingly, Brian later called it “boring”. 16. Surfin’ USA (1963) One of the fastest learners in pop, Brian described 1962’s Surfin’ Safari as merely “a rehearsal”. The qualitative leap on the Chuck Berry-indebted Surfin’ USA – released a mere five months later – feels mind-blowing. It’s tighter, smoother, shinier, more exciting: a song entirely of its moment, but so infectiously gleeful as to defy time. 15. Heroes and Villains (1967) The projected follow-up to Good Vibrations pushed Brian’s fragmentary writing technique to its limit. Disjointed in a way its predecessor simply wasn’t, it’s still an incredible achievement, unlike anything else in pop then or now. What audiences in 1967 would have made of the five-minute version, belatedly released in 2011, is anyone’s guess. 14. Do It Again (1968) Hymning the early 60s before the 60s were over, Do It Again helped usher in a retrospective mood in US pop culture, harking back to a mythic prelapsarian era just as American Graffiti and Don McLean’s American Pie would subsequently do. It’s also a fantastic song: the lead vocal-free middle section is particularly thrilling. 13. In My Room (1963) The greatest and most moving of the Beach Boys’ initial ventures into introspection. With its worries, fears and crying in the dark, In My Room seems astonishingly vulnerable for a male pop band in 1963: an early sign that all was not as it seemed behind the sunny California facade. 12. Cabinessence (1969) Spare a thought for Love, the naysaying villain in the saga of Smile going unfinished: who wouldn’t be a little shocked by Cabinessence? But if you’re not a 60s pop star looking for a hit, it sounds glorious and ambitious: drawing on folk music, cowboy songs and Aaron Copland, alternately funny, touching and disturbing. 11. Don’t Talk (Put Your Head on My Shoulder) (1966) A strong candidate for the title of the most beautiful song the Beach Boys ever recorded, Don’t Talk (Put Your Head on My Shoulder)’s sumptuous, string-laden yearning stands out even on Pet Sounds. Analyse its harmonic complexities, diminished chords and passing tones if you want: however Brian did it, it’s impossible not to succumb to. 10. Please Let Me Wonder (1965) Side two of Beach Boys Today! offered a succession of dazzling, plush ballads that bore testament to Brian’s increasing fondness for marijuana and acted as a dry run for Pet Sounds. Every one of them is amazing, but the subtly arranged, swooning beauty of Please Let Me Wonder is something else. 9. I Get Around (1964) Perhaps the finest expression of swaggering youthful arrogance in pop history – “we’ve never missed yet with the girls we meet” – I Get Around manages to be impossibly pleased with itself and totally irresistible: the astonishing harmonies, Brian’s vaulting falsetto, the key change midway through, the fabulous pizzicato guitar on the verses. 8. God Only Knows (1966) In recent years, God Only Knows seems to have become the definitive Beach Boys song: you’re far more likely to hear it on the radio than I Get Around. Its resulting over-familiarity notwithstanding, its plaintive loveliness – amplified by Carl’s vocal – can still take your breath away in an unguarded moment. 7. California Girls (1965) The contrasting personalities at the Beach Boys’ centre in one stunning pop package. Love’s lyrics pay swaggering tribute to the sun-kissed ladies of the band’s home state, equal parts lechery and we’re-the-best cheerleading. Brian’s astonishing instrumental introduction, however, seems beamed from a very different world: reflective, autumnal, suffused with sadness. 6. Wouldn’t It Be Nice (1966) Pet Sounds’ clarion call features Brian throwing everything at the wall – tempo shifts, risky key changes (the first arrives six seconds in), instruments rendered unrecognisable by his studio techniques, harmonies so beautiful and tricky they reduced Carl to tears in the studio – and finding it all sticks: an incredible song. 5. Don’t Worry Baby (1966) One of the greatest B-sides ever released, Don’t Worry Baby has it all: an exquisite melody made more exquisite still by Brian’s tender vocal, a lush backdrop of harmonies, a moving lyric about teen romance and an ill-considered drag race that seems to reflect Brian’s own troubles and insecurities. 4. ’Til I Die (1971) A stunning piece of songwriting – check out the extended alternative mix on 1998’s Endless Harmony – ’Til I Die is the most emotionally desolate song in the Beach Boys’ catalogue: a howl of resigned despair from a man in terrible distress. Its hopelessness is chilling, its sonic richness cosseting: an incredibly potent, unsettling combination. 3. Caroline, No (1966) Almost anything from Pet Sounds could hold this position in the chart, but for sheer emotional power, it’s hard to beat Caroline, No’s meditation on innocence lost, which could just as easily be about a child as an old flame. The music is sumptuously sad; the final, agonised note of Brian’s vocal heartbreaking. 2. Surf’s Up (1971) The first time the public heard Surf’s Up, four years before it appeared on the eponymous album, it was being lavished with praise: “Too complex to get all of first time around … poetic, beautiful,” gushed the 1967 documentary Inside Pop, superlatives that horrified Brian. But it deserves them: elliptical, deeply haunting and elegiac, it seems to anticipate the waning of the 60s even at their height. 1. Good Vibrations (1966) In the new documentary Long Promised Road, Don Was attempts to explain Brian’s production techniques by playing his old multi-tracks. It doesn’t work: “I don’t know how he did that,” shrugs Was, baffled. Good Vibrations is testament to those inexplicable powers. An act of unprecedented audacity, it was spliced together from fragments recorded in four different studios. But it doesn’t sound like an avant-garde experiment: it sounds like a breathtaking pop single, its endless shifts and changes coalescing into a perfectly formed, unbelievably thrilling whole. The greatest single ever? Maybe. The pinnacle of 60s pop’s invention and daring? Probably. The Beach Boys’ crowning achievement? Absolutely. • Long Promised Road is in cinemas now.A Hero, a tense, mazy drama from the Iranian writer-director Asghar Farhadi, centers on a figure familiar to anyone who’s attuned to the ebbs and flows of internet celebrity: the social media Main Character, the subject of an internet backlash. Rahim (Amir Jadidi, endearing yet inscrutable), is a man imprisoned for debts in the city of Shiraz, who becomes a local hero for an act of charity of ambiguous motivation. His girlfriend, Farkhondeh (Sahar Goldoust), found 17 gold coins who she says were left in a purse at a bus stop, but instead of paying toward his freedom, Rahim contacts a bank and arranges a return to their owner. Within days, on furlough from jail, he’s the feelgood story of the moment. I’ve written before about how there are few films which successfully capture the internet and/or social media without tipping into flat moralism, obsolescence or laughable facsimiles. (Social media and the internet are of course not the same thing, though in today’s climate of platform consolidation, to refer to one is basically to refer to the other, especially in the context of film and television.) This is partly because text phrasing, online references and digital interfaces change so quickly – at a much faster pace than the production of a film, let alone its distribution – that including it in text messages or social media references can jarringly distract from the story at hand; timestamped phone and computer screen risk locking the story into a tight, hyper-specific timeline that can constrain narrative, filming location or cultural references. The few good internet films convey genuine human emotion through depictions of phone-lit characters consumed by the infinite scroll (Eighth Grade, Sweat, Ingrid Goes West) or confined to movement within a desktop (the so-called “screen-life” films produced by Timur Bekmambetov – Profile, Searching and Unfriended – and the 2020 movie Spree). A Hero, available to stream on Amazon, is a rare exception to both of these trends. The two-hour feature is one of the sharpest films about how the online influences our postures off it, evoking a real-time turn of the timeline’s tide, while barely engaging with the internet itself. Farhadi rarely shows a screen, but you can feel the churn of the internet behind Rahim’s rapid celebrity, recorded in heartwarming newspaper articles arranged by his prison, mentions of things seen on social media, and an award from a local charity that collects donations to pay off his debt. And as with anything popular online, there are quickly detractors and doubters. A fellow inmate praises Rahim’s ability to fool everyone with icy contempt. A hiring manager pokes holes in Rahim’s story that he struggles to plug up with evidence. Did he and Farkhondeh really just find gold coins? Who was the skittish woman who collected them, nowhere to be found? Rahim is handsome and ingratiating, a natural charmer, but how much do we trust his story as more reports of his unreliability surface? “I didn’t lie,” he tells his sister Malileh (Maryam Shahdaei), when the deluge of bad optics begins to erase his good fortune. “But you didn’t tell the truth,” she retorts. In Farhadi’s film, as it can be online, both are simultaneously correct and unmoored, swimming in conflicting takes, narratives and hidden motivations. Characters need only reference things seen on social media or “what people are saying” for audiences to fill in the virtual background. The kind of celebratory online attention that Rahim has received and then reaped tends to be corrosive; very, very few things on the internet age well, especially if it goes viral. Popularity engenders backlash, which platforms then amplify. Main characters are revealed to have complicated, maybe unsavory backstories. Pile-ons careen out of control, context or scope. (To cite two prominent examples from just the past two weeks on US social media: the furor over West Elm Caleb and the curdling of Wordle fandom.) Anyone interested in maintaining their two days of fame or parlaying it into something else must participate in an increasingly hollow and cringey game of self-promotion, one even influencers themselves – the ones who make actual money off of producing content on big platforms – appear exhausted with. One can imagine smaller versions of this happening simultaneous to the action in A Hero, which mostly sticks to Rahim’s confused, soured IRL perspective. It’s there in the way charity officials titter about returning their donations, caught in the difficult position of backing a controversy. It’s implied when the daughter of Rahim’s creditor, Nazanin (Sarina Farhadi), whose dowry was spent to cover Rahim’s loans, takes out a phone to film a physical altercation. It haunts scheming by Rahim, Malileh and brother-in-law Hossein (Alireza Jahandideh) to restore Rahim’s reputation. It frames concerns of “authenticity” in the filming of Rahim’s innocent, scared son Siavash (Saleh Karimai), who has a severe speech impediment, as a ploy for sympathy. Farhadi has traced dense thickets of ethics and motivations before, in his two Oscar-winning pictures A Separation and The Salesman, and A Hero applies the same scrupulous vision to characters besieged, directly or adjacently, by the whims of public discourse out of one’s control. When Rahim learns that an unflattering video of him, one that he fought to keep hidden, has been posted online, we do not see the comments, takes, explainers, hate messages. It’s all there on his face, which has the pall of a real death. It’s unclear what he mourns most – his reputation, his ego, any prospect of controlling the narrative, his dignity, possibly his freedom from debtor’s prison. A Hero is one of the best films on social media by playing on what we already know, refracting familiar, repetitive dynamics into a taut psychological drama that muddies the internet’s preferred lines of good and bad. You do not have to see the explosion or know its real cause to understand the fallout. Social media waves rise and fall, crest and repeat, forgotten in a day but leaving real wreckage behind. We know that but tend to forget it – behind all of these screens are fragile, complicated humans. A Hero puts that truth first, offering a model for future internet-adjacent films to come.The author of Fight Club has praised the “happy ending” afforded to David Fincher’s film of his book for a new Chinese cut of the movie. Chuck Palahniuk described the change, in which the police successfully foil an anarchist plot and the heroes are incarcerated, as “SUPER wonderful”. Palahniuk told TMZ: “The irony is that … they’ve aligned the ending almost exactly with the ending of the book, as opposed to Fincher’s ending, which was the more spectacular visual ending. So in a way, the Chinese brought the movie back to the book a little bit.” The conclusion of the 1999 film in its original cut sees Ed Norton’s narrator realise that the character played by Brad Pitt is in fact a projection of his own mind. He then stands on top of a tower block and witnesses the plan overseen by his alter ego to destroy consumerism begin to take effect, as the skyscrapers around him explode. The Chinese version distributed by streaming service Tencent Video instead ends with a caption telling viewers that police uncovered the plot in time and arrested all criminals. The character played by Pitt was put on trial, according to the new edit, before being “sent to a lunatic asylum, receiving psychological treatment. He was discharged from the hospital in 2012.” Palahniuk initially responded to reports detailing the change by saying: “This is SUPER wonderful! Everyone gets a happy ending in China!” He consolidated his thoughts on Substack, calling the incarceration of Pitt’s character: “Amazing. I’d no idea! Justice always wins. Nothing ever exploded. Fini.” He added: “My guess is they also omit the flash of penis at the end. And that they pixelate the dildo in Marla’s room. Crime does not pay!” The news on Wednesday of the re-edit was met with outrage on social media, but Palahniuk said he was already used to his books being changed in some countries, and even banned in some parts of America. “The strange flip side is that in many foreign markets the publisher rewrote the novel so it would end like the film,” he wrote. “Without permission, I might add.” Palahniuk added to TMZ: “What I find really interesting is that my books are heavily banned throughout the US. The Texas prison system refuses to carry my books in their libraries. A lot of public schools and most private schools refuse to carry my books. But it’s only an issue once China changes the end of a movie? I’ve been putting up with book-banning for a long time.”Asta Nielsen’s career started with a bang. The Danish diva’s first step on the path to becoming perhaps the greatest actress of the silent era, and one of the cinema’s first truly international film stars, was a hot romance and an overnight sensation. In her first film, The Abyss, 1910, she played a music teacher torn between two lovers: a sensible vicar’s son, and a circus performer who treats her terribly but has captivated her sexually. Nielsen delivers a compelling performance as a young woman riven by the conflicting demands of duty and desire, which culminates in the film’s most infamous scene, a lascivious dance. She circles her tyrannous lover, swaying her hips, before taking a rope from around her waist and tying it tightly around her man. As soon as audiences caught their breath, they clamoured for more. Nielsen soon realised that her future lay in the cinema. She was 29 when The Abyss was released, and had been working as a jobbing actor since leaving school, but despite glowing reviews couldn’t land the leading roles of her dreams. The cinema offered opportunities that the stage had failed to provide, and she elevated the new art form to something more sophisticated, more adult, with her radical new performance style. She and the writer-director of The Abyss, Urban Gad, moved to Germany where they made several more films together – and soon married. Nielsen immediately set herself apart from her peers thanks to her acting technique, which she studied from the rushes: she summoned emotions, nuance by nuance, to her face and with the smallest movements could tell complex stories of passion and loss on camera. In her memoirs, she called it: “The absolute gift of thinking yourself into fragments organised beforehand in your mind, which requires authenticity of expression in front of the all-determining lens.” When she auditioned for drama school as a teenager, she offered a fully silent performance. She was told to return with a more traditional audition piece, but it is telling that her understanding of performance began with physicality, not reciting lines. The Hungarian film critic Béla Belász considered that Nielsen had invented an entirely new language for the screen: “Only when advances in cinematography enable us to assemble our first gesture lexicon will we be in a position to gauge the extent of Asta Nielsen’s thesaurus of gestures.” Nielsen liked to joke that her scripts gave her little material to work from, simply reading, for example: “Baby dies. Asta’s main scene.” That’s almost certainly a rank exaggeration of the facts, but it is true that she brought a lot more technique to her scenarios than many of her peers. For Nielsen, achieving these miniature effects was the essence of making great cinema. Born in 1881, Nielsen didn’t have an easy start, growing up in poverty in Copenhagen and Malmö, Sweden, and giving birth to a daughter out of wedlock when she was 19 and a student at the Royal Danish Theatre drama school. She refused to marry the child’s father, a law student, because marriage would have inhibited her theatrical ambitions. It was a fairly audacious decision for a working-class girl in 1901, but Nielsen was single-minded in matters of love and work. As were the often shockingly headstrong women she loved to play on screen. Her appearance was striking. With a slender, androgynous body and dark features set against pale skin, which she accentuated with her makeup and costumes, she was fascinating to look at. And those large eyes of hers contained pools of deep feeling that hypnotised audiences. She created such a distinct persona on film that it was as if she had been born for the camera. It seems that few people remember Nielsen’s astronomical stardom now, but the BFI Southbank in London is hosting a retrospective of her work in February and March, which will reintroduce this distinctive silent star to the big screen. As a “film-primadonna” (the title of one of her self-reflexive movies), Nielsen went on to make 72 films, continually striving to improve her technique and find material worthy of her efforts, before retiring from the screen in 1932, aged 51, after her first and only talkie. She was a hoot in rip-roaring comedies (such as 1916’s gender experiment The ABC of Love and 1918’s fish-out-of-water romp The Eskimo-Baby) but particularly excelled in heartbreaking tragic roles, in adult melodramas filled with the deep emotion and sexual passion that she conveyed so naturally to the camera. Try her early film Poor Jenny (1912) or her heartbreaking mature work, such as Der Absturz (The Decline, 1923), in which she plays a woman waiting for her lover’s return. Or Dora Brandes (1916), in which she plays a woman shattered by guilt, with shades of Dostoevsky’s novel Raskolnikov. Nielsen was every inch the diva, but her cool androgyny gave all her roles a certain edge of unpredictability, even when she wasn’t playing teenage tomboys in drag. In perhaps her most famous role, she played Hamlet in a feature-length adaptation of Shakespeare’s tragedy in 1921, directed by Svend Gade – but Nielsen’s Prince of Denmark was secretly a princess, disguised as a boy all her life to secure her claim to the throne. It’s a loose interpretation of the play, but Nielsen’s silent soliloquies are as eloquent as any spoken verse reading. As a result, this Hamlet, produced by Nielsen’s own company, has to be seen to be believed. The excitement about Nielsen’s films, and her indelible appearance on screen, made her a megastar, adored by fans from her native Denmark all the way around the world to Australia, and especially in Germany where she spent most of her career – and was hailed as “Die Asta” – The Asta. During the first world war, soldiers in the trenches on both sides pinned up her picture and sent her fan letters. She inspired poets and artists and thrilled the avant garde, while receiving the highest possible acclaim from critics and peers, who considered her mastery of screen acting to be as revolutionary in its own way as Charlie Chaplin’s comedy. Even in the US, where her films were screened less often due to their erotic content and cinema booking systems that didn’t favour imported films, critics marvelled. “She acts. That’s the thing,” enthused the New York Times critic in 1921. “She does not just pose before the camera, nor does she rant and tear around violently. She impersonates a character, she makes it live and have a meaning, a hundred meanings. Her mouth is not simply something to paint a cupid’s bow on. It is an organ to express the thoughts and feelings of the woman within.” Nielsen’s fame may have faded with the passing decades, but one of her younger co-stars gave a sense of her impact on cinema. Greta Garbo said Nielsen taught her everything she knew: “In terms of expression and versatility, I am nothing to her.” • In the Eyes of a Silent Star: The Films of Asta Nielsen is at BFI Southbank from 3 February to 15 March.Hello, and happy Thursday, On Tuesday afternoon, Jim Cooper, a moderate Democrat who has been in Congress for more than three decades, announced he was retiring. The timing was not a coincidence. Less than 24 hours earlier, the Tennessee legislature had approved a map with new boundaries for the state’s eight congressional districts. Since 2003, Cooper has represented a district that includes all of Nashville, and it has been reliably Democratic (Joe Biden carried it by 24 points in 2020). But the legislature’s new plan erased his district. Republicans sliced up Nashville into three different districts, attaching a sliver of Democratic voters in each to rural and deeply Republican areas. Donald Trump would have easily won all three of the new districts in 2020. Cooper was blunt in his assessment of what had happened. Republicans, he said in a statement, had made it impossible for him to win re-election to Congress. Despite his best efforts, he said, he could not stop Republicans from “dismembering Nashville”. The map doesn’t just weaken the voice of Democrats, it also dilutes the influence of Black voters and other voters of color in Nashville. In Cooper’s current district, Black voters make up about a quarter of the voting-age population. They will comprise a much smaller share of the voting age population in the new districts, making it harder for them to make their voices heard. Andrew Witherspoon, my colleague on our visuals team, and I put together an interactive map that shows exactly how Republicans transformed Cooper’s district. It’s one of the clearest examples of how politicians can essentially rig elections in their favor just by moving district lines. It underscores how gerrymandering is a remarkably powerful and efficient method of voter suppression – the influence of certain people’s votes matter less before a single ballot is even cast. Tennessee isn’t the only place this is happening. In Kansas, Republican lawmakers are advancing a plan that would similarly crack Kansas City, making it more difficult for the Democrat Sharice Davids, the first Native American woman elected to Congress, to get re-elected. In North Carolina, Republicans cracked the city of Greensboro in order to dismantle the state’s sixth congressional district, currently represented by a Democrat. Democrats have also shown a willingness to engage in this kind of distortion where they have control of the redistricting process, in places such as Illinois, Maryland and probably New York. Democrats will have complete control over drawing 75 congressional districts, compared with 187 for Republicans. The day before he announced his retirement, I spoke with Cooper about why he thought this was happening and what he thought the consequences would be for Nashville voters. What’s happening now is just “raw politics”, Cooper said. “In two previous redistricting cycles, none of the politicians in the state knew that I existed as a candidate. That made it easier – they weren’t trying to get Jim Cooper. And then in cycles where they did know I existed, it was either too difficult to rearrange the counties, or they were gentler,” he told me. Politico reported recently that after Republicans weren’t as aggressive as they could have been in states such as Texas and Georgia, there is some pressure to be even more aggressive in places like Tennessee. The Nashville constituents who are being sliced up into each of the three districts are likely to have much less importance to their new, Republican representatives, Cooper said. Any input they have, “at most, it will be tokenism”. “This is not a majority-minority community, but it will limit the ability for them to be heard. Because they’ll become essentially a rounding error in much larger districts that are dominated by the surrounding towns,” he said. “The center of gravity will shift.” Also worth watching … A federal court told Alabama to redraw its congressional districts after finding Republican lawmakers had discriminated against Black voters. Alabama is appealing the ruling. Arizona Republicans are proposing a suite of new voting restrictions after a widely criticized review of the 2020 election results. Texas continues to face significant problems after implementing sweeping new voting restrictions ahead of its 1 March primary. Ohio Republicans are redrawing state legislative and congressional maps after the state supreme court struck down earlier efforts as unconstitutional partisan gerrymanders. There are still concerns the new state legislative maps are severely gerrymandered.A police force is under investigation over its contact with two teenagers whose bodies were found at a beauty spot in Dorset. The male and female, both in their late teens, were discovered by a dog walker in a wooded area beside a reservoir near Bridport. Dorset police said there were no suspicious circumstances but have not said how they died. Their identities have not been revealed but their families have been informed. A spokesperson said the force had referred itself to the police watchdog, the Independent Office for Police Conduct (IOPC), over the matter. “Dorset police has made a mandatory referral to the IOPC in line with procedures related to the death or serious injury of an individual,” the spokesperson said. One of the reasons a force should refer itself to the IOPC is “if someone had direct or indirect contact with the police when, or shortly before, they were seriously injured or died”, and where “the contact may have caused or contributed to the death or injury”. The incident happened in a secluded spot close to West Bay. Paul Williams, who lives nearby, said: “The whole road was taped off. A dog walker found them. A police community support officer came here yesterday looking for CCTV.” Another man, who wished not to be named, said: “It’s dreadful. Certainly not something you expect to happen on your doorstep.” Ian Bark, the mayor of Bridport, said: “My sympathies go out to the friends and families of these young people. It is very sad to hear that two people who are both so young have died.” The police spokesperson said: “At 10.11am on 25 January we received a report of two people, a girl and a man, both in their late teens, having been found dead at Bothenhampton Reservoir, Wych Hill. Officers attended. There are no suspicious circumstances. Their next of kin have been informed and the coroner notified.” A spokesman for the IOPC said: “We can confirm that we have received a mandatory referral today from Dorset police relating to prior police contact with two teenagers who were sadly found dead. “We are currently assessing the available information to determine what further action may be required from us.”For the fourth match in succession under the hefty weight of home pressure, Ash Barty stood before a taller, stronger opponent capable of hitting just about every tennis player in the world off the court. Each time her opponents have arrived on Rod Laver Arena armed with their biggest weapons, it has taken Barty little more than an hour to dismantle them with relative ease. On Thursday night it was Madison Keys’ turn to experience the deep discomfort of Barty’s game, and she was beaten as soundly as all the others. After just 62 minutes Barty won 6-1, 6-3 to reach the Australian Open final for the first time. She has dropped just 21 games across six matches. Saturday’s stage is now set. Barty will look to become the first Australian to win their home Open in 44 years, since Chris O’Neil in 1978. She is the first Australian woman to reach the singles final here since Wendy Turnbull in 1980. “It’s unreal,” Barty said. “Honestly, it’s just incredible. I love this tournament, I love coming out here and playing in Australia. As an Aussie, we’re exceptionally spoiled that we’re a grand slam nation that we get to play at home. We get to play in our back yard. I’m just happy that I get to play my best tennis here. I enjoy it, I’ve done well and now we get a chance to play for a title. It’s unreal.” In the final Barty will face Danielle Collins, the 27th seed, after the American rose to the occasion in her second grand slam semi-final and produced a ball-striking lesson of the highest standard. She eviscerated Iga Swiatek, the Polish seventh seed, 6-4, 6-1 to reach her first major final. Like many of Barty’s opponents before her, Keys could only smile in her press conference as she relived the ordeal of facing the Australian in her current form. “It’s tough,” said Keys. “It sucks. I mean, she’s just playing incredibly well. You have a gameplan in your head but she’s just executing everything so well.” Keys last played Barty at the 2019 French Open en route to Barty’s first grand slam title. She said that she feels Barty’s level has significantly improved since then, highlighted by her slice cutting through the court and the assertiveness with which she commands matches. Barty drew countless errors from Keys with her backhand slice, she pulled her on the run with sharp crosscourt forehand rallies and she did not hesitate to step inside her baseline with her forehand. “Obviously I was able to make Maddie uncomfortable and make her press, and that was kind of part of the plan as well,” she said. Between them, Barty and Keys are the two best servers of this year’s tournament but the match-up demonstrated Barty’s all-around excellence on both serve and return, with 48% of her serves going unreturned, whereas Keys managed just 19%, a steep drop from her tournament average of 33%. Not only did Barty serve impeccably, but she also constantly put returns into play and refused to allow Keys free points. As Barty digested her success, she looked back to her first Australian Open experience when she was 11 or 12 at a training camp, a moment that opened her eyes to what is possible in tennis. “To see how professional it was and to see everyone going about their business was really eye-opening,” she said. “My first taste of it was in the juniors and I loved it. I think being able to get a taste of that kind of lit the flame. You wonder what you can achieve. You wonder what you can do.” What Barty has done since is far beyond what she could have imagined. Over the past few years she has separated herself from the rest of the field, marking herself as the undisputed No 1 and leaving her defeated opponents in awe. On Saturday she will return to Rod Laver Arena to compete at home for her first Australian Open title. Collins followed Barty shortly afterwards and, faced with the opportunity of her career, she was in the zone from the very beginning until the end. She demolished Swiatek’s second serve and finished with 27 winners to just 13 unforced errors. Such was the relentlessness of Collins’s aggression, Swiatek described the American’s shots as the hardest she has faced. “I was prepared for her playing [an] aggressive game, but I think that was the fastest ball I have ever played against in a match,” she said. The route that Collins has trod to reach the pinnacle of her sport, a grand slam final, is notable in itself. She built her game on the public courts of Florida and she spent her youth playing college tennis at the University of Virginia. Since turning professional in 2016, she has had to navigate numerous serious health problems. Nine months ago, she underwent endometriosis surgery that included removing a tennis ball-sized cyst from her uterus. Three years earlier she was diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis, an autoimmune disease. Yet here she is. Collins will break into the top 10 and she will be the new American No 1 next week. “To be playing on this stage where so many of my idols as a kid played, it’s almost surreal,” said Collins. “This is just what we all, as kids, dream of doing. So it’s just such a special moment for me. I’m just trying to embrace all of it.”Within life’s never-ending quest for self-improvement, most of us understand there are aspects of ourselves that probably can’t be altered. Introvert or extrovert are tricky categories to switch. Ditto messy or tidy or, in my case, a cyclical combination of the two that entails lurching from one to the other on a reliable one-month swing. The hardest to change, most baked-in characteristic, however – one that depends for its flavour on anxiety, understanding of time, relationship with authority and pure strategic fervour – is whether you are a late or an early person. You can be a mixture of both, depending on context. In my late 20s I went through a phase of turning up to things on the wrong day, something I look back on as a symptom of a short-lived greater disturbance. Generally, I’m reliable – a roughly on-time person depending on whom I’m meeting. The better the friend, the later I’ll let myself be, but only within a five-minute margin. I’m not habitually late and look down on those who are. (I also look down on the habitually early, although I’m crashingly early for things I’m nervous about, and neurotic when it comes to the airport.) I’ve never slept through an alarm or missed a flight. Throughout my kids’ early childhood these parameters held firm, which entailed much screaming on my part before school. We were never, not once, late. One consequence of the early pandemic is supposed to have been an improved ability to differentiate between what matters and what doesn’t. This went deep, drilling down into habits and structures that prior to March 2020 seemed non-negotiable, and tended to be expressed as a wakeup call not to sweat the small stuff. Two years in, however, and it feels to me as if that lesson has been flipped. For a while, we spent a lot of time thinking if we went to a bar, we might die. Then we went to a bar and, if we were lucky, we didn’t die. In fact, nothing happened at all. The kids missed months and months of school, unthinkable in before times, and nothing much happened. I don’t mean there won’t be long-term educational or behavioural consequences, or that different age groups and demographics didn’t suffer differently. Only that in the day to day, for a lot of people there was a gap between the predicted horror of this outcome and the sense of a continuation of daily life, the banal slog of it all somehow surviving dire forecasts. Before the pandemic, a single week of missed school was considered very bad indeed. Now I have two kids in second grade who sat out seven months. They seem fine. Which brings us to lateness. In the New York public school system, if you arrive late, you trigger an automated call to your cell phone that night informing you, robotically, that “your child was late today,” and telling you to send in a note explaining yourself. Prior to the pandemic, we’d never triggered this message. In the last month, I’ve triggered it 17 times. The first day it happened I yelled at my kids all the way to school, forcing an unhappy pace on them and railing about how slow they are in the mornings. But then a strange thing happened: nothing. Nothing happened. The sky didn’t fall in. Nobody died. I started to think about how my kids probably won’t even be in this school system in five years’ time. As long as they aren’t so late as to cause a disruption, what’s the big deal? Very consciously, as if flipping a switch, I decided it didn’t matter. A whole new world opened up. I encountered, outside the school every day, the Late People. It was like taking up smoking. Every day the same cast of characters, exchanging conspiratorial looks as they ran up the hill. These have never been my people and now suddenly they are, and I don’t understand how it’s possible. There’s an argument that during lockdown something happened to my concept of time; that it became more elastic. I have definitely hit an I-can’t-take-any-more moment, which I’ll have to deal with at some point. Is this Giving Up? Is it, as the popular Katherine May book might have it, “wintering”? At what point does wintering turn into giving up? It’s good to be without anxiety and we all benefit from less shouting, but on the other hand, where does it end? What if I can never drum up adrenaline again? I suspect it won’t last. This week alone we’ve been on time twice. If I’m minded to worry, the concern isn’t the lateness, it’s the not caring. What else, given this experience, might one learn not to care about? Is this a good or a bad thing? Late isn’t a good look, I still believe that. And yet here it is: a small, formerly tightly wound part of myself that in this new mode is quietly rejoicing. Emma Brockes is a Guardian columnistThe rate at which institutional investors, such as private equity and pension funds, are buying up housing is accelerating in major European cities, driving up house prices, research suggests. The volume of purchases in Europe hit €64bn (£53bn) in 2020, with about €150bn worth of housing stock conservatively estimated to be in the hands of such large investors. Berlin, with €40bn worth of housing assets in institutional portfolios, double the value found anywhere else in Europe, is at the top of the league table, followed by London, Amsterdam, Paris and Vienna, according to analysis of the Preqin private database of investors, funds and large transactions. The research carried out by Daniela Gabor, professor of economics and macrofinance at the University of the West of England, and Sebastian Kohl at Berlin’s Free University, suggests Europe’s housing has become an increasingly attractive “asset class” for investors in part due to near-zero interest rates and an encouraging regulatory framework. European central bank data shows that real estate funds in the Eurozone reached €1tn in 2021, the size of Spain’s GDP, from about €350bn in 2010. Within that, residential assets are said to be an increasingly important part. Between 2012 and 2021, the number of major residential transactions involving institutional investors increased the most in Germany (from 16 to 92), Denmark (two to 13) and the Netherlands (two to 60). The private equity company Blackstone, the world’s largest institutional landlord, manages about $730bn in funds globally, of which $230bn was allocated to real estate in September 2021. Blackstone, which posted record profits in October 2021, owns 65,000 residential units across five European countries. A Blackstone spokesman said the firm believed it played a “positive role in addressing the chronic undersupply of housing across the continent” through “investing hundreds of millions to improve properties for tenants”. He said: “The significant undersupply of housing across the globe is the cause of rental rate increases. “Blackstone owns a tiny fraction of the tens of millions of rental properties in Europe. Given our ownership levels, we have no ability to impact broader rent trends and anyone suggesting that such a small player could influence rental rates is engaging in a wilful misunderstanding of how the market works. “We are proud to be responsible custodians of rental housing and we are committed to our residents, which is why we have implemented programs to help residents facing financial difficulties.” With countries across Europe facing the squeeze due to high rent, property prices and energy costs, the role of institutional landowners in the housing market is nevertheless increasingly becoming a target of public anger. The Irish government sought last year to discourage multiple house purchases by large investors by increasing stamp duty to 10% on the purchase of more than 10 houses. Spain’s leftwing government is seeking to ban the sale of social housing to investment funds and to impose rent controls. The residents of Berlin voted in a referendum last year in favour of a proposal that homes owned by private real estate companies with more than 3,000 housing units should be taken into public ownership. Kim van Sparrentak, a Green MEP, who commissioned the study, said: “This study shows how large investors are playing Monopoly with our homes, focusing only on returns, rather than providing a place to live. “The EU needs to recognise that the housing crisis is not just about building more housing and that it needs to play its role in ensuring affordable housing as a fundamental right. Instead of addressing this problem, EU rules are actually facilitating this trend. We need strict regulations to counter large investors from taking over our housing stock.” The failure of the EU and national governments to properly tax the wealthy is said to be facilitating the transfer of funds to pension funds and insurance companies, whose businesses have, in turn, been boosted by the withdrawal of the welfare state, it is claimed. Low interest rates have encouraged investors to search for yield outside “traditional” assets such as government bonds, and to move into new asset classes, including housing, the report argues. According to Preqin data, more than 4,000 institutional investors, directed about $3.6tn of their $136tn assets to European real estate in August 2021. Of these, 1,325 investors held residential assets in their portfolios. The value of real estate portfolios that include housing was said to be about $2tn.A sculpture of the NBA great Kobe Bryant and his daughter Gianna “Gigi” Bryant was brought on Wednesday to the helicopter crash site where they died alongside seven others on a hillside near Los Angeles two years ago. The 160lb (73kg) bronze statue depicts Gigi holding Kobe’s hand as it rests on her shoulder. Both are wearing basketball uniforms. Engraved on the statue’s steel pedestal are the names of all nine victims of the crash, which occurred early in the morning on 26 January 2020, amid foggy weather. It also includes an inscription of Bryant’s famous quote: “Heroes come and go, but legends are forever.” Sculptor Dan Medina said he hoped the statue could help Bryant’s many fans. “On this day, the second anniversary of the accident, I decided to bring it up from sunrise to sunset and create a bit of a healing process for fans,” he said. “Today was special because I witnessed a lot of that. People would come up and they would leave with some sort of satisfaction.” A five-time NBA champion in his 20 seasons with the Los Angeles Lakers, Bryant’s death at age 41 shocked the world of professional sports and sent his legions of fans into mourning. Bryant, who lived in the area for most of his life often used helicopters to beat Los Angeles’s heavy traffic, and on the day of the crash was taking Gianna to play in a basketball game at his academy outside the city. His daughter was 13 at the time of the crash. Nicole Szuch-Dinets of Woodland Hills was one of the dozens of fans who made the trip to pay their respects. “I remember when this happened. We live close and we could hear the helicopter,” she said. “And then it popped up on my phone and we didn’t believe it. So I wanted to come out of respect and I thought this statue is beautiful.” Tributes to Bryant by his friends, fans and former teammates poured out on social media on Wednesday. “I know many of you are out there and you miss him and still wish to see his brilliance on the court, and what he was doing as a dad,” Kareem Abdul-Jabbar said of Bryant. “It was wonderful the way he was coaching girls and getting them into the game. I hope all of you out there remember him the way you should and give your prayers to his wife and family.”Police forces in England and Wales have recorded the highest number of rapes and sexual offences over a year, official figures released on Thursday show. There were 63,136 rapes recorded in the year to September, according to the Office for National Statistics (ONS), up 13% from the previous period (56,119). This was the highest recorded annual figure to date and included 17,419 offences between July and September – the highest quarterly figure. The highest number of sexual offences was also recorded in the 12 months to September (170,973), a 12% increase compared with 152,620 in the same period the previous year. This was driven by “noticeable increases since April 2021”, the ONS said. Rape accounted for 37% of all sexual offences recorded by police. The ONS said the latest figures may reflect a “number of factors”, including the “impact of high-profile incidents, media coverage and campaigns on people’s willingness to report incidents to the police, as well as a potential increase in the number of victims”, and it urged caution when interpreting the data. The figures cover the months after the kidnap, rape and murder of Sarah Everard in March. She was attacked and killed by a Metropolitan police officer, Wayne Couzens, prompting a national debate about sexual violence, the safety of women and the response from government, police and prosecutors. A statement from the ONS said: “The overall trend is also currently difficult to disentangle from the impact of lockdowns. Offences recorded by the police dropped noticeably during the spring 2020 lockdown before rebounding to previous levels in the July to September 2020 quarter. “The winter 2020 to 2021 lockdowns saw a smaller reduction in the number of sexual offences recorded by the police but a greater level of increase in these offences in the subsequent quarters.” Yvette Cooper, the shadow home secretary, said the figures show the Conservatives had no grip on law and order. “The government is refusing to adopt Labour’s plans to improve community safety and security – including for all police forces to have specialist rape investigation units, violence against women and girls to be a strategic policing priority, more police to be back out into local neighbourhoods or a proper plan to tackle online fraud. The result is that under the Conservatives more and more criminals are getting away with their crimes, and it is victims who are paying the price. Communities deserve better,” she said. Diana Fawcett, chief executive at the charity Victim Support, said she was “extremely concerned” that sexual offences had not only increased but reached a record high. “Lockdown restrictions and the turmoil of the pandemic have made the past few years an especially difficult time for survivors of sexual abuse. “We have also seen a rise in the number of survivors seeking support, in particular following the easing of national lockdowns. This may reflect rises in these offences, though it may also be the case that more survivors are reporting these crimes. It is vital that those who do come forward are treated with respect and given high quality support every step of the way through the criminal justice system.” The latest statistics also show a fall in the number of crimes resulting in a suspect being charged. Between October 2020 and September 2021, the percentage dropped to 6% from 7.3% the previous year. Police records also show “that over the last six months, certain offence types are returning to, or exceeding, the levels seen before the pandemic”, the ONS said. An increase in fraud and “computer misuse” offences during the pandemic “more than offset the reductions seen for other types of crime”. Police recorded 5.8m crimes in England and Wales in the 12 months to September, a 2% increase compared with the previous year of 5.7m. Excluding fraud and computer misuse, the overall figure falls 1% to 4.9m. There were 872,911 offences (not including fraud crimes) flagged as domestic abuse-related for the 12-month period, representing a 5% increase from 835,319 offences in the previous year. The ONS said it “cannot conclude whether there has been an increase in the number of victims of domestic abuse” because of changes in the way the crimes are reported and recorded, but added: “Data from victim services suggests that experiences of domestic abuse may have intensified during periods of national lockdown and that victims faced difficulties in safely seeking support under these conditions.” A press release from the Home Office about the latest figures did not mention rape or sexual assault, instead claiming that the latest statistics show that the government’s crime plan is working. Priti Patel, the home secretary, said in a statement: “This Government continues to cut crime through our Beating Crime Plan, which brings together record resources to drive police recruitment and target the very crimes that blight too many of our communities.”The Italian labour ministry has opened an investigation after a company seeking a female receptionist aged under 30 asked job applicants to include a photograph of themselves in a bathing costume alongside documents proving their credentials. The advert, posted on several specialised job sites by a Naples-based security company, stipulated that the candidate must be female, no older than 30, a fluent English speaker and have their own car and “a sunny character with an attractive appearance”. “We ask that you send a full photo in a bathing suit or similar,” the advert for the €500-a-month job went on to request. The incriminating line was later removed and the advert reposted, but not before a screenshot was widely shared across social media, sparking outrage. “They want a photo in a bathing suit? What an absurd advert,” said Chiara Marciani, the labour councillor for Naples. “It is scandalous, and for several reasons – beginning with the search for a woman under the age of 30 and a salary that is absurdly inadequate for the commitment and tasks the job requires.” The company, which is based in Naples’ business district, told the Italian press that the request for a bathing suit photo was “inappropriate” and the result of a “mere distraction” by the “inexperienced worker” who crafted the ad and who didn’t understand its policy on gender equality. The labour minister, Andrea Orlando, has asked inspectors to investigate. “The problem of sexism persists … there needs to be much more work done on gender equality,” said Marciani. “There are so many issues that need to be addressed, especially in a city like Naples, which has a very low rate of women in employment.” According to OECD data from 2019, less than half of all working-age Italian women were in jobs. The situation was exacerbated by the coronavirus pandemic, with women disproportionately affected by job losses. Many women are forced to resign after becoming pregnant as they are unable to juggle work and family life, with lack of affordable childcare facilities and inflexible work conditions being among the main reasons. Sexism has also been prevalent in billboard advertisements across Italy, prompting the senate to last year ban adverts on streets and all forms of transports deemed sexist or discriminatory.The UK government wants to reverse a controversial privatisation deal by seeking to wrest ownership of 38,000 homes in the Ministry of Defence housing portfolio from a company run by the private equity firm of the billionaire Guy Hands. The move is expected to lead to a legal battle between the MoD and Hands’ private equity firm Terra Firma over whether the government can take back full ownership of the homes. In 1996, under the defence secretary Michael Portillo, the Conservative government sold 57,400 houses used by military service men and women and their families to Annington Homes for £1.7bn in a sale and leaseback deal. In one swoop, Annington became the biggest residential property owner in England and Wales. The MoD rented back the homes on a 200-year lease at a discount but also agreed to pay for their maintenance and refurbishment. The value of the properties has ballooned under Annington’s ownership to many times their original purchase price, meaning the taxpayer has missed out on any profits from the property boom. They were valued by Annington at £7.6bn last year, while their vacant possession value is estimated at £10bn. The MoD is paying about £180m a year in rent plus £140m in repairs and upgrades. Terra Firma, which bought Annington from Nomura Holdings for £3.2bn in 2012, said it would challenge the MoD’s move, and that it expected to win in what it predicted would be a “very long and very expensive” court case. At the time of the deal the MoD hoped to free up cash for renovation as the homes were falling apart. However, the National Audit Office concluded in a 2018 review that taxpayers were between £2.2bn and £4.2bn worse off as a result of the arrangement. The NAO said the MoD had “lost out on billions of pounds’ worth of increases in asset values, while Annington has made a significantly higher return on its investment than expected”. The MoD has terminated its lease on more than 17,000 properties, and now rents just over 38,000 houses and flats from Annington. Jeremy Quin, the minister for defence procurement, said in a written statement to the House of Commons on Thursday: “Given our obligations to secure value for money, we have reviewed MoD’s current arrangements with Annington” and that the “department will explore the exercise of its statutory leasehold enfranchisement rights to buy out Annington’s interest in the homes and gain full ownership rights”. Quin told MPs that the ministry had made a single claim for one house in a test case, and planned to submit a further claim for another house in the near future. He said if the cost of recovering full ownership was less than the present value of the MoD’s ongoing liabilities, “such a transaction is likely to represent good value for money. The MoD would then benefit from any future appreciation in value of the units”. Terra Firma is reportedly looking to sell Annington. Hands was involved in Nomura’s purchase of Annington in 1996, when he worked at the Japanese bank. Under the arrangement, the MoD rents back thousands of houses for members of the armed forces and their families. The original deal gave the MoD a 58% discount on renting the houses for the first 25 years, which was reduced to 49.6% in a rent review that took two years to negotiate and concluded in November. This will increase the rent bill by £36m a year. Quin said the MoD had served notice on Annington under section 5 of the Leasehold Reform Act 1967 of its desire to enfranchise a house currently leased from Annington. “Annington, through its lawyers, has notified the MoD that it is considering the impact of the claim and has put the MoD on notice of a potential dispute,” he added. In a statement, Terra Firma said: “Annington has been aware since mid-December of the MoD’s attempt to enfranchise a single property in Cranwell. “This is the first time the MoD has indicated in any forum that it wishes to enfranchise more than one unit. We believe that regardless of any legal merit, reneging on agreements that had been operating for over 25 years is an appalling thing for the British government to do. “Our advice is that while this will be a very long and very expensive legal dispute, we will prevail. However, clearly this does put the sale of Annington on hold. This is clearly extremely negative for the investors who include various UK pension funds and sovereign wealth funds representing strategic military allies of Britain.” • The headline and introduction of this article were amended on 28 January 2022 to clarify that the homes are not owned by Guy Hands himself.If you had been forced to predict which blue-chip Canadian-American rock legend was going to suddenly pull their music off Spotify in protest at the streaming site hosting a far-right-friendly podcast that spreads medical misinformation, Neil Young would have been a very safe bet. He is famously among the most ornery, uncompromising and capricious of said blue-chip legends. The years that produced his most famous work also played host to Young wilfully sabotaging his own commercial prospects in order to follow his muse (or, as he memorably put it, “heading for the ditch”); suddenly abandoning tours midway by directing his tour bus to pull off the motorway en route to the next show; whimsically declining to release a succession of completed albums; and incurring the wrath of his partners in Crosby, Stills, Nash &amp; Young (CSNY) by removing their contributions from the master tapes of his songs before releasing them. He spent a substantial chunk of the 1980s making wildly uncommercial albums, apparently with the specific intention of annoying his record label, which ended up suing him for being unpredictable – it lost, perhaps because, as his labelmate Elton John put it, its lawsuit “felt a bit like suing Neil Young for being Neil Young”. He has failed to mellow with age: not for nothing is the news section of his website called the Times-Contrarian; according to Young’s recent post on it, when his lawyers advised him “that contractually I didn’t have the control of my music to [leave Spotify], I announced I was leaving anyway, because I knew I was”, which is pretty much the most Neil Youngian response imaginable. He has a long history of political activism. It was Young who wrote Ohio, CSNY’s response to the Kent State Massacre, arguably the most famous protest song of the early 70s; Young who piloted the 2006 CSNY Freedom of Speech tour, its setlist so packed with Young’s new anti-Bush protest songs that audiences in red states booed and walked out; Young who threatened to pull out of a 2019 gig in Hyde Park with Bob Dylan unless the promoters ditched their sponsor, Barclays, “a fossil fuel funding entity”. And he has longstanding beef with Spotify. He previously removed his music from the streaming site seven years ago (it later returned), complaining it offered listeners “the worst quality in the history of broadcasting”, a theme he returned to last week, directing his fans to other streaming services that “present my music today in all its high resolution glory”. Young isn’t the first artist to take issue with the world’s biggest music streaming company. Taylor Swift launched a three-year boycott in 2014, after a row over the site’s royalty rates in which she said Spotify was undervaluing art (she subsequently backed down, framing the decision as a gift to her fans). Adele withheld her album 25 from Spotify for months after release; new album 30 was there from the outset, but only after Spotify agreed to change its shuffle function being the default setting when playing albums – a mark of how major stars do have at least some clout with the streaming giants. But Young’s disagreement feels different: it isn’t about money or artistry, but politics, or at least having a social conscience. Swift and Adele are huge streaming artists: they have 10 times Young’s monthly listens on the site. He may be a rock legend, but, in streaming terms, Young is David to Joe Rogan’s Goliath: Rogan’s podcast is the biggest on Spotify, which paid $100m (£82m) for its exclusive rights. There’s vague talk from Spotify of “hoping to welcome [Young] back soon”, a statement with a different tone from its obsequious response to Adele’s shuffle request: “Anything for you”. Young has suggested that others might follow his principled lead: “I sincerely hope that other artists will move off the Spotify platform” he wrote. Thus far, they haven’t. Just as Bob Dylan didn’t have anything to say about Barclays or fossil fuels, high-profile messages of support have been thin on the ground, and no one else has pulled their music in support. Perhaps that reflects Young’s relatively privileged financial status regarding Spotify. Last year, he sold 50% of his publishing rights to the investment fund Hipgnosis, netting him $150m (£112m): that’s a very significant cushion against losing Spotify’s royalties, where an artist is estimated to earn between $3,000 and $3,500 per million streams. Moreover, Young isn’t the kind of artist who needs Spotify. Given the age of his core fanbase, it’s hard not to suspect he makes a lot more money from touring and from physical product – particularly the glut of archival recordings he’s released over recent years (five live albums and a 10 CD box set in the last two years alone) – than he does from people clicking on Heart of Gold or Rockin’ in the Free World. His is a different position from a younger artist, with a younger audience, for whom streaming is the primary means by which fans access their music. They are reliant on pleasing Spotify: getting on playlists to promote their music and growing their fanbase in much the same way as artists were once reliant on getting radio play. The importance of streaming, and of the biggest player in the streaming game, has only been amplified by the effect of Covid on the live industry. Whether it’s healthy for any one company to have quite so much sway is a very moot point, but given the circumstances, it’s an extremely brave and principled artist who risks incurring Spotify’s wrath in 2022 without the kind of financial safety net that Neil Young has. • This article was amended on 28 January 2022 to correctly identify Neil Young as Canadian-American, rather than American as an earlier version said due to an editing error.Liz Truss has been criticised for taking a private jet to Australia for official business rather than using a scheduled flight. The foreign secretary used the private government Airbus A321 for her flight from London’s Stansted airport to Sydney, via Dubai and Kuala Lumpur, arriving on 20 January. The foreign secretary held talks with her Australian counterpart and gave a speech on arguing global aggressors are “emboldened in a way we haven’t seen since the cold war”. The Independent, which first reported the transport arrangement, quoted industry sources who put the cost at half a million pounds. One of the daily Qantas flights to Perth and on to Sydney would have been scheduled to get Truss there almost five hours earlier. After two days in Sydney, Truss flew to Adelaide for a speech, using the same plane, on 22 January, then flew home, taking the same refuelling stops, the following day. A small ministerial and staff delegation would be expected to be onboard. The A321 is leased by the Cabinet Office at a cost of £75m for two years, according to aviation expert and former pilot Andy Netherwood. Because the plane uses Boris Johnson’s “Global Britain” livery it spends much of its time on the tarmac because it cannot be used by non-governmental customers. A Foreign Office spokesperson said: “It’s necessary for the foreign secretary to travel abroad to pursue UK interests around security, trade and technology, as she did during this visit to Australia. “This trip used government transport and was fully within rules set out in the ministerial code.” Truss has long been a champion of eliminating government waste. In 2007 she wrote a paper for the Reform thinktank arguing for public servants to fly economy class. “Every public sector worker should feel personal responsibility for the money they spend and the money they save,” she wrote. “They should spend taxpayers’ money with at least the care they would give to their own. This change of mindset would be reflected in everyday changes such as travelling by economy rather than business class.” The foreign secretary has also previously been criticised for allegedly overruling the civil service to demand more expensive hospitality. She hosted a lunch with Joe Biden’s trade representative at a private club owned by a Tory donor after overruling civil service advice to look for a cheaper venue, according to leaked emails. Angela Rayner, the deputy leader of the Labour party, said: “Liz Truss shows the public exactly quite how little respect this Conservative government has for taxpayers’ money with her ridiculous waste of half a million pounds on a private jet trip. This government is brazen in its disregard for upholding decency. “It is obscene that government ministers are jet-setting yet are hiking taxes and refusing to do anything to help working families when they are feeling the pinch of the cost of living crisis. “Tories waste disgusting amounts of public money on their own vanity and comfort, Labour wants to see families see a cut to energy bills – that is the difference.”Elderly people living near or downwind from unconventional oil and gas wells such as fracking sites are more likely to die prematurely, according to a major new US study. Extracting oil and gas through newer or unconventional methods like fracking has expanded rapidly across America over the past two decades with at least 17.6 million people now living within one kilometer of an active well. Compared with traditional drilling, unconventional oil and gas development (UOGD) is linked to higher levels of exposure to toxic air pollution and poor water quality, as well as noise and light pollution which can be harmful to human health. The impact of fossil fuel extraction – including by unconventional methods – has disproportionately affected low income communities and people of color. Researchers from the Harvard TH Chan School of Public Health studied the health records of 15 million people on Medicare, the health insurance program that includes at least 95% of Americans aged 65 and older, living in all significant drilling regions from 2001 to 2015. They also gathered data on about 2.5m oil and gas wells covering leading exploration states, from Montana to Texas and Pennsylvania. The closer people live to an oil and gas operation, the higher the risk of dying prematurely, even after accounting for socioeconomic, environmental and demographic factors such as gender and race, according to the study published in Nature Energy. Residents most adversely affected are those living nearby and downwind, suggesting toxic airborne contaminants emitted from UOGD sites probably contributed to higher mortality rates. Exposure to toxins associated with unconventional drilling such as volatile organic compounds (VOCs), nitrogen oxides and radioactive materials are linked to a wide range of life-threatening medical conditions. “Our findings suggest the importance of considering the potential health dangers of situating UOGD near or upwind of people’s homes,” said Longxiang Li, a postdoctoral fellow in the Department of Environmental Health and the study’s lead author. Overall, elderly residents living near these wells have about 2.5% higher mortality rates than those living far away compared with 3.5% for those who are also downwind. This would mean thousands of premature deaths linked to the oil and gas boom, though the peer-reviewed study does not include estimates of lives lost. This is the first major study into the link between premature death in older people and unconventional oil and gas drilling activities, and the first to examine the importance of wind direction. As of 2015, more than 100,000 onshore UOGD wells have been drilled, with many clustered around densely populated residential areas. “Although UOGD is a major industrial activity in the US, very little is known about its public health impacts. Our study is the first to link mortality to UOGD-related air pollutant exposures,” said Petros Koutrakis, professor of environmental sciences and senior author of the study. It builds on previous studies that have found residents living near these sites are significantly more likely to suffer prenatal complications, cancers and respiratory and cardiovascular diseases. As unconventional oil and gas exploration continues apace further research is needed to understand the causal links between living nearby or downwind and adverse health effects, the authors conclude.“It looks like the bottom of the ocean, the light is completely different. And the perspective of time changes out here. The days are so long.” Down the line, Cate Le Bon is describing the beauty of desert living. “Everything is so still,” she says. “Sound travels differently out here. It feels like you’re in a vacuum, and you choose when you want to break the seal.” She still speaks about the Mojave with the wonderment of a newcomer; the events of the past two years mean that she has spent perhaps just two months in the home she bought in Joshua Tree, California. Instead, she pinged around the globe from Wales to Topanga Canyon, anything to keep working; producing records for John Grant and Devendra Banhart and recording her own sixth album, the spectacular Pompeii, the follow-up to her Mercury-nominated 2019 album Reward. Since 2008, Le Bon has been one of the most idiosyncratic musicians in the UK, sought out for collaborations by pop-adjacent peers such as Gruff Rhys, St Vincent, John Cale and Deerhunter. Her own music has depth, strangeness and wonder: ornate synths meet lugubrious brass, slivers of guitar, kaleidoscopic lyrics and a voice that can be sweet and dusky, elastic and chilling. When the first murmurings of the pandemic began, Le Bon was due to head to Iceland to begin work on Grant’s album. This was some while before the restrictions of grounded flights and global lockdowns, and so she and her longtime collaborator and co-producer Samur Khouja chose to travel “hopefully” to Reykjavik, believing then that soon it might all pass. It was only when Warpaint drummer Stella Mozgawa flew out to join the recording sessions that Le Bon began to wonder whether things might be more serious. Within a day, Mozgawa’s parents insisted she had to fly back to Sydney before the borders shut. “That was the moment where we all went: ‘Oh shit! This is real! And so on the Wednesday morning I was driving her through the most alien landscape at 5am to the airport. And we were just both wide-eyed going: what the hell is going on?” From Iceland, Le Bon watched the world close down, saw live music halt, and friends across the arts suddenly having to seek new employment in supermarket warehouses. At the end of April she made it to the UK to stay at her family’s home in west Wales, a glorious spell of good weather and rare family time. She felt some guilt at her good fortune. “Everything felt so calm and you’re freed from the agenda of a plan.” Le Bon, Khouja, and Le Bon’s partner, the musician and painter Tim Presley, ended up in a friend’s house in Cardiff where Le Bon had once lived in her 20s. She talks about the sense of strange familiarity, “remembering instinctively where all the light switches were, and I knew all the sounds of the house, and all those things you kind of store in your body, and you start thinking: what else am I storing that I’m not aware of?” There was the added dichotomy of being “somewhere so familiar but so detached from it all. I’m in the city where my best friends are, but I’m still talking to them on FaceTime because it was during the lockdown.” This was some distance from the original plan for this album, which they wanted to record in Chile or Norway, “somewhere where we could be completely removed from anywhere familiar, any comforts. Where we could really lean into shedding, and this idea of becoming invisible because you’re free of all those things.” Le Bon jokes that the work she, Khouja and Presley made in this time could be seen as “a product of three people losing their minds in a terrace house” but it is Le Bon’s finest work to date – inquisitive, beautiful, witty and wise. “I tried to lean into what John Keats calls ‘negative capability’,” she says, when asked how the times bled into the songs. “Where you stop striving for reason and you stop trying to solidify things and you lean into the chaos of them. And I guess you try to shelve fear, and you lean into hope and curiosity.” She tried to embrace the absurdity of the situation – “I love dadaism, and the idea of Cabaret Voltaire and all these things that emerged in really bleak times” – and leaned into the absurd for Pompeii’s lyrics, too. “Absurdity doesn’t mean that something doesn’t make sense and it doesn’t mean that something doesn’t have emotion,” she says. “Absurdity isn’t nonsense to me. Often writing these things, I knew I didn’t fully understand them, but they felt right, and I knew that they were almost like letters to my future self that would become apparent. So I just trusted. You’ve got to trust your gut.” She listened a great deal to Music for Saxofone and Bass Guitar by Sam Gendel and Sam Wilkes – “a record that felt like an extended moment, that you don’t really break, where the lighting almost stays the same throughout” – and endeavoured to make something similar. “Where you listen to it and it can feel a little claustrophobic, and then at different times of the day it feels quite freeing and it plays with the perspective of time.” Freed from the usual restrictions of studio bookings, she and Khouja could spend time “deconstructing and reconstructing the songs” over and over. “For me this is the most enjoyable way to make something,” she says. “Where you can start something in the morning, and by the evening you’ve completely changed its character, you’ve rebuilt it, you’ve broken it down and found the stone that sings, and then you rebuild it around that.” Le Bon has worked with Khouja since he engineered her 2013 breakthrough Mug Museum. “I’ve been in studios, would you believe, where men tell you that this isn’t possible and you’re doing something wrong – like, for fuck’s sake. And Samur was just completely devoid of all that bullshit,” she says. “We’ve worked together so much now that sometimes it’s just a look, and he knows exactly what I’m thinking. I think maybe in another life we could be a detective team.” And for all the global restrictions, recording Pompeii was, Le Bon says, “probably the most free I’ve felt. In that strange time of thinking about all this existential dread and thinking about the future of music and what you want for yourself, there’s this idea that maybe it’s the last thing you’ll ever make, or there won’t be anyone to hear this. I could be dead by the end of this. And there’s something quite freeing about that, strangely.” When it came time to record the saxophones, restrictions had lightened. They relocated to a converted chapel studio in west Wales, where they were joined by old friends Euan Hinshelwood and Stephen Black. “It was beautiful,” she says. “We spent four days doing saxophones, and then on the last night we drank about 10 bottles of wine and we danced for six hours. That joy of being around these people who you realise you need, and to celebrate, because you don’t have the words, you just dance.” In the room next door, Presley was busy painting. One afternoon he came into the studio and showed Le Bon and Samur a painting “that just floored us both”, she says. “I couldn’t stop thinking about how it hadn’t existed that morning when we were having coffee, and now it exists and it’s having this profound effect on us all. I kept thinking about what Virginia Woolf calls ‘the enormous eye’ and that’s what he’d accomplished in a way. He’d just sat down, no preconceptions, no exterior influence, just leant into hope and curiosity and allowed himself to create this thing that was really kind of spooky and beautiful, beyond words.” The picture now graces the cover of Pompeii. It shows Le Bon, wide-eyed in a white habit, part-icon, part Joan of Arc: a moment when the seal was still unbroken. Pompeii is released on 4 February.The Kalevala, the Finnish epic poem describing the creation of the world and the journeys and adventures of the people of the land of Kalevala, first appeared in print in 1835; an expanded version, almost twice as long, followed 14 years later. Its appearance proved hugely significant in the development of Finland’s national identity and the country’s progress towards independence (which was eventually achieved in 1917), and its influence on 19th- and 20th-century Finnish artists was immense. For Sibelius the Kalevala was famously a lifelong source of inspiration, from his earliest large-scale work, Kullervo, to his last, the symphonic poem Tapiola. But he was by no means the only composer to write works based on the epic and the stories it contains, and three of those pieces are brought together in this collection from the Lahti orchestra under their former music director, Dima Slobodaniouk. Inevitably it includes some Sibelius too: the first recording of the 1897 version of Lemminkäinen in Tuonela, fractionally longer than what we know as the third movement of his Lemminkäinen Suite. The other composers represented belong to the generations that followed in Sibelius’s intimidating footsteps. It’s revealing that their Kalevala works all date from relatively early in their careers, as if a coming-to-terms musically with their country’s most significant work of literature was a necessary rite of passage for them all. Leevi Madetoja‘s Kullervo dates from 1913, but though Madetoja had been a pupil of Sibelius, his compact, 13-minute symphonic poem portraying one of the epic’s “heroes” owes more to Tchaikovsky than it does to his teacher. Tauno Pylkännen’s Kullervo Goes to War, completed in 1942, is much closer to Sibelius, and a taut, powerfully effective piece that surely should be better known outside Finland than it is. Uuno Klami’s Kalevala Suite is much the most ambitious of the three works. It’s the most uneven of them too, but in many ways the most interesting, as the only one that clearly distances itself from the world of Sibelius. Stravinsky, especially The Firebird and The Rite of Spring, is very obviously the dominant influence in the five movements, which portray different episodes in the epic, from The Creation of the World to The Forging of the Sampo (a mysterious, magical device that confers riches and good luck on its owner). Taken together the three works and the Sibelius rarity make a fascinating collection of music that will be totally unfamiliar internationally; if none of them is a neglected masterpiece, all are very well worth hearing, especially in such characterful and accomplished performances as these.Surprise that Tommy Fleetwood has slipped to 43rd in the world – and the fifth-ranked Englishman – owes everything to appreciation of his talent. Before the pandemic, Fleetwood was inside the top 10 and looked a certainty to claim at least one major championship. Instead there has been a winless run that now stretches back to late 2019. An opening round of 67 at the Dubai Desert Classic suggested Fleetwood is of a mind to return to earlier prominence. There has not quite been cause to ponder where it all went wrong, but day one at the Emirates Club supplied a reminder of what an impressive sight Fleetwood in full flow can be. He dropped just one shot, at the 13th, but easily offset it with six birdies. “I’m very focused on my overall game,” Fleetwood said. “Obviously there are two aspects I need to improve. I need to be in the fairway a lot more with a driver and I need to be putting better. “For the most part – I’m not going to speak too soon – but I feel like if I do put it in the fairway, that is giving me the best chance to score and I feel like I’m hitting my irons really nicely. I did two things well for the most part and I holed some nice putts and no matter what golf course I go to, that’s going to be my main focus for the foreseeable future. To get back to doing the things that I always did do so well and taking it from there.” Simple in theory, but Fleetwood is thus far delivering inside the ropes. A strong putting display from Joachim B Hansen allowed him to claim the early lead, at seven under par. On a tightly packed leaderboard Justin Harding – who must return on Friday morning to complete his first round after darkness fell – trails Hansen by one. Pablo Larrazábal, Sergio García, Andrea Pavan and Thongchai Jaidee joined Fleetwood in posting 67s. Collin Morikawa, the Open champion, and Viktor Hovland are among those a shot further back. Morikawa had been seven under with four to play but from there dropped three shots. “It was a disappointing finish but I’ve been working Monday through Wednesday, even into yesterday late after the Pro-Am trying to figure things out,” Morikawa said. “When you are thinking about so much you always have to remember to go and play golf. I’ve been thinking about everything, trying to figure out what to do.” Handily for Morikawa, it is only January. Rory McIlroy’s day also started brightly. The Northern Irishman was three under through five but eventually had to settle for a 71. His game appears a work in progress and he said: “There were a couple of bad decisions or mental mistakes and then maybe made a couple of bad swings in there as well.”Two-time Super Bowl champion Ben Roethlisberger has announced his retirement from the NFL. The quarterback, who played the entirety of his 18-season career with the Pittsburgh Steelers, confirmed the news in a video posted to Twitter on Thursday. “The journey has been exhilarating, fueled by a spirit of competition,” Roethlisberger said. “Yet the time has come to clean out my locker, hang up my cleats and continue to be all I can be to my wife and children. I retire from football a truly grateful man.” The 39-year-old’s retirement comes as no surprise and he had all but confirmed in recent weeks that the Steelers’ playoff loss to the Kansas City Chiefs earlier this month would be his final game. At 6ft 5in and 240lbs, Roethlisberger was tough to bring down for opposing rushers, and he was often able to extend plays until he could find open receivers with his powerful arm. He won Super Bowls XL and XLIII with the Steelers and was named to the Pro Bowl on six occasions. He is almost certain to make the Hall of Fame and finishes his career with the fifth-most passing yards (64,088) in NFL history. “Ben has always been a fighter,” team-mate Cam Heyward said. “Always given us a chance. He’s battled a lot. He’s been rewarded with two Super Bowls, but we needed every bit of Ben Roethlisberger in every game he’s played. You can’t just replicate that.” Although he was brilliant on the field his early career was marred by separate accusations of sexual assault in 2009 and 2010. A civil case filed against him stemming from an alleged incident at Lake Tahoe in 2009 was settled out of court. A woman in Georgia alleged he assaulted her at a bar in March 2010 but prosecutors did not formally charge him. That prompted a suspension under the NFL’s personal conduct policy for the start of the 2010 season, which ended with Roethlisberger leading the Steelers to the Super Bowl for a third time, a loss to the Green Bay Packers. Remarkably, the Steelers never experienced a losing season an any of Roethlisberger’s nearly two decades under center.The national pig herd has lost-one tenth of all sows over the last six months, farmers’ associations have revealed, after breeders were forced into a massive cull caused by a shortage of labour in abattoirs. The National Farmers’ Union president, Minette Batters, and the National Pig Association chairman, Rob Mutimer, have written a joint letter to the environment, food and rural affairs secretary, George Eustice, calling for an urgent summit to address labour and supply-chain concerns. They say measures introduced to support the industry have so far delivered “minimal benefit” to pig producers. The call comes as the cull of healthy pigs on farms continues, with an estimated 35,000 animals killed since September, according to the NPA, although unreported cases mean the actual number is likely to be higher. Since the crisis hit last year, approximately 30,000 sows have been removed from the national herd, they said. About 40 independent farms have left the industry, the associations claimed. The letter states: “The NPA and NFU are asking that you urgently arrange a summit of the entire pig supply chain so that we can agree a plan to get these pigs off farms and on to people’s plates.” In October, after weeks of warnings of the impact of an ongoing shortage of workers at slaughterhouses, farmers were forced to start killing animals to make space and ensure the continued welfare of their livestock. Producers warned at the time there was a backlog of as many as 120,000 pigs left stranded on farms long after they should have gone to slaughter. Before Christmas, the backlog had risen to 170,000. Farmers say it continued to increase rapidly over the festive period due to staff taking holidays and isolating with Covid. The industry said the situation has deteriorated despite the government’s package of support measures announced in the autumn. These included permitting foreign butchers to enter the UK on temporary visas, longer working hours at processing plants and a scheme allowing producers to store pig carcasses for several months before processing. The organisations are calling on Eustice to simplify the visa application process. The NPA said it is only aware of 105 butchers who have travelled to Britain or are due to arrive, representing just 13% of the 800 visas allocated by government. The NPA warns that not enough pigs are being processed, with around a third of pigs ready for slaughter not being taken each week. This results in an increased backlog of animals on farms, while those which are left behind are becoming heavier and more difficult to manage. Average weights of pig carcasses have continued to rise, reaching over 95kg, an increase of almost 10%, or 9kg, compared with two years ago. Farmers are facing soaring costs for feed, leading to losses of about £25 per pig for almost a year. Some producers are removing breeding sows from their herds, while others are leaving the sector altogether. “All of these factors are taking a huge toll on farmers’ mental health as the crisis worsens every week,” the letter to Eustice states, “especially for those having to endure the trauma of culling healthy animals when there seems to be no end in sight.”DERBY DAYS When Festy Ebosele rejected the opportunity to sign for Nottingham Forest last week, Derby County supporters probably thought they couldn’t love the youngster more. The right-sided teenage speedster was the subject of a £500,000 bid from the Rams’ most bitter rivals but is widely reported to have baulked at the notion of further demoralising a fanbase already in despair at the prospect of not having anything to support unless a buyer for what’s left of their club after years of financial mismanagement can be found in the not-too-distant future. While Derby could certainly do with £500,000, Ebosele’s tender years mean whoever signs him next may have to pay a good deal more in compensation. Little victories are important and it’s a big win for the Rams that he chose not to move down the road. What with points deductions, administration and being eight points adrift of safety, it’s been a bleak old year for Derby fans, so much so that one of few current silver linings in the massive black cloud hovering over Pride Park is the prospect of a potential rescue by former Newcastle owner Mike Ashley. Mike Ashley! But on Wednesday night, for an hour or so, Ebosele rode to the rescue once again. Contacted by one supporter who had hoped to get an autograph for young daughter Bella from her favourite player, the Irishman travelled to Mansfield to surprise her at football training, chat to her at length, present her with a shirt and pose for pictures along with his dog. A pooch, incidentally, The Fiver couldn’t help but notice bears a passing resemblance to something you might more usually see perched on BoJo-loyalist and Tory MP Michael Fabricant’s head. “This is why Derby have to survive,” wrote Bella’s dad Dave. “This guy is only 19 but he is the kindest person and made Bella feel like a million dollars.” In need of a buyer willing to spend up to a hundred times that amount – the thick end of £70m – to save a football club that doesn’t own a stadium (and potentially ruinous legal claims from Middlesbrough and Wycombe should they go to court), Derby could have gone to the wall next week. But earlier on Thursday, they learned they have been given a deadline extension of one month to show they can stay afloat financially for the rest of the season. “Today’s development will allow the club to meet its ongoing obligations whilst giving a further four weeks to continue the discussions with the interested bidders and relevant stakeholders in respect of a sale,” droned a statement from their administrators and the Football League. The extra month will give Derby time to address the £29m they owe in taxes and it has been reported they have had positive talks with Her Majesty’s bean-counters over an agreement to pay significantly less than that amount. With the Inland Revenue not generally renowned for their charity and mercy, The Fiver can only conclude that Wayne Rooney must have sent Ebosele to have a quiet word. QUOTE OF THE DAY “I pay tribute to all those that have worked so hard to get to this point” – Sunderland Central MP, Julie Elliott, after it was revealed that professional female footballers in England are to finally benefit from maternity and long-term sickness cover, in a landmark change to their contracts. FIVER LETTER “Has The Fiver and Big Website not received the memo that this is the Africa Cup of Nations 2021 and not 2022? Of course, you can call it Afcon Not 2021 in the tradition of the Euros” – Ron Kondowe. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Ron Kondowe. RECOMMENDED LISTENING Football Weekly Extra focuses on the African Cup of Nations stadium tragedy. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS Australia are a step closer to the Human Rights World Cup after their flamin’ 4-0 win over Vietnam in qualifying. Egypt will face Morocco in the Afcon Not 2021 last eight after Mo Salah’s shoot-out penalty took them past Ivory Coast. Beth England now has 50 WSL goals after scoring in Chelsea’s 2-0 victory against West Ham. The Pope’s Newc O’Rangers remain four points clear of the Queen’s Celtic in the Scottish Premiership after Scott Arfield’s late goal against Livingston; Ange Postecoglu’s side survived a late fightback to see off Hearts. John Terry is an NFT bro, of course he is, and the Premier League is taking legal action over his use of its trophies as part of whatever ape-based business it is he’s offering. Chelsea are doing likewise as regards his use of their badge (which represents something of a sea-change). Speaking of Monchi, Sevilla have pulled the plug on talks with Newcastle over Diego Carlos. “The offer was very important, respectful, but it was an offer that our board considered insufficient,” he tooted. One of the oddest transfers in recent memory is taking another turn: Manchester United are loaning Amad Diallo to the Pope’s Newc O’Rangers. And, curiously, Adama Traoré is less than thrilled with the prospect of becoming the next Victor Moses, so his mooted move to Spurs might be off in favour of one to Barcelona. STILL WANT MORE? On Holocaust Remembrance Day, we should commit to ridding football of antisemitism, write Simon Taylor and Dr Kathrin Meyer. Max Rushden reckons we should spend less time whining about decisions and more time enjoying actual football; it’ll never catch on. It’s one deadline day: get all the latest women’s football deals, plus the men’s moves in the run-up to their Monday deadline. Five things out for which to look in the upcoming Concacaf qualifiers for the HR World Cup. Meanwhile, the Canadians are coming and Jacob Steinberg has been getting his chat on with one of their stars. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! RIP BARRY CRYERHave you ever wanted to see a US soldier bricking himself because he thinks he’s heard a bear? Of course you have. We all have. Thankfully, some benevolent television executive clocked that and made Alone for us: 10 people are dumped in the wilderness, completely alone (geddit), competing to see who can survive the longest and win US$500,000. Here’s the kicker: none of the contestants know how well anyone else is doing, so they have to just keep going until everyone else drops out. “It’s the type of thing you see on the news, where a guy gets lost in the woods, and we’re purposefully doing it,” says one early contestant, sounding as if he’s just realised what those 400 waivers were for. At first, Alone might sound like the worst kind of reality TV. We’ve seen thousands of shows about guys who want to drink their own wee and stomp around a forest; at this point, most of us would politely invite them to stay there. But in every season of Alone – without fail – the blowhards drop out quickly when things get too hard, or too wet, or too scary. Like Desmond, the aforementioned army man. Oh Desmond. In the first episode of season two, Desmond brags that he’ll “come back 20 pounds heavier, with a bear skin suit on. You know, from eating the motherfucker”; on his first day he thinks he hears a bear and immediately asks to be taken home. Alone does seem to trade in middle-aged men who married young and are now desperate for adventure; frankly, the producers could have made another series called Alone that follows the alarming number of pregnant wives and small children being left at home so dad could eat kelp and shout at cougars. But the show’s gender balance does improve with each season as it got more popular, and it becomes more interesting for it. During Covid, everyone has enjoyed nice shows like Bake Off or Frasier or The Office. But Alone is the nasty, compelling little masterpiece we should have been watching when we were considering using forest leaves for toilet paper and couldn’t hug our families. Because the thing that gets people on Alone is not the bears (or the mere concept of bears) or the starvation or the cold. It’s the solitude. The contestants don’t even get producers for company, as they’re all trained beforehand to film everything by themselves. They’re also completely separated, usually by distance, water or impassable mountains. (The first two seasons are filmed in northern Vancouver Island, British Columbia, while later seasons are in Patagonia, northern Mongolia and other parts of Canada.) Without the muscly morons or any producers, we’re left alone (geddit) to watch people who truly know how to survive in nature. This means you also learn a lot – how to make a fire, which plants are edible, how to catch fish with a discarded water bottle, even the nutritional value of a fingernail (two calories and one gram of protein, FYI). And as the contestants grow more skinny and vulnerable, Alone transforms too: the tone gentles into something wonderfully introspective, a meditation on modern life, on patience and gratitude, on our basic needs and wants. Some are broken by the experience (after a week, most people have some kind of a breakdown), while others revel in it (one winner spends his time carving wooden spoons and chopsticks for Christmas gifts when he goes home). “People are just amazing, we just don’t realise that,” says David, a ex-missionary who, at this point of season two, is six weeks in and so starved that even fishing hurts his body. “We’re social creatures, we’re not supposed to live alone ... I have no one else to talk to, or to depend on, or care for. I think that a signficant motivation in life, that keeps us moving, keeps us going, is to care for someone else.” Alone is less about the Desmonds, and more about the Davids of the world. And it makes for a very touching and compelling show. After 50-odd days, the first winner (I won’t spoil it) turns to the camera men as they walk towards him and says, disappointed, “This is it? So soon?” And reader, I almost believed him. Alone is available on SBS On Demand and Binge.If, like me, you have a habit of buying clothes that don’t actually fit you but can’t resist trousers blessed with a wonderful pattern or a blazer with excellent buttons, you need a tailor. Or if, like me, you prefer to buy vintage or secondhand over modern fast fashion for environmental reasons, you need a tailor to make everyone else’s old clothes newly yours. While tailoring might seem like an extravagance, it is a small outlay when compared to the financial and environmental costs of buying new clothes every time something no longer fits. As a small woman with a penchant for trousers that once belonged to old men, I often need waists and hems brought in and up on treasures I find in op-shops. A friend of mine now swears by getting her clothes taken out after having gained weight during lockdown. And tailoring doesn’t require a trip to Savile Row (unless you’re a particularly fancy Guardian reader; if so, I doff my top hat to you). Most alteration shops are accessibly priced, with most changes falling somewhere under $50. The most expensive alterations will involve specific fabrics, like silks, or dresses, particularly anything with a pleat. Your local shopping centres and suburbs will likely have a dry cleaner who will also offer an alteration service. Some big chains, like Uniqlo, offer an in-store alteration service if you go to their bigger shops. It might take some trial and error to find a regular tailor you trust, but generally anyone can get a new hem right, so it is a place to start. Just go in with a clear idea of the result you want – a cinched waist, more room in the shoulders, a tapered leg – and they’ll do the rest. The best tailor I have found so far was a lovely old Turkish man who ran a small dry cleaner in my previous suburb; no matter what I brought him, he would take it on and usually make even more ambitious suggestions for improvements to the fit, for which he’d never charge me more than $20. There are other cheap ways to freshen up clothes, some that you may be able to do yourself. One is swapping out buttons: I like to buy interesting ones from vintage shops and sew them on with a coloured thread – another small change that can make a big difference, and turn an ignorable coat into an enviable one. Tailoring has also made me fall in love with clothes again, which makes me wear those pieces more often and leaves me less inclined to buying others. And ladies? Tailors can even add pockets.Tim Freedman is happy, maybe even buoyant. “I’ve been enjoying writing and playing and singing more than I have in 15 years,” he says over a bowl of pasta. It’s day one of the publicity round for Sancho, the first album from the Whitlams in 16 years. The jovial mood chimes somewhat with Freedman’s catalogue, which he admits is replete with “sad songs about blokes”. Usually sad songs about sad blokes – those who died, those who were left behind, those who wished they’d done more, done better. The Whitlams has been one of the most successful, genuinely independent bands in Australia for nigh on 30 years, but their full history can’t be told without reference to the deaths of two original members – Stevie Plunder (born Anthony Hayes) and Andy Lewis – and the troubled circumstances each suffered before they died. The band’s 1997 breakthrough album Eternal Nightcap was dedicated to Plunder; his drinking and drug use had led to his departure from the band he co-founded, and he was found dead at the bottom of Wentworth Falls in the Blue Mountains in 1996. Meanwhile, Blow Up the Pokies – which addressed Lewis’ gambling addiction – was written by Freedman and Greta Gertler not long before Lewis’ suicide in 2000. Two years later, The Curse Stops Here saw Freedman determined to survive the loss of those friends and to do something meaningful with his own life. Both songs became defining Whitlams tracks – but Freedman won’t accept that grief is his default setting. “I think the fellow in I Make Hamburgers and You Sound Like Louis Burdett and Thank You For Loving Me At My Worst – three of my most successful songs – are about being jocular and having a ball,” he says. If any record could justify a set of sad songs about blokes it would be this new Whitlams album, which is named after and features two songs about longtime tour manager and live sound mixer Greg Weaver, who died suddenly of a heart attack in May 2019. A constant in the Whitlams camp since Eternal Nightcap, Weaver was dubbed by Freedman: the Sancho to his “impractical, impetuous, disorderly” Don Quixote. Quixotically, Sancho is anything but glum: the title track and Sancho In Love are filled with in-jokes, character assessments and a list of Weaver’s favourite things. They are packed with unalloyed joy and a sense of the world of a touring band and crew who lived in each other’s pockets for weeks or months or years on end. “I’m not letting someone that wonderful go without putting down what we loved about him and the good times that we had,” Freedman says. “I was very conscious of not saying, ‘And now I’m sitting here feeling very sad.’ “It was also a very different kind of death: it was random. He was a fellow who didn’t drink or smoke and it made no sense to anyone; it was a bowling ball from the left of centre. Also, it wasn’t just me dealing with that, it was the whole band. “He was everyone’s friend [and] I allowed myself to be self-indulgent; I’m just gonna write this for the fellas, so we can all get together when it’s recorded and feel Greg in the room, dancing behind the desk. Which is a really fond memory.” Joy is not a stranger on Sancho, with the band – made up of guitarist Jak Housden, drummer Terepai Richmond and bass player Warwick Hornby alongside Freedman – often punching through like a classic 70s pop/rock band. Even songs about a low-rent criminal just missing the big score, Ballad of Bertie Kidd, or an old man hopelessly falling in love, (You’re Making Me Feel Like I’m) 50 Again, give reasons to smile. Nor is joy a stranger in the life of Freedman, a slightly grizzled 57-year-old with a teenage daughter and a steady relationship, who sports the lean, tanned, occasionally shaved look of a middle-aged surfer/philosopher, with the conversation to match. “The easiest way to find meaning in life is to keep doing what you are actually quite good at and take a little bit of pleasure in occasionally being excellent,” Freedman says. “Everyone from Socrates onward would say virtue is basically just trying to be good at something and applying your talents to it,” he says, explaining why he has dived back into music full-time. “I do want to give joy with my music. There is no greater joy, and I forgot all about that for seven or eight years because I was a bit frazzled and I needed to find my enthusiasm.” The persistent neck pain and cumulative effects of a decade of touring that built their following but wore them out, led to a short break that extended into eight years between national tours. But Freedman never closed the book on music entirely, playing occasional shows, solo and with the Whitlams. “I didn’t intend taking that long off; I stepped out of the room, and just didn’t step back in.” But in a twist of perversity, he found that enthusiasm again while writing the song Sancho – just before Covid hit and wiped out much of the entertainment industry for two years. “I wasn’t ambitious. But I’m actually ambitious now. I want to start doing more shows, bigger shows, better shows. I’ve got my energy back, my neck isn’t hurting after I had the operation, I can play the piano again without being in pain,” Freedman says. “When you have to take painkillers and champagne just to get onstage … it’s no way to meet your grandchildren.” While music, champagne and painkillers took a step back, something else filled the void. Something hinted at on Sancho, an album dotted with small time crooks, gambling references and the language of the racetrack. “In the time that I was having time off [from music] I was on the periphery of horse racing culture and, to be honest, I was a full-time gambler for four years,” Freedman says. “I really enjoyed it because I could live at home and there was still this real adrenaline shot. Seventy minutes into a set at the Enmore Theatre is a very similar adrenaline to yelling ‘GO’ at the television when you are white-knuckling a favourite. “I had a good time with the horses. I think one afternoon I won 300 grand, one Saturday afternoon. That took pressure off that year,” he adds, almost defensively. “Yeah, I was serious. But when you’re betting that much, it means you’re losing some Saturdays [too].” Still, he won often enough for several major betting agencies to refuse to take his bets any more, he claims, preferring money from people more likely to lose consistently. “If you go close to making 3% on turnover, they don’t need you, because you’re not a loser. It’s just a hi-tech version of the pokies, it’s no different. You are allowed to win, it’s just not that common.” It’s a counter-intuitive admission. Blow Up the Pokies was one of the Whitlams’ biggest hits, a furious lament against the industry that ruined his bandmate’s life. But Freedman is adamant that he was not, and is not, a gambler. “I’ve never talked about it because I’m the guy who wrote Blow Up the Pokies, why would I be a gambler? Except I wasn’t losing,” he says seriously. “I had to stop in the end because you always stop when the quality of your data diminishes, and I’m not [an addictive] gambler. It’s like being in music for 20 years and not becoming an alcoholic – you should be able to bet professionally for three or four years and not become a gambler. “It’s all about pushing your glass up against danger, then turning around and walking away.” Sancho is out now. The Whitlams are touring Australia through February, March and AprilPharmacies in some areas of Sydney with the highest rates of Omicron infections are struggling to provide rapid antigen tests to concession card holders despite participating in the federal government scheme. Only three of 15 participating pharmacies from the South Western Sydney local health district had any RATs available to concession card holders when contacted by the Guardian this week, with the exact same number replicated in the Western Sydney local health district. Both those health districts have some of the highest rates of infection in New South Wales with both districts accounting for a third of cases since the beginning of December. On Thursday alone the districts accounted for over 25% of total cases in NSW, with over 30% of PCR tests coming from South Western and Western Sydney. But there is an ongoing discrepancy between PCR and RATs being registered from the region with both health districts lagging behind other regions in NSW when it comes to reporting positive RATs while simultaneously recording the most positive PCR tests in the state. The discrepancy could be linked to the lack of RATs available to concession card holders across the region. It comes as the president of Professional Pharmacists Australia, Dr Geoff March, called the concession card scheme rollout “reckless and negligent”. “The federal government’s announcement relied on pharmacies sourcing the RAT tests themselves, but a recent survey found that over 93% of pharmacists have reported major difficulties accessing any supplies at all,” he said. In a statement, the PPA outlined how the shortages had left pharmacists reeling, saying many were at “breaking point”. “The shortages are taking a major toll on pharmacists themselves, with over 75% of pharmacists also reporting that the shortage of RAT tests had a ‘significant’ or ‘extreme’ impact on their ability to do their work,” March said. The PPA also called for the government to provide pharmacists with PPE supplies such as N95 masks, saying the shortage of supplies was “undermining” the health of chemists. Across the Western Sydney Local Health District, which includes Blacktown, Parramatta, Auburn and Castle Hill, pharmacies told the Guardian they do not expect stock to return until mid-February. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Some said they sell out of stock extremely quickly, and – with shortages affecting wholesalers as well – have struggled to meet demand. A pharmacist from North Rocks who asked to remain anonymous said most of their lack of stock was linked to wholesalers, who were restricted in what they could offer. “[The wholesalers] could only offer us single packs, they have themselves struggled to get the packs to us,” they said. “We actually haven’t been able to sell any of the concession card tests, we are a small pharmacy and they usually sell out on the same day they arrive.” In the South Western Sydney Local Health District, which covers areas hit hard by the Delta outbreak last year including Bankstown, Liverpool and Fairfield, pharmacies have similarly struggled. The three pharmacists that did have stock told the Guardian they had placed restrictions on purchases to limit people hoarding the tests, with all three saying they could only offer two at a time. The scheme, introduced by the federal government earlier this week, allows the 6.6m concession card holders in Australia to access up to 10 free RATs over a three month period. Guardian Australia reported on Thursday pharmacies are losing up to $7.50 on each rapid antigen test under the scheme. The tests currently cost the pharmacies up to $17.50 each but the government is providing only a $10 reimbursement, according to the Pharmacy Guild of Australia. The guild has established a rapid antigen test finder for concession card holders, but a pharmacist in Bankstown who also asked to be anonymous explained it only shows participating chemists. “It doesn’t actually reflect stock levels, just shows participating pharmacists,” they said. “At this point, we don’t know when stock will return, the demand has been that high.” Smaller pharmacies have also been competing with larger pharmacy chains such as Chemist Warehouse for supplies, further squeezing the market. The federal government has previously indicated that testing supplies will improve in the coming weeks, with 16m tests expected to arrive at pharmacies before the end of January. It comes as NSW recorded 17,316 new infections on Thursday, a slight drop on the previous day’s figures, with 7,382 of those cases from RATs and 9,934 from PCR tests.Even during the summer holiday switch-off it was impossible to miss the takes about the Netflix satire Don’t Look Up. Climate scientists related to the helplessness and panic felt by the astronomers in the movie who discovered a “planet killing” comet about to hit Earth, only to have their warnings mocked and ignored. Critics panned it. Too obvious and laboured, they said. Which indeed it might be. But a purely cinematic critique of a parable about missing the point of planetary destruction does kind of … miss the point. In the same lazy beach week that I watched Don’t Look Up, I also read the beautiful Bewilderment by Richard Power, with its wrenching depiction of a neurodivergent nine-year-old who simply cannot understand why adults are ignoring accelerating signs of environmental destruction. Both book and movie made me think about how we report the climate crisis. Even in the grip of a pandemic, it is the emergency of our times, and raising the alarm is an ongoing editorial priority for the Guardian, in Australia and globally. The undercurrent of that reporting, the bleak truth beneath every story, is the gap between what the science says to be true, and what we do about it. In Australian public policy that gap is a yawning chasm, a reality that has been drowned out, wilfully ignored and wickedly misrepresented during a decade of climate “wars”. The “wars”, of course, were never about who had the best plan to avoid unfolding environmental catastrophe, but rather which party or faction could most effectively turn not having any plan to their immediate political advantage, or which was best at misrepresenting and destroying a competitor’s workable ideas. Maybe that’s why it was so hard to laugh during Don’t Look Up when Meryl Streep, playing the US president who had just been told of impending global destruction, decided the best thing to do was to “sit tight and assess” until after the midterms. Anyone approaching the issue with basic scientific literacy sees the disconnect between science and politics. Most have coped by focusing on the practical, the possible, the incremental changes that inch things forward. Not allowing the idea of perfect climate policy to become the enemy of the good might have felt more consequential had more good policy been on offer. But through that lens, there was incremental progress towards the end of 2021. Both major parties committed to a target of net zero emissions by 2050, although as Guardian Australia’s environment editor, Adam Morton, pointed out, the Coalition’s commitment included no new policies, largely relied on unproven technology and did not actually get the country to net zero. Or, as our political editor, Katharine Murphy, put it, it was really just “the status quo with some new speculative graphs”. Then Labor announced a 2030 target of a 43% reduction in emissions, more ambitious than the Coalition’s 26-28%, but still carefully calibrated to try to withstand yet another scare campaign. Rather than dusting off their hyperbolic lines about the destruction of the economy, business and employer groups supported Labor’s policy, leading Morton to tentatively wonder whether the climate wars might be over. At the moment a political truce around inadequate policy seems like a best possible scenario. Maybe even followed by modest progress during the next term of parliament. But we are long past the time for incrementalism. With rapidly diminishing years left before the world runs out of time to decarbonise, this year’s election has to move beyond the tired analysis about how Australian parties may find some slick or sneaky climate message that satisfies voters in “coal seats” as well as those in the inner city, as if “coal” seats are somehow immune from the ecological and economic impacts of global heating. The questions demanded by that gap between science and political reality can no longer be trumped by backroom strategic games. Does Australia really want to play its part in limiting global warming to 1.5C? Do those vying for political office really understand the consequences of failing to meet that target? If they are committed to it, why is the government spending $600m on a new gas-fired power plant in New South Wales – to take just one of many examples of policy blatantly contradicting promises. Its own market operator says it’s not needed and the International Energy Agency said almost a year ago there could be no new investments in coal, oil or gas if the world was to have even a shot of meeting that goal. Perhaps the mobilising “Voices of” or teal independents will force these questions on to the agenda, or if not them, the moderate Liberals whose seats they threaten. Perhaps the possibility of a hung parliament and the need to deal with some of those independents will steer the debate back towards something resembling sane. Perhaps the overwhelming concern of voters will finally hold sway. Guardian Australia has worked to elevate the climate debate since its establishment in 2013, with news, analysis, video series and podcasts. We’ll be intensifying our efforts this election year, through news and analysis from Murphy and Morton and environment reporters Lisa Cox and Graham Readfearn, through Readfearn’s factchecking column Temperature Check and Peter Hannam’s reporting on the green economy. However the politics plays, we’ll stick with the task of asking the questions demanded by the science.It is a truth universally acknowledged that an author who hands in her manuscript must be in want of a good physiotherapist. After more than two years working on a book about Stoicism, my body had calcified around my laptop. My joints were always stiff and sore, sleep was unrefreshing and one shoulder had moved inches up towards my ear, as if I were perpetually holding a telephone receiver in the crook of my neck. When I finally handed in my book, I decided to begin to heal and have a massage. But in the Melbourne CBD on a hot Sunday, it appeared that all my old haunts had shut – victims perhaps of long lockdowns. After an hour of hobbling through the city, I came across a semi-deserted shopping mall (a tailor, nail bar, cheap tax return place, all shut or abandoned). At the back was a small red light, a faded picture of a bare back and a brochure stuck to the window. Could this be the place to fix me? The door was unlocked, so I stepped in, activating a low-energy buzzer. Inside it looked like a disused storeroom. All the lights were off. There was a black vinyl couch that had been slashed in parts (yellow foam spewing out) and a pallet of bottled water on the ground. But otherwise it looked abandoned. Then, from the gloom at the back of the shop, a woman I would later know as Deane came out to greet me. Deane would have been in her 50s with orange lipstick, purple Crocs and a blue apron with a wide pocket, like the women in tuck shops used to wear to carry stuff like spare change, raffle tickets, pens and a spanner. I explained my problem to Deane, “mid-back issues, in the wrong chair, on a small computer, two and a half years!” and bent in half, walking in circles for a bit, a pantomime grimace on my face. Deane said nothing but took out a large knife from her apron. Woah! I saw the flash of the blade as she suddenly advanced towards me, before bending at the waist, plunging the knife into the pallet of water and stabbing furiously at the plastic. Handing me a hot bottle of water from the pallet, she commanded: “Drink this!” “But it’s too hot,” I didn’t say. I drank the unrefreshing beverage and enjoyed it the way someone dying of thirst would enjoy drinking seawater. Deane promised to fix my back, as she led me to a small partition towards the back of the shop. On the walls were posters saying the business offered no sexual services – which was fair enough – but also another poster saying that if any of the staff offered sexual services or asked for money for sex, clients were to contact the owner of the business on this number and report them. Huh? There was not even a ceiling fan to stir the warm air, and as I lay down on the plastic table that was covered in sheeting used to protect furniture, I worried that my sweat would create a powerful adhesive and result in skin loss when I detached. I also wondered about the circumstances surrounding the poster. What had gone down? Ten minutes passed. I felt vulnerable under the tiny towel. Then a door opened. I recognised Deane from her pair of Crocs. Then … WHACK – I involuntarily yelped. It was as if Deane had hit me with a club. WHACK. “Argh … !” WHACK. Deane must have had an implement – no human hand could be that strong. She hit me again, even harder this time, and I protested. “That hurts! It’s sore there.” Deane agreed. “Yes, it’s very sore there,” before striking me again with the club. Suddenly the Crocs disappeared. I heard a grunt and felt the table buckle. What? Deane was up there with me. Why? Oh no! No! Deane’s knees were either side of me so she could use her full body weight to press into my upper back. Argh! Deane was giving it her all – pounding me in the middle of my back, tenderising me like a steak. I too was making strange grunting sounds. I worried my nose might break, pressing it so hard against the table. WHACK! WHACK! I could see what Deane was straining for – the crack of the middle back as the errant vertebrae popped into shape. The crack never came and eventually Deane dismounted. Before I’d had time to recover, Deane had thrown a bucket of oil over me. There was so much oil that she had trouble gripping the club, so for a short while it felt like a normal (albeit extremely oily) massage. That is, until she started working on my head. By this stage I had been turned around but Deane had thrown some sort of hood over my eyes, so I couldn’t see what was happening. But it felt like Deane was raking my scalp with an extremely powerful, possibly motorised implement. This didn’t feel like the touch of a normal human hand – this was the touch of a CLAW. I tried to recall whether Deane had long, talon-like nails (I concluded no, since she would have opened the pallet of water with her fingers). The scratching continued, and I wondered – how is this helping my back? I also wondered if my scalp was bleeding. I felt a trickle of something down my forehead, but it could have been sweat or … the oil? Deane did other confusing things: washed my feet with detergent, pulled my hair, pumped her hands on my chest like she was giving CPR. But the strangest was when she attacked my upper ear lobes – a place no one had paid much attention to before, and proceeded to strenuously knead and tug at the cartilage, like she was wanting to debone my ears. My sore back asked: What about me? Losing only a small amount of skin getting off the plastic sheeting, I hobbled out of the room, feeling beaten up and raw. Deane was nowhere to be seen. “Goodbye and thank you!” I called out into the darkened shop. It sounded like a sob. Throughout the night, each part of my body done over by the claw hammer of Deane took turns in throbbing with pain. The next day I was still hobbling, but in the manner of someone with cracked ribs and a bruised back. It was impossible to tell whether the infliction of the second injury had cured the original complaint.A re-elected Coalition would pour $1bn into Great Barrier Reef conservation projects over the next decade, the government says, just months after campaigning to prevent the reef being listed as “in danger” by the world heritage committee. The announcement, to be made by the prime minister, Scott Morrison, in north Queensland on Friday, comes a fortnight after Labor pledged $163m to protect the natural wonder. It highlights the reef as a key election fight in the Cairns electorate of Leichhardt. The funding pledge arrives just days before Australia is due to send a report to Unesco about the state of the reef and its plans to protect it, before a critical meeting of the world heritage committee scheduled for July in Russia. Morrison said: “Funding will support scientists, farmers and traditional owners, backing in the very latest marine science while building resilience and reducing threats from pollution in our oceans, and predators such as the crown-of-thorns starfish.” Billed by the government as the “single largest investment” in the reef, the nine-year investment includes more than half a billion dollars for water quality, covering work on erosion, land condition, and reducing runoff of pesticides and nutrients. Another $253m will specifically address reef management and conservation, including work from the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority to combat crown-of-thorns starfish and prevent illegal fishing. Other funds will go towards reef health monitoring systems and research into reef resilience, and $74.4m will target habitat restoration, marine debris and species protection in programs led by traditional owners and community groups. The government said its proposal would almost double the number of areas to be protected from crown-of-thorns starfish, from 253 to 500 reefs, as well as encouraging local farmers to improve land management to reduce agricultural runoff into the ocean. “This is already the best managed reef in the world and today we take our commitment to a new level,” Morrison said, ahead of the official announcement in Cairns on Friday. The new policy is in addition to the government’s previously announced $2bn for the Reef 2050 plan. On top of its environmental benefits, Morrison painted the announcement as reinforcement for the 64,000 jobs and $6.4bn in tourism revenue supported by the reef. “From breakthrough science in coral seeding and restoration to improved water quality, the latest on water management and compliance systems, as well as the protection of native species, we are working across every aspect of the reef,” the environment minister, Sussan Ley, said. “Our farmers, tourism operators and fishers are our reef champions and we are supporting them through practical water- and land-based strategies that will contribute significantly to the health of the reef.” Ley and the government’s marine science experts agree the greatest threat to the world’s biggest coral reef system is climate change. The 2,300km reef has seen five mass bleaching events – in 1998, 2002, 2016, 2017 and 2020 – all caused by rising ocean temperatures driven by global heating. In December the government released the first revision in five years of its cornerstone reef conservation policy, the Reef 2050 plan. Conservationists said the plan was flawed because it was linked to the Morrison government’s inadequate greenhouse gas reduction targets. But they also said more funding and action was needed to improve water quality and address unsustainable and illegal fishing. Before Christmas, Labor said it would adopt a target to cut emissions by 43% by 2030 based on 2005 levels – slightly lower than the 45% target it took to the 2019 election but higher than the Morrison government’s target of a 26-28% cut. Last year UN science advisers recommended the reef be placed on the world heritage “in danger” list – the first time any site had been recommended for the listing primarily because of the impacts of climate change. After a strong protest from the federal government, including dispatching Ley on a private jet to personally lobby world heritage committee members around the world, the reef was not given the listing. But the committee asked Australia to submit a report by 1 February this year on the reef’s condition and the steps taken to protect it. A monitoring mission to be led by Unesco experts is also due to be held in the first half of this year before the world heritage committee considers again whether to put the reef on its list of sites “in danger” at its next meeting in July. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, committed $163m to the Great Barrier Reef during a trip to Cairns earlier this month. The opposition proposed $85m for “shovel-ready” reef protection projects, $63m to expand the Reef 2050 plan, and $15m for reef research. “We need to make sure that the reef is kept off the endangered list of the world heritage listing,” Albanese said. Veteran Liberal National party MP Warren Entsch is the government’s special envoy for the reef. He held the seat of Leichhardt at the 2019 election by a 54-46% margin against Labor candidate Elida Faith, who will challenge for the seat again this year.Electricity demand hit a record low in several states during a milder-than-usual end to 2021, but average wholesale prices were up from a year earlier due to the higher cost of fossil fuels even as their share of the market dived. The December quarterly energy dynamics report by the Australian Energy Market Operator (Aemo), released on Friday, showed renewable energy set generation highs in the national electricity market (NEM). Clean energy accounted for 34.9% of generation across the quarter, beating the 31.6% record set in the previous three months. At one point on 15 November renewables supplied 61.8%, surpassing the previous record of 61.4% set in the September quarter. NEM emissions fell to the lowest quarterly total on record at 28m tonnes carbon dioxide equivalent, 8% less than the previous quarterly low set a year earlier, Aemo said. Cooler, wetter climatic influences, driven in part by a La Niña event in the Pacific, curbed demand for air-conditioning. With more consumers supplying their own power from rooftop panels, average demand from the grid dropped to 19,876 megawatts – the least in a December quarter since 2005, Aemo said. More expensive fossil fuels played a central role in pushing up wholesale power prices in mainland states, particularly in Queensland and NSW. Power averaged $57 a megawatt hour, down 13% on the September quarter, but nearly a third higher than in the December quarter of 2020. “Increases in underlying traded prices for black coal and gas were likely to have been influences on offer price levels for some of these generators,” the report said. “The gap between prices in the northern NEM regions of Queensland and NSW and the southern regions persisted through the quarter, with prices in [the two states] averaging $45/MWh higher than those in Victoria and South Australia, the second largest differential after the June quarter of 2021.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Market prices were negative or zero for longer periods due to the increased use of rooftop solar and large-scale solar plants. In Victoria, spot price averages in the quarter were negative between 0925 hrs and 1420 hrs, while the overall average between 0800 hrs and 1630 hrs was just one cent per MWh. However, the global scramble for energy supplies late last year fed into local costs. Black coal-fired power plants and their gas equivalents were more often outbid by other sources as a result, even though repairs on ageing units actually increased their availability compared with a year earlier. During the quarter, the coal plants in Queensland and NSW averaged just over 10,000 MW of supply, the lowest during the October-December period since the market’s creation in 1998. Victoriaalso saw average use rates of its brown coal-fired plants decline. While the Morrison government had touted a gas-led recovery from Covid, the share of the fuel in the market was the lowest for the fourth quarter since 2003. In renewables-rich South Australia, the share was the least since the market’s start. Demand for grid power sank to a record low on Sunday 17 October, of 12,936MW at 1pm, almost 9% lower than the previous nadir set during the September quarter. That date and time was also NSW’s lowest for operational demand. Consumers there tapped the grid for only 4425MW, shaving about 5% off the previous record low set in 1999. Victoria’s new minimum demand of 2333 MW was set on 28 November – also at 1pm on a Sunday. That tally lopped about 6.6% off the previous low notched during the fourth quarter of 2020. Averaged over the quarter, NSW, Victoria and SA each posted record December quarter lows for grid demand. The spread of rooftop panels to total about 3200MW of capacity meant many consumer supplied their own needs even during a period marked by increased cloudiness and rain influenced by the La Nina. Even the maximum demand days were cut, such as in NSW where the 11,176MW top was the lowest in a December quarter since 2001. The trends in place at the end of 2021 look set to extend into this year. Futures prices for 2022 increased across all states, rising from an average of $57/MWh at the end of September to end the year at $73/MWh. “Participants’ outlooks [were] influenced by wholesale spot price trends, possible impact from long-term generation unit outages and closures, and potentially higher fuel cost expectations in 2022,” Aemo said.Aged care workers are being “pushed to the edge” amid a worsening Omicron crisis, a lack of rapid tests, dire staffing shortages and effective bans on essential visitors, unions and advocates say. Data suggests Omicron had spread to more than 700 aged care homes across Australia last week, compounding existing frailties in the aged care system. Providers have pleaded with the government for a surge workforce, including using the Australian Defence Force, and complained of dire shortages of rapid antigen tests which the commonwealth had promised to provide for residents, staff and essential visitors. Despite the pledge, more than half of aged care workers surveyed by the United Workers Union said they had not been given a rapid test by their workplace, instead having to source it themselves or use temperature checks as a substitute. Rapid tests are not being distributed proactively to prevent outbreaks but instead are being prioritised for sites with existing Omicron cases due to supply problems. Even then, the Guardian revealed this week that some providers in the grips of an outbreak were still waiting for weeks for shipments of rapid tests to arrive. Carolyn Smith, the aged care director of the UWU, said the lack of tests was placing huge amounts of stress on staff who feared taking Omicron into their workplaces. “It’s just an incredible emotional load on workers who are already pushed to the edge,” she said. “They are already really tired, overworked, struggling to get proper personal protective equipment – lots of them don’t have proper N95 masks.” The Australian Nursing and Midwifery Federation is also surveying its members and the preliminary results suggest a huge amount of stress on the sector. About 58% had experienced a Covid-19 outbreak, 20% were planning to leave their position within 12 months, and 40% had recently worked double shifts. “They’re going to work already completely anxious and overwhelmed because they know they’re going to have to hit the ground running, they’re so understaffed,” the ANMF acting federal director, Lori-Anne Sharp, said. “It was bad before. It’s been bad staffing-wise for a decade, and now with Omicron … the federal government was warned; their plans were inadequate.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The staffing capacity problems are being compounded by the restrictions on visitors, which are often due to a lack of rapid tests to screen them prior to entering facilities. The Guardian reported this week that essential visitors – partners in care, for example – were being blocked by some facilities that had mandated rapid tests but were unable to supply them due to commonwealth undersupply. One of those facilities, St Basil’s Homes in South Australia, said its hand was forced by unreliable supply from the federal government. Craig Gear, the chief executive of the Older Persons Advocacy Network, said the barrier to visitation was compounding the staffing crisis. Essential visitors were a crucial support to staff, helping to meet basic care needs for their family members, he said. “We can’t have that, particularly when we’re calling for partners-in-care and every resident to have a named visitor who can come and access and provide support, even if there is an outbreak,” Gear said. “We can’t have the supply of rapid antigen tests being the barrier to those sorts of programs which are also a boost to the workforce, because they will help take some of the pressure off of the workforce.” The aged care minister, Richard Colbeck, said the government had provided more than 6m tests to the aged care sector. It was prioritising test supply to outbreak sites, he said. But the ANMF says pleas for the defence force to be deployed as a surge workforce have so far been ignored. “The ANMF is engaging with the federal government and our industry stakeholders to address the various issues impacting health and aged care during the pandemic, but from what our members are telling us, it’s crucial that chronic understaffing, particularly in nursing homes, is resolved – before lives are lost unnecessarily,” Sharp said.Only one of Australia’s 23 approved at-home rapid antigen tests explicitly states it will detect Omicron, as the Therapeutic Goods Administration carries out a review of all tests to check how they work with different variants of Covid-19. Most of the product disclosures for tests list their ability to detect Delta and other variants, but not Omicron. However, manufacturers are providing evidence to the TGA of their tests’ effectiveness as it comes to hand. The United States Food and Drug Administration has warned that “early data suggests that antigen tests do detect the Omicron variant but may have reduced sensitivity”. The TGA has announced that variants caused by virus mutations could mean “test kits may no longer be able to detect the virus, leading to false negative results”. It has commissioned the Peter Doherty Institute to verify manufacturers’ claims about how good their tests are at detecting both the Delta and Omicron variants. It is also publishing a regularly updated list of those manufacturers who have provided evidence about their tests’ performance on its website. A spokesperson said self-tests and point-of-care tests were being reviewed “to ensure that they perform at the level of sensitivity and detection rates they claim and to assess their ability to detect emerging variants”. Manufacturers must provide ongoing study data, the spokesperson said. “The TGA and the Doherty Institute are working as quickly as possible to undertake the testing to ensure the TGA can provide the most up to date information about the test kits’ performance.” Dr Ashwin Swaminathan, an infectious diseases physician and senior lecturer at the Australian National University, said the performance of the tests with different variants was “a moving feast”. “[The TGA] are doing it in real time, releasing results as they go along,” he said. “It’s the role of the TGA to make it clear what a test can and can’t do. “In the context of governments buying up all these tests and distributing them to schools and workplaces and vulnerable people in society, where it’s a major part of our strategy going forward, we really need to know what the tests can do.” There have been ongoing supply shortages of the rapid antigen tests amid bickering over whether government demand has diverted supply from pharmacists. Dean Whiting, the chief executive of Pathology Technology Australia, said high-quality products identify the presence of the “nuclear capsid protein”. This is a “highly conserved” part of the virus which is much less likely to mutate, unlike the spike protein. It is the spike protein that has mutated to form new variants, and Omicron has many mutations, allowing it to dodge vaccine antibodies and making the booster jabs necessary. “All the manufacturers I know target the nuclear capsid protein,” Whiting said. PTA represents 70% of rapid antigen test suppliers. “All the good manufacturers have gone back and tested against Omicron to determine what effectiveness they have.” But he said that it can take months for tests to make it all the way down the supply chains into people’s hands, so changes made at the manufacturing level in terms of their instructions wouldn’t always keep up. “It’s always a good idea to look for brands you know and trust, because these are global brands that won’t risk their reputation on poor quality products,” he said. Swaminathan said rapid antigen tests should be used in conjunction with other information about a person’s infection risk. “It’s a really good diagnostic tool if it’s used in the right way in conjunction with common sense and other background information to prevent transmission and infection,” he said. “If we don’t use it in that context it could add to disruption.” For example, he said, if someone with Covid-like symptoms who had been exposed to an infected person and who had not been fully vaccinated returned a positive RAT, that would just confirm the diagnosis. But someone who had a very low risk of infection who got a positive test might have a false positive. In other situations people should understand that there were false negatives so they needed to retest or take a PCR test. With millions of tests being distributed, even a small proportion of wrong results would be significant, Swaminathan said. He has detailed in The Conversation ways to check how accurate your RAT result is. Guardian Australia has contacted the TGA for comment.I am 53 and I don’t know what I want to do with my life. Every job and every relationship I’ve ever had have been initiated by the other party. I’ve never made a friend outside of the formal structure of work or school. I haven’t developed any real passions or maintained any hobbies. I was content for a while to be defined by my job and my family, but while the job is fine and pays amazingly well it is not a vocation. My marriage ended years ago and my kids are almost adults. I want to feel as though there was a purpose and a direction to all of this. I want to be able to say that I love my life. How do I begin, starting from here? Eleanor says: I think you’re asking about something that hums in the centre of a lot of people, especially in midlife, and especially after years in a pandemic. The ties that connect us to what we know and love seem to grow stretched and slack – we want to feel tethered again, embedded, like it would matter if we floated away. The trouble is, it’s difficult to find purpose and contentment by running directly at them. In fact, the more preoccupied we are with the goal of feeling fulfilled, the less likely we are to accomplish it. We can start to imagine “true happiness” as something mythical and lofty, a condition in which we never feel lonely or lost, and in chasing that ideal we overlook the small glimmers of laughter or quiet moments of repose in which genuine happiness actually lives. Tomes have been written about how to feel purpose and joy. You could have a lot of fun reading them and coming up with your own personal recipe, but I think a good starting mission is: insist on making your life as nourishing as you can and then find equilibrium with the remainder. Both parts of that mission are hard. The first is hard because it requires grit and optimism when you might feel low on both. You write you’ve struggled to make and keep friends or hobbies. This is about insisting that can change; that the path you’ve been on has no authority to dictate where you go next. Things do change – one of my biggest role models couldn’t swim a lap as an adult and 10 years later swims kilometres in the ocean every week. But they change because you keep turning up. Reach out to the people you used to be close to from work and school; think of whatever made you feel most alive as a kid and go back to it in some small way; join a community organisation that makes other people’s lives better and forces you to become part of a collective. The annoying part is you have to actually do all those things, even when you don’t want to, and even when it feels like they’re not “working”. The goal isn’t to do them until they make you feel life has a point – it’s to populate life with enough experiences and people that happiness creeps in between them, almost while you’re not looking. That’s what gets you to part two; finding equilibrium with the remainder. Even when we’ve put serious elbow grease into making a life we’re proud of, there will be moments of loneliness and grief and worry. They may even be frequent. It can be tempting then to abandon the changes we’ve made, thinking “why bother?” – as though the things we fill our life with have betrayed us if we still don’t feel full. Resist that temptation as much as you can. Pain is an inevitable part of living; by staying engaged with the world and other people we can come to see that feeling as a companion to joy instead of a threat. You write that you want to feel there “was” a purpose to your life, but a past tense isn’t in order yet. Start with a change of tense; ask what purpose could there be? *** Ask us a question Do you have a conflict, crossroads or dilemma you need help with? Eleanor Gordon-Smith will help you think through life’s questions and puzzles, big and small. Questions can be anonymous. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service hereGlobal oil prices are at their highest levels since 2014 with Brent crude, one widely cited gauge, topping US$90 (A$127) a barrel on Wednesday. Tension over a possible Russian invasion of Ukraine is obviously one factor stoking energy costs. But what do the higher prices mean for Australians and is there much we can do about it? What are petrol prices doing in Australia now? As the ABS noted last week when releasing December quarter consumer price index data, automotive fuel was “the most significant” contributor to the 3.5% annual inflation rate. Fuel prices have risen for six quarters in a row, with the 32.3% annual increase in 2021 the biggest since 1990. The national average price during the latest quarter also reached a record $1.64 a litre for unleaded petrol, the ABS said. Perhaps not surprisingly for an internationally traded commodity that underpins economies – and that nations have gone to war over – the agency says fuel has often been a major contributor to price changes. And sometimes, it’s a drop. At one point early in the Covid pandemic, oil prices were briefly negative, but nobody reported service stations in Australia paying motorists to take away their petrol. On the skids, for now Still, Australians would be right to wonder how local fuel prices are set. Despite scary newspaper headlines warning prices are likely to remain sky-high for a while, the average fuel cost in most capital cities has actually been on the slide in the past week or so. That, at least, is according to the Australian Competition and Consumer Competition, which has copped criticism over the years for not finding consistent price collusion by service stations. By their measure, average petrol prices peaked in Sydney more than a week ago at just under $1.80 a litre, and are now a few cents cheaper. In Melbourne, they peaked two weeks ago, and are down about 10 cents a litre to $1.63 a litre. Perth has posted a drop of more than 20 cents a litre since mid-January with petrol recently selling for just over $1.55. “It’s certainly the case that they’re falling slowly in most of the capital cities that have price cycles,” Peter Khoury, a spokesperson for NRMA in NSW, says. Khoury says how those cycles turn – and why prices can vary across suburbs by 30 cents or more on the same day for essentially the same product – can defy logic. “Nowhere else on earth has this price cycle that we have in those capital cities,” he says. “It’s a very bizarre situation where we know [global] oil prices are going up but in a number of those capital cities, prices are currently falling because of the price cycle.” Equity issues Those recent falls aren’t likely to last, though, so now might be a good time to fill up. Since many drivers would do that every week or so, there’s little need for a prompt. “When [prices] go back up, they’ll go back up to near-record highs,” Khoury predicts. Darwin and Hobart are mysteriously left out of those cycles, as are most regional areas. Big distances preclude the option for many in remote areas of shopping around for cheaper prices. Catherine Birch, a senior economist with ANZ, says regional folk typically devote a larger chunk of their income to fuel bills, as do low- to middle-income households. The effect of rising prices tends to get magnified for them. “There’s no other way to get around than driving, so a lot of these people are more exposed than people who live in the cities, who can switch to public transport,” she says. Not just Russia Threat of Russian aggression towards Ukraine clearly adds to uncertainty about peace in general and energy prices in particular. Russia supplies about a third of Europe’s gas and so there’s a bit of a scramble to secure energy, not least because winter can bring sudden spikes in orders from households and businesses seeking heat. Oil and gas prices tend to move in step. But, as Birch’s ANZ colleagues note, demand was already on the rise as economies rebounding from Covid lockdown ran up against constraints on supply. Amin Nasser, head on Saudi Arabia’s Aramco – the world’s biggest oil producer – has lately joined those warning that suppliers have been under-investing in production. Opec members such as Nigeria have struggled to meet increased quota levels, while the US has been lately topping up its strategic crude oil stockpiles. Economic fallout? As noted last week, investors tend not to be great prophets of geopolitical strife. That said, economists like Birch are generally sanguine about the wider economic implications of fuel prices remaining high. Fuel prices have tended to increase faster than average goods, as noted above, but the average household expenditure on fuel is not huge. According to the ABS’s 2015-16 Household Expenditure Survey, on average, Australians spent approximately $2,300 on automotive fuel each year. While somewhat dated now, that outlay made up just 3.3% of a CPI basket. Even with higher bowser prices, the fundamentals of spending and the outlook more generally are “actually looking quite strong”, Birch says. Consumers have socked away $200bn in savings and Australia’s jobless rate is at a 13-year low of just 4.2%, leaving them relatively well-poised to absorb higher fuel bills. Nor will the central bank be overly concerned – unless of course there’s a war – when its board meets next Tuesday for the first time in 2022. “One of the questions RBA will be asking itself is, ‘will lifting rates earlier, do anything to address oil price inflation?’” Birch says. “I think on the whole the answer is going to be ‘no’, really.” For those who can afford it, though, there is one way to dodge petrol price volatility. “Over the longer term higher oil prices could also help accelerate the move away from oil” towards electric vehicles, she says. “If we can … get the take-up in Australia rising more quickly, that would lower people’s exposure to oil and oil prices.”Donny van de Beek’s club career statistics: Ajax (2015-20), 41 goals, 34 assists, 175 appearances – 90 in central midfield, 68 attacking midfield, 14 defensive midfield, one wide left and two in the final moments. Manchester United (2020-present), two goals, two assists, 50 appearances, 18 in central midfield, 14 attacking midfield, three defensive midfield, three wide left and 12 too short to matter. This cliff-face fall-off in numbers between Van de Beek’s first and current clubs points to the mysterious case of a Dutch‑schooled Netherlands first choice with Champions League quarter- and semi-final goals on his CV who joined United and instantly became player non grata. It is hard to comprehend what happened to leave the 24-year‑old available as a winter-window loanee; why, when United have failed to acquire an elite-level schemer since Michael Carrick signed in July 2006, Van de Beek has not had a concerted run to discover whether he might be good enough. A misconception has developed that Van de Beek is solely a No 10, not an 8 or 6. The logic runs that having to compete with United’s incumbent trequartista and de facto leader, Bruno Fernandes, is the reason why his career has been mothballed. This myth is busted by the appearance stats above (the majority come in midfield), by how Fernandes is operating as an 8 in Ralf Rangnick’s 4-3-3 (if the Portuguese can, Van de Beek can) and by Ole Gunnar Solskjær’s appraisal of the player when signing him in September 2020. “His ability to see space, time his movements and read the game will really complement the qualities that we have in midfield,” said United’s then manager. Quality of the highest echelon, though, is not associated with a department that, since Carrick’s pomp ended about a decade ago, has featured the modest talents of Marouane Fellaini, Morgan Schneiderlin, Bastian Schweinsteiger and Ander Herrera. When Van de Beek took the No 34 shirt for the club his competitors were Nemanja Matic, Fred, Paul Pogba and Scott McTominay. Pogba and McTominay may have an argument for selection ahead of Van de Beek but each can be erratic and they have suffered sufficient injuries for the Dutchman to have enjoyed more than a solitary run of two consecutive appearances – in November 2020, versus Istanbul Basaksehir and Southampton. On his debut as a 67th-minute substitute two months before, Van de Beek scored in a 3-1 loss at Crystal Palace but by the close of his first season there had been only 15 starts in 36 appearances with a total of nearly 1,460 minutes, and two assists. This term the numbers are four starts in 14, the second of his two United goals – in the 4-1 defeat at Watford that caused Solskjær’s sacking – and no assists. The downward graph is a puzzle. If in the past year and a half United had been a formidable, trophy-winning force whose side selected itself this would be an explanation. United are not. Solskjær piloted them to last season’s Premier League runners-up spot, then saw his team bomb in May’s Europa League final against Villarreal. A shootout defeat followed a 1-1 draw in which Solskjær deployed four substitutes but in two hours of play did not call on Van de Beek, who had 20 minutes’ experience of the showpiece as a replacement when Ajax lost the 2017 final to United. Solskjær took off both central midfielders – Pogba and McTominay – and preferred Dan James (now at Leeds) and the unreliable Fred. The current campaign threatens to be far poorer. In the autumn, United descended into a rabble who lost a fourth manager since May 2013 – Solskjær – and after the winter break they will stand fourth, 19 points (with a game in hand) behind Manchester City. Their Champions League last-16 tie with Atlético Madrid starts next month but only a fantasist would bet on a fourth competition triumph. The FA Cup – next Friday’s fourth-round visitors are Middlesbrough – may end the four-year trophy drought but even if so 2021-22 will be the latest muddled year in United’s annals. Van de Beek could assess all this and wonder what he has done to deserve his season and a half in the cold. The view from the training ground is that unlike, say, James, Van de Beek is good enough at least to be given a fair chance. It adds to the conundrum of his low status. Maybe a clue can be found in Jadon Sancho’s similar experience. The forward is United’s third-highest transfer (£73m) but is struggling for regular game time in his first season despite being pursued by Solskjær across two summers. Or in Jesse Lingard, whose loan to West Ham last season was impressive enough to get him into England’s provisional Euro 2020 squad but who has hardly been given a kick this season. Van de Beek, too, may be suffering from odd selection choices that are a function of the instability at the club. On signing, Van de Beek said: “Having spoken to the manager about his vision, I cannot wait to be a part of that.” He is still waiting. A ray of hope for Van de Beek is how United will not sell him this month, so whoever is in charge next season can make their own judgment. Rangnick himself is an outsider for the post. But given he is content for Van de Beek to be loaned, the player may hope for a change of luck when United make the appointment. He could certainly do with one.Efforts to increase uptake of Covid jabs in the UK should be concentrated on reducing the number of unvaccinated people rather than booster jabs, a leading expert has said. As Omicron spread rapidly around the country towards the end of 2021, health advisers and government ministers stressed that two doses “are not enough” to protect against the new variant, urging those eligible to take up a booster dose as soon as possible. The message hit home: in an attempt to avert another dismal Christmas and protect their loved ones people dashed to get jabbed, with 968,665 booster or third vaccinations reported on 21 December alone. But uptake subsequently fell dramatically, with booster doses now bobbing about 50,000 a day. Now a leading vaccine expert has said the focus should be placed on reducing the numbers of those who have yet to have even their first jab. “I think the booster programme might have reached saturation and [it is] best to concentrate on those who had no vaccine at all – as their chance of dying is 11 times higher than vaccinated folks,” said Prof Beate Kampmann, director of the vaccine centre at the London School of Hygiene &amp; Tropical Medicine. When the booster slowdown first became apparent, the government’s vaccine minister, Maggie Throup said the Christmas break and public holidays were key factors. But the ongoing slump suggests there is more at play. Dr Simon Williams, a behavioural scientist at Swansea University, said one reason could be that people needed to wait 28 days after testing positive for Covid before they could have a booster. “At the start of January, cases were astronomically high, with Omicron at its peak, so we might in theory see an increase in booster uptake now, as more people become eligible,” he said. But he said hesitancy or complacency around booster jabs might also play a role, adding his own research had found many people have “variant fatigue” – the view that Omicron is just another variant and it is just time to get on with life. “This has been compounded by a common perception that Omicron is a ‘milder’ variant,” Williams said, adding that, in fact, it is in large part thanks to vaccinations, including boosters, that Omicron has not lead to as many hospitalisations as initially feared. Williams suggested falling levels of infection might also reduce the sense of urgency around getting boosted – despite boosters being one of the factors behind the decline. But Kampmann said another reason was the perception of vaccine effectiveness. “I suspect it all has to do with people feeling less confident that the vaccine is going to protect them from Omicron infection, and the observation that despite vaccination people still had contracted this variant,” she said, adding people forget why the booster programme existed. “Primarily [it is] to keep individuals out of hospital and protecting those who are the most vulnerable from progressing to severe disease. And for that the booster is definitely needed and has been shown to work very well,” she said. The latest figures from the UK Health Security Agency reveal more than 90% of those aged 70 and over in England have now had a booster. While Williams said he agreed a priority should be to continue to attempt to engage and encourage the unvaccinated to get vaccinated, particularly those who are vulnerable, he added boosters remained important, noting while the jabs did not fully prevent transmission, they helped. “To keep rates and illness going down, booster uptake is still needed,” he said. While efforts are to understand the reasons for hesitancy in some communities and to counter misinformation are needed to encourage uptake of all Covid jabs, Williams said there was another issue to tackle to increase booster uptake. “For some there might be a bit of a conflict or confusion between the message that boosters are important to help protect against the ongoing threat posed by Omicron, and the message that is sent out by the quite sudden removal of pretty much all policy protections and the reduction of the self-isolation period, coupled with the message of ‘getting on with it’,” he said. Not for the first time in the pandemic, the message appears to be that when it comes to jabs, communication is key.Stephen Colbert On Thursday’s Late Show, Stephen Colbert weighed in on sky-high tensions over Russia’s massing of troops on the border with Ukraine. “So the world’s two greatest nuclear powers are toe-to-toe in a high-stakes staring contest, but not everyone is pulling for our guy,” he said, citing a new poll which found 62% of Republicans think Putin is a “stronger leader” than Biden. “What is wrong with you? Stop rooting for the other team!” he marveled. “Haven’t you seen Rocky IV, From Russia With Love, Air Force One, Rambo First Blood Part II, Golden Eye, The Hunt for Red October? Come on! “I’m not sure what the Republican criterion for toughness is. It is true that Biden hasn’t murdered anyone with a cup of tea laced with polonium, a noose, point-blank shootings or by chucking them out of windows,” he continued, citing several examples of the Kremlin killing dissidents. “The only way Joe’s gonna kill you is by repeatedly telling the same story.” Nevertheless, Republicans are “crushing hard” on Putin, Colbert concluded, pointing to a clip from Fox &amp; Friends in which host Brian Kilmeade said, based on a poll in which six out of 10 Americans thought Biden was likable, “give us a strong leader who’s a little less likable”. “Republican daddy issues are going to kill us all,” Colbert mused. Trevor Noah On the Daily Show, Trevor Noah reacted to news that Stephen Breyer will retire from the supreme court. “Democrats have been relentlessly pestering Breyer to step down so that they can replace him before Mitch McConnell comes back into power and makes a rule that all supreme court justices have to have been platinum QAnon members in the past,” Noah noted. “Honestly, no one should be surprised by this news, right?” he continued. “It probably isn’t fun being hounded all day by people screaming at you to retire. “Think about it, everywhere this guy goes, people are telling him he should be retiring. He’s probably in line at the grocery store and people are like ‘retire, bitch!’ He’s at Starbucks, the name on the cup is ‘Retire Bitch.’” While many Democrats are relieved at the 83-year-old justice’s retirement, Noah was skeptical. “I feel like the only winner here will be Mitch McConnell,” he said. “Maybe I’m just scarred. Because even though the Republicans don’t control the Senate, don’t be shocked when Mitch still makes it happen. “He’s just going to come out like, ‘It’s a longstanding Senate tradition that we cannot confirm a supreme court justice in a year when there’s a new season of Ozark on Netflix.’” Seth Meyers On Late Night, Seth Meyers decried the “fake controversy” over Biden calling the Fox News correspondent Peter Doocy a “stupid son of a bitch” on an apparent hot mic after Doocy asked a vacuous question about inflation at a White House press conference. “Look, ideally the president would not lob insults at anyone, including reporters, but if we’re being honest, you know, it was kind of a stupid question,” said Meyers. “Does Biden think inflation is a political liability? What is he supposed to say? ‘No, I think it’s good that gas and ground beef are more expensive! I’m gonna cruise to re-election on the strength of Subway’s $6 footlong.’” Biden later apologized to Doocy and told him over the phone that “it’s not personal, pal”. “Which does strike me as kind of a non-apology apology,” Meyers mused. “You called him a stupid son of a bitch. If it wasn’t personal then what was it? Business?” And just in case, “let’s just get the false equivalency out of the way,” he added. “No, this isn’t even remotely like Trump, who repeatedly whipped his crazed fans into a frenzy by hurling insults at reporters and calling them the enemy of the people.” Jimmy Kimmel And in Los Angeles, Jimmy Kimmel recalled a time when “people from both sides of the aisle come together to say Peter Doocy is stupid”, such as the late John McCain, a GOP senator from Arizona who once replied to Doocy, “why would you say something that stupid?” Kimmel also blasted Eric Trump, who appeared on Fox News – “the closest he can get to a Zoom with his dad” – to complain about Biden not being “present” as president. “My father sat there 24 hours a day and fought for the United States’ best interests,” he claimed. “Well, I agree with the sat there 24 hours a day part,” Kimmel retorted, “but you forgot to mention: on the toilet, pleasuring himself to Lou Dobbs. You left the key part out!” And he suggested Biden, who has promised to nominate a black woman to the supreme court, pick Anita Hill to replace Breyer. “How good would that be?” he said. “She marches in, sits on the bench right next to Clarence [Thomas], cracks open a can of Coke. She’s like, ‘Hey Clarence! How’s your weekend, bitch?’”Although wearing a face mask was no longer a legal requirement, many travellers and shoppers in London and Birmingham chose to continue covering up as they went about their morning business. Commuters at Birmingham New Street committed to widespread mask-wearing, with almost half still wearing them around the station and many saying they would put one on when they got on a train. Of 100 people passing through the station entrance on Thursday morning, 48 were wearing masks, with a variety of different reasons for doing so – on the day not wearing one stopped being an offence in England. “I think I’ll keep wearing one for the foreseeable. The number of colds and coughs I’ve had over the past couple of years has gone right down, and wearing a mask is not that bad,” said salesman Stuart Whitman, 50. “I’m not as worried about Covid any more, I feel like we’re on the way out, but I find it a lot healthier to wear a mask. At this time of year there are loads of germs going round with the kids going back to school, and I like not having a cold.” But there were also many people who were relieved to be ditching face coverings. “I’m no longer wearing one. Everyone should be vaccinated and we’ve got to live with it now. It’s not going to go away. We can’t keep restricting our lives for every strain of coronavirus,” said 57-year-old Steve Horne. “It’s up to everyone what they want to do now. But I’m fully vaccinated so I’m led to believe I’m protected.” In the capital, mayor Sadiq Khan has said Londoners must keep donning their masks on public transport, and in Waterloo train station only a handful of people were spotted flouting the rules. Marilia Perry, originally from Leeds, said mask wearing was still important to her and that she continued to work from home. She recently got her booster jab but said she “would like to respect others who might not have had all their vaccinations yet”. Walking by the South Bank, Marie Braniff-Hudson, 66 and her husband, David Hudson 65, wore their masks outdoors, and said their expat life in Singapore, where rules were much stricter, has made them accustomed to wearing masks. “In Singapore, you would be fined if you are not wearing a mask,” said Hudson. Braniff-Hudson said the couple were shocked when they saw people not wearing them in England. “We now have an Asian frame of mind,” she said. With advice to work from home now eased, Transport for London reported a small uptick in travellers on Thursday. Up to 10am, 1.2 million people had taken the tube – up 9% compared to last week, but still only half of pre-pandemic levels. City of London workers were slowly returning to the office. About 120,000 commuters used connecting tube stops on Thursday morning, a 12% increase compared with last Thursday. Shops revealed a similar mask-wearing majority to public transport. When the Guardian visited the Charing Cross branch of Waterstones, which no longer had posters on mask requirements, all of the nine shoppers wore face coverings. Only one of the 10 customers in the Tesco opposite Trafalgar Square was maskless. In the Birmingham branch of variety store Flying Tiger, seven out of 10 customers were wearing masks, and in Foyles bookshop every customer was wearing one. But around the corner in Tesco Express numbers were much lower – there was one mask-wearer to six unmasked. Many cited high case numbers as one of the main reasons why they were still choosing to wear a face covering. “Coronavirus hasn’t gone away, it’s still very much in evidence. We’ve had our vaccinations but it doesn’t stop you getting it,” said 74-year-old Shelia Roberts, who had travelled to Birmingham for the day from her home on the outskirts of Redditch. “We’re obviously of the senior variety, so for us it’s safer to continue wearing them in certain places. We’re going to the Hippodrome theatre, so we’ll almost certainly wear them in there. If I go to the supermarket, I always wear it and I’ll continue to.” “You’ve got to use your own common sense, and if I feel I want to wear them for the rest of my life then it’s up to me,” added her friend, 71-year-old Glenda Smith. “What’s the harm in a little bit of fabric to keep you well?”Humanitarian agencies have mounted an emergency response across southern Africa this week as the death toll from tropical Storm Ana reached 77. Officials reported that at least 41 people had been killed in Madagascar, 18 in Mozambique and 11 in Malawi. The EU’s aid agency Echo said on Thursday that at least 350,000 people have been affected across the three countries, including more than 80,000 displaced from their homes. Flooding has cut off roads and damaged power and water supplies. The storm passed over Zimbabwe, but no deaths have been reported. Aid agencies have set up dozens of temporary sites to house those made homeless. Unicef said it is deploying staff to set up temporary learning centres as well as distribute food, medicine and water purification tablets in Mozambique. The agency said 12 health facilities and 137 schools had been damaged by the storm in Mozambique, forcing more than 27,000 children out of school. It estimated $3.5m (£2.6m) was needed to respond to the storm. A spokesperson for the World Food Programme said the agency had been preparing for this year’s cyclone season when the storm hit the region on Monday. “Storm Ana has brought heavy rains and flooding in Madagascar, Mozambique and Malawi. Agricultural land, key infrastructure and houses have been damaged, and lives and livelihoods lost,” said the spokesperson. “Southern African countries have been repeatedly struck by severe storms and cyclones in recent years that have impacted food security, destroyed livelihoods and displaced large numbers of people.” In 2019, Cyclone Idai caused devastation across Mozambique, Malawi and Zimbabwe, affecting millions of people. The Madagascar Red Cross Society said flooding, which was worse in slum areas and for more fragile homes made with earth walls and thatched roofs, had destroyed many people’s food stocks. Cristina Uamusse, secretary general of the Mozambican Red Cross Society, said early action taken to pre-empt the storms had helped limit the damage. “We have been working with communities for many years and have seen what a significant difference pre-positioned stock movement from provinces to districts make on our response time to community needs,” she said. WaterAid said it is concerned about the spread of disease if water sources have been contaminated by flooding. Malawi’s government has declared a state of natural disaster after electricity cuts caused by flooding at power stations. “Our priority now is restoring power to health establishments, water treatment distribution systems, and schools,” the national power utility said in a statement. Maria Luisa Fornara, the Unicef representative in Mozambique, said: “This latest storm to hit Mozambique is a blunt reminder that the climate crisis is very much a reality and children are most impacted by climate-related severe weather events.” Unicef said Mozambique has faced eight tropical storms since 2016.Poland has started building a wall along its frontier with Belarus aimed at preventing asylum seekers from entering the country, which cuts through a protected forest and Unesco world heritage site. The Polish border guard said the barrier would measure 186km (115 miles), almost half the length of the border shared by the two countries, reach up to 5.5 metres (18ft) and cost €353m (£293m). It will be equipped with motion detectors and thermal cameras. Poland has accused Belarus’s president, Alexander Lukashenko, of deliberately provoking a new refugee crisis in Europe by organising the movement of people from the Middle East to Minsk and promising them a safe passage to the EU in revenge for the sanctions Brussels has imposed on his authoritarian regime. Thousands of asylum seekers, mainly from Syria, Iraqi Kurdistan and Afghanistan, were caught attempting to cross the frontier and were violently pushed back to Belarus by Poland’s border guards, and hundreds of families were trapped in the forest between the two countries in the midst of a frigid winter. At least 19 people have died since the beginning of the border standoff between Poland and Belarus. Most of them died of exposure to freezing temperatures. The humanitarian emergency reached its peak in November when Belarusian authorities escorted thousands of asylum seekers to the Polish border. Dozens of refugees told the Guardian how Belarusian troops gathered groups of up to 50 people and cut the barbed wire with shears to allow them to cross. “The construction of the barrier on the Polish-Belarusian border has started,” said a statement from the Polish border guard on Twitter. “It is the largest construction investment in the history of the border guard.” The cost is approximately 10 times the whole budget of Poland’s migration department this year. The news has raised human rights concerns among aid workers and charities worried that refugees fleeing conflicts and starvation will not be able to apply for asylum, and there are also environmental concerns. “This money could be used to build and launch [an] effective and humane migration, reception and asylum policy,” said a spokesperson for Ocalenie Foundation, which supports refugees living in Poland. “No wall in the history of the world stopped migration. Also, it would be a disaster for the nature in Białowieża area.” The Białowieża forest world heritage site, on the border between Poland and Belarus, is an immense range of primary forest including conifers and broadleaved trees. It is home to the largest population of European bison. Anna Alboth, of Minority Rights Group and a member of Grupa Granica, a Polish network of NGOs monitoring the situation on the border, said: “Walls are dividing, not protecting. The decision about building such a wall on the Polish-Belarusian border is not only lawless but also brings a risk of irreversible harm to the environment, in one of the most rich natural places of Poland and the whole of Europe. “Instead of spending money on walls and private companies, it should be spending on developing a migration policy that prioritises human rights and safety of the people on the move, local people, animals and nature.” A border guard spokesperson, Anna Michalska, told Poland’s PAP news agency that the “intention is for the damage to be as small as possible”. She said: “Tree felling will be limited to the minimum required. The wall itself will be built along the border road.” Contractors would only make use of existing roads, she said. Last year Warsaw’s rightwing government quadrupled the presence of border guards and military personnel in the area, creating a two-mile deep militarised zone, and built a razor-wire fence, in a show of force unknown in the country since the end of the cold war. Dozens of checkpoints were placed along the perimeter of the so-called red zone, which is inaccessible to aid workers and journalists. Last week Poland’s supreme court condemned the government for preventing reporters from accessing the area. Judges in Warsaw said the ban was incompatible with Polish law and that “there is no justification for admitting that this particular professional group represents a threat to steps taken”.We would like to hear about the tickets you have collected as beloved keepsakes. Have you saved a stub from a memorable event such as a film, play, concert, or football match? Tell us all about your tickets and why you kept them below. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.The best work of Barry Cryer, who has died aged 86, was in two different ways unseen. He wrote jokes for generations of comedians from Tommy Cooper and Morecambe and Wise through the Two Ronnies to Rory Bremner, and much of his professional pleasure came, like that of a demolition expert, from appreciating carefully engineered explosions from a distance. A lot of the big laughs he received personally came on radio, where he was a chairman during the 1972 first series of I’m Sorry I Haven’t a Clue before becoming a pivotal and consummate panellist for the rest of his life. While his TV appearances were much more infrequent, Cryer was immediately recognisable, partly due to to a distinctive look – prematurely white hair offset by big, thick, black-framed spectacles. Although he often wrote or collaborated with Oxbridge-educated comics – Monty Python’s John Cleese and Graham Chapman, Graeme Garden and Tim Brooke-Taylor of the Goodies – Cryer was shaped, in attitude and language, by successive tiers of Yorkshire education. A native of Leeds, he was a grammar school student and a contemporary of Alan Bennett – both did their homework in Leeds city library, and remained forever friends. But, when Bennett went to Oxford University, Cryer read English literature at Leeds University. He worked there on a college comedy revue with fellow students Wole Soyinka and Tony Harrison, who both became major poet-playwrights. The men remained friends. Cryer’s own plan had been to become a stage and screen actor, but repeated recurrences of the severe skin condition eczema limited his availability and visibility and, as public anxiety can be a factor, encouraged him towards writing and what was then called the wireless. The illness had first occurred in childhood. Bennett’s published journals record Cryer’s story of spending much of his early years swathed from scalp to toe in emollient bandages “like the Invisible Man”. Always a sharp social observer, Cryer was astonished that all the 1930s and 40s Leeds folk he encountered were too kind and polite ever to mention this mummification, focusing on the eyes peeping between the white crepe and commenting on the weather. A running gag in Bennett’s journals is a sudden phone call from Cryer to deliver a single comment, followed by the terminating observation: “I’ll let you get back to your life!” These interventions reflected Cryer’s deep commitment to wit – he was almost always working on or trying out a new gag – but also an abiding kindness: Bennett notes that the calls often came when a friend was in trouble with life or work. They quickly cured gloominess. In a posh London shop, Cryer has overheard a mummy telling a daddy: “Remind me to tell Austin that there was no main verb in that sentence!” Or he has just heard about “the man who swallowed liquid Tipp-Ex instead of Viagra – he woke up with a massive correction!” Cryer belonged to a generation of English male comic talent reluctant to leave a meaning undoubled. The house speciality of I’m Sorry, I’ll Read That Again, predecessor to I’m Sorry I Haven’t a Clue, was the canny linguistics of clever deadpan punning (often turning on the disguised inclusion of words actually banned from the airwaves) that sneaked sexual meanings past the stiff blue pencil of BBC bosses. Cryer took this aural sex even further in a spin-off from the radio franchise, You’ll Have Had Your Tea, which was additionally daring in featuring him and Garden playing stereotypes of Scottish tightfistedness. Comics of Cryer’s longevity had careers bracketed by two cultural puritanisms: initially a quasi-Christian morality emanating from the political right wing and latterly a policing of personal offence that is most connected with the left. His response to the first wave of censors was coming up with filth too clever for them to detect; to the current tut-cutters, he remained unapologetic, sharing Cleese’s view that a “woke joke” is an impossibility. It was striking that the final credit of his lifetime, Now, Where Were We?, a recently recorded podcast with his son Bob, featured a majority of guests (Miriam Margolyes, Stephen Fry, Danny Baker) who have tested the edges of humour. A writer and comedy performer whose closest contemporaries, collaborators and friends included some of the biggest figures in comedy, theatre and literature might be seen by outsiders as the inferior cultural achiever. But they would acknowledge that Barry Cryer, as much as they did, put his particular talents to maximum impact and public entertainment.Fendi, the Italian luxury brand now led by the British designer Kim Jones, made a bold bid for red carpet glory with an imperial procession of high-drama evening wear at Paris haute couture fashion week. The lean, strong-shouldered silhouette of the iconic Academy Awards golden trophy echoed through a collection with its sights set on the Oscars red carpet. Bustier corsetry, swagged asymmetric draping and a Vatican-purple mini cape kept the dramatic tension simmering. Extra long skirts were cut to pool majestically as the wearer paused for the flashbulbs, reflecting light upwards from their satin folds. With the recently crowned designer of the year at its helm, and with the fortunes of its iconic Baguette bag boosted by a starring role in the Sex and the City sequel And Just Like That, Fendi is a house in its pomp. Still regal, if a little more low key, were pieces that nodded to classic black-tie menswear. A loose kaftan gown in matt midnight blue duchesse silk was edged with a stripe of jet black sequins, a finishing touch that echoed the sheen of a satin lapel on a tuxedo jacket. Jones, who divides his time between his home in London and the Fendi headquarters in Rome where he works closely with Silvia Venturini Fendi, has spoken of being inspired by the understated elegance of the Fendi family – “the way they can look so chic at work, and half an hour later they come to dinner a touch different, having changed the look”. Haute couture week will close on Friday evening with a commemorative show in honour of Pierre Cardin, who died in December 2020 aged 98. The house is now led by the late designer’s great-nephew Rodrigo Basilicati-Cardin, who worked alongside his uncle for 30 years. The show is expected to include pieces designed by the late Cardin, alongside modern interpretations of the label’s space-age aesthetic, created by the current design studio. London fashion week has announced a schedule of 37 live catwalk shows for its turn in the fashion spotlight next month as the industry moves cautiously back toward physical presentations, reflecting a consensus that digital versions have failed to entirely captivate audiences, despite their environmental and economic advantages. Molly Goddard, whose exuberant tulle dresses are beloved of Rihanna and scored a starring role on screen in Killing Eve, will make a return to the catwalk, while the independent label 16Arlington will stage a show in honour of its co-founder Federica Cavenati, who died in November aged 28. But in a blow to the box office power of the London shows, neither Burberry nor Victoria Beckham, the city’s best-known fashion names, will take part.Prince Andrew has filed his answer and defences to Virginia Giuffre’s sexual abuse lawsuit against him, brought in the New York district court. Here are some of the key points from the court papers. The prince’s lawyers say: Prince Andrew denies the allegations contained in paragraph one of the complaint. (Paragraph one of the complaint: “This suit arises out of defendant’s sexual abuse of plaintiff when she was under the age of 18 years old.”) Prince Andrew lacks sufficient information to admit or deny the allegations contained in paragraph two of the complaint. (Paragraph two: “During 2000–2002, beginning when plaintiff was 16, plaintiff was the victim of sex trafficking and abuse by convicted sex offender Jeffrey Epstein.”) Prince Andrew denies the first clause in paragraph seven of the complaint. He lacks sufficient information to admit or deny the remaining allegations contained in that paragraph. (Paragraph seven: “Prince Andrew was a close friend of Ghislaine Maxwell, a British socialite who spent years overseeing and managing Epstein’s sex trafficking network, and actively recruited underage girls, including plaintiff.”) Prince Andrew denies the allegations contained in paragraph nine of the complaint. (Paragraph nine: “After publicly feigning ignorance about the scope of Epstein’s sex-trafficking operation and sympathy for Epstein’s victims, Prince Andrew has refused to cooperate with US authorities in their investigation and prosecution of Epstein and his co-conspirators.”) Prince Andrew admits that he met Epstein in or around 1999. He denies the remaining allegations in the first sentence of paragraph 30 of the complaint, and lacks sufficient information to admit or deny the allegations contained in the second sentence of that paragraph. (Paragraph 30: “According to Prince Andrew, he first met Epstein in 1999 through Maxwell, Prince Andrew’s close friend. Prince Andrew and Maxwell have been photographed at numerous social events together.”) Prince Andrew lacks sufficient information to admit or deny the allegations contained in paragraph 33 of the complaint. (Paragraph 33: “In 2006, Prince Andrew invited Epstein to his daughter’s 18th birthday party, despite Epstein being charged with procuring a minor for prostitution only one month prior.”) Prince Andrew lacks sufficient information to admit or deny the allegations contained in paragraph 38 of the complaint. (Paragraph 38: “The below photograph depicts Prince Andrew, plaintiff, and Maxwell at Maxwell’s home prior to Prince Andrew sexually abusing plaintiff.”) [Virginia] Giuffre’s complaint should be dismissed because this court lacks subject matter jurisdiction over the action. Giuffre, through her own actions, inactions, and other conduct – including, without limitation, entering into the 2009 release agreement with Epstein containing a broad third-party release of her claims against Prince Andrew and others – waived the claims now asserted in the complaint. Assuming, without admitting, that Giuffre has suffered any injury or damage, Giuffre and/or others, who are not Prince Andrew, contributed in whole or in part to the alleged damage. Assuming, without admitting, that Giuffre has suffered any injury or damage alleged in the complaint, Giuffre’s claims are barred by the doctrine of consent. Giuffre’s alleged causes of action are barred in whole or in part by her own wrongful conduct and the doctrine of unclean hands. Giuffre’s claims are barred in whole or in part by the applicable statute(s) of limitations.The Kremlin has said it is willing to continue talks with the United States over European security, but is “not optimistic” about their prospects, after Washington and Nato allies again rejected a key part of Russia’s proposed new order for post cold-war security. Russian president Vladimir Putin’s chief spokesman Dmitry Peskov said “there isn’t much reason to be optimistic” after the US and Nato rejected Moscow’s demands for a veto on Ukraine’s membership in a co-ordinated response on Wednesday. Moscow needed time to analyse the US document and would not “rush into assessments” Peskov added. Russia’s foreign minister Sergei Lavrov said Moscow’s main concern - the potential for Ukraine to join Nato - had not been addressed, but there was hope “for the start of a serious conversation on secondary issues”. “There is no positive response in this document on the main issue,” he said. Meanwhile, one of Lavrov’s spokespeople appeared to rule out war with Ukraine, in comments that led to a jump in the value of the Russian rouble, as investors gained confidence conflict could be avoided. “We have already repeatedly stated that our country does not intend to attack anyone. We consider even the thought of a war between our people to be unacceptable,” said Alexei Zaitsev, a spokesman for the foreign ministry. The focus turns again to Russian president Vladimir Putin, who is yet to voice his response and is being briefed on the document. Ukraine’s president Volodymyr Zelenskiy gave an upbeat assessment on the latest diplomatic manoeuvres, noting that his diplomats would meet counterparts from Russia, Germany and France next month in Berlin. Ukraine has been seeking to downplay some reports of an imminent mass attack by Russia. One of Zelenskiy’s aides told Reuters the borderline “hysteria” about a Russian attack was hindering Kyiv’s attempts to borrow on international capital markets. On a visit to Copenhagen, seeking to marshal support from Nato member Denmark, Ukraine’s foreign minister Dymytro Kuleba gave his approval of the US response to Russia and called for a unified response from the west on economic sanctions. You can read my summary of the day’s events here: Russia remains open but ‘not optimistic’ over Ukraine talks That’s all for today. Thank you for following the Ukraine liveblog. Oil prices steadied on Thursday, after Brent crude earlier hit a seven-year high above $90 a barrel, Reuters reports. Russia is the world’s second-largest oil producer, prompting fears of disruption of energy supplies to Europe, although concerns are more focused on natural gas. “The market is very erratic on headlines on the Russia-Ukraine situation,” said Phil Flynn, senior analyst at Price Futures Group. “There’s uncertainty about what’s going to happen.” Oil prices surged on Wednesday amid the ongoing stalemate over European security between Russia and the west, but investors are also reacting to concerns about supply from the United Arab Emirates. Will Russia invade Ukraine? Ask the Guardian’s correspondents and other experts at this upcoming Guardian Live event. Mark Rice-Oxley, Andrew Roth, Luke Harding, Nataliya Gumenyuk and Orysia Lutsevych will be discussing the ongoing developments between Russia and Ukraine, on Tuesday 8th February, 8pm GMT | 9pm CET | 1pm PDT | 4pm EDT. Book tickets here The Berlin correspondent for the Times and the Sunday Times, Oliver Moody, has posted an interesting thread on German foreign minister Annalena Baerbock’s speech to the Bundestag earlier on Thursday. It starts here: German chancellor Olaf Scholz will meet US president Joe Biden on 7 February during a visit to the Washington, the White House has announced. The two leaders are expected to discuss ongoing tensions between Russia and Ukraine, among other topics. Meanwhile, my colleague in Berlin, Philip Oltermann, has been looking at what Germany’s main political parties have to say about sanctions. Friedrich Merz took over the leadership of Angela Merkel’s CDU party last Saturday, when he criticised Scholz for, as he put it, not immediately engaging with the US and Russia after taking office. Scholz’s SPD is in government with Annalena Baerbock’s Greens and the pro-business FDP. The Moscow Times has a helpful round-up of what Russia state media are saying about current tensions over Ukraine. State-run Channel One has focused on Ukraine, reports the Moscow Times. Channel One has featured ruling United Russia party lawmakers calling for the government to provide the separatist-controlled regions of Luhansk and Donetsk in Ukraine with the weapons “they need to contain Kyiv’s aggression”. Rossia 1, another leading state-run channel, however, put Ukraine behind Covid-19 and trade talks between Italy and Russia in its primetime coverage. Meanwhile the state-run news agency RIA Novosti has an interview with Russia’s former president Dmitry Medvedev, who is now deputy chairman of Russia’s security council. Ukraine, Medvedev said, has become “a toy in the hands of Nato and above all the US”. His comments were picked up by RT, Rossiskaya Gazeta and other state media. On the same theme, the BBC’s Moscow correspondent Steve Rosenberg has a regular, excellent round-up on the Russian press on his Twitter feed. The latest post looks at how pro-Kremlin media see divisions in the west, while one independent analyst tries to parse what Vladimir Putin wants. Dmitri Trenin of the Moscow Carnegie Centre, interviewed by Kommersant, sees two different options for the Kremlin. Option one, as Rosenberg recounts, is “some kind of diplomatic resolution” where Moscow can claim it has secured a dialogue on European security for the first time since the reunification of Germany. Trenin’s option two is Russia breaking with the west and developing closer ties with China, Iran and US opponents, such as Cuba and Venezuela. Ukraine’s foreign minister Dmytro Kuleba has said his government approves of the Biden’s administration’s response to Russia’s security demands in Europe, the Guardian’s senior international correspondent Luke Harding reports from Kyiv. Kuleba said Kyiv had seen the US’s “written response” before it was hand-delivered on Wednesday to the Kremlin by the American ambassador in Moscow, John Sullivan. The US government reaffirmed its support for Ukraine’s right to join Nato, opposing Russian calls for a veto on new members. “Important that the US remains in close contact with Ukraine before and after all contacts with Russia,” Kuleba tweeted. “No decisions on Ukraine without Ukraine. Golden rule.” Vladimir Putin’s press secretary Dmitry Peskov has said the response from Washington is unsatisfactory and added that Russia’s president is currently studying the document. The US deputy secretary of state Wendy Sherman, speaking on Wednesday, made clear the White House was not willing to offer “covert concessions” on Ukraine, or to withdraw Nato troops from eastern European countries including Romania and Bulgaria, as Moscow has demanded. Nato is considering sending some troops to Slovakia, according to the country’s foreign minister Ivan Korčok. He said no decisions had been taken, but discussions were underway, according to the website aktuality.sk. His comments come as the US has asked other Nato allies to consider deploying hundreds more troops in Europe Nato deployed battlegroups to Poland and the Baltic states, after Russia annexed Crimea in 2014. The US wants further reinforcements in the Baltics, as well as Romania and Bulgaria. The Russian currency continued to make gains on Thursday, after a senior Russian official said the idea of war with Ukraine was unacceptable. Russian foreign ministry spokesman Alexei Zaitsev said “our country does not intend to attack anyone. We consider even the thought of a war between our people to be unacceptable.” By 1322 GMT the rouble was 1.9% stronger against the dollar, pulling away from a near 15-month low. The trigger for the first rise may have been Belarus saying Russian troops would leave its territory once military drills, scheduled to end in February, are over, Reuters reports. A dealer at a large Russian bank told the agency: There was already active dollar selling since this morning, but the news from Belarus accelerated this process. Zaitsev’s later comments lifted the rouble further. Investors have been unnerved by the prospect of sweeping sanctions on Russian, including Russian banks being cut off from the Swift interbank messaging system, if the Kremlin orders an invasion. Western countries are also looking at export bans on key civilian technologies, as part of a sanctions package intended to deter an attack. Europe’s dependence on Russian gas has once again been thrust into the spotlight as tensions over Ukraine have mounted. But the US has a plan. White House officials said earlier this week that the Biden administration is preparing to finalise a deal to “ensure Europe is able to make it through the winter and spring” by brokering a deal for major gas producing countries to send liquified natural gas (LNG) by tanker to Europe. As the Guardian’s energy correspondent Jillian Ambrose reports, it is not a plan without challenges. The global gas supply crunch which emerged as economies began to rebound following the Covid-19 slump means there is little spare gas to go around, according to analyst Xi Nan from Rystad Energy. The US has said that its conversations are “really broad, with a lot of companies and countries around the world” so that it wouldn’t need “to ask any one individual company or country to surge exports by significant volumes, but rather smaller volumes from a multitude of sources”. “The question,” said Helima Croft at RBC Capital, “is whether the US can find any slack in the system”. Read Jillian’s full report: Energy crisis: where could Europe’s gas come from if Russia cuts exports? Ukraine’s president Volodymyr Zelenskiy has given a positive assessment of negotiations with Russia in Paris. Senior officials from Russia, Ukraine, France and Germany met in Paris on Wednesday, where they agreed to further talks in Berlin next month. A statement issued by the Ukrainian president’s office said: The President of Ukraine Volodymyr Zelenskiy positively assesses the fact of the meeting, its constructive nature, as well as the intention to continue meaningful talks [in] two weeks in Berlin. Ukraine’s government, embroiled in a war with Moscow-backed separatists in the Donbass for eight years, has downplayed some reports of an imminent large-scale invasion by Russia. An adviser to Zelenskiy said on Thursday there was borderline “hysteria” about an attack. Hello again, this is Jennifer Rankin, back from a break, picking up the blog from Oliver. Investors and currency traders appear cautiously optimistic that the risk of imminent war has decreased, with the Russian rouble being up 1.1% against the dollar on Thursday. The rouble appeared to rebound following news out of Belarus this morning. The Belarusian ministry of defence said Russian troops would leave its territory once joint exercises between the two ex-Soviet countries were over next month. Russia began moving troops into Belarus, north of Ukraine, earlier this month to conduct military exercises, in a move that sharply increased fears of an invasion. Some military analysts have suggested Russia could send its forces through Belarus to attack Ukraine from the north, as well as the east. “At the end of the inspection, military units and sub-units of the Russian Federation’s Armed Forces will leave the territory of the Republic of Belarus,” the ministry said. The so-called “Allied Resolve” exercises are due to end around 20 February. Russia’s foreign ministry has said that Moscow is focused on a diplomatic solution to the crisis, saying war between Russia and Ukraine would be “unacceptable”. “We have already repeatedly stated that our country does not intend to attack anyone. We consider even the thought of a war between our people to be unacceptable,” said Alexei Zaitsev, a spokesman for the ministry. Meetings in Paris on Wednesday between Ukrainian and Russian representatives, together with French and German officials, ended “without a result”, Zaitsev said, but he added there were hopes that talks in Berlin in two weeks’ time will be productive. Moscow has sought to downplay fears of a looming Russian invasion, despite positioning troops on its border with Ukraine. Hello readers. Oliver Holmes here. I’m taking over the live blog briefly while Jennifer has a break. Ukraine is struggling to borrow on international capital markets because of borderline “hysteria” over a Russian attack, an adviser to Ukraine’s president has told Reuters. Oleg Ustenko, an aide to President Volodymyr Zelenskiy, told the news agency in Kyiv that borrowing had become “not impossible, but extremely difficult”. He said: In the context of a sharp increase in the degree of discussions around issues related to the security of Ukraine, which sometimes border on hysteria, the country’s opportunities for entering foreign capital markets are limited. Under such conditions, he said, Ukraine had to secure its “financial cushion” through sources other than financial markets. He said Ukraine hoped to borrow $5bn from other countries, European and international institutions. Earlier this week, the EU promised Kyiv €1.2bn in financial aid, adding to the €17bn the EU and its financial institutions have provided in grants and loans since Russia annexed Crimea in 2014. The French president Emmanuel Macron will have a telephone conversation with Vladimir Putin on Friday, the Guardian’s Paris correspondent Angelique Chrisafis reports. France remains convinced that there is room for dialogue over the Ukraine crisis, and that talks could help get Russia into a concrete process of “de-escalation”. Macron’s call with the Russian president has two goals, the French government spokesman Gabriel Attal said. First, “to continue dialogue” and second, to “push Russia to clarify its position and the aim of [military] manoeuvring.” Attal said Macron “is at the heart of efforts towards de-escalation”. The call is scheduled for 10.45 am Paris time. Macron has long approached international affairs with the conviction that he can open up dialogue by fostering personal ties and one-to-one relationships with tricky world leaders, including Putin, and that he has a power of persuasion. But he has acknowledged that “a discussion with Russia is always difficult”. Macron has yet to officially announce a bid for re-election in France’s presidential race in April and to launch his campaign. But his opponents have begun to seize on the Ukraine crisis to pressure the pro-European Macron over France’s place on the international stage and to question his long-standing promise of an EU that would be “powerful in the world”. Valérie Pécresse, the right’s candidate for the party, Les Républicains, who is a Russian-speaker, wrote in Le Monde that Europe and the EU must have a prominent seat at the table, and not leave it to the US decide the response to the crisis. “Where is France’s voice today?” asked the Communist party candidate Fabien Roussel. Nathalie Loiseau, the MEP and Macron’s former Europe minister, said Macron was engaged in two elements: “dialogue and diplomacy on one side and dissuasion on the other side”. Germany has vowed to hit Russia with “strong sanctions” if it invades Ukraine, including on the disputed Nord Stream 2 pipeline built to bring Russian gas to Europe, AFP reports. “We are working on a strong package of sanctions” with Western allies, and it covers several aspects “including Nord Stream 2”, Foreign Minister Annalena Baerbock told parliament. Her statement came soon after the US State Department said the pipeline would not move forward if Russia invades Ukraine. Nord Stream 2 is set to double supplies of cheap natural gas from Russia to Germany, which the EU’s top economy says is needed to help transition away from coal and nuclear energy. Although the €10bn pipeline was completed in September, it is still pending approval from German and EU regulators. On Wednesday, Germany’s economy minister Robert Habeck acknowledged that if sanctions had to be deployed against Russia, the German economy would also suffer. If there are to be sanctions, there will be none that won’t hit the German economy. If you are looking for the background on the long-running controversy on Nord Steam 2, read this essential explainer from the Guardian’s diplomatic editor, Patrick Wintour: Nord Stream 2: how Putin’s pipeline paralysed the west A senior Russian official has said a nuclear missile crisis between Moscow and Washington was unavoidable without measures to ensure restraint and predictability, Reuters reports. Vladimir Ermakov, a senior Russian foreign ministry official, said Moscow thought the United States was preparing to deploy short and intermediate range missiles to Europe and the Asia-Pacific region, according to the Russian state news agency Tass. Germany’s restrictive stance on exporting weapons or military equipment to Ukraine is causing consternation in Kyiv and elsewhere in Europe, but the position has popular support among the German population. In a new YouGov poll published on Thursday morning, 59% of respondents supported not sending lethal weapons to help Ukraine protect itself against a Russian attack. Only 20% said they supported weapons exports, 21% declined to answer. Support for restricting the export of German weapons to Ukraine was strongest amongst supporters of leftwing Die Linke and the far-right Alternative für Deutschland, weakest among supporters of the Green party and the liberal FDP, the two junior partners in the German coalition government. Germany is one of the world’s top five arms exporters, with deals reaching a new record of almost €5 billion last year. Importers of arms produced in Germany include Egypt, which is tied into conflicts in Yemen and Libya. Germany’s defence minister, Christine Lambrecht, announced on Wednesday that Berlin would supply Ukraine with 5,000 military helmets. She said the offer sent “a very clear signal: we are on your side”. Vitali Klitschko, the mayor of Kyiv and a former world heavyweight boxing champion, who previously lived in Germany, described the offer as a “joke”. The Kremlin has said there is room to continue talking to the United States, but “won’t rush” with its assessment of the response from Washington to its proposals to re-write the post cold-war security order. The Russian president’s spokesman Dmitry Peskov said it would take time for Moscow to review the US document, after Washington issued a formal response on Wednesday to Russian demands for a veto on future Nato enlargement and a rollback of alliance forces. The Guardian’s Moscow correspondent Andrew Roth has sent this quote from Peskov: “You heard what the US state secretary and the NATO secretary general said yesterday: they were loud and clear about non-acceptance of the main concerns expressed by Russia... So there isn’t much reason to be optimistic. But I would still avoid any conceptual opinions. Here is a bit more via Reuters: Based on what our colleagues said yesterday it’s absolutely clear that on the main categories outlined in those draft documents... we cannot say that our thoughts have been taken into account or that a willingness has been shown to take our concerns into account. But we won’t rush with our assessments. Speaking separately, Russia’s foreign minister Sergei Lavrov said there was a hope of dialogue on secondary issues, but the US had not given a positive reaction to Russia’s most important question, namely the expansion of Nato. Ukraine has welcomed Russia’s offer to continue talks in early February as “good news” and a sign that Moscow wants a diplomatic solution to the current crisis. Senior Russian and Ukrainian officials met on Wednesday in Paris with representatives of France and Germany. The four countries have agreed to meet again in two weeks time in Berlin. As AFP reports, Ukraine Foreign Minister Dmytro Kuleba said The good news is that advisers agreed to meet in Berlin in two weeks, which means that at least for the next two weeks, Russia is likely to remain on a diplomatic track. Nonetheless, he called for the West to strengthen its military and defence cooperation with Kyiv. While I am a big fan of soft power, I’m afraid that this is really the time for hard power to be used. Kuleba was speaking after a meeting with his Danish counterpart Jeppe Kofod in Copenhagen, as part of Ukraine’s continuing diplomatic outreach. Denmark is a Nato member and on Thursday promised further funds to help Ukraine carry out reforms. The United States has not given a positive response to Russia’s most important security question, Russian foreign minister Sergei Lavrov has said. The Russian news agency Ria Novosti quotes Lavrov as telling reporters that there was “no positive reaction” on the main question. On the main question in this document [from the US] there is no positive reaction. The main question is our clearly-stated position about the admissibility of further expansion of Nato to the east and deployment of strike weapons that could threaten the territory of the Russian Federation. Lavrov is referring to the US government’s formal response on Wednesday to the Kremlin’s security demands set out last month. President Vladimir Putin “will decide on Russia’s next steps with regard to the US and Nato responses to the security proposals” Lavrov is quoted as saying in a Reuters snap. The EU’s chief diplomat Josep Borrell has welcomed the US response to Russia’s security demands. Writing on Twitter, the EU high representative for foreign and security policy urged Russia to take the diplomatic path. US secretary of state Antony Blinken on Wednesday set out the US’s formal response to the Kremlin’s maximalist security demands issued in December. In a written reply, Blinken reiterated US support for Ukraine’s right to join Nato, although no one thinks that will happen anytime soon. The EU has been accused of being absent from the main diplomatic manoeuvres. EU leaders, including Borrell, reject this charge and are keen to project a united front with the US. European diplomats have also praised their US counterparts for extensive briefings and sharing information. “My heart is hurting. Why did Russia do this?” This are the words of Ulshin, a Ukrainian army commander, surveying the wreckage of what was once a school in Shyrokyne, in eastern Ukraine, on the frontline between the Ukrainian army and pro-Russian forces. He was talking to Luke Harding, a Guardian foreign correspondent, who has been reporting extensively from the frontline, where he has found echoes of world war one in the muddy stalemate. Here is his video report from the coastal city of Mariupol on preparations for a potential Russian attack. It’s also a powerful reminder that Ukraine has been at war with Russian-backed separatists in the Donbass region since 2014, with at least 14,000 lives lost. If Russia invades Ukraine, how will it happen, where will it happen and when will it happen? And how did international tensions ratchet up to this point in the first place? The Guardian’s Moscow correspondent Andrew Roth, visual projects editor David Blood and interactive journalist Niels de Hoog have put together a terrific guide to troop deployments with maps, satellite images and the background to the current stand-off. Here is one interesting detail: A map released by Ukrainian military intelligence in November showed a worst-case scenario: Russian forces crossing the Ukrainian border from the east and attacking from annexed Crimea, as well as launching an amphibious assault on Odessa with support from Russian soldiers in Transnistria and troops sent in from Belarus. Some aspects of the plan, such as offensives from the east and through Crimea, already appear possible. Others, such as an attack from Belarus, appear to factor in troops that have not yet arrived in the region. Russia-Ukraine crisis: where are Putin’s troops and what are his options. China has told the United States it wants to see all sides involved in Ukraine remain calm and avoid increasing tension, Reuters has reported. China’s Foreign Minister Wang Yi and US Secretary of State Antony Blinken spoke about tensions over Ukraine in a telephone on Wednesday. “We call on all parties to stay calm and refrain from doing things that agitate tensions and hype up the crisis,” Wang told Blinken, China’s foreign ministry said in a statement. The US state department quoted Blinken as having “conveyed that de-escalation and diplomacy are the responsible way forward”. Russian leader Vladimir Putin is to meet the Chinese president Xi Jinping at the opening session of the winter olympics in Beijing on 4 February. Some analysts believe if an attack happens it would be after this date. Ukrainian police have detained a National Guard soldier who shot security guards at a military factory for unknown reasons, killing five people and injuring five others, the interior minister said in a Facebook post. Here are the details from Reuters: Four servicemen and one civilian woman were killed by the soldier, who was armed with an AK-47 assault rifle and 200 rounds of ammunition. Interior Minister Denys Monastyrskiy named the soldier as Artem Ryabchuk and said he would “bear the strictest responsibility provided by law”. Monastyrskiy said a special commission would be set up to investigate all circumstances that could have led to the crime. Deputy interior minister Anton Gerashchenko said the inquiry would focus on the shooter’s motive. “First of all, the question of whether the serviceman faced psychological pressure in (his) team will be studied,” Gerashchenko said. Investigators would also look into how the soldier passed a medical examination that qualified him to access weapons. Hello and welcome to the Guardian’s live blog on the Ukraine crisis, bringing you all the latest news. I’m Jennifer Rankin and I’ll be bringing you up to date with diplomatic developments for the next few hours. It’s another day of acute tensions, as western countries await a formal response from Russia, after the US and Nato again reaffirmed support for Ukraine’s aspiration to join Nato. On Wednesday the US State Department warned that the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline between Russia and Germany will not move forward if Russia invades Ukraine. Germany’s ambassador to Washington, Emily Haber, appeared to endorse this position, citing previous comments from German chancellor Olaf Scholz and foreign minister Annalena Baerbock that “nothing will be off the table”. As Russia’s military build-up on Ukraine’s borders continues, the UK defence secretary Ben Wallace has said he is “not optimistic” that a Russian incursion can be stopped. Wallace, who is due to meet his Russian counterpart Sergei Shoigu in the coming days, told the BBC there was still “a chance” an invasion could be stopped, but he was not optimistic. He was speaking after the US and Nato reaffirmed Ukraine’s right to pursue membership of the transatlantic alliance. The US on Wednesday delivered a written response to the Kremlin’s maximalist demands from last month, which called for a veto on Ukraine’s Nato membership and the withdrawal of alliance forces from eastern Europe. Russian President Vladimir Putin was due to be briefed on the document, but his foreign minister has already given a big hint of the Russian response. Sergei Lavrov said If the west continues its aggressive course, Moscow will take the necessary retaliatory measures. We won’t allow our proposals to be drowned in endless discussions. Read more in the Guardian’s report from Washington, Paris, Kyiv and Moscow: Meanwhile police are searching for a Ukrainian National Guard soldier, who shot security guards at a military factory in central Ukraine for unknown reasons, killing five people and injuring five others before fleeing. The shooting took place in the early hours of Thursday in Dnipro at the Pivdenmash missile factory during the issuance of weapons to the guards, according to an official statement. It is not clear if the incident is linked to the current tensions with Russia.I wish the Guardian would stop using “we” and “us” to mean “some people” (How Covid killed the one-night stand – and made us all kinkier, 27 January). The chances that we are all kinkier are nil, as many of us weren’t kinky in the first place and mostly, I imagine, still aren’t. Also, there’s a heading about “our obsession with fish oil”. I’m so obsessed with fish oil that I can’t recall when I last even thought about it; surely I’m not the only one. Mark Miller Kendal, Cumbria • Thomas Zimmer ignores the fact that the United States is a republic, not a democracy (The US Senate presents a long-term threat to US democracy, 24 January). Americans pledge allegiance to “this republic”, not to this democracy. The US Senate and the electoral college are bulwarks against being ruled by the guillotine of democracy – a fact made clear by French history. Richard Sherman Margate, Florida, US • Adrian Chiles might write of poetic expressions to describe players from West Bromwich Albion (Let’s not say ‘pip pip’ to our most poetic expressions!, 27 January), but that same team beat my own beloved Peterborough United 3-0 last Saturday, leading to much self-flagellation and chants of “We’re so shit it’s unbelievable”. Toby Wood Peterborough • My husband says his mother kept a perpetual stockpot on the stove for leftovers. He was startled to see her adding old marmalade tarts on one occasion (Letters, 25 January). Maureen Bell Birmingham • The most apt title for Jacob Rees-Mogg would be minister for the age of entitlement (Letters, 24 January). Ron Clarke Malvern, Worcestershire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Simon Diggins (Letters, 25 January) urges that “those, like Jenkins, who find it difficult to understand why a country like Ukraine might wish to chart its own course, let him look over the Irish Sea at a close historical parallel”. Unfortunately, such a look might support Simon Jenkins’ view that a measure of autonomy for eastern Ukraine is the only way out of the crisis. Ireland achieved practical independence at the cost of the partition of Ireland by the British government in 1920. Mike Morrogh Kew, London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.The World Health Organization chief has backed the veteran rock star Neil Young in his dispute with the music streaming behemoth Spotify, thanking the musician for “standing up against misinformation and inaccuracies” around Covid vaccinations. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, WHO’s director general, tweeted that “we all have a role to play to end this pandemic and infodemic” – in particular social media platforms. Spotify has begun removing Young’s music from its platform after an ultimatum issued by the star earlier this week to the company. Referring to controversial podcasts by Joe Rogan hosted by Spotify, Young said: “They can have Rogan or Young. Not both.” Spotify swiftly made its choice, triggering an almighty storm over anti-vaccine conspiracy theories, cancel culture and the policing of social media. Many of Young’s fans and supporters of his stance called for a boycott of the streaming platform, and for other artists to follow his lead. “I stand with Neil Young” and “#CancelSpotify” became rallying calls on social media on Thursday. The actor and activist Mia Farrow tweeted: “Wow @Spotify you chose to keep creepy, dangerous liar Joe Rodan over the magnificent Neil Young ?” There was no immediate sign of other big names in the music industry siding with Young against Spotify – an indication perhaps of its market dominance. Between 2010 and 2020, Spotify’s share of the US music market rose from 7% to 83%. The controversy began with an open letter from Young to his manager and record label, posted earlier this week but since taken down. The Joe Rogan Experience podcast, hosted exclusively on Spotify and with an estimated audience of 11 million, had “tremendous influence”, the letter said. “Spotify is spreading fake information about vaccines – potentially causing death to those who believe the disinformation being spread by them,” Young wrote. The streaming platform had a responsibility to “mitigate the spread of misinformation on its platform.” He instructed his manager to “let Spotify know immediately TODAY that I want all my music off their platform. They can have Rogan or Young. Not both.” In a statement issued on Wednesday, Spotify responded by saying: “We regret Neil’s decision to remove his music from Spotify, but hope to welcome him back soon.” The company also said it had “detailed content policies in place and we’ve removed over 20,000 podcast episodes relating to Covid since the start of the pandemic”. Rogan signed a $100m deal in 2020 giving Spotify exclusive rights to his show, which features conversations with guests on a range of issues, including politics, comedy, conspiracies and cancel culture. It is Spotify’s most popular podcast and one of the biggest in the world. Three months ago, the company reported its revenue had grown 27% over the previous year, and it named the Joe Rogan Experience as a factor in the double digit growth in its podcast business. Last year, Rogan was criticised by the White House chief medical adviser Anthony Fauci for suggesting that young, healthy Americans did not need to be vaccinated against Covid. The comment was “incorrect”, said Fauci. In the past few weeks, hundreds of scientists and medical experts have signed an open letter to Spotify, saying that Rogan had “repeatedly spread misleading and false claims on his podcast, provoking distrust in science and medicine” and had “spread a number of unsubstantiated conspiracy theories”. They highlighted a three-hour episode of Rogan’s podcast, in which Robert Malone, a scientist and vaccine sceptic, claimed that “a third of the population” had “become hypnotised” through “mass formation psychosis” as if in Nazi Germany and “totally wrapped up in whatever Fauci in the mainstream media feeds them”. Despite Spotify’s claim that it has removed thousands of podcasts relating to Covid since the start of the pandemic, Rogan has repeatedly said the company has not policed his content. “Spotify has asked me to change nothing. They’ve never – they’ve been amazing. I’m very happy with them, I’m very happy,” he said last year. Young, 76, whose hits include Heart of Gold, Harvest Moon, Helpless and Keep on Rockin’ in the Free World, has a long if inconsistent political history. His album, Living With War, released in the aftermath of the Iraq war, called for the impeachment of President George W Bush. Donald Trump, he said, had “betrayed the people, exaggerated and amplified the truth to foment hatred” and that “social media … is crippling our belief system, turning us against one another.” Last year, he sold half of the rights to his song catalogue to Hipgnosis for an undisclosed amount, but believed to be nine figures. A clue to his views on viruses and vaccines may be found in his autobiography, Waging Heavy Peace, published in 2012. He recalls contracting polio as a five-year-old before a vaccine was widely available, quoting his brother, Bob: “It was obvious that his life was on the line.” Young wrote: “We had a quarantine sign on our house that said Poliomyelitis on it, and warned people about not entering or something to that effect. No one wanted to be near me for a while.” He has had other serious health issues during his life, including epilepsy and a brain aneurysm. A spokesperson for Young said it was not known whether the star would make any further comment on the issues concerning Spotify and Joe Rogan. “He’s very much his own person on things like this,” the spokesperson said. Spotify has been contacted for comment.Long ago, Stoke Newington police station in north London was a byword for police brutality. After public protests the Met had a clearout. The result was that in 2010 a joint constabulary and prison inspectorate report found great improvements, partly because of “an active body of independent custody visitors”. ICVs were introduced as a citizens’ oversight of police stations in the Scarman report. But since then, here in London, their powers and effectiveness have been subject to continuous erosion by mayors Livingstone, Johnson and Khan. The restoration of community engagement is urgently needed if custody practices of the sort suffered by Konstancja Duff are to be eradicated (Rights groups call for statutory inquiry into misogyny in the Met, 25 January). So long as the police regard giving legal advice to people who have been stopped on the street as obstructing and assaulting police, we will need all the capabilities available to us to rein them in. Mary Pimm and Nik Wood London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.The time warp of the cricket establishment was vividly exposed in Barney Ronay’s article (Tin-eared county chairmen show why English cricket is in trouble, 25 January), but the origins of these attitudes are much deeper. Excellence in cricket requires more investment than most other sports; one essential is a well-prepared pitch and level outfield, not least in order to ensure basic safety when coping with a hard cricket ball at speed. It also requires a coaching programme to develop the complex skills needed for young players to thrive. Alas, nowadays few state secondary schools have the financial capacity to devote to the expense required and very little formal cricket is played in state schools. This means that many interested youngsters, the potential expert cricketers of the future, have no chance to acquire the basic skills, and few come into the county teams’ academies. A quick glance at the list of players currently on Yorkshire’s books shows that of the 27 educated in the UK, almost all came through public or direct grant schools. No doubt there would be the same proportion of skilled players coming through state schools into the county game, but they are absent through no fault of their own. The knock-on effect is that the elitist public school culture, which has produced the archaic attitudes of so many in the cabinet and of many Conservative MPs, is also embedded in the cricket establishment, as so clearly set out by Ronay. To change this requires a deliberate investment in the game in state schools to broaden the pool of players. Michael Meadowcroft Leeds • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.John Harris rightly draws attention to the shocking levels of public distrust in politicians (Distrust, discord and disengagement will be the disgraceful legacy of Boris Johnson, 24 January), but there is another insidious and dangerous social effect about which little has been said: the impact on the young. As a teacher with more than 40 years’ experience, I know only too well that children and young people tend to be much more profoundly influenced by the things that they see adults in authority do as opposed to the things adults tell them to do. I have rarely seen a political story resonate so strongly with teenagers (even those with no interest in the news) as the scandal about lockdown parties. And while the rights and wrongs of the matter may be clear to them, many will learn the lesson that if you are in trouble, the right thing to do is to lie your way out of it, that if you are suspected of wrongdoing you should let others take the blame, and that it is acceptable to ask other people to do things that you are not prepared to do yourself. Kevin Naghten London • Thank you, John Harris, for your article. A lifetime of intellectual, cultural and emotional attachment to democratic norms and values makes me an unlikely supporter of hereditary monarchy or of unelected legislators. So it is an uncomfortable experience to adjust that attachment and support. I am obliged to respect the Queen, for eschewing the offered privilege of relaxed rules for a funeral, and the House of Lords, for ejecting the authoritarian additions to the policing bill. Both have modelled resistance to the principles and behaviour of the democratically elected representatives forming the UK government. This experience will be a major part of the legacy of the current incumbent of No 10 and those he has chosen as ministers, especially those who have chosen, publicly, to defend his behaviour. Peter Thomas Bassenthwaite, Cumbria • If I remember correctly, at the beginning of the pandemic the government was reluctant to impose onerous rules because of the belief that the public would not keep to them. Perhaps now we can understand why they thought that. Leo North Crewe, Cheshire • At PMQs, Boris Johnson contrasted being a leader with being a lawyer. But the two postwar governments that, for good or ill, changed society most were both led by lawyers – Clement Attlee and Margaret Thatcher. Mind you, who would look to Johnson for a proper grasp of political history? Christopher Packer London • Not another Downing Street exposé, I thought, seeing the phrase “chaotic orbit” with comments by Gray. But no. It’s scientist Bill Gray, not civil servant Sue Gray. Just derelict space machinery, not a rogue prime minister hurtling out of control (Out-of-control SpaceX rocket on collision course with moon, 26 January). Patricia Baker-Cassidy Oxford • My father had emergency brain surgery two weeks ago. The hospital is closed to visitors, so we cannot visit. However, during one Zoom call, he responded with a thumbs up when Derby County showed signs of recovery, but with another gesture when Boris Johnson was mentioned. Felix Bellaby Buxton, DerbyshireWhat do Melania Trump’s wide-brimmed white hat, a painting of her wearing the hat and an NFT of an animated version of the hat have in common? They were all put up for auction by the former first lady – and as of early Wednesday, failed to rake in the target price of a $250,000 opening bid. Trump announced earlier this month that she would auction off the autographed hat, which she wore to meet the French president, Emmanuel Macron, and his wife during an official state visit in 2018. The auction also included a watercolor painting of herself wearing the hat and a non-fungible token, or NFT, of the painting. She insisted that all bids be made in Solana tokens, a cryptocurrency. When the auction concluded on Wednesday there were only five bids on the items, each around the minimum requirement of 1,800 Solana tokens. Although the minimum number of tokens was met, a steep dive in the crypto market over the last two weeks resulted in the final bid being approximately $170,000 – about $80,000 short of the opening bid threshold. “The auction winner will receive a personalized letter from Mrs. Trump, accompanying the hat and watercolor on paper and certifying authenticity. The NFT will be minted on the Solana Blockchain,” said a statement released earlier this month from the Office of Melania Trump. It said a “portion” of the proceeds derived from the auction would be given to provide people “who have been in the foster care community with access to computer science and technology education”. The auction collection, named “Head of State”, marks Trump’s second high-profile venture into NFTs and cryptocurrency. In December, she put up for sale an NFT titled Melania’s Vision: a watercolor painting of her eyes.Time to wrap up, with Reuters’ latest take on today’s strong US GDP report: The U.S. economy notched its strongest growth in nearly four decades in 2021 after the government injected trillions of dollars in COVID-19 relief, and is seen soldiering on this year despite headwinds from the pandemic, strained supply chains as well as high inflation. The Commerce Department’s report on Thursday showed the economy accelerating in the fourth quarter as businesses replenished depleted inventories to meet strong demand for goods. Last year’s robust growth supports the Federal Reserve’s pivot towards raising interest rates in March. The sharp rebound in growth last year could offer some cheer for President Joe Biden whose popularity is falling amid a stalled domestic economic agenda after the U.S. Congress failed to pass his signature $1.75 trillion Build Back Better legislation. It, however, could diminish prospects of more money from the government. The government pumped nearly $6 trillion in pandemic relief. “While Omicron will lead to weaker growth in the first quarter, activity is expected to rebound nicely once the latest pandemic wave abates and supply-chain glitches ease,” said Sal Guatieri, a senior economist at BMO Capital Markets in Toronto. “The Fed will need to be ‘humble and nimble’ as it navigates underlying economic strength, worsening labor shortages, and stubbornly high inflation.” The economy grew 5.7% in 2021, the strongest since 1984. It contracted 3.4% in 2020, the biggest drop in 74 years. The stunning reversal came as gross domestic product increased at a 6.9% annualized rate in the fourth quarter. That followed a 2.3% growth pace in the third quarter. Here’s today’s main stories too: Here’s Danni Hewson, AJ Bell financial analyst, on the latest US growth figures, and the highlights from today’s financial results: “And despite higher than forecast US GDP figures it’s impossible not to consider the factors that propelled the country to those heights. Firstly, we can’t forget where the country had been during the first Covid pummelling, secondly, all that stimulus lubricating the wheels is going to start to disappear which is why growth is forecast to slow considerably. And that’s the bit investors need to focus on, where economies are going and not just where they’ve been. “And looking through some of today’s earnings updates both in the UK and the US, there’s good news and then there’s bad. Mastercard’s profits were given a nice nudge thanks to the return of the traveller, a universal factor which also helped EasyJet which reported surging forward bookings. But cost pressures and supply issues are still continuing to dog businesses of all kinds. UK drinks maker Fevertree and US chip maker Intel Corp saw shares fall after both warned those lingering issues will impact profits in the near term. “It’s something burger slinger McDonald’s has first-hand knowledge of, but as with all investments, there’s no one size fits all. Though shares fell after the market opened, they did recover slightly. Many of the factors which weighed down those golden arches have now been resolved and the buying power of the fast-food giant coupled with its brand loyalty and low-cost offer should put it on a better footing this quarter. Wall Street’s volatility index has dipped today, as trading calmed down after some rather rocky sessions: In the City, shares have ended the day higher with the FTSE 100 index up 85 points at 7554, up 1.1% today. Banks and mining companies posted gains, along with online grocery tech company Ocado (which yesterday announced it had developed “game-changed” robots to allow cheaper, faster deliveries). The strong US growth figures lifted European markets higher, after coming under pressure this morning. Germany’s DAX gained 0.4%, while France’s CAC finished 0.6% higher, shrugging off earlier worries about rising US interest rates. David Madden, market analyst at Equiti Capital, says the fear that was running through the markets faded. Bargain hunters stepped into the fold, and now the DAX, the FTSE 100 and the CAC are have finished higher on the day. It is similar scene in the US, where the S&amp;P 500 is up over 0.8%. Earlier, it was announced the US economy grew by 6.9% in the final quarter of 2021, which easily beat the 5.3% forecast that economists were expecting. The reading was a sharp rise on the 2.3% growth was that seen in the third quarter of last year. This is clearly good news for the health of the US economy, while it strengthens the case for an aggressive tightening policy from the Federal Reserve. The fact that US stocks are higher despite the solid GDP reading could be a sign that dealers are getting used to the idea there could easily be four or five rate hikes this year. Despite the recovery, US home sales dropped in December as a lack of supply hit the market. Contracts to buy US previously owned homes fell by 3.8% last month, with the inventory of properties on the market at record lows. Pending home sales fell in all four regions. Lawrence Yun, chief economist at the National Association of Realtors (NAR), explains: “Pending home sales faded toward the end of 2021, as a diminished housing supply offered consumers very few options.” The US economy could continue to recover this quarter, as the surge in Omicron cases falls back, says Robert Frick, corporate economist at Navy Federal Credit Union. “Much of the strong growth in fourth quarter GDP was due to businesses building up inventories, and the numbers indicate consumer spending slowed in December either because of Omicron or because spending was frontloaded in October and November as holiday shoppers feared shortages. With the Omicron wave falling quickly, shelves restocked and consumer demand generally strong, we should see the economy continue its healthy recovery this quarter.” Back in the UK, the government wants to reverse a controversial privatisation deal by seeking to wrest ownership of 38,000 homes in the Ministry of Defence housing portfolio from the billionaire private equity boss Guy Hands. The move is expected to lead to a legal battle between the MoD and Hands’ private equity firm Terra Firma over whether the government can take back full ownership of the homes. In 1996, under the defence secretary Michael Portillo, the Conservative government sold 57,400 houses used by military service men and women and their families to Annington Homes for £1.7bn in a sale and leaseback deal. In one swoop, Annington became the biggest residential property owner in England and Wales. The MoD rented back the homes on a 200-year lease at a discount but also agreed to pay for their maintenance and refurbishment. The value of the properties has ballooned under Annington’s ownership to many times their original purchase price, meaning the taxpayer has missed out on any profits from the property boom. They were valued by Annington at £7.6bn last year, while their vacant possession value is estimated at £10bn. The MoD is paying about £180m a year in rent plus £140m in repairs and upgrades. Terra Firma, which purchased Annington from Nomura Holdings for £3.2bn in 2012, said it would challenge the MoD’s move, and that it expected to win in what it predicted would be a “very long and very expensive” court case. At the time of the deal the MoD hoped to free up cash for renovation as the homes were falling apart. However, the National Audit Office concluded in a 2018 review that taxpayers were between £2.2bn and £4.2bn worse off as a result of the arrangement. The NAO said the MoD had “lost out on billions of pounds’ worth of increases in asset values, while Annington has made a significantly higher return on its investment than expected”. Here’s the full story: Although 5.7% annual growth is certainly strong, it does follow a torrid 2020, which saw the downturn since the second world war. That creates a strong ‘base effect’, as the relaxing of restrictions allows growth to recover. But having said that, the US has recovered faster than other G7 nations, regaining its pre-Covid size by the middle of last year. Intel’s shares are being pummelled after the semiconductor maker issued a lower-than-expected profit forecast. Intel have dropped 7%, despite the company reporting record quarterly earnings last night. Traders are disappointed that Intel forecast first-quarter earnings per share of 80 cents, compared to an expectation of 86 cents. Chief executive Patrick Gelsinger warned that supply chain constraints would continue this year, and into next year as the “unprecedented demand” for chips continued. Intel is also spending heavily on new capacity and improving its production technology, after Gelsinger - a Silicon Valley pioneer - rejoined Intel as CEO last year. Those investments could help it challenge rival AMD better, but will also weigh on profitability. Today’s higher-than-expected GDP figures suggest the US economy is in a strong position to handle higher interest rates, argues Josie Dent, managing economist at the CEBR. Indeed, yesterday [Fed chair Jerome] Powell acknowledged that the economy is in a much stronger position than the last time the Fed tried to increase interest rates, with a low unemployment rate and strong output growth. Overall, Cebr is forecasting 3.8% growth in GDP in the US in 2022 as the recovery from 2020’s contraction slows.” The markets are now pricing in five increases in US interest rates this year, after Powell made it clear that the Fed would act to bring down inflation, which hit a 40-year high of 7% last month. President Biden has tweeted that last year’s 5.7% growth shows his economic policies are working: Wall Street has jumped, as investors hail the faster-than-expected acceleration in US growth in the last quarter. Stocks are higher in early trading, despite concerns that the US Federal Reserve will raise interest rates aggressively to tame inflation. The Dow Jones industrial average has risen by 337 points, or 1%, to 34,505 points. Chemicals producer Dow Inc (+4.9%), Microsoft (+2.1%), Nike (+2.1%) and Salesforce.com (+1.9%) are leading the risers. The broader S&amp;P 500 index has jumped by 1.2%, recovering some of its recent losses. Neil Birrell, chief investment officer &amp; fund manager at Premier Miton Diversified Growth Fund, says “A raft of US economic data has shown that the economy is in robust health. The GDP data came in higher than expected for Q4 and jobless claims were a bit lower than expected. There can be little doubt that the Fed needs to act, but we know that already, it’s all about the speed and the scale of the policy move. Markets are struggling to digest the macro environment at the moment, and it is likely to drive asset prices, even through the reporting season.” The strong US recovery shows the value of the huge fiscal and monetary pandemic stimulus packages, says Claudia Sahm, director of macroeconomic research at the Jain Family Institute. The U.S. economy grew last year at the fastest pace since Ronald Reagan’s presidency. Today’s GDP report shows the economy expanded by 5.7% during 2021, as growth bounced back from the shock of the pandemic. Government and central bank stimulus packages supported consumer spending and businesses, while vaccine rollouts have helped firms to reopen and rehire staff. It’s the strongest calendar-year growth since the US gross domestic product — its total output of goods and services — surged by 7.2% in 1984. It’s a strong recovery from 2020, when the US economy had shrunk by 3.4% as Covid-19 rocked the US and global economy. Associated Press reports. The economy ended the year by growing at a solid 6.9% annual pace from October through December, the Commerce Department reported Thursday. Squeezed by inflation and still gripped by COVID-19 caseloads, the economy is expected to keep expanding this year, though at a slower pace. Many economists have been downgrading their forecasts for the current January-March quarter, reflecting the impact of the omicron variant. For all of 2022, the International Monetary Fund has forecast that the nation’s GDP growth will slow to 4% for 2022. Today’s GDP figures surpass expectations and suggest that the U.S. economy is accelerating faster than anticipated, says Richard Flynn, Managing Director at Charles Schwab UK. That may put more pressure on prices (which could spur the Federal Reserve into raising interest rates more quickly). Flynn says: There is a heightened risk that an overheating economy could push inflation even higher. With booming growth, the tight labour market is pushing up wages, and inflation has spiked to its highest level in decades. Real interest rates, adjusted for inflation, have been steeply negative for the past few years, contributing to very loose financial conditions. “Despite a strong performance in Q4, the unfortunate reality is that U.S. economic performance continues to be driven by the pandemic. Today’s figures measure GDP up until the end of December 2021, excluding some of the recent surges in COVID-19 cases. Indeed, there’s been weakness across U.S. stock indices in the first weeks of 2022, as investors digest some of the risks facing the economy: receding monetary and fiscal liquidity, persistent effects from the pandemic, and a rise in inflationary pressures.” The US economic recovery picked up speed in the final quarter of the year. GDP rose by 1.7% in the October-December quarter, or at an annualised rate of 6.9%. That’s much stronger than the 2.3% annualised growth recorded in July-September, and faster than expected. The acceleration of growth in the fourth quarter was led by an upturn in exports as well as accelerations in inventory investment and consumer spending, the GDP report says. It says: The increase in exports of goods was widespread, and the leading contributors were consumer goods, industrial supplies and materials, and foods, feeds, and beverages. The increase in exports of services was led by travel. Consumer spending, or personal consumption, grew by 3.3% during the quarter, up from 2% in Q3, while business investment rose by 2%. Inventories surged as firms stocked up on goods to meet high demand, and to protect themselves from the supply chain crisis. The number of Americans filing new claims for unemployment benefit has dropped. There were 260,000 new ‘initial claims’ filed last week, a drop of 30,000 compared with the previous week. It suggests demand for labor remained strong this month, with workers keen to hold onto staff. Wall Street futures have pushed higher, with the S&amp;P 500 index now expected to rise around 0.4% when trading begins in an hour. As this chart shows, it’s been a choppy week! Indian tech company Ola has announced plans to invest £100m in the UK to open a research and development facility for a planned electric car, in a significant boost to the British automotive industry. Ola launched its taxi app that rivals Uber in cities including London, Birmingham and Cardiff in 2018, but it is pushing into electric vehicles with a recently launched road-going scooter and a planned electric car. The new facility will be based in Coventry, the traditional West Midlands centre of the UK automotive industry. It will create 200 jobs in design and engineering. Workers at the plant will also research battery technology. Ola was founded in India in 2010 by Bhavish Aggarwal, and it now claims to be the world’s third-largest ride-hailing app. This week its electric vehicle arm, Ola Electric, raised $200m in funding at a reported $5bn (£3.7bn) valuation – previous backers include Softbank, the major Japanese technology investor. It is also reportedly planning a stock market float to raise as much as $2bn. Oil is trading at fresh seven-year highs today, amid concerns that the Ukraine crisis could disrupt energy markets. Brent crude has risen to $90.64 per barrel, having hit the $90/barrel mark yesterday for the first time since 2014. The energy team at SP Angel say: Crude prices surged on Wednesday, with Brent climbing to US$90/bbl for the first time in seven years, amid tensions between Ukraine and Russia, the world’s second-largest oil producer, that have fanned fears of energy supply disruptions to Europe OPEC+ has also missed its planned supply increase target in December, highlighting capacity constraints that are limiting supply as global demand recovers from the COVID-19 pandemic The FT’s Colby Smith has a good take on last night’s Federal Reserve press conference, where America’s top central banker took a tough line on fighting inflation: Jay Powell had always said that if inflation was in danger of spiralling out of control, the Federal Reserve would be willing to bring out the hammer to knock prices down. On Wednesday, in his most hawkish press conference since the start of the pandemic, the chair of the Fed gave the clearest signal yet that such a moment was fast approaching. “Powell essentially said to the markets and the economy, ‘put on your seatbelt, we are getting ready to take off’,” said Nathan Sheets, global chief economist at Citigroup and a former under-secretary at the US Treasury. “If inflation doesn’t fall as they expect, the Fed is prepared to be vigorous.” The Fed’s drive towards tighter policy was apparent not just from what Powell said about the path forward for monetary policy, but also what he refused to divulge about the US central bank’s plans for interest rates later this year. “Powell was distinctly not willing to rule out more frequent [or] larger rate hikes,” Sheets said. More here: ‘No more Mr Nice Guy’: Fed chair signals tougher stance on inflation UK retailers have suffered weak January sales, as the Omicron variant kept people away from the shops over the festive period. Retail sales were poor for the time of year for the first time since September, according to the CBI’s latest Distributive Trades Survey. A net balance of 23% of retailers said trading was below normal, the weakest reading since March. The poll took place between 22 December and 18 January, when Covid-19 cases were surging, and Plan B restrictions meant many people were working from home. But..... sales are expected to remain below seasonal norms in February, with the cost of living squeeze likely to leave people with less to spend in the shops. Ben Jones, Lead Economist at the CBI, says: “It was not surprising that retail sales dropped back below seasonal norms in January, given the spread of Omicron, the reintroduction of restrictions late last year and increased consumer caution. “Even as cases fall and Omicron-related restrictions are rowed back, retailers will be looking to the year ahead with a degree of concern. The sector faces an inflation double whammy, as rising energy and transport costs erode households’ spending power and retailers’ own costs continue to mount. “It is vital that the Government comes forward with measures to protect the most vulnerable consumers, who will struggle the most with anticipated price rises.” Retailers also reported that their stock levels were too low, as the supply chain crisis continues to hamper deliveries: Economic activity appears to have picked up in the UK last week, as firms try to recover from the shock of Omicron. Retail footfall in the UK increased by 2%, to 80% of the level seen in the equivalent week of 2019. Visits to high streets rose by 4%, as more shoppers ventured out as Covid-19 cases fell from recent record highs. People spent more, with credit and debit card purchases rising 2% last week. Restaurants saw a welcome increase in customers too, after the usually busy Christmas period was wiped out by Omicron. The number of UK seated diners increased by 5 percentage points in the week to Monday, to 97% of its pre-pandemic levels. But many businesses are still reeling from a drop in trading this month. A third reported that their turnover had decreased compared with normal expectations for this time of year, with over half blaming the pandemic. Firms are also short of workers, the ONS adds: In mid-January 2022, 13% of businesses reported a shortage of workers; the accommodation and food service activities industry reported the highest percentage (28%), with 60% of these businesses reporting that employees are now working increased hours because of the shortages. Sterling has hit a one-month low against the US dollar, as expectations of US interest rate rises push up the greenback. The pound dipped below $1.34 for the first time since 27th December, down half a cent today. After last night’s hawkish press conference from the Fed, the dollar has strengthened. It’s hit its highest level since July 2020 against a basket of currencies. Neil Wilson of Markets.com says: The Fed gave the green light to lifting rates in March but chose to keep on with asset purchases until them, rather than ending them sooner. Quantitative tightening – reducing the balance sheet – will come some time later. The hawkishness came from Jay Powell in the press conference. He stressed that the economy and labour market are in much better shape than in 2015, the last hiking cycle. Powell dropped some remarks that can only lead us to think the Fed is minded to raise rates more aggressively than the dots and markets had thought. “I think there’s quite a bit of room to raise interest rates without threatening the labour market,” he said. Powell didn’t rule out hiking every meeting, pointing to as many as seven 25bps hikes this year. Dario Perkins of City firm TS Lombard tweets: Posh mixer maker Fevertree has warned that costs will rise faster than expected this year. Shares in Fevertree have dropped almost 7% this morning, after it reported that cost headwinds in 2022 will be more significant than it had anticipated. Fevertree, which makes a range of tonic waters and sodas plus ginger beer and lemonade, grew its sales by 23% last year, including 33% growth in the US, in the face of “unprecedented macro uncertainty and supply chain disruption”. CEO Tim Warrillow cautioned that restrictions at hospitality venues could weigh on growth, even though there’s less disruption than in 2021: The Group continues to deliver impressive growth in every one of our key markets, however, I am of course mindful that short-term logistics challenges and cost pressures remain, along with On-Trade restrictions, albeit at a much lower level than this time last year. Home drinking and cocktail making boosted Fevertree, though. It reports a good performance from ‘off-trade’ (sales in supermarket etc) as at-home consumption and interest in premium long mixed drinks becomes increasingly established. Saga, the travel and insurance group specialising in products and holidays for over-50s, has joined easyJet (see earlier post) in reporting a bounce back in bookings -- lifting optimism for a recovery this summer. Saga said it has seen strong bookings for its cruises in the period from 1 August to 26 January. The company said that for this 2022/2023 financial year, which runs from 27 January, cruises have a booking load factor of 86% in its first half and 73% for the full year. Euan Sutherland, chief executive of Saga, says: “While Omicron has impacted travel bookings through December and January, our outlook for cruises in 2022/2023 and beyond is positive.” The company said that the cruises operation produced profits on an adjusted basis in the period to 26 January, but a pre-tax loss of £45m to £50m. Here’s the full story: While other markets are struggling, the UK’s FTSE 100 has now popped into positive territory. The blue-chip index is 24 points higher, up 0.3%, while Germany (-0.5%) and France (-0.35%) are still lower after big losses in Asia overnight. Banks and mining companies are leading the charge, including Standard Chartered (+4.5%), HSBC (+2.8%), Rio Tinto (+2.1%) and Barclays (+1.8%), along with packaging firm DS Smith (+1.4%). The London market cops a lot of flack for its old-economy focus (it was dubbed Jurassic Park last year, for its lack of innovative technology companies and its focus on dividends over growth). But the current move away from innovative but unprofitable tech firms is working in the Footsie’s favour, after Federal Reserve chair Jay Powell failed to stop January’s market rout. Russ Mould, investment director at AJ Bell, points out that the FTSE 100 is outperforming other indices so far this year (it’s up 1.5%, while the US S&amp;P 500 is down over 8%). “It’s what Powell didn’t say that troubled investors. The key concerns are how aggressive the Fed will be with raising rates – will they go up at every meeting this year, and will they go up by more than 0.25 percentage points each time? “Powell said the central bank would be guided by the data and so growing investor fears that the Fed might be quite aggressive in its efforts to curb inflation remain intact as there was no clarity on exactly what would happen and when. “The only thing we can really take from the Fed’s latest meeting is that interest rates are almost certainly going to go up in March. “Once again, the FTSE 100 was an outlier among global markets, with 2022 proving to be quite a year for the underdog. For the past decade the UK market has been like the last child to picked for a team in gym class, no-one having faith in its abilities for fear it wouldn’t perform well. But the FTSE 100 is now one of the best performing major markets this year on a relative basis. “For once, investors are eager to own the FTSE’s ‘old economy’ companies in banking, tobacco and oil, as these are value stocks which are once again in fashion.” Electricals retailer AO World is reviewing its operations in Germany, as rising costs and the relaxation of lockdown rules hit sales. AO’s revenues in Germany fell by 24% year-on-year in the last quarter, twice as fast as in the UK. It has now launched a strategic review of the German business, which it says is facing several challenges, including rising competition and supply chain problems: Our German business is being significantly impacted by a number of recent material changes to the local trading environment: competition in the online market has intensified whilst online penetration has returned to pre-pandemic levels; digital marketing costs have substantially increased against pre-pandemic levels; and supply remains constrained. We expect these trends will continue for the foreseeable future in the German market. Shares in AO have dropped 2.7% to 103p. Back at the start of 2021 they were worth over £4, after a surge in demand from locked-down customers. Norway’s sovereign wealth fund has reported a 14.5% return for last year, helped by the boom in technology shares. Norway’s Government Pension Fund Global, which invests the profits from Norway’s North Sea oil boom, achieved a return of 1,580bn kroner (£133bn) in 2021. That lifted the fund’s value at the end of last year to 12,340bn kroner, or just over £1trn. Nicolai Tangen, CEO of Norges Bank Investment Management which oversees the fund, says the stock market boom last year boosted its returns. “The good results are mainly due to very strong developments in the equity market throughout the year. There was good return in all sectors, but the investments in technology and financials performed particularly well. The investments in technology returned an impressive 30.2 percent.” The UK’s competition watchdog has launched an in-depth study into the booming music streaming market, to assess whether the big record labels and services such as Spotify hold “excessive power”, and whether artists and fans are getting a fair deal. The Competition and Markets Authority (CMA), which was called on to launch the study following a scathing report by a cross-party committee of MPs last year calling for a “complete reset” of a streaming model which it believed only benefited big labels and superstar acts. Music streaming now dominates fans’ listening habits and accounts for 80% of the £1.7bn total UK industry income last year. Spending on subscriptions to services such as Spotify, Apple Music and Amazon Music hit £1.3bn, compared with just £135.6m on vinyl albums, and £150m on CDs. “Whether you’re into Bowie, Beethoven or Beyoncé, most of us now choose to stream our favourite music,” said Andrea Coscelli, the CMA chief executive. “A vibrant and competitive music streaming market not only serves the interests of fans and creators but helps support a diverse and dynamic sector, which is of significant cultural and economic value to the UK.” Here’s the full story: And here’s a recent feature looking into the music streaming sector: Germany’s DAX share index is having a tough morning too, down 1.4% this morning. The technology sector is leading the selloff, with software group SAP down almost 8% despite reporting strong growth in cloud computing sales. Online food ordering service Delivery Hero (-5%), laboratory equipment maker Sartorius (-5.1%), e-commerce group Zalando (-2.9%) and chemical firm Linde (-2.3%) are also in the fallers. The yield, or interest rate, on two-year UK government debt has hit its highest in over a decade. Two-year gilt yields have risen to 0.993% this morning, the highest since May 2011. That follows a rise in U.S. Treasury yields, after the Federal Reserve signalled it would raise interest rates in March, as it prepares to start reducing its balance sheet. Yields measure the rate of return on a bond, and move inversely to prices. The 2-year yields fell below zero in 2020, in the rush for safer assets. The reopening of hospitality venues, and higher demand for premium spirits, has boosted drinks maker Diageo. Diageo, whose brands include Johnnie Walker whisky, Smirnoff vodka, Tanqueray gin and Baileys Irish Cream, grew its sales by 15.8% in the second half of 2021. Operating profits jumped 22.5%, with operating margins also widening. The world’s largest spirits maker has benefited from shoppers stocking up on spirits and beers at home during the Covid-19 pandemic, with wealthier consumers splashing out on more expensive brands. Diageo says prices increases in some countries boosted its results, alongside stronger sales to bars and restaurants (the ‘on-trade’ sector) as customers returned to hospitality venues. The positive price/mix benefit was primarily driven by mix, reflecting the strong growth of premium plus brands, particularly in scotch, tequila and Chinese white spirits, as well as the continued recovery of the on-trade channel in Europe and North America and the partial recovery of Travel Retail. There was also a price benefit, primarily from price increases in Latin America and Caribbean, Africa and North America. Richard Flood, investment manager at Brewin Dolphin, said: “Diageo has produced a great set of results with a strong increase in sales, margin, and profits over the past six months. The continuing shift by consumers to spirits consumption has benefited the company, as this is a sector of the drinks market that it dominates. Diageo has been able to successfully navigate the challenges of Covid with its strong presence in both the off-trade, as well as the pubs sector – or on-trade – which is expected to recover further as Covid fades, leaving Diageo well positioned for the future.” Private rents in Britain are rising at their fastest rate on record, piling more pressure on households feeling the strain of the cost of living crisis. The average advertised rent outside London is 9.9% higher than a year ago as tenants making plans for a post-pandemic life jostle for properties, according to the website Rightmove. Meanwhile, London rents have hit a new record and are higher now than before the start of the pandemic after a bounceback in demand fuelled by the gradual return to the workplace and more overseas students looking for a place to live. The average advertised asking rent outside London is £1,068 a calendar month, said Rightmove. In London it is £2,142. The increases have been attributed to a mismatch between the number of tenants looking for a place and the stock of available properties. Tenant demand is 32% higher than this time last year, but the number of available properties is 51% lower, said the website. France’s CAC share index has dropped by 1.3% in early trading, Spain’s IBEX is down 1%, while Italy’s FTSE MIB is 0.7% lower. Charles Henry Monchau, CIO at Bank Syz, sees more volatility ahead, as the recent market jitters hasn’t deterred the Fed from pressing on with normalising monetary policy. What is clear from yesterday’s critical Federal Reserve announcement is that markets still need to go through an adjustment process and price-in the fact that the Fed will need to normalise policy through rate hikes and shrinking of the Fed balance sheet. The FOMC statement also implies no Fed put at this stage, i.e. the Fed will not place itself into a corner and backtrack on its plans to normalize monetary policy just for the sake of putting a halt to equity market correction. So, while we stay bullish on equities, the worsening of liquidity conditions implies a bumpy road ahead with more volatility. The London stock market has opened lower, with the blue-chip FTSE 100 index losing 45 points or 0.6% to 7423 points. Silver producer Fresnillo (-5%), hedge fund Pershing Square (-4.75%) and technology investor Scottish Mortgage (-3.1%) are leading the fallers. Banks are holding up better (higher interest rates help profit margins), with Standard Chartered up 1.5%. The smaller FTSE 250 index, which is more domestically focused, has lost 1.2%. There’s lots going on in the City this morning too, including budget airline easyJet reporting that the Omicron variant has hit takings. EasyJet’s load factor, a measure of how many seats were filled, fell to 67% in December, from over 80% in October and November. It attributed the fall to “the impact that Omicron had on customers’ confidence and ability to travel during December”, which led to reduced ski travel. easyJet saw significant levels of late flight transfers out of December due to travel restrictions and concerns over Omicron. This pulled load factor over the last quarter down to 77%, missing guidance of over 80%. But brighter times could be ahead, with easyJet seeing an increase in bookings after the UK Government decided to remove all travel testing requirements. Johan Lundgren, easyJet chief executive said: Booking volumes jumped in the UK following the welcome reduction of travel restrictions announced on 5 January, which have been sustained and then given a further boost from the UK Government’s decision earlier this week to remove all testing requirements. We believe testing for travel across our network should soon become a thing of the past. We see a strong summer ahead, with pent up demand that will see easyJet returning to near 2019 levels of capacity with UK beach and leisure routes performing particularly well. Jonathan Sullivan, Managing Director in Accenture’s Travel Industry, says airlines need systems that can cope with more disruption: Because leisure travel is notoriously seasonal, the key differentiator in airlines’ long-term survival will be the ability to offer and deliver more services and products that tempt and delight customers. “While that sounds simple, the industry must overcome the obstacle of its dated underlying systems. Modern digital systems are essential to digitally sell and manage a broader variety of add-on services, including from third parties. These systems also need to gracefully cope with the reality that travel plans may be changed or rescheduled at short notice. Deutsche Bank’s US economists now expect the Fed to raise US interest rates five times this year, one more than their previous base case. Strategist Jim Reid explains: The biggest takeaway was the Chair’s emphasis that this cycle was different from the last round of tightening, in that inflation is well-above target, the labour market is historically tight, and growth projections remain above long-run potential. While the Chair demurred when asked what that specially meant for parameters of monetary policy, he did not rule out a faster pace of rate hikes or larger increments, adding that the Fed had plenty of room to tighten given the state of the labour market. So March, and every subsequent meeting should be treated as live with a 50bp hike at some point an increasing possibility, Reid adds. Luigi Speranza, chief global economist at BNP Paribas Markets 360, now expects the Fed to raise interest rates six times this year, after last night’s hawkish comments from Jerome Powell: We read Fed Chair Powell’s comment that this cycle is different from the previous one as an indication that the Fed’s bias is for a steeper tightening than the markets and we had envisaged. We have moved our call for this year to six 25bp hikes from four previously and now expect the fed funds target range at 2.25-2.50% at end-2023, 25bp higher than we had previously forecast. Our new base case for six hikes this year poses challenges to our bullish outlook for US equities. However, it is not sufficient to derail it on a standalone basis if earnings growth remains strong, in our view. Last month, the Fed’s officials predicted they would increase rates three times in 2022, while the markets had been pricing in four increases. Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. Global markets are rattled today after the US central bank signalled it is ready to raise interest rates as it battles the highest inflation rate in forty years. Federal Reserve chair Jerome Powell struck a notably hawkish tone at last night’s press conference, saying officials were minded to raise interest in March, and didn’t rule out an aggressive string of interest rate rises at coming meetings. Powell told reporters there was “quite a bit of room to raise interest rates without threatening the labor market”, as it also prepares to shrink its balance sheet which has swelled to $9trn . He also warned that inflation remains above the Fed’s long-run goal and supply chain issues may be more persistent than previously thought. Investors are bracing for a sharp rise in interest rates this year, after Powell hinted that the Fed could tighten policy faster than in its last hiking cycle, with growth and inflation are higher than in 2015. As Powell put it: We are going to need to be, as I’ve mentioned, nimble about this. The economy is quite different this time. Powell’s hawkish comments wiped out Wednesday’s Wall Street rally, and has sent shares reeling in Asia-Pacific markets to their lowest level in 15 months. “The Fed’s gone from being the market’s best friend, to a possible enemy,” said Kyle Rodda, analyst at the online trading platform IG in Sydney, adding that the Fed was set on “bringing inflation down, rather than protecting asset prices”. Japan’s Nikkei has led the way, plunging more than 3% while the Kospi in Seoul found itself in similarly negative territory. The market in Hong Kong was off 2.5% and Sydney shed nearly 2%. MSCI’s broad gauge of regional markets outside Japan fell more than 2% to its lowest level since November 2020. European stock markets are set to drop sharply, as January’s market turbulence continues. Also coming up today We find out how the US economy fared in the final three months of 2021, when the first estimate of GDP for October-December is released. Economists predict that growth sped up, to an annualised rate of 5.5%, from 2.3% in Q3, before the Omicron variant hit at the end of the year In the UK, car production has fallen to its lowest level since 1956, as rising energy costs and computer chips shortages hurt the recovery. The agenda 7am GMT: GfK survey of German consumer confidence 11am GMT: CBI distributive trades survey of UK retail 1.30pm GMT: US Q4 GDP report 1.30pm: US weekly jobless figures 3pm GMT: US pending home salesThe Democratic Unionist party has set 21 February as a fresh deadline for the foreign secretary, Liz Truss, to find a solution to the dispute over the Northern Ireland Brexit protocol. In her first visit to Northern Ireland, Truss, who inherited Brexit negotiations from Lord Frost at Christmas, met the DUP’s Paul Givan and Sinn Féin’s Michelle O’Neill, first minister and deputy first minister respectively. Givan said the government must take unilateral action if an agreed position cannot be reached with the EU by the fourth week of February. But Sinn Féin has said any attempt to trigger article 16 of the protocol would cause more uncertainty in Northern Ireland. Truss said she wants to strike a deal on the protocol that works for everyone in the region. “We are making progress. We’re having constructive talks. I want to make significant progress by February. That’s important but it’s important that we secure the support of all of the communities in Northern Ireland, including the unionist community.” Sources close to the foreign secretary said she was in “listening mode” and told party leaders of her “commitment to securing changes to the protocol that defend peace and stability, protect sovereignty of decision-making for all, and ensure free flow of GB-NI goods”. They added that she believed a deal could be done and she was looking for “durable, practical solutions”. Earlier this week Truss and the European Commission vice-president, Maroš Šefčovič, said they hoped a deal could be done by the end of February before the electioneering for the May Stormont elections. Speaking after the meeting, Givan said there has to be progress made “imminently” in negotiations. He said: “Liz Truss has indicated that she is making progress with the European Union and obviously 21 February is a very significant date in terms of what progress will have been made or not made.” A meeting of the joint working committee on the withdrawal agreement takes place on that date. He added: “I pressed the foreign secretary about the need to take action in the absence of there being progress and an agreed outcome with the European Union. The foreign secretary indicated that the UK government does stand ready to take action, she mentioned the use of article 16, but she prefers to get an agreed position with the European Union.” He added: “I have emphasised the absolute critical nature of that progress being made, because the protocol is causing instability to these institutions, it is damaging our economy and this is having a real impact on Northern Ireland. “So, we need to see that progress, we need to see that imminently, and we also need to see action taken by the UK government if there isn’t an agreed outcome.” The meeting came a day after the DUP’s leader, Sir Jeffrey Donaldson, said he could not guarantee Givan would still be in position next week. It also came just hours after the SDLP criticised the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office for “playing politics” with the Northern Ireland protocol in an official video on the negotiations. In the video, the FCDO said: “The Northern Ireland protocol was designed to protect the peace process and respect all communities in Northern Ireland. It is doing the opposite.” Claire Hanna, the Social Democratic and Labour party MP, said it was a Trumpian strategy while her colleague Nichola Mallon, deputy party leader, said it was “reckless”.Record numbers of women are reaching the age of 30 child-free, new official figures have shown. More than half (50.1%) of women in England and Wales born in 1990 were without a child when they turned 30 in 2020, the first generation to do so, according to the Office for National Statistics (ONS). That is almost three times higher than the lowest number of women ever to be child-free at 30 – 17.9% of those born in 1941. At the same time the average number of children women have by the time they reach 30 has fallen to its lowest-ever level (0.96). The latest ONS data on childbirth also show that, while two-child families remain the norm, growing numbers of women are never becoming mothers or having only one baby. The statistics confirm the major shift towards older motherhood that has taken place over recent years, that experts have linked to advances by women in the workplace, the cost of rearing children and people taking longer than before to establish significant relationships. “We continue to see a delay in childbearing, with women born in 1990 becoming the first cohort where half of the women remain childless by their 30th birthday”, said Amanda Sharfman of the ONS’s centre for ageing and demography. “Levels of childlessness by age 30 have been steadily rising since a low of 18% for women born in 1941. Lower levels of fertility in those currently in their 20s indicate that this trend is likely to continue,” she added. Among women who turned 45 last year almost one in five – 18% – were without children, a big rise compared with the 13% of their mothers’ generation who did not become a parent. The number of women having only one child has also risen sharply in that age group, from 13% among their mothers’ generation to 17% last year. Mothers who turned 45 last year – the ONS deems childbearing age to end the day before a women reaches 46 – had on average 1.92 children. That was the same number as those born a year earlier but was less than the 2.08 offspring that their mothers had. The most common age at which women born in 1975 gave birth was 31, nine years later than their mothers did at the age of 22. Average family size has fallen. While the commonest family unit remains those with two children, their number is falling. Among women in that age group 37% gave birth twice compared with the 44% of their mothers’ generation – women born in 1949 – who did so. Just over a quarter (27%) had three or more children while 17% had just one son or daughter. “The average number of children born to a woman has been below two for women born since the late 1950s,” added Sharfman. The lowest average was 1.89 children among women born in 1972 and 1973. The ONS believes that the average number of children is likely to stay at or above 1.92, based on current levels of cumulative fertility seen in women born in the mid-to-late 1970s. “While two-child families are still the most common, women who have recently completed their childbearing are more likely than their mothers’ generation to have only one child or none at all,” Sharfman added. Dr Jo Mountfield, a consultant obstetrician and vice-president of the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists, said: “Over the last few decades, there has been a general trend of women choosing to have babies later than women a generation ago, and a growing trend of women having fewer or no children. This is due to a range of social, professional and financial reasons. “Choosing when to have children is a personal decision that should be fully respected and supported, as should the decision to have no children. With the advances of technology and medicine, including access to contraception, fertility treatments and egg freezing, women have more control and options on how and when to have children.” However, young people should bear in mind that natural fertility starts to decline from the age of 35 and later pregnancy involves an increased risk of complications, including it taking longer to get pregnant, fertility problems and a higher risk of miscarriage, she added.A man has been jailed after admitting harassing England’s chief medical officer, Sir Chris Whitty, by filming him with a phone against his will. Footage of the incident last June, which was shared widely on social media, was shown at the trial of Jonathan Chew, 24, at Westminster magistrates court. It showed Chew, alongside Lewis Hughes, jeering at Whitty and holding him. Hughes was given a suspended sentence last year. But the district judge Paul Goldspring handed Chew an eight-week sentence and ordered him to pay £1,058 in costs and compensation. Chew, from Chelmsford in Essex, whistled when the custodial sentence was read out. He was also reprimanded by the judge for vaping while the costs were ordered. “Are you smoking? You are not allowed to vape in court,” Goldspring said. Explaining the costs, the judge said: “I wouldn’t normally impose costs as well as an immediate custodial sentence but I do so because your contempt for these proceedings has been breathtaking.” Chew sang “West Ham till I die” as he was led away. For the defence, Rabah Kherbane argued in mitigation that Chew had a learning disability, high levels of suggestibility, ADHD and autism, which affected his culpability on the date of the incident. He also had a delayed maturity. Goldspring said those factors were not significant in sentencing. He said: “Your behaviour doesn’t give me any confidence that your remorse is genuine. I accept that you suffer from autism, learning disabilities and some other issues, including a lack of maturity. “I accept that initially, at least, your intention was not hostile, intimidatory or humiliation. I’m afraid it very quickly turned into all of those things.” He added: “You and Mr Hughes came across Professor, now Sir, Christopher Whitty, and it appears that you have a penchant for having your photograph, or selfie, to be taken with people who you consider to be celebrities. “You asked for a selfie and once you were told no, it was obvious even to you, with autism, that Prof Whitty was very uncomfortable, slightly intimidated, perhaps humiliated by you filming him. You persisted and you placed your hands on him.” The judge praised Whitty for the “great professionalism under a great deal of pressure” he had shown during the Covid pandemic. Addressing Chew, he said of Whitty: “He didn’t choose to be in the public. He is entitled to go about his daily life without the fear of someone like you. “I also sentence you on the basis that there should be a deterrent for targeting those who do not choose to be in public eye, from behaviour like this.” He added: “Your offending in my view very clearly crosses the custody threshold. You targeted him in the sense that you recognised him from the TV. “Secondly, although you did not upload the video, you were complicit by sharing; you added to the humiliation. In my view that was your intention.” The court heard that Chew had a long criminal record that included five offences against a person, and three public order offences. Goldspring said: “You were on licence at the time, and you have a significant and I would say appalling criminal record. And in particular, you have relevant convictions for public order offences.” Goldspring also chided Chew for obstructing police officers. He said: “You chose to give your brother’s name. Unfortunately, that wasn’t something you put right immediately or indeed ever. “Eventually you were caught up with because you and your mother gave an interview to the Sun newspaper. You persisted with your not guilty plea in relation to overwhelming evidence of obstruction all the way up until the day of trial.” Chew was given two weeks in prison for obstructing the course of justice, to run currently with his eight-week sentence. Hughes, 24, of Romford in east London, earlier pleaded guilty to a charge of assault by beating and was sentenced last July. He was handed an eight-week prison sentence, suspended for two years, and was ordered to pay a total of £307 in fines and compensation. He was sacked from his job as an estate agent after the incident.Greece’s main opposition leader, Alexis Tsipras, has filed a motion of no confidence in the government, saying its bungled response to a winter blizzard this week showed it was no longer fit for office. Submitting the censure motion, the leftist former prime minister, said Kyriakos Mitsotakis’s administration was “the worst the country has known” since the collapse of military rule in 1974. “Because we have the obligation to turn rage and despair into a force of political change, my conviction is that this government has to go as soon as possible,” he told MPs when he filed the motion on Thursday. “It has to go before it is too late – too late for society, the country and democracy.” Thousands of motorists were stranded in their cars as a snowstorm of rare intensity swept over Greece on Monday, forcing the army to evacuate trapped drivers as public anger mounted. Blackouts, some lasting 48 hours, were reported across Athens. Mitsotakis apologised for the state’s lack of preparedness, accepting “mistakes and shortcomings” in its handling of a weather event that had been forecast days earlier. Tsipras accused the centre-right government of also mismanaging other emergencies, singling out last summer’s wildfires and the coronavirus pandemic. This week’s blizzard, which led to almost the entire public sector being shut down, had “buried hopes” of it ever learning from its mistakes, he said. At more than 23,000 deaths from a population of 11 million, Greece has one of the highest Covid-19 fatality rates in the EU. Tsipras’s move means there will be three days of parliamentary debate. But analysts dismissed the possibility of Mitsotakis, who controls a majority in the 300-seat parliament, losing a vote scheduled for Sunday. The government, which has been in office since July 2019, said the motion offered an opportunity for it to outline its achievements on multiple fronts. “It is a tactical move by Tsipras at a time when he and his Syriza party are losing popularity because of a resurgent centre-left,” said Giorgos Kyrtsos, an MEP with the ruling New Democracy, referring to the reanimated Kinal party. Yet Kyrtsos, who has also been a vocal critic of the government’s policies, said it was clear that trust in Mitsotakis’s “new managerial style”, even among diehard supporters of the Harvard-trained technocrat, was starting to wane. “The perception of the government is beginning to change,” he said, expressing consternation over the “excessive control” it had attempted to exert over the media. “Nobody expects it to lose the vote, but the perception that it can solve problems was, I think, lost in the snow.”The west is planning to incentivise the Taliban to abide by their promise to allow girls to be educated by providing funding for teachers’ salaries only in provinces in which the pledge is met. The Taliban claimed this week the group would allow girls of secondary school age to be educated from March, the start of the next school term. Sceptical diplomats said they would need more than verbal assurances, with physical and budgetary evidence of preparations being required. If no credible nationwide pledge was made or implemented, western diplomats said a plan to fund teachers’ salaries would go ahead only in those provinces where girls were allowed to attend school. Some provinces have been less repressive about the rights of women. The salary funds would come from the World Bank-administered Afghan Reconstruction Trust Fund (ARTF), the single largest source of aid to Afghanistan before the Taliban took over in August. Worth £1.5bn, the fund has been frozen since then. Next month, the World Bank executive board is likely to discuss how more cash can be released from the fund, not just to help with humanitarian work but, for the first time since August, with the payment of key workers in health and education. As reports of dire humanitarian need mounted in December, £280m was released but it was mainly sent to the World Food Program and Unicef, and was not spent on salaries. Accused of letting Afghanistan fall apart, diplomats say there is a growing consensus that the west needs to go beyond conventional humanitarian aid and to fund teachers’ salaries, but only if girls are not being excluded from education. London and other capitals have been pushing for a larger tranche of ARTF funding to be released, but are waiting on a World Bank board paper, which will map out how cash could be released for salaries in education, health and agricultural production without reaching the Taliban. The west refuses to recognise the group, and the US has imposed sanctions on many of their leaders. The key proposal is for UN agencies, such as Unicef, or the International Red Cross to produce lists of frontline health and education workers so payments can be sent to their bank accounts directly. One source stressed the plan was for the medium term, adding that the Taliban were “slowly realising that this is the only way this will work”. The cash for key workers is only one aspect of how the humanitarian crisis is worsened by sanctions. On Thursday, the Norwegian Refugee Council became the latest aid agency to say it is nearly impossible to channel money into Afghanistan due to the state of the banks and fears among western financial institutions that transactions will fall foul of US Treasury sanctions. Before Christmas the UN security council passed a resolution aiming to protect bank transactions for humanitarian purposes from the sanctions regime. Since then the US Treasury has issued six general licences to allow such payments to go ahead, and is in discussion with Citibank, the main bank that handled Afghan transactions, to reassure its officials it will not be sanctioned if it returns to the market. The UK is also bringing the UN’s humanitarian exemption into UK sanctions law, and is providing £280m to Afghanistan this year. US officials are talking to the Afghan Central Bank to discuss how it can be made more independent and credible. Western officials say it is a misunderstanding to regard theACB’S £8bn in frozen reserves as a potential source of humanitarian funding since it is seed capital for the bank, and if handed back to the Taliban would amount to diplomatic recognition of the group. On Tuesday, the Asia Development Bank board released £405m, mainly for the Afghan agricultural sector.British lawyers have cast doubt on the strength of Prince Andrew’s defence to Virginia’s Giuffre’s lawsuit and whether it can help him settle the case, thereby avoiding a “disastrous” court trial. In papers filed with the US district court on Wednesday, Andrew denied sexually abusing Giuffre when she was a minor and also sought to bar his accuser’s claim on grounds including the time elapsed since the alleged offences – despite a New York statute having extended the window for child victim claims – and her “wrongful conduct”. Much of the document was made up of repetitive responses either denying allegations made by Giuffre in the complaint, or stating that Andrew “lacks sufficient information to admit or deny”. Nick Goldstone, head of dispute resolution at Ince Gordon Dadds LLP, said: “There are certain things where it is ludicrous for him to say he has insufficient information to admit or deny. Six months on, he has at least put forward a defence and that is interesting, but it does appear to be a boilerplate exercise, rather over-enthusiastically deployed.” Among the allegations from Giuffre’s complaint that Andrew said he could not admit or deny were that: Andrew and convicted sex-trafficker Ghislaine Maxwell have been photographed at numerous social events together. Jeffrey Epstein pleaded guilty in Florida in 2008 to the charge of procuring a minor for prostitution. Andrew had been on Epstein’s private plane and stayed at some of his homes. The infamous photograph depicts Andrew, Giuffre and Maxwell at Maxwell’s home. Andrew admitted in the disastrous 2019 Newsnight interview to having been on Epstein’s jet and having stayed at several of his properties, while Epstein’s conviction is a matter of public record. The prince’s court papers also raised eyebrows for their denial that Maxwell, whom Andrew met when she was at university, was a close friend. Richard Spafford, partner at Reed Smith, said: “It is possible to have met someone at university 40 years ago, but not be close friends with them later and that’s perfectly reasonable but I think it’s likely to be an issue in the case and it’s an issue on which there will be argument and discovery and I suspect that the plaintiff side won’t accept what Prince Andrew is saying.” The defences in the court papers contain no reference to previous claims made by Andrew that he cannot sweat (Giuffre had alleged that he got sweaty on a dancefloor with her in 2001) and that he visited a Pizza Express on the day of the claimed sexual encounter with Giuffre. Spafford said it was “interesting” they were not in the document, as might have been expected, and suggested that may mean they are not points his legal team mean to pursue. He described the document as a “standard approach” in that it contained forceful denials “but that’s frequently followed by an attempt to settle”. Mark Stephens, a partner at Howard Kennedy and expert in reputation management said: “My read of it is that he’s taking an aggressive position in litigation, is indicating that he’s prepared to go through with it to improve his leverage for settlement.” With the Queen’s platinum jubilee approaching next week, Stephens did not rule out an attempt at a speedy settlement but he said, following the prince’s filing, it was still clear that Giuffre’s lawyer, David Boies, “holds most of the cards”. Boies has said his client would be unlikely to be interested in a “purely financial settlement” but lawyers who spoke to the Guardian suggested it was imperative for Andrew to settle. Goldstone said of the filing by Andrew’s lawyers: “It’s a ‘[throw in everything but the] kitchen sink’ exercise which I think is designed probably to show the world that he’s ready for a fight, whilst, in my view, he clearly isn’t ready for a fight. He shouldn’t be volunteered to be cross-examined on this pleading because it’s a nightmare. It’s not a defence or a response document that would fill me with fear if I was acting for the claimant. There has to be a way out of this for Andrew that will avoid a jury trial because a jury trial is a complete disaster.”Exeter Chiefs say they have received a “very positive” response to the decision to replace their Native American-themed branding with a new club logo from this summer. The club’s “visual identity” will now be based on a local Celtic chief inspired by the Dumnonii tribe, who were based in Devon, Cornwall and part of Somerset in the iron age. The change, as confirmed by the Guardian in November, follows criticism of the club’s existing branding and accusations of “cultural appropriation”. Now, in common with several North American professional sports teams, the club’s badge is being revised and will bear the helmeted image of a Celtic warrior, a nod to the heritage of the surrounding region. According to the club, the rebrand reflects the Celtic helmets worn in and around 300BC which were inspired by the La Tène art style popular in Britain at the time. The city of Exeter was previously known as Isca Dumnoniorum which translates as “Watertown of the Dumnonii”. The “Chiefs” moniker is to remain unaltered. West Country rugby sides have long dubbed their first team “the Chiefs”, with Exeter having done so as far back as 1908. Discussions are continuing regarding other associated branding, including the Wigwam bar and the totem pole which stands in the reception area at Sandy Park, but the Guardian understands they are also poised to be replaced. Exeter’s current branding has been in existence since 1999 but the Chiefs’ chairman, Tony Rowe, said the club’s board had decided it was time for a change which, he estimated, will cost in the region of £500,000. “We are excited to welcome in the next era of rugby within Exeter,” said Rowe. “As a rugby club we have been willing to listen, we have consulted far and wide, and now we are ready to invoke change. This is a new direction for our great club, but equally it’s an exciting vision that I’ve no doubt will propel us onwards and upwards over time.” Rowe had previously told the Guardian that he felt the club’s membership would resist any changes but Exeter did retire their regular mascot Big Chief in 2020 after accepting it could be viewed as disrespectful. Some are already comparing the facial features of the Celtic warrior to, variously, Jack Nowell, the 12th-century sultan Saladin and the TV presenter Rylan Clark but the pressure group Exeter Chiefs for Change has welcomed the switch. “Our faith in the club has been restored today and we are overwhelmed with excitement at the new identity that celebrates Devon’s own rich history and gives us even more reason to be proud of our club and our region,” said a spokesperson. “Indigenous peoples have long said they are not respected nor honoured by the Native imagery … so we’re relieved those concerns have been listened to and acted upon.” The social media platform TikTok, meanwhile, has signed a four-year deal to partner with the Six Nations. The women’s tournament, which has not previously had a title sponsor, will now be known as the TikTok Six Nations. To date there have been more than 5.1bn views of rugby content on TikTok.Downing Street has still not received the Sue Gray report into “partygate”, according to a briefing this afternoon, leading to speculation that it will now not be published until Monday. Labour has said it is increasingly clear that Boris Johnson has lied about his involvement in the decision to authorise the evacuation of dogs and cats from Afghanisation as part of the humanitarian airlift in August. The shadow levelling up secretary, Lisa Nandy, made the claim about the PM following the publication yesterday of emails showing that Foreign Office officials thought Johnson had agreed to the evacuation of the animals. Johnson today dismissed the claims that he intervened personally on behalf of the animals as “rhubarb”. (See 1.42pm.) But No 10 has failed to explain why officials in Whitehall, and others (see 3.51pm), thought he was involved, what conversations he had with people about this, and why Johnson’s parliamentary private secretary, Trudy Harrison, was involved in trying to help facilitate the airlift. After the PM’s interview, Newsnight’s Sima Kotecha released extracts from two emails showing that Dominic Raab, the foreign secretary, and a senior diplomat both wanted advice from No 10 as to whether the animal charity, Nowzad, should get help. The BBC reports: In one, a senior official to then-foreign secretary Dominic Raab said Mr Raab was “seeking a steer from No 10” on whether the charity’s staff should be called forward for evacuation. Another, from the PM’s special representative for Afghanistan, Nigel Casey, suggests National Security Adviser Sir Stephen Lovegrove was asked to “seek clear guidance for us from No 10 ASAP on what they would like us to do”. Peers have called for Zac Goldsmith to explain why his office sent an email last August which said Johnson had authorised the animal airlift if that was not the case. Liz Truss has been criticised for taking a private jet to Australia for official business rather than using a scheduled flight. The i’s Paul Waugh has dug out a choice quote from when Liz Truss took a rather different approach to the question of what travel arrangements were most suitable for ministers from the one she adopts now. (See 3.11pm.) James Forsyth’s article in the Spectator on the state of play in the Conservative party at the moment is well worth a read. Here’s an extract. The mood in the parliamentary party is appalling. MPs are fed up with trying to explain events to voters who are brimming with righteous anger. They also feel resentment at how they’ve been treated. When Johnson pleaded with one new MP not to put a letter of no confidence in, the MP replied that this was the first time Johnson had spoken to him in 25 months. Why should he offer his support? One Tory grandee, also appealed to by Johnson, responded with a list of assurances the PM had given him but failed to honour. ‘This isn’t normal politics. It is mutiny on the Bounty,’ explains one secretary of state. It is difficult to know how events will unfold for two reasons. First, the precise nature of the Gray report will matter a lot. Secondly, it is, in the words of one member of the government payroll, ‘increasingly hard to read the parliamentary party, as everybody is getting to the lying-to-everyone stage’. There is a link to the article here. Downing Street has still not received the Sue Gray report, a No 10 spokesman told journalists at the afternoon lobby briefing. The DUP has set 21 February as a fresh deadline for the foreign secretary, Liz Truss, to find a solution to the dispute over the Northern Ireland Brexit protocol. In her first visit to Northern Ireland, Truss, who inherited Brexit negotiations from David Frost at Christmas, met the DUP’s Paul Givan and Sinn Féin’s Michelle O’Neill, the first minister and deputy first minister respectively. Givan said the government must take unilateral action if an agreed position cannot be reached with the EU by the fourth week of February. But Sinn Féin has said any attempt to trigger article 16 of the protocol would cause more uncertainty in Northern Ireland. Sources close to the foreign secretary said she was in “listening mode” and told party leaders of her “commitment to securing changes to the protocol that defend peace and stability, protect sovereignty of decision-making for all, and and ensure free flow of GB-NI goods”. They added that she believed a deal could be done and she was looking for “durable, practical solutions”. The government has reopened the application process of the post of Ofcom chair, my colleague Jim Waterson reports. Boris Johnson wanted Paul Dacre, the former Daily Mail editor, to do the job, but Dacre was rejected by the board making recommendations to ministers. Other potential candidates were rejected and, controversially, Dacre was allowed to apply again when the process was reopened, with the job criteria tweaked in a manner that seemed likely to help his chances. But Dacre then pulled out of the contest and instead returned to the Mail, where he is now editor-in-chief of the parent company running the newspaper group. Julian Knight, the Conservative MP who chairs the Commons culture committee, described the process as a shambles. He said: The search for the next chair of Ofcom goes on in a recruitment process that would put a reality TV series to shame. In an unexpected twist to the plot, would-be candidates have been given an extra seven days to apply. Not content with the outcome of the initial round of interviews, the DCMS department restarted the appointments process using specially-employed headhunters to get a better field of candidates, only to see a favourite walk away. Now, that better field of candidates is not enough. The word shambles has begun to look like an understatement. In an interview with BBC News earlier, Dominic Dyer, an animal rights campaigner involved in the rescue of staff and animals from the Nowzad charity in Kabul last August, insisted that Boris Johnson was involved in what happened. Repeating claims he has made in interviews in the past, he said: We said all along, from the end of August, when this operation completed, that it was something that the government had supported at the highest level. I don’t think any one of your viewers would think that on my own, or working with [Paul “Pen” Farthing, the Nowzad founder] or a few volunteers, we could get an aircraft on the ground in Kabul and undertake an evacuation of this kind, in what was a very highly complex and dangerous situation. It took an awful lot of support across Whitehall, in Defra, in the Home Office, in the Foreign Office and in Downing Street itself. Dyer also said he did not understand why Boris Johnson did not “embrace his role in this project”, because there was significant support for the evacuation, he said. Asked if Johnson himself directed communicated with Farthing about the evactuation, Dyer said: The prime minister played a role because he’s the head of the government. There were points in this process where the Ministry of Defence and the secretary of defence clearly had concerns about this operation and did not approve of what we were seeking to do ... And it took the prime minister to unlock that process. You don’t have ministers working across Whitehall in the way that they were without approval at the highest level. Peers have called for Zac Goldsmith to explain why his office sent an email last August which said Boris Johnson had authorised a controversial airlift of animals from Kabul – yet he told the House of Lords in December this was not the case. My colleague Dan Sabbagh has the story here. And Keir Starmer has renewed his call for the Sue Gray report to be published in full. He said: The Sue Gray report needs to be published in full and as soon as possible. And I mean in full - not redacted, not edited, not a summary, not parts left out. In full. Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minister, said today that Boris Johnson should publish the Sue Gray report as soon as he receives it. She told ITV Border: The report should be published immediately after Boris Johnson receives it and published in full. The longer he was to sit on it, the more suspicion people would have about what he might be doing to it. But she also claimed it was already clear that Johnson had misled parliament. I think it’s really hard to imagine anything she could say that would change what we already know from what’s on the record, and that’s that Boris Johnson misled parliament, and I think that’s the severity of the position he’s in. Opposition parties have condemned the foreign secretary, Liz Truss, for using a government jet for her recent ministerial visit to Australia instead of taking a commercial flight. The flight was revealed by the Independent, which said it would have cost around £500,000. Commenting on the story, Angela Rayner, the deputy Labour leader, said: Liz Truss shows the public exactly quite how little respect this Conservative government has for taxpayers’ money with her ridiculous waste of half a million pounds on a private jet trip. This government is brazen in its disregard for upholding decency. And Sarah Olney, the Lib Dem business spokesperson, said: This is a staggering waste of taxpayer’s cash at a time many families are feeling the pinch. Once again we see just how out of touch this Conservative government truly is to the millions of people struggling to get by. The Foreign Office told the Independent the jet used by Truss was a government one and that the decision to use that, instead of a commercial flight, was taken in line with the ministerial code. The Independent reports: “It is understood the private flight was chosen for ‘security considerations’ amid fears that conversations could be overheard by other passengers.” In a previous era the change to unemployment benefit rules announced today would have been presented, and understood, as a straightforward tightening of claimaint rules by a Conservative government likely to cut the welfare budget. (The press release about the announcement is here, and here is my colleague Patrick Butler’s story about what’s proposed.) But, describing the policy in his pooled TV interview in north Wales, Boris Johnson presented it not as a standard Tory crackdown on benefit claimants unwilling to work, but as a necesssary response to economic success. He explained: The difficulty is actually this economy is going so well post-Covid that we’re short of hundreds of thousands of pairs of hands to do vital jobs. So the point of Way to Work is to shorten the period when people are off work, shorten the period when people are feeling that sense of low self-esteem, maybe, because they haven’t got a job, get them into work and help to get the economy moving. Johnson said there were 1.25m job vacancies in Britain, but 1.8 million people on welfare who might be available to fill those vacancies. Today’s announcement does not just involve tighter sanctions; it includes a programme called Way to Work which will offer more support for job seekers, such as time with work coaches. In his pooled TV interview in north Wales, Boris Johnson also said that it was “absolutely vital” for the £12bn national insurance increase to go ahead. He claimed that the public understood this. Asked about the tax rise, which is due to go ahead in April but which is now the target of a campaign by Conservative MPs and rightwing papers who want it abandoned, he said: Every penny will go towards fixing the Covid backlogs and also social care. And the two things are connected. Don’t forget, if you go around hospitals, as I have done a lot in the last 18 months, two years, so much of the problem is caused and aggravated, made worse, by the numbers of people that are waiting in hospital that can be discharged, but they can’t be let out of hospital because we can’t find the right package of social care, and it does need to be sorted out. But when asked to confirm that the increase would definitely go ahead, he refused to give an absolute assurance. Instead he replied: It is absolutely vital. We have to fund the Covid backlogs, we have to fix social care. Every penny will go to that end. I think people do understand. I don’t think there’s a family in this country that hasn’t been affected by the Covid backlogs in one way or the other ... We had to spend over £400bn keeping the British economy going during the lockdowns. We’ve got now to move forward, we’ve got to fix the Covid backlogs and we’ve got to sort out social care. I think that’s the right thing to do. Newsnight’s Sima Kotecha has been tweeting some of the documentation suggesting that, despite Boris Johnson’s denials, No 10 was involved in the decision to authorise the evacuation of Nowzad staff and animals from Kabul. Boris Johnson has restated his claim that he was not involved in the decision to authorise the evacuation of animals as part of the airlift evacuation from Kabul overseen by the British army last August. In a pooled broadcast interview in north Wales, asked if he had authorised the evactuation of animals from Kabul, he said: No, this whole thing is total rhubarb. I was very proud of what our armed services did with Op Pitting and it was an amazing thing to to move 15,000 people out of Kabul in the way that we did. I thought it was also additionally very good that we were able to help those vets who came out as well. But I can tell you that the military always prioritised human beings and that was quite right. I think we should be incredibly proud of Op Pitting and what it achieved. At the time of the evacuation, the Ministry of Defence insisted that in facilitating the departure of a charter flight taking staff and animals from Nowzad, an animal shelter run by the former Royal Marine Paul “Pen” Farthing, it was not putting animals ahead of humans because by that stage of the evacuation operation all the people who could have been evacuated by the MoD had already been helped. However this claim has been widely challenged, including by a Foreign Office whistleblower. It is claimed that helping Nowzad get its animals out was a distraction from the evacuation effort for humans. And here is a summary of the main points from the Downing Street lobby briefing. The PM’s press secretary said that the Sue Gray report could “hypothetically” be published today or tomorrow - but he said No 10 has still not received it. (See 12.33pm.) The spokesman said No 10 was “in no way” seeking to block the Gray report and that claims to the contrary were false. He said: We are in no way seeking to block the report nor are we seeking to do as Mark Harper suggests. It remains our intention to publish the report as it is received from the investigation. The spokesman was responding to this tweet from Mark Harper, a former Conservative chief whip. The spokesman said there were “no plans” to abandoned the national insurance increase set to take effect in April. But he would not absolutely commit to the tax rise coming into force at that point. The spokesman rejected claims that partygate has led to paralysis in government. “Absolutely not,” he said, when this claim was put to him. As examples of the government taking important decisions, he cited plan B ending, changes to unemployment benefit rules announced today and the role in tackling Russian aggression on the border with Ukraine. The spokesman said that Trudy Harrison was acting as a constituency MP when she tried to help find a flight to evacuate animals from Kabul. Harrison is also Johnson’s parliamentary private secretary and the firm thought Harrison was acting with Johnson’s support. But the spokesman would not say why Harrison was acting in this case when she had no direct constituency link with the animal charity needing help. And he did no deny suggestions that Harrison spoke about the case with Johnson. The spokesman also restated the No 10 claim that Johnson was not involved in the decision to authorise the animal evacuation. At the Downing Street lobby briefing the prime minister’s spokesman said that No 10 has still not received the Sue Gray report. No 10 had had “no sight [of it] whatsoever”, he said. The spokesman also said it was “hypothetically” possible for the report to be published today or tomorrow. He said: It remains hypothetically possible to still publish it today or tomorrow. We have committed to publishing in the house. I think, hypothetically, it is not a requirement under the terms of reference. Obviously we would want to do so at the earliest possible opportunity but we are not in control of at which point we are in receipt of the report. Asked what would happen if No 10 received the report on Friday night, he said: We would need to make a decision in conjunction with the Speaker about what he thought was acceptable, obviously balancing the significant public interest in having sight of the report. The spokesman was referring to the Speaker’s desire for important announcements to be made in parliament first, and his likely anger if the report were to be published at the weekend when the Commons was not sitting. Earlier, during business questions, Jacob Rees-Mogg, the leader of the Commons implied that publishing over the weekend with the house not sitting would be wrong. He said: I don’t know when the report will be published, I don’t know when it will be possible to announce a statement, but I am certainly of the view, and I know Mr Speaker you share this view, that this house has the right to know first. Here are three stories from other papers today about the efforts Boris Johnson has been making to win over Conservative MPs who might be tempted to call for a no confidence vote. Tory MPs want Johnson to reverse the national insurance increae, the Daily Mail reports. The Daily Mail is campaigning for exactly this outcome, and so a splash like this is not particularly surprising. But that does not mean that Tory MPs aren’t making this argument. “Boris Johnson has told Tory MPs that he has received “bad advice” and warned that deposing him could result in a general election, the Times (paywall) reports. It says: The prime minister held 15-minute meetings with more than a dozen Tory MPs in recent days as he tries to shore up his support before a potential confidence vote. He has claimed that his successor would have to hold an election to legitimise their leadership and also argued that now is the wrong time to remove him given that Russia is on the brink of invading Ukraine. Johnson has “privately pleaded with at least 30 potential rebels in a bid to head off a leadership challenge”, the Telegraph (paywall) reports. It says: Several of the prime minister’s most loyal supporters are running a “shadow whipping operation” to bring wavering MPs back on side. They are telling rebels they do not have enough support on the Tory benches to reach the 54 letters of no confidence required to mount a challenge. Mr Johnson is insisting to colleagues that he will not resign over the latest allegations of parties in Downing Street during the pandemic, which are being investigated by both Sue Gray, a civil servant, and the Metropolitan Police. Lord Frost, who resigned as a Brexit minister before Christmas saying that he was unhappy with the goverrnment’s domestic policy agenda, has restated his call for a shift to the right in government policy. In tweets backing the argument in a Telegraph column by Allister Heath, Frost said “huge changes” were needed “to make sure we can create wealth and enhance freedom”. Frost was too modest to say that one of Heath’s recommendations was for Johnson to “recant his worst policies and delegate huge amounts of power to a David Frost-like CEO in No 10”. Lisa Nandy, the shadow levelling up secretary, said this morning that the public is getting “deeply frustrated” by the delays in the publication of the Sue Gray report. She said: I think the whole country is deeply frustrated about this run-around that the prime minister is giving the public with this delayed report into what has been going on in Downing Street. I think people up and down this country have made enormous sacrifices and are finding it very, very difficult to witness a prime minister who doesn’t seem to think he needs to abide by the rules that he himself made, that they stuck by at great personal cost. The prime minister needs to just get on with this now, he needs to come clean about what’s been going on Downing Street and his part in it as well. Nandy also restated Labour’s threat to use a parliamentary vote to try to get the full Gray report published in the event of some of it being held back. She said: If [the PM] won’t publish it in full, we will take every step that we can to make sure that information is in the public domain. Labour could table a “humble address” motion when it next allocated time for a debate in the Commons demanding the publication of the full report. Humble address motions are binding on the government and if the motion were to pass - quite a big if, because it would require around 40 Tories to rebel - the document would have to be published. Thérèse Coffey, the work and pensions secretary, was also asked about the Afghan dog rescue story on her morning interview round. Unlike Jacob Rees-Mogg (see 11.11am), she did not just dismiss the story as an irrelevance. Instead she said that Boris Johnson has said he had no role in “individual evacuations” and that Ben Wallace, the defence secretary, has said that he personally was in charge of the operation. Asked, if that was the case, why a Foreign Office official wrote an email saying “the PM has just authorised [animal charity Nowzad’s] staff and animals to be evacuated”, Coffey told LBC: It’s not unusual in parliament and in government for people to say, for their pet projects, the PM said it’s a priority. There will be an urgent question on this in the Lords later. In the Commons Chris Bryant, the Labour MP and member of the foreign affairs committee, asked Jacob Rees-Mogg, the leader of the house, about the new email evidence that was published yesterday suggesting that Boris Johnson was lying when he said he was not involved in the decision to authorise the rescue of dogs and cats from Afghanistan last summer as part of the humanitarian airlift. Bryant said it was important to get to the bottom of what actually happened. He went on: There may be a perfectly innocent explanation - but it may be guilty as charged, mayn’t it? In response, Rees-Mogg did not addresss the disrepancy between the email evidence and the No 10 claims at all. Instead he just criticised Bryant for “fussing about a few animals”. He said Under Operation Pitting (the Kabul evacuation) our armed forces and civil service worked around the clock to evacuate 15,000 people, including around 8,300 British nationals and 5,000 people through the Afghan relocations policy. This was an incredibly successful and pressurised operation and our armed forces once again, showed what amazing things they can do when called upon to do it. And [Bryant] is fussing about a few animals. I think it shows the level of seriousness which he characteristically brings to today’s debate. Normally I’m not big on birthdays, or boasting, but as someone who has played a role in embedding daily live blogs in the media ecosystem, I’d like to point out that today is a special day for the Guardian’s Politics Live blog. It’s our 2,500th edition. Politics Live started here, soon after the May 2010 general election. During the campaign I had been writing a daily election blog which was innovative and turned out to be popular, and afterwards I just kept going under the PL banner. Colleagues who crunch data for the Guardian have been looking at the statistics, and they are remarkable. Since 2016 (the first full year for which we have data), the blog has received just over one billion page views (or hits, as they are more commonly called). That is when someone clicks on a story to read. It’s an astonishing figure. Websites like the Guardian also record how long people spend reading online articles and since 2016 the total amount of time all readers have spent reading the blog comes to 21.4 million hours. I hope that wasn’t all the guy who was in touch the other day to recall being distracted by the blog during Brexit while he was meant to be revising for exams. And since 2016 we’ve published 17.4 million words in the blog - equivalent to 250 normal novels, or 30 copies of War and Peace. Not all those words are from me. I quote and aggreggate a lot, so much of that content will have come from somewhere else. And I’m not the only person writing Politics Live. Guardian colleagues regularly write the blog too, particularly in the evening or on Fridays if I’m not around. (You can always check who the actual writer is at any given moment by checking the byline in the top left hand corner.) And it is not just Guardian journalists who contribute. We only have data on this since 2019, but over the last 30 months we have published 6.7 million comments below the line. Thank you. A few years ago I discussed what it is like writing the live blog, and why I think it is a valuable contribution to Guardian journalism, in more detail here. I haven’t been ambushed by cake yet, but the day is young. Back to work ... Jacob Rees-Mogg, the leader of the Commons, has just said that the government wants to ensure MPs can spend all day in the Commons today debating Holocaust Memorial Day. He said the government had not tabled any statements that might take away time from the debate, and he thanked the opposition for not tabling urgent questions either. The government wanted to “devote the whole time to debating Holocaust Memorial Day”, he said. He did not categorically say that there would be no Commons statement on the Sue Gray report later, but he might just as well have done. Increasingly it looks as if the Johnson stateement won’t come until next week. Nadine Dorries, the culture secretary and one of Boris Johnson’s most diehard ministerial supporters, has backed Jacob Rees-Mogg’s claim that the removal of Johnson would lead to a general election. Johnson and his team have been making this argument to Conservative MPs in the hope that, given the healthy Labour lead in the polls, this might help to discourage them from calling for confidence vote in Johnson. Rees-Mogg, the leader of the Commons, argued on Newsnight earlier this week that, because the UK was moving to a “presidential system”, a new PM would have to call an election. Last night, on ITV’s Peston, Damian Green, the former first secretaray of state, became the latest Tory to accuse Rees-Mogg of getting this wrong. He said: Jacob, bless him, is talking nonsense in that. We have a system of parliamentary democracy, he’s leader of the House of Commons, he must have noticed that. And just, you know, probably the two most presidential prime ministers we have had in my lifetime have been Thatcher and Blair. Both of them left in the middle of a parliament and both of their successors went on for the whole term of that Parliament. So this idea that every time you change prime minister you have to have a general election is just constitutional nonsense. As mentioned earlier, the BBC were calling it Grayja vu this morning. A reader has been in touch to suggest that an alternative would be Groundhog Gray. Boris Johnson has left No 10 and is doing a visit later this morning, Sky News reports. That means the prospect of his doing a statement in the Commons on the Sue Gray report later today is increasingly unlikely. In his Red Box briefing (paywall) for the Times, Patrick Maguire says the planned trip today will take the PM several hundred miles away from London. Good morning. As one journalist on the Today programme put it this morning, it’s Grayja vu. We’re still waiting for the report from the senior civil servant Sue Gray into partygate that could determine whether or not Boris Johnson gets to stay on as prime minister. Earlier this morning it still had not formally been submitted to No 10. Johnson says he wants to publish it soon after he gets it, and make a statement to MPs too, and it is possible that this could happen today. But many MPs are not at Westminster. The business is light, with a debate on Holocaust Memorial Day the main focus, and Tory MPs are on a one-line whip, which means they don’t have to attend. As the Telegraph’s Christopher Hope reports, a delay until next week is looking increasingly possible. Thérèse Coffey, the work and pensions secretary, was on the interview round this morning. Asked when the Gray report would come out, she replied: “I genuinely don’t know.” Boris Johnson is still trying hard to shore up support among Tory MPs, and I will post more on that later. But in interviews last night at least one new line emerged: ministers say that, even if Johnson were interviewed by the police under caution, he would not have to resign. When Tony Blair was PM, and the police wanted to interview him about the cash-for-honours affair, he made it known to them that, if they interviewed him under caution (ie, as a suspect, not a witness), he would feel obliged to resign. The police backed off, and interviewed him without cautioning him first. (In the event, no one was charged at all.) If Blair thought he was establishing a precedent, it is not one Johnson intends to follow. In an interview on Channel 4 News last night Jacob Rees-Mogg, the leader of the Commons, was asked if Johnson would resign if the police felt the need to read him his rights before taking a statement from him on partygate. Rees-Mogg replied: No, of course that wouldn’t be a resigning matter because people are innocent in this country until proved guilty. And it is worth bearing in mind the police themselves have said that the fact that they are investigating something doesn’t mean that any crime has necessarily been committed. They are investigating because that is what the police do. (Rees-Mogg was wrong about this. On Tuesday Dame Cressida Dick, the commissioner of the Metropolitan police, said the police were only investigating these “after the fact” lockdown incidents because they appeared to be “serious and flagrant” breaches of the rules and there seemed to be no “reasonable defence”.) And later, on ITV’s Peston, Kwasi Kwarteng, the business secretary, was also asked if being interviewed under caution would be a resignation matter for the PM. He replied: “No I wouldn’t go that far.” He also implied cash for honours was a more serious scandal, saying it raised “very serious questions about propriety and ethics”. Here is the agenda for the day. 9.30am: Nadine Dorries, the culture secretary, gives a speech at the advertising industry’s annual conference. After 10.30am: Jacob Rees-Mogg, the leader of the Commons, takes questions in the Commons on next week’s business. 11.30am: Downing Street holds a lobby briefing. 12pm: Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minister, takes questions from MSPs. I may cover some UK Covid developments here, but there is more on our global live blog, including details of this morning’s announcement that restrictions on visiting people in care homes in England will be eased from Monday. I try to monitor the comments below the line (BTL) but it is impossible to read them all. If you have a direct question, do include “Andrew” in it somewhere and I’m more likely to find it. I do try to holdinanswer questions, and if they are of general interest, I will post the question and reply above the line (ATL), although I can’t promise to do this for everyone. If you want to attract my attention quickly, it is probably better to use Twitter. I’m on @AndrewSparrow. Alternatively, you can email me at andrew.sparrow@theguardian.comA five-year-old boy who was fatally stabbed at his home in Coventry has been named as David-Mario Lazar. The boy, known to his family as Mario, was found with serious injuries at his home in the Earlsdon area of the city just before 6pm on Tuesday. A 49-year-old woman arrested on suspicion of his murder has been sectioned under the Mental Health Act. She is known to the family and David-Mario was in her care at the time of the incident, police said. In a statement, his parents, Cristina and Dorinel, said he was “the most beautiful child in the world”. “He was a very happy boy. He was always smiling from when he woke up to when he went to sleep,” they said. “He had so much energy. He loved to dance and sing. He is all of our hearts, all our love and is everything to both of us.” Despite the best efforts of police officers and paramedics to save him, David-Mario was pronounced dead at the scene. A postmortem examination has confirmed he died from a stab wound. West Midlands police said on Thursday that the property on Poplar Road remains cordoned off while officers carry out a forensic scientific examination. They are not looking for anyone else in connection with the incident. Supt Ronan Tyrer, from Coventry police, said: “Our investigation continues into the desperately sad death of David-Mario. Our specialist officers are supporting his parents and we cannot comprehend the grief they must feel. Our thoughts are with them. “David-Mario’s school has been informed and they are contacting parents and carers of their pupils. The community are shocked and saddened by this young boy’s death. “We continue to urge people to avoid speculation on social media or sharing posts which could ultimately add to the family’s distress.”Boris Johnson: Where are we off to? Special adviser: Wales. Johnson: Why? Special adviser: Why not? You haven’t been there for a while and the diary is empty now that the Sue Gray report is taking longer than expected. Plus, it’s far enough away from London for you to be unable to make a statement to parliament today even if the report was to be delivered. Johnson: Makes sense. Maybe if I make myself scarce every day for the next week everyone will just forget about Sue Gray. Special adviser: I don’t think Sue Gray is going to forget about Sue Gray. Or the rest of the country. Plus, there’s a limit to how obstructive we can be seen to have been. So try not to think about the report today and use the time while we’re travelling to call Tory MPs to shore up support in case there’s a no confidence vote. Johnson: Is that Archie? Tory MP: No, it’s Andy. Johnson: Of course you are. Good to speak to you Sandy. It’s the Suspect here. I mean, the prime minister. I’m just calling to find out how you are … Tory MP: To be honest, I’ve had better months … Johnson: Me too. Tory MP: Look, I’ll admit when I first heard about all the parties inside No 10 I was a bit shocked. But now I’ve calmed down and had a bit of time to reflect, I can see you deserve to be cut a bit of slack … Johnson: That’s very good of you. I was working tremendously hard and it can be so easy to walk into one’s garden to find trestle tables full of food and dozens of people getting pissed and conclude you were still at a Covid test-and-trace briefing. Not to mention the shock of being ambushed by a cake in the cabinet room while my wife and the interior designer – among others – sang Happy Birthday. Tory MP: That must have been terrifying. As I said, I have no problem with you lying. We all knew you were a pathological liar when we elected you party leader so it would be totally unreasonable of us to expect you to change. The trouble is that my inbox has been full of constituents who don’t feel the same way. They are furious that you have obviously misled parliament and taken the country for granted. Johnson: I can assure you I have done nothing wrong and that I’m the innocent victim in all this … Tory MP: Yes, yes. Save all this for the police. I believe you. But what are you going to do to put things right? Johnson: What would you like me to do? Tory MP: Well, you could get rid of that smirk for a start. And then you could try being a bit more Conservative … Johnson: What could be more Conservative than having brought the government to a complete standstill with a “one rule for us and another rule for the little people” scandal? It’s a classic of the genre. Tory MP: Good point, well made. But maybe you could have another look at the national insurance increase in April? Johnson: We are the party of low taxes except when we are raising them. Can I just say that it is all Rishi Sunak’s fault. He gave me bad advice and is to blame for making me do it … Tory MP: What does that mean exactly? Johnson: I’m not entirely sure. I’m fully behind the rise until the moment when I find the whole party is about to dump me, at which point I will do a reverse ferret. Or maybe I won’t … Tory MP: I see. Moving on. What are you going to do about Brexit? Johnson: What would you like me to do? Tory MP: Could we try diverging further from the EU? Johnson: Even if it’s pointless and more expensive for British business? Tory MP: Especially if it’s pointless and more expensive for British business. We need a futile gesture to show that we have really taken back control. Johnson: OK, if you insist. It’s no skin off my nose if GDP tanks. Just so long as I’m still in a job. Tory MP: That’s more like it. Now what else have you got planned? Johnson: Well, in the short term, I’m planning on going to Australia in the February recess … Tory MP: What for? Johnson: No reason, really. Just Liz Truss said the private jet was amazing. Tory MP: That’s just what voters need to see. You sunning yourself, while the rest of the country freezes its nuts off. Johnson: Must go. I’ve just reached Wales. Just remember you’re in line for a ministerial post at the next reshuffle. And that if you don’t support me then funding to your constituency will be cut. Goodbye. Lovely to chat. ITV: Could you explain why everyone in Whitehall seems to think you personally intervened to prioritise the rescue of animals over people from Afghanistan? Johnson: I never did. That’s total rhubarb. Anyone who says different is a liar. ITV: Mmm. But there are emails and a letter from Trudy Harrison, your PPS. And surely no one else but you could have organised such a flight at such short notice. Harrison: You definitely did. Johnson: I didn’t. Just remember your place. Your job is – like everyone else who works for me – to lose your job when required. Everything is about me. Harrison: You’re right. You definitely did nothing wrong. I was acting in an entirely personal capacity on behalf of my constituents. Even though none of my constituents were involved. Johnson: That’s better. Now can I go home? I need to try to redact the Sue Gray report.An already weakened England Twenty20 team in Barbados will play the deciding double-header against West Indies this weekend without their captain, Eoin Morgan, who withdrew from Wednesday’s third match after reporting a thigh strain in the warm-up and has now been ruled out of the rest of the tour. Moeen Ali, who stepped in to lead the side during their 20-run defeat, will remain in the role as England attempt to overturn a 2-1 deficit in the final two games of the series. Morgan’s injury is described as “relatively minor” and is unlikely to have a long-term impact, with England’s white-ball side not scheduled to play between the end of this tour and the three one-day internationals in the Netherlands in June. Tom Banton, whose 39-ball 73 in a losing cause on Wednesday has underlined his status as one of the rising stars of the English game, has put his form down to his decision to spend the buildup to the series working with his coaches at Somerset rather than travelling to Australia for the Big Bash League. “That might have made the difference,” he said. “The way cricket is, there’s ups and downs and you’ve just got to ride that wave. I went to the IPL and Big Bash [at the end of 2019], and it was amazing. But then I didn’t really get time to be at home and work on my batting. I’ve got to be a bit more careful about what I do during the winter and plan out my year a bit better, just to make sure I’m getting work in back at Somerset, still ticking over with training.” At the end of 2020 Banton pulled out of the BBL, though more because of concerns over the impact of bubbles than to spend time at Taunton. “After a time, it just takes its toll,” he said. “I want to be able to live my life and not be stuck in a hotel. I want to see my friends and be at home, see my family, as well as playing cricket. In the end it was too much for me. I pulled out of Big Bash because you had to [quarantine] in a hotel room for two weeks, and it’s just crazy to think that people would even do that.” Banton has turned down opportunities in the Pakistan Super League and in the Indian Premier League after this series in favour of returning to Somerset and working towards the domestic season. “I’ll be in England and I’ll be at home, I won’t be sat in a hotel the whole time and I’ll be able to go out and live a normal life,” he said. “At the end of last summer I went on a group holiday with the Somerset boys to Spain, which I probably haven’t been on in about five years, and I think things like that are just really important, to get away from cricket.” In many ways Banton is in an unenviable position as a white-ball opener and potential wicketkeeper labouring in the shadow of Jos Buttler, auditioning for a role that does not exist. “He’s probably the best in the world,” Banton said. “I’m quite good mates with Jos and it’s weird because I look up to him and now I get to play with him and it’s awesome. I definitely want to follow in his footsteps. Obviously the team is so strong and I’m not going to fit in the strongest team at the moment. I’m just trying my best to one day hopefully be able to cement my position. I’m not really thinking too much about the squad – it’s just good to be here.”Sue Gray may hold the fate of the prime minister in her hands – but the senior civil servant has been given extra time to help choose the next head of Ofcom, after the government once again extended the deadline to apply for the job. When not investigating who was dragging suitcases of booze into Downing Street for lockdown-busting parties, Gray is also leading the increasingly farcical interview process to find a new chair of the media regulator. This began almost two years ago, when the former Daily Mail editor Paul Dacre was offered the job by Boris Johnson “over a rather sad bottle of wine” as part of a government bid to install right-leaning figures in key public roles. According to Dacre, the prime minister verbally promised him the job regulating the UK’s broadcast news and social media websites. The only issue was that Dacre would need to go through the formalities of a vetting process before his appointment was rubber-stamped by ministers. Yet Dacre unexpectedly flunked the interview process, causing the government to abandon the recruitment process altogether and advertise the job again. This time ministers put the noted Whitehall fixer Gray in charge of the interview panel – along with two individuals with ties to the Conservative party. One individual with knowledge of the recruitment process suggested Gray had been put in charge to ensure that Dacre was approved at the second time of asking. Yet the former Daily Mail editor then blindsided the government in December by withdrawing his application without telling ministers. With other candidates put off applying for a job that they perceived to be a stitch-up, the government has now reopened applications yet again. The last time the £142,000 three-day-a-week job was advertised, only nine individuals applied. The delay means that Ofcom has been without a permanent chair since December 2020 at a crucial time in its history, as it prepares to regulate social media platforms. It is also having knock-on effects elsewhere in the media industry, with a backlog of Ofcom-approved appointments now building up at institutions such as Channel 4. Dacre was uncomfortable with scrutiny of his potential appointment to Ofcom, writing last year that the Guardian’s “hysterical obsession with little old me is not just unhinged, it’s psychotic”. He said he had decided to withdraw from the recruitment process because “the toxic hatred of Brexit that is so palpable among the people who really run this country meant I would not be able to do justice to myself, or Ofcom or the public it’s meant to serve”. The Conservative MP Julian Knight, who chairs the culture select committee, said the recruitment process for the chair of Ofcom “would put a reality TV series to shame”. He added: “In an unexpected twist to the plot, would-be candidates have been given an extra seven days to apply. Not content with the outcome of the initial round of interviews, the DCMS department restarted the appointments process using specially employed headhunters to get a better field of candidates, only to see a favourite walk away. Now, that better field of candidates is not enough. The word shambles has begun to look like an understatement. “Anyone out there who’s still interested, there’s still time to apply – the new deadline is 23.59 next Wednesday.”A string of failings may have contributed to the death of a “deeply vulnerable” law student who killed herself while being treated in a psychiatric hospital in Bristol, an inquest jury has said. Zoë Wilson, 22, had informed staff she was hearing voices in her head telling her to kill herself and 30 minutes before she died was seen by a nurse through an observation hatch looking frightened and behaving oddly but nobody went into her room to check her. Speaking after the jury’s conclusions, Wilson’s family said that Avon and Wiltshire mental health partnership NHS trust (AWP) should face criminal charges over the case. AWP said it accepted it had fallen short in its care of Wilson. The student was described as a brilliant young woman, deeply loved by her family. In 2018 when she was in the final year of a law degree at Exeter University her mental health deteriorated, and she developed delusional behaviour with episodes of psychosis. She returned to the family home in Bristol and in June 2018 she was admitted to hospital but discharged three months later. Her condition deteriorated again and in April 2019 she was admitted to an acute facility at the psychiatric hospital Callington Road in Bristol, remaining there until 6 June 2019 when she was transferred to the Larch ward, which caters for lower-risk patients. On 17 June 2019 she told staff she was hearing voices telling her to kill herself and handed over an item that she could have used to harm herself with. She was not moved to an acute ward and other items that she could have used were not removed. At 1am on 19 June she was observed standing beside her bathroom door looking frightened but staff did not go to her. Thirty minutes later she was checked again and had harmed herself. Emergency services were called but she was pronounced dead. Giving evidence to Avon coroner’s court, the nurse who saw Wilson at 1am said he had only worked in the unit a handful of times and had not met Wilson before that night. The jury concluded that steps taken to keep her safe that night had been inadequate and also criticised communication and information sharing. In a statement, her family, said: “Zoë was a wonderful, bright, and deeply vulnerable young woman. She was on a low-risk ward even when she told staff that voices in her head were telling her to kill herself.” They called for AWP to face a criminal prosecution by the Care Quality Commission (CQC). “We will continue to fight for justice in her name,” they said. “She will never be forgotten.” Tony Murphy of Bhatt Murphy solicitors, who represent the family, said: “The family now await the CQC’s investigation into the trust. Time is of the essence as the three-year anniversary of Zoë’s death approaches in June.“ Selen Cavcav, senior caseworker at the charity Inquest, said: “Zoe’s escalating mental health crisis should have rung alarm bells for the clinicians and other staff who were in charge of care.” Dr Sarah Constantine, medical director at Avon and Wiltshire mental health partnership NHS trust said: “I would like to express my sincere condolences to the Wilson family. We accept the jury’s findings and recognise that in this instance we did not do everything that we could for Zoë.” + In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.From Monday, coronavirus restrictions related to care homes in England will be eased. Here are the changes, and the science behind them. What’s changing? Residents who test positive will have to self-isolate for up to 10 days, with a minimum isolation period of five full days followed by two sequential negative lateral flow tests – as is already the case for the rest of the population. Isolation periods for those having care after an emergency hospital visit will also be reduced to a maximum of 10 days, while a requirement for residents to test or self-isolate after normal visits out will be removed. Care homes will have to follow outbreak management rules for 14 rather than 28 days, and by 16 February care workers will need to use lateral flow tests before work rather than taking a weekly PCR test. The limit on visitors to care homes will be lifted. Visitors should still obtain a negative lateral flow test result earlier in the day of their visit, and guidance on the use by visitors of PPE such as face masks remains unchanged. Why are the rules easing? According to the Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC), it has been enabled by a successful booster vaccination programme, with 86.5% of care home residents having had their booster jab. The latest data from the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) shows that with a Pfizer booster – regardless of the vaccines used for previous doses – the effectiveness against hospitalisation is about 90% shortly after receiving the jab, falling to about 75% after 10 to 14 weeks. Very high levels of protection are also seen for Moderna boosters. The figures suggest vaccine effectiveness against death in people aged 50 and older is about 95% two weeks after a booster. What are the rules around staff vaccinations? The DHSC says: “Since 11 November last year all care home workers, and anyone entering a care home, have needed to be fully vaccinated, unless they are exempt under the regulations.” That means there may be some staff who, for medical reasons, have not been vaccinated. Are the changes safe? The care minister, Gillian Keegan, said the changes were backed by scientists, and experts largely agree. “If lateral flow tests are used in conjunction to prevent most contact with infectious people, then broadly speaking the risk will be low,” said Prof Rowland Kao, an epidemiologist at the University of Edinburgh and member of the modelling group Spi-M. He said there remained an issue for residents and staff when it came to those with existing conditions or who were unvaccinated, either by choice or for other reasons. “In those cases there should be measures and protocols in place to prevent them from being viewed as second-class citizens,” he said. Ian Hall, a professor of mathematical epidemiology and statistics at the University of Manchester and a member of the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage), backed the changes. “The decision was reviewed scientifically and is a balance of harms of Covid but also the harm of deconditioning and wellbeing from isolation in a highly vaccinated population,” he said. “We strongly recommended that measures are put in place to observe the impact of these measures following implementation and if there are clear episodes of transmission the risk assessment is reviewed.” Others cautioned against easing measures any further. Dr Helen Salisbury, a GP in Oxford, said it would be “foolhardy” to remove the need for lateral flow tests and masks for visitors, noting that not everyone who had three jabs had had a strong immune response, that people tend to develop more health problems as they get older, and that even among the vaccinated, the risks from Covid increase with age. “I’m delighted if people are able to see their families, but it doesn’t make sense to me to lift all restrictions completely,” she said.As a planet-killing comet hurtles towards Earth in the film Don’t Look Up, scientists Jennifer Lawrence and Leonardo DiCaprio scramble to get the world to take the threat seriously. For many, the Netflix hit was an allegory of the world’s inaction on climate change, but now a pair of physicists have taken a more literal view of the question at the heart of the drama: if a 10km-wide asteroid is six months away from impact, is it possible to avert a planet-ending catastrophe? The answer, from a purely technical perspective, appears to be yes. “We show that humanity has crossed a technological threshold to prevent us from ‘going the way of the dinosaurs’,” Prof Philip Lubin and Alex Cohen, both physics researchers at the University of California Santa Barbara, conclude in their paper posted this week on the Arxiv database. The 15-page analysis starts by weighing up the scale of the threat posed by a 10km-wide asteroid, concluding that it would have similar impact energy to the asteroid event that led to the extinction of the dinosaurs 66m years ago. Allowing such an object to enter the Earth’s atmosphere could, in an extreme scenario, result in staggering atmospheric temperature rises of 300C, destroying virtually all life on Earth. The merits of different options are considered, with the PI (Pulverize It) method being among those favoured. This would involve an array of penetrators being used to inject nuclear detonators that would split the asteroid into fragments that would either miss Earth entirely (for larger asteroids) or be small enough to burn up in the atmosphere (for asteroids smaller than 1km across). Radioactive fragments hitting the Earth would not be a major concern, the paper said. The approach would pose political challenges, since testing the detonators before deployment would currently be banned under the nuclear test ban treaty. “In any realistic scenario of an existential threat, presumably logic would prevail, at least one would hope,” the authors write, perhaps drawing inspiration from the 1979 film, Meteor, in which the United States (Sean Connery) and the then Soviet Union (Natalie Wood) put aside cold war tensions to deal with an incoming asteroid. The paper also considers the option deployed in the 1999 film, Armageddon, where oil rig workers, Bruce Willis and Ben Affleck, are hired by Nasa to drill into an asteroid the size of Texas and detonate a nuclear bomb to break it into pieces. This is a less realistic scenario, the paper concludes. Such enormous asteroids do exist – Ceres, the first asteroid detected, is nearly this size. However, breaking it in half would require about 10m Gigatons TNT, equivalent to more than 1m times the energy of the Earth’s entire nuclear arsenal. In the case that attempts to divert or destroy the incoming asteroid fail, the paper suggests that underwater or subterranean bunkers as a last-ditch line of defence. “Taking life underwater or underground would be a wise civil defence-based strategy to assure some survival of the human and other species,” the paper said. The paper concludes on the optimistic note that averting the existential threat of a large, Earthbound asteroid is just at the limit of our technological capabilities. “Ideally, we would never be in this situation, but better ready than dead.” The duo are not the first to consider the scenario from a technical perspective. There is an active research community working on planetary defence. The United Nations Office for Outer Space Affairs holds an annual conference on the subject in which experts consider mitigation scenarios, legal issues and how communications might be handled. However, some were less than enthusiastic about the paper’s premise. Mark McCaughrean, senior adviser for science &amp; exploration at the European Space Agency, described the work as “classic space bubble nerdery”. “Answer the technical question, but completely miss the point of the film, namely that the advice of scientists is routinely ignored,” McCaughrean said on Twitter. “Especially when the real disaster is happening now and in a way that’s too slow and boring for people to care.” • This article was amended on 4 February 2022. While the paper in question looked at the impact of an asteroid, the film Don’t Look Up is about a comet, not an asteroid as an earlier version said due to an editing error.As the Tories’ most senior Muslim female politician, Sayeeda Warsi, puts it, to be accused of Islamophobia is “career enhancing”, but to be a victim of Islamophobia is “career destroying”. She should know: her often lonely public campaign against Islamophobia has been rewarded with political exile. What could be described as Warsi’s law applies to Nusrat Ghani too: a Tory politician who claims to have been sacked as a minister because her “Muslimness” was “making colleagues uncomfortable”. Compare and contrast their experience with Zac Goldsmith’s: after a failed London mayoral campaign against Sadiq Khan that was accused of being riddled with Islamophobia, Goldsmith was elevated to the House of Lords and made a minister. Or what of Nadine Dorries, who has retweeted far-right criminal Tommy Robinson, and responded to a video from Khan about tackling Islamophobic hate speech with: “How about, ‘it’s time to act on sex abusing grooming gangs’ instead?” Islamophobia reaches down into the grassroots of the party. A YouGov poll uncovered that six out of 10 Tory members believe Islam “is generally a threat to western civilisation”, that 45% believe the racist lie about “no go areas” for non-Muslims, and nearly half don’t want a Muslim prime minister. However politically convenient it may be to pretend this is a Tory-specific problem, the Labour party cannot claim to be innocent. Twenty-nine per cent of its Muslim members report suffering Islamophobia in the party, over a third have witnessed it, and 44% didn’t believe the party took it seriously. During the Batley and Spen byelection, Labour officials briefed rightwing newspapers that they were losing Muslim support because of Keir Starmer’s efforts to tackle antisemitism, and welcomed losing “the conservative Muslim vote” over Labour’s position on gay rights and Palestine. This bigoted depiction of often lifelong Labour voters for cynical electoral benefit is Islamophobia, pure and simple. Witness, too, how Labour rescinded the suspension of Trevor Phillips after he described Muslims as “a nation within a nation”. More widely, anti-Muslim racism is endemic in British society, with a new study finding that middle-class social groups are significantly more likely to admit to bigoted views about Islamic beliefs than their working-class counterparts. I have been inundated with examples of what should be described as anti-Muslim racism. Telecoms engineer Usman Chaudhary has had eggs thrown at him in Rochdale while strangers yelled “Bin Laden” and “terrorist” at him. Many others tell me of passersby hissing “Isis” and “suicide bomber” at them. One civil servant working for central government spoke of white colleagues saying, “he’s one of the good ones!”. Apologists for Islamophobia play semantic games – “Islam is not a race” is their go-to jibe – but, as Warsi tells me, “discrimination is not based on the actual practice of your faith, it’s about a racial identity of Muslimness or perceived Muslimness”. No wonder there are no adverse political consequences for Islamophobia: anti-Muslim bigotry is condoned and perpetuated across the spectrum of the British press. While one study found that 78% of the Mail on Sunday’s stories featuring Muslims were negative, the Times, our supposed paper of record, confers Islamophobia with respectability with headlines such as “Christian child forced into Muslim foster care”. A correction to this dishonest story eventually came, but the damage was done. “If you look at the polling and survey evidence, there’s been no real progress in the last decade in how Muslims are seen in society,” Miqdaad Versi, director for media monitoring at the Muslim Council of Britain, tells me. Why? Partly because British Muslims – half of whom live in the poorest 10% communities – lack power and an organised voice. The rhetoric fanned by media outlets and politicians, particularly during the “war on terror”, has further normalised this racism. Like all forms of bigotry, it’s the voices of the victims that need to be heard the loudest. But that doesn’t mean non-Muslims shouldn’t speak out: the failure to do so is what makes anti-Muslim hate mainstream, and that is why to say nothing is to be complicit. Owen Jones is a Guardian columnistAntonio Conte has suffered a serious blow after missing out on a deal for Adama Traoré, one of his priority January targets. Barcelona have instead agreed a deal to take the winger on loan from Wolves for the rest of the season. Tottenham had a longstanding interest in Traoré and, with Fabio Paratici, the managing director of football, driving the negotiations, there was confidence late last week that they would get him. Conte has made it crystal clear he needs to strengthen his squad but Spurs enter the final four days of the window without a signing. The manager has even betrayed an element of desperation, saying lower-quality recruits would do; in his words “also if it’s not the best opportunity … we need to do something”. Tottenham continue to pursue the Fiorentina midfielder Sofyan Amrabat and the Porto winger Luis Díaz, with the Amrabat deal looking the more straightforward to conclude if, as expected, at least one of Tanguy Ndombele and Dele Alli leaves; both have been marginalised by Conte. Mauricio Pochettino, the Paris Saint-Germain manager, wants to take Ndombele. He oversaw the midfielder’s purchase at Spurs for a club record fee of close to £60m. Ndombele is also keen on the reunion. There is an option for Barcelona to buy Traoré in the summer for €30m (£25m) plus add-ons and they will cover his full salary until June. The deal for the 26-year-old to return to the club where he started his career is expected to be completed on Friday. Wolves would have preferred an obligation for Barcelona to buy but they dropped that to get the transfer done, with Traoré holding out for a move to the Camp Nou. The player had been keen on joining Spurs but the club’s failure to close a deal and the emergence of interest from Barcelona changed the picture. Wolves have accepted that Traoré will not extend his contract beyond the end of next season and rejected a £15m offer from Tottenham. Traoré joined the Barcelona youth setup and made his way via the B team to a first-team debut in 2013 but he left for Aston Villa in 2015 after only four appearances. He can play as a winger or wing-back. Tottenham’s proposal is to take Amrabat on loan with an option to buy for €16m. The Morocco international, who is at the Africa Cup of Nations, has made only one Serie A start this season, in mid-October. Spurs have had a €45m (£37.6m) bid rejected for Díaz, who has a £66m release clause. The 31-cap Colombia international is considered one of Europe’s most exciting talents and has scored 14 goals in 18 league games this season. Ajax remain interested in taking the winger Steven Bergwijn from Spurs on a permanent deal.The National Gallery of Ireland’s exhibition of the work of Jack B Yeats, soon to conclude, is most encouraging for those who feel that they have yet to fulfil their creative potential. The artist made many of his most avant garde works when he was in his 70s and 80s, a period in which he was also at his most prolific as an oil painter. As an artist, he ended up worlds away from the young man he’d been in 1905, producing sketches for the Manchester Guardian to illustrate JM Synge’s pioneering articles on the appalling poverty suffered by the inhabitants of rural Connemara and Mayo. Over time, his style loosened and dissolved into near abstraction – though he never abandoned elements of figuration. By the end, he was no longer working from observation, but from memory. Memory is fallible. Family members will remember the same incidents differently, and describe them using different words. Eyewitness accounts often vary. Memory is slippery and dangerous, but that is also what makes it such a profoundly important creative tool. Where would Paula Rego be without her self-consciously faulty use of memory, one that verges on mythologisation, in an oeuvre that draws so deeply on her childhood? The point for her is not accurate, photographic recall, but memory used almost as a dreamscape, to be visited to harvest artistic material. James Joyce’s reconstruction of Dublin in Ulysses, published a century ago this year, relishes precisely recalled topographical details – but he used memory to alienate himself from his native city, so that he could re-render it as the epic canvas for his masterpiece of modernism. The National Gallery exhibition shows Yeats returning to similar scenes throughout his career; often, the further he is, temporally, from the source material (childhood holidays in Sligo, the 1920s streetscapes of Dublin), the more powerful the work. The American author George Saunders has made a similar point about distance, memory and creativity in a different context: that of the work of Leo Tolstoy. The Snowstorm, a story published in 1856, has an almost documentary quality, he argues, based as it was on an actual event two years previously in which the author had been lost all night in the snow. By the time he came to write Master and Man four decades later, based on the same experience, memory had been transfigured into a masterpiece of the short story form. Yeats’s very last paintings, made in the 1940s and 50s, can seem almost numinous, filled with a significance beyond their apparent subject matter. His Leaving the Far Point (1946) seems on one level to conjure up a memory from his youth, as three figures in holiday finery amble along a Sligo shore. But the figures almost deliquesce into the landscape behind them; there is a great sense of loss in this work. The neuroscientist Prof Ruth Byrne has pointed out that these late works sometimes not only depict remembered scenes, but in a sense, render how scenes are remembered – “faintly and tenuously”. The painting speaks of nostalgia, mortality and loss, but also, through the very fragility of the figures, the elusive nature of memory itself.Soon after the Taliban swept into Kabul, with Afghanistan’s economy collapsing, people began to sell meagre possessions, from mattresses to cooking pots, to buy basic necessities. Now we learn that desperate Afghans are selling their children and their kidneys, finding no other way to keep their families from starvation. Almost everyone is short of food; more than half the population faces extreme levels of hunger, and nearly 9 million are at risk of famine. The desperation will only worsen. The foreign aid that fuelled the economy has vanished; huge numbers are jobless; food prices have soared. Drought has worsened the already grim picture. The UN says that $8bn is needed now: $4.4bn in humanitarian assistance, and $3.6bn to deliver essential services and maintain community infrastructure. Deborah Lyons, the special representative for Afghanistan, noted that donors are worried that they may help the Taliban consolidate their position or seem to be legitimising it. The disappearance of feminist activists last week – after one filmed a video of men she said were Taliban trying to enter her home – is further horrifying evidence of their brutal rule. Many older girls are still barred from school. LGBTQ+ people have reported mob attacks and rape. No one wants to give succour to the Taliban. But it should be possible to deal with them to support ordinary Afghans without formally recognising their government. The alternative is to abandon Afghans, who are suffering twice over: from Taliban control and from the international response to it. A funding conference is desperately needed. The United States is unlikely to step up; Joe Biden wants to put the withdrawal fiasco behind him. Gordon Brown, the former British prime minister, has rightly urged – along with Malala Yousafzai and Save the Children – that the UK should act as the host. Britain too has a responsibility to the Afghan people. It has not met this. It has failed too many of those who are vulnerable because they worked with the UK, or because they did what it urged them to do – such as the women who joined the police or judiciary. As Kabul fell, the government approved the evacuation of cats and dogs cared for by the British animal charity Nowzad and vets who officials admitted were not “extremely vulnerable”, while humans known to be in immediate and severe danger have been denied refuge in the UK. From Foreign Office emails and other documents disclosed on Wednesday, it appears that officials acted on the prime minister’s personal authorisation, despite his denials. “We are human beings living here like animals, while they are rescuing animals from Afghanistan,” said one man who worked for the British as a consultant – and whose pregnant wife was shot dead when the Taliban raided their home. He has been told that he does not qualify for the Afghan relocations and assistance policy (Arap) because he was employed indirectly. It was supposed to be supplemented by the Afghan citizens resettlement scheme, but there is no way for individuals to apply. It has also been rebadging people who have already arrived in the UK under Arap. This is shameful. Britain must do more for Afghans who are not safe in their country. But it must also help the many more who will remain there. A funding conference ought to address underlying issues, not just request pledges. The waivers given for humanitarian aid are wholly inadequate: the US should smooth the path for development aid too, but above all, the financial system, on the brink of collapse, must be revived. No aid can suffice when the economy is being strangled. Given the justified concerns that the Taliban could benefit, a variety of solutions have been put forward, from the conditional release of a chunk of Afghanistan’s frozen reserves to credit swaps. Catastrophe can still be averted. It must be.The liberal supreme court justice Stephen Breyer is retiring and Joe Biden has said he will stand by a previous promise to nominate a Black woman to America’s highest legal body. At 83 years old, Breyer is the oldest justice of the court and his retirement will give Biden his first seat to fill on the supreme court, which is currently conservative-leaning by six to three. Replacing Breyer won’t allow Biden to change that dynamic but it does allow him to ensure the liberal contingent is not reduced further and make history by appointing its first Black woman. Here are some of the women considered leading contenders for the seat: Ketanji Brown Jackson Born in Washington DC and raised in Miami, Florida, Jackson has been a judge of the US court of appeals for the DC circuit since June 2021 after the 51-year-old Harvard graduate replaced the attorney general, Merrick Garland. The DC circuit has historically been seen as a stepping stone to the supreme court. From 2010 to 2014, Jackson served as vice-chair of the United States sentencing commission, during which the commission significantly reduced sentences for numerous drug offenders. Leondra Kruger Kruger, a native of Los Angeles, is an associate justice of the supreme court of California. The 45-year-old was previously the acting principal deputy solicitor general under the Barack Obama administration. Supreme court justice Elena Kagan once called Kruger “one of the best advocates in the Department of Justice”. Kruger has argued 12 cases in front of the supreme court. She has previously described her approach to the law as one that “reflects that fact that we operate in a system of precedent”. J Michelle Childs Childs is currently serving as a district judge of the US district court for the district of South Carolina. Appointed by Obama in 2009, the 55-year-old Detroit native has also been nominated by Biden for a seat on the DC circuit court of appeals. Childs was also the first Black woman to become a partner at Nexsen Pruet, LLC, one of South Carolina’s major law firms. She has served as the deputy director in the labor division at South Carolina’s department of labor, licensing and regulation. Congressman Jim Clyburn, a close ally of Biden, is fiercely supports Childs and has previously pushed the Biden administration to nominate her as the supreme court’s next liberal justice. “She is the kind of person who has the sort of experiences that would make her a good addition to the supreme court,” Clyburn said. Wilhelmina Wright Wright is a district judge of the US district court for the district of Minnesota. A favorite of Senator Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota, the 58-year-old is also Minnesota’s first female African American justice. Wright has previously said that fairness, impartially and respect for the rule of law have been her “lodestar”, adding that she “give[s] no consideration to whether I agree or disagree with a party”. She has also emphasized the importance of diversity in the judicial system, at one point writing: “I believe it would undermine the public’s trust and confidence in the judiciary if there were no judges who are women or judges of color.” Eunice Lee Since August 2021, Lee, 52, has been a judge of the US court of appeals for the second circuit after being nominated by Biden. Lee has worked at the office of the appellate defender in New York City from 1998 to 2019. In addition, from 2019 until her bench appointment, Lee was an assistant federal defender in the appeals bureau of the federal defenders of New York. Candace Jackson-Akiwumi Jackson-Akiwumi is currently a US circuit judge of the US court of appeals for the seventh circuit since July 2021. Jackson-Akiwumi is the first judge appointed to the seventh circuit who has a background as a federal public defender. Nominated by Biden in April 2021, Jackson-Akiwumi was also a staff attorney at the federal defender program in the northern district of Illinois from 2010 to 2020 where she represented indigent people who were accused of federal crimes. From 2020 to 2021, Jackson-Akiwumi served as a partner at Zuckerman Spaeder, a DC-based law firm where she focused on civil litigations and white-collar criminal defense. Sherrilyn Ifill Ifill is the president and director-counsel of the Legal Defense and Educational Fund at the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP). Before joining LDF as an assistant council in 1988, the 59-year-old New York native was a fellow at the American Civil Liberties Union. Ifill taught civil procedure and constitutional law for over two decades and pioneered numerous law clinics, including one of the first in the country that focused on challenging legal obstacles to the re-entry of ex-offenders. In 2021, Time named her one of the world’s 100 most influential people. This article was amended on 27 January 2022 because an earlier version said that Wilhelmina Wright was the first African American justice on the Minnesota supreme court. Wright was the first female African American justice appointed to that court.