Reforms in Qatar have stalled with a year to go before the World Cup, leaving thousands of migrant workers trapped and exploited, according to a damning new report by Amnesty International. Last year Qatar passed two laws to end restrictions on migrant workers leaving the country or changing jobs without their employer’s permission, which were widely welcomed. However, Amnesty has accused the authorities of “complacency” in applying the laws and says it has led to the worst elements of the kafala system, which binds workers to their employer, resurfacing. A new 48-page Amnesty report, Reality Check 2021, quotes one migrant worker saying she was threatened by her employer when she wanted to change jobs and told she had to pay 6,000 Qatari riyals (£1,200) – more than five times her monthly salary – for a no-objection certificate or else be sent home. Although the change in law should have allowed her to change jobs freely, the complaint she submitted to the Ministry of Administrative Development, Labour and Social Affairs was rejected, Amnesty says. Other practices, such as withholding salaries and benefits to make it harder for workers to leave their jobs, are also still going on, according to Amnesty. “Apparent complacency by the authorities is leaving thousands of workers at continued risk of exploitation by unscrupulous employers, with many unable to change jobs and facing wage theft,” said Mark Dummett, the human rights organisation’s global issues programme director. “They have little hope of remedy, compensation or justice. After the World Cup, the fate of the workers who remain in Qatar will be even more uncertain.” Qatar’s treatment of its migrant workforce of 2 million has come under unrelenting scrutiny since it won the right to host the competition in 2010. In August Amnesty also accused the country of failing to investigate the deaths of thousands of migrant workers in the past decade. It has now urged Fifa to call on the Qatar government to fulfil its programme of labour reforms before the opening match of the World Cup on 21 November next year. “Qatar is one of the richest countries in the world but its economy depends on the 2 million migrant workers who live there,” Dummett said. “By sending a clear signal that labour abuses will not be tolerated, penalising employers who break laws and protecting workers’ rights, Qatar can give us a tournament that we can all celebrate. But this is yet to be achieved.” Sacha Deshmukh, Amnesty International UK’s chief executive, said the Football Association could do more to press the authorities in Doha. “The exploitation of Qatar’s massive migrant workforce has already cast a dark shadow over next year’s World Cup, and the FA ought to use the remaining year until kick-off to push for lasting labour reforms in Qatar,” he said. “The FA is part of the Uefa Working Group on Workers’ Rights in Qatar and can press the Doha authorities over strengthening migrant worker protections, investigating worker deaths and helping to fashion a tournament with a genuinely positive legacy. “It’s more important than ever that England’s coaching staff, players and supporters raise human rights issues ahead of next year’s kick-off.” In a statement, the government of Qatar said it rejected Amnesty’s assertion that labour reforms have not translated into changes on the ground for migrant workers. “Amnesty fails to document a single story from among the 242,870 workers who have successfully changed jobs since barriers were removed in September 2020, or from the more than 400,000 workers who have directly benefited from the new minimum wage through salary increases and other financial incentives,” it said. “Since exit permits were removed in 2018, hundreds of thousands of workers have left Qatar and returned without permission from their employer; improvements to the Wage Protection System now protect more than 96% of eligible workers from wage abuse; new visa centres in labour-sending countries have significantly reduced exploitative practices before workers arrive in Qatar; and new rules extend the ban on summer working to minimise the effects of heat stress. “In the first half of 2021, 35,280 accommodation and worksite inspections were carried out and 13,724 penalties were issued to violating companies, including worksite closures, fines and prison sentences. A further 4,840 site visits were made by labour inspectors to raise awareness of the new laws among employers and employees. Systemic reform is a long-term process and shifting the behaviour of every company takes time.”Countries are losing almost half a trillion dollars through tax abuse by multinationals and the super-rich, enough to fully vaccinate the global population against Covid-19 three times over, a report has said. Research by tax campaigners found that estimated losses had risen from $427bn last year to $483bn (£359bn) in 2021, with the UK alone responsible for almost 40% of the total. Britain facilitates abuse and evasion through a network made up of British overseas territories and the City of London, the report said. The State of Tax Justice 2021 – jointly published by the Tax Justice Network (TJN), the Global Alliance for Tax Justice and the global union federation Public Services International – said $312bn of the total sum was the result of cross-border corporate tax abuse by multinational corporations and $171bn offshore tax evasion by wealthy individuals. The report said the total was calculated based on data self-reported by multinational corporations and banking data collected by governments. Miroslav Palanský, a TJN data scientist, said the figures represented “the tip of the iceberg” and that actual losses from tax abuse were much higher. According to the annual snapshot, the tax revenues lost by lower-income countries would be enough to vaccinate 60% of their populations, bridging the gap in vaccination rates between poor countries and wealthier western nations. However, it found rich countries were responsible for facilitating 78% of global tax losses, and called on responsibility for setting international tax rules to be moved from the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) – a club of 38 wealthy nations – to the UN. It comes after the OECD brokered a deal between almost 140 nations to agree a minimum 15% global tax rate for corporations. However, the State of Tax Justice 2021 report said it was expected to recover only a fraction of revenues lost to tax havens and would redistribute most recovered taxes to rich OECD members instead of the countries where the taxes should have originally been paid. Alex Cobham, the chief executive of the TJN, said: “Another year of the pandemic, and another half-trillion dollars snatched by the wealthiest multinational corporations and individuals from public purses around the world. Tax can be our most powerful tool for tackling inequality but, instead, it’s been made entirely optional for the super-rich. “We must reprogramme the global tax system to protect people’s wellbeing and livelihoods over the desires of the wealthiest, or the cruel inequalities exposed by the pandemic will be locked in for good. The State of Tax Justice tells us exactly which countries are responsible for the tax abuse we all suffer. It’s time they were held accountable.” A UK government spokesperson said: “We’ve led the world in its efforts to crack down on global tax abuse – most recently by helping to create a global minimum corporation tax and new tax rules for 2023 so the right tax is paid in the right places by the right firms. “On top of this, we have improved global transparency by driving up standards to help tax authorities find hidden incomes and assets. Overseas territories and crown dependencies are self-governing.”We are closing down this blog now, you can continue to see all our coronavirus coverage here. Thanks for reading. Mexico’s health ministry reported 775 new confirmed coronavirus cases and 57 more fatalities on Monday, bringing the country’s overall death toll from the pandemic to 291,204 and the total number of cases to 3,846,508. Officials have said the ministry’s figures are likely significantly lower than the actual numbers of both Covid-19 cases and deaths. Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelensky said on Monday that people will be offered a cash incentive to get double-vaccinated against Covid-19 in a bid to boost the country’s low inoculation rate. AFP reports: “Everyone who has had two doses will be able to receive 1,000 hryvnias” or about 35 euros ($40), Zelenksy said in video message, a sizeable sum for the citizens of one of Europe’s poorest countries and where fewer than a third of the population has been fully vaccinated. The money could be used to buy a sports club membership, tickets for the cinema, theatre or a museum, or go towards a train or plane ticket for a journey within Ukraine, the president said. “These are the sectors that have been hardest hit by the lockdowns,” Zelenksy said. The government is expected to approve 200m euros in the coming months for the scheme which will be launched on 19 December. The former Soviet republic recorded 442 deaths from coronavirus in the past 24 hours on Monday, the second-highest number of new deaths in the world after Russia, which reported 1,211. The country of 45 million people is currently experiencing its worst-ever wave of the pandemic, driven mainly by the more infectious Delta variant and a high degree of vaccine scepticism among the population. Authorities have tried to boost the vaccination by imposing restrictions on people who are not vaccinated, such as the requirement for a vaccine certificate for some public spaces. But according to health ministry data, only 28% of Ukrainians have received two vaccine doses. “We have passed the peak of this wave” of the pandemic, Zelensky nevertheless insisted. In all, Ukraine has recorded 3.2m cases since the start of the pandemic and more than 77,000 deaths. Nigeria will start a mass Covid-19 vaccination campaign later this week, aiming to inoculate half of its targeted population by the end of January, government officials said. Reuters reports: Africa’s most-populous country has a goal to vaccinate 111 million people to reach herd immunity. Under the initiative to start on Friday, 55 million doses or more than a million a day will be administered. The country has to date vaccinated only 2.9% of those eligible to get vaccines. The plan will see vaccine sites set up at private health facilities, universities, colleges, stadiums, motor parks and shopping malls among other venues. Boss Mustapha, head of the presidential steering committee on Covid-19, said the government “has enough vaccines in the pipeline to vaccinate about 50% of the target population by the end of January 2022”. He also said the government was making efforts to secure booster shots “so as to build a healthy level of antibodies”. He did not provide details. Faisal Shuaib, executive director of the National Primary Health Care Development Agency, said Nigeria received about 5 million AstraZeneca shots last month from the Covax global-sharing facility, both purchases and donations. Nigeria also had commitments for 11.99 million and 12.2 million doses of Pfizer/BioNTech and Moderna Covid-19 vaccines, respectively, he said. The government has purchased nearly 40 million Johnson &amp; Johnson vaccine doses, which would be coming in batches, said Shuaib. The US had administered 442,005,260 doses of Covid-19 vaccines in the country as of Monday morning, the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said. This from Reuters: Those figures are up from the 440,559,613 vaccine doses the CDC said had gone into arms by 14 November. The agency said 99.2% of the population aged 65 years and above had received at least one dose as of 6am ET on Monday. The CDC tally includes two-dose vaccines from Moderna and Pfizer/BioNTech, as well as Johnson &amp; Johnson’s one-shot vaccine. About 30.1 million people have received a booster dose of either Pfizer, Moderna or Johnson &amp; Johnson’s Covid-19 vaccine. Booster doses from Moderna and Johnson &amp; Johnson were authorized by the US health regulator on 20 October. The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has advised Americans not to travel to the Czech Republic, Hungary and Iceland because of a rising number of Covid-19 cases in those countries. The CDC raised its travel recommendation to “Level Four: Very High” for the three countries, telling Americans they should avoid travel there. The CDC separately lowered its Covid-19 travel advisory to “Level One: Low” for Japan, India, Pakistan, Liberia, Gambia and Mozambique. Germany’s prospective coalition government is pondering lockdown restrictions for the unvaccinated, as infections in the country keep soaring. Measures could include requiring the unvaccinated to show proof of a negative test before travelling by bus or train. “The possibility of being able to order contact restrictions in private and in public spaces is to be added to the catalog of measures,” agreed the possible partners of the so-called traffic light coalition, which is expected to be formed. The leader of the Green Party Robert Habeck told ARD: “Contact prohibition or 2G regulation [a rule stipulating people must either be vaccinated or recovered from the virus] means in large parts: Lockdown for unvaccinated people. That is the vulgar translation.” The federal states should also get legislative tools that would enable them to prohibit or restrict leisure, cultural and sporting events as well as gatherings, and to prohibit entry to health facilities, prohibit the sale and public consumption of alcohol and close universities. Green parliamentary party leader Katrin Göring-Eckardt announced Monday afternoon that a vaccine mandate for certain professional groups such as nurses would also be introduced. “We will get this off the ground,” she said, adding that her party was in agreement with the SPD and FDP, the other two parties hoping to make up the next government. On Monday, the Robert Koch Institute (RKI) said public health authorities had reported a record 303 new infections per 100,000 people over the past seven days - the first rise above 300 since the beginning of the pandemic. Hello, I’m Jedidajah Otte and I’ll be taking over for the next few hours. Feel free to get in touch with updates, tips and pointers relevant to our coronavirus coverage, I’m on Twitter @JedySays or you can email me. UK TV presenter Craig Revel Horwood has tested positive for Covid, meaning he will not take part in the BBC show Strictly Come Dancing this weekend. The judge is the first member of the show’s broadcast team to test positive for the virus and is having to self isolate. A Strictly spokesperson said: “Craig Revel Horwood has tested positive for Covid-19 and is now self-isolating following the latest government guidelines. While Craig will not be taking part in Strictly Come Dancing this weekend, all being well he will return the following week.” Below is a rundown of the latest Coronavirus news from around the world: • Britain’s booster vaccine rollout is to be extended to people aged between 40 and 49, officials said, in a bid to boost waning immunity in the population ahead of the colder winter months. • France has reported 1,257 people in intensive care units for Covid, a rise of 47 on the previous days figures. It reported 91,298 deaths now that have taken place in hospital, up by 70. • Italy reported 44 Coronavirus deaths on Monday, up from 36 on Sunday, the health ministry said. The country also reported 5,144 infection cases, down from 7,569 a day earlier. • UK prime minister Boris Johnson warned people not to be complacent, saying that a new wave of Covid has “steadily swept through central Europe” and is now affecting the nation’s closest neighbours. • The coronavirus has killed at least 5,098,386 people since the outbreak emerged in China in December 2019, according to a tally from official sources compiled by AFP on Monday. • On the day its lockdown of unvaccinated people begins, Austria has become the first European country to take radical action in a bid to increase take-up of jabs as new cases surge. A doctor was suspended by a Houston hospital for spreading misinformation about Covid-19. Houston Methodist hospital said Dr Mary Bowden, an ear, throat, and nose specialist, spread “dangerous misinformation” about Covid and shared personal and professional opinions the hospital deemed “harmful to the community”. Bowden, a recent hire, posted several tweets stating that she was against Covid-19 vaccine mandates. She also used Twitter to promote Ivermectin as a treatment for Covid-19, despite several public health officials having warned the public not to use the anti-parasitic drug, which has uses in humans and animals, as a coronavirus treatment. Battling a surge in Covid-19 cases, Switzerland’s week-long immunisation drive nudged up its vaccination rate, figures showed Monday, as the president accepted that few more people may come forward for jabs. The wealthy Alpine nation launched a “vaccination week” to address the drop-off in uptake of the jab in recent months. The number of Covid-19 vaccine doses administered during last week’s nationwide push was up 38 percent on the week before, Monday’s health ministry figures showed, according to the ATS national news agency. Switzerland had just 10% of the population fully vaccinated by April 23, racing to 50% three months later on July 29. But in the subsequent months that swift progress has tailed off drastically. Halfway through November, 65% of the Swiss population are now fully vaccinated, with a further two percent having had their first dose of a two-jab course. Employers in Latvia are allowed to dismiss employees who refuse to get vaccinated against Covid-19 from Monday, under new rules aimed at taming the pandemic in the EU member state. Elected politicians without a vaccination certificate or evidence of having recovered from Covid-19 will also be barred from their duties and receive no salary until they get vaccinated. The ban could include two parliamentarians who are refusing to get inoculated. Below is a summary of the latest developments: Europe • Britain’s booster vaccine rollout is to be extended to people aged between 40 and 49, officials said, in a bid to boost waning immunity in the population ahead of the colder winter months. • Dutch hospitals are feeling the strain from a surge in Covid-19 patients but the worst has yet to come, the head of the country’s hospital association said. • Germany’s chancellor Angela Merkel said that the world needs to be better prepared to probe the origins of diseases and welcomed the creation of a new World Health Organization advisory group on dangerous pathogens. • International travel to Spain will likely recover some two thirds of its pre-pandemic levels in the fourth quarter of this year, the tourism minister Reyes Maroto said. • Russia reported 1,211 deaths from Covid-19 in the past 24 hours, close to an all-time high of 1,241 reported last week, as well as 38,420 new cases. Americas • Florida lawmakers will meet in a special legislative session, called by Republican Governor Ron DeSantis with the goal of thwarting coronavirus vaccine mandates. • US president Joe Biden’s vaccine requirements are prompting more Americans to get Covid shots, White House press secretary Jen Psaki said on Friday. Asia-pacific • Singapore will allow vaccinated arrivals from five more countries, including Indonesia and India, to access the country without quarantine via its travel lanes from Nov. 29, its transport minister said. • Japan will promote the establishment of production bases for semiconductors, Covid vaccines and drugs as part of Prime Minister Fumio Kishida’s economic stimulus, a draft plan seen by Reuters showed. • A Maori tribe that claims New Zealand’s most famous haka as its heritage told anti-vaccine protesters to stop using the traditional performance to promote their message. • China is battling the spread of its biggest outbreak, according to the latest numbers, with travellers from a city where infections have grown faster than elsewhere in the country subject to tough quarantine rules in nearby areas. Middle-east and Africa • A ban on public sector employees entering their offices if they are unvaccinated and untested for Covid-19 took effect in Egypt on Monday as the government pushes to accelerate vaccination rates in the final weeks of the year. • Israel’s economy is expected to grow 7.1% in 2021 and 4.7% in 2022, the finance ministry said following a rapid recovery. The country also said on Sunday children aged five to 11 would be eligible for vaccination. France has reported 1,257 people in intensive care units for Covid, a rise of 47 on the previous days figures. It reported 91,298 deaths now that have taken place in hospital, up by 70. In Northern Ireland, Sinn Fein deputy first minister Michelle O’Neill said her party was prepared to take “whatever steps are necessary” to avoid another lockdown. “The executive will meet again on Wednesday with a focus on the huge pressures in the health service,” she tweeted. “We will continue to be guided by the health advice to take whatever steps are necessary to protect the public and avoid another lock down scenario.” In Kiev, the capital of Ukraine, there have been double the number of cremations as deaths from Coronavirus soar. The numbers are up vastly compared to the summer months, its spokesman told AFP, as the country battles a devastating new wave of coronavirus infections and low vaccination rates. One of Europe’s poorest countries, Ukraine recently reported record numbers of daily Covid-19 deaths and cases, resulting in a significant increase in burials and, in particular, cremations. “To date, compared to the summer period, the number of processions has doubled,” Andriy Yashchenko, a spokesman for the Kiev crematorium, told AFP. “If during the summer there was on average 60 processions per day, now there are between 100 and 120,” he said. Ukraine reported 442 daily coronavirus fatalities on Monday, the second-highest number in the world after Russia. Ukrainian authorities initially struggled to source vaccine doses and have since fought to convince vaccine-sceptic Ukrainians to get inoculated. But new restrictions requiring vaccinations have seen people across the country flock to vaccine centres. The crematorium – one of three such facilities in the ex-Soviet country – is part of one of the oldest and largest cemeteries in Kiev. Yashchenko said the facility has stayed open for hours more than usual in recent weeks, and has sometimes been operating until midnight. He added that the cremation of coronavirus victims is different as indoor services and open caskets are prohibited. On Monday, an AFP correspondent saw two processions that followed the cremations of coronavirus victims. Relatives of the victims distributed candles outside the building, and a priest read a prayer before the closed coffins were taken away for cremation. Yashchenko said that in October the facility cremated over 2,800 people, compared to 1,400 in August. Since the start of the pandemic, Ukraine has recorded more than three million coronavirus cases and 77,000 deaths. Italy reported 44 Coronavirus deaths on Monday, up from 36 on Sunday, the health ministry said. The country also reported 5,144 infection cases, down from 7,569 a day earlier. UK prime minister Boris Johnson said that a new wave of Covid has “steadily swept through central Europe” and is now affecting the nation’s closest neighbours. He said: “Our friends on the continent have been forced to respond with various degrees of new restrictions, from full lockdowns, to lockdowns for the unvaccinated, to restrictions on business opening hours and restrictions on social gatherings.” “We don’t yet know the extent to which this new wave will wash up on our shores, but history shows we cannot afford to be complacent.” The government said a further 47 people had died within 28 days of testing positive for Covid-19 as of Monday, bringing the UK total to 142,945. Separate figures published by the Office for National Statistics show there have been 167,000 deaths registered in the UK where Covid-19 was mentioned on the death certificate. As of 9am on Monday, there had been a further 39,705 lab-confirmed Covid-19 cases in the UK, the government said. You can follow what is happening over on the UK blog as Boris Johnson is about to hold a press briefing. Below is a summary of the global news in the last few hours: Belgium’s government is bringing forward a meeting to decide on tighter measures to control the spread of Covid-19 amid a rapid increase in infections and hospital admissions. The UK’s Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) has made two significant announcements, recommending rolling out booster vaccines to those aged between 40 and 49, and recommending a second dose of the Pfizer vaccine to people aged 16 and 17. The coronavirus has killed at least 5,098,386 people since the outbreak emerged in China in December 2019, according to a tally from official sources compiled by AFP on Monday. On the day its lockdown of unvaccinated people begins, Austria has become the first European country to take radical action in a bid to increase take-up of jabs as new cases surge. The Irish prime minister has said he is “extremely concerned” by the rise in covid cases just weeks after the strictest lockdown in the EU was lifted. On Monday night, the government’s cabinet subcommittee on Covid is to meet to discuss pausing some of the easing of restrictions including the return to office work. It comes amid fears a relaxation in public behaviour in relation to masks and Covid certificate checks in restaurants and indoor hospitality is leading to a rise in cases. On Monday, the chief executive of the national Health Service Executive said the situation in hospitals was “grim”. The department of health was notified of 3,805 new cases on Monday with 106 patients in intensive care units, just under half that in January. Paul Reid said this was “very concerning” as hospitals were now also open to other patients on elective surgery unlike earlier in the year. “Now we’ve a whole set of non-Covid care taking place in our hospitals alongside rising Covid cases. The situation is grim and something has to give,” he told RTE. The figures come just weeks after the night time economy was re-opened after 20 months. Official data shows last week showed the median age of those with Covid was 34. Cineworld’s box office revenues surpassed pre-pandemic levels at its cinemas in the UK and Ireland last month as blockbusters such as No Time to Die, Dune and Venom draw film fans back to the big screen. The world’s second-largest cinema operator, which owns the Cineworld and Picturehouse chains in the UK and Regal Theatres in the US, said box office and concession revenues at its UK and Irish operation in October reached 127% of the level in the equivalent month in 2019. Shares in Cineworld jumped 11%, making the company the biggest riser on the FTSE 250 on Monday morning, as investors cheered the news of a recovery in the Covid-battered cinema industry. Austria became the first EU country on Monday to impose a lockdown on the unvaccinated and the first to start inoculating children as young as five, as the virus strengthens its grip on the continent. Surging infection rates have placed western Europe once again at the heart of the global epidemic and governments are being forced to take action, the Netherlands already announcing the region’s first partial lockdown of the winter. Austria has inoculated about 65% of its 9 million people, below the EU average of 67%. Daily new infection rates have been hovering at about 12,000 in recent weeks, up from roughly 2,000 a day in September. Here are the latest developments in the coronavirus crisis: Austria lockdown for unvaccinated Austria’s lockdown of unvaccinated people begins, the first European country to take radical action in a bid to increase take-up of jabs as new cases surge. Peru also gets tough Peru, the country with the world’s highest Covid-19 mortality rate, is to require adults to show proof of vaccination to enter indoor spaces from next month. India opens to tourists India opens again to foreign tourists from countries with reciprocal agreements after a 20-month ban due to the pandemic. UK to expand booster shots Britain’s booster programme for vaccinations will be expanded to all healthy adults aged 40 to 49 after scientists give the green light. Filipinos back to school Thousands of children in the Philippines are allowed to return to classrooms for the first time since the start of the pandemic, as a pilot reopening of schools gets under way. Italy targets radical anti-vaxxers Italian police raid radical anti-vaccine activists alleged to have called for violence, including urging “hangings” and “shootings” of people supporting virus restrictions. Cambodia welcomes jabbed Cambodia announces that fully vaccinated foreign travellers can visit the kingdom without quarantine, giving a boost to the Covid-battered tourism industry. Japan economic hit Japan’s economy shrank far more than expected in the three months to September, as a surge in virus cases hit spending and supply chain issues hampered business. More than 5 million dead The coronavirus has killed at least 5,098,386 people since the outbreak emerged in China in December 2019, according to a tally from official sources compiled by AFP on Monday. The US has suffered the most Covid-related deaths with 763,092, followed by Brazil with 611,283, India with 463,655, Mexico with 291,147, and Russia with 256,597. The countries with the highest number of new deaths were Russia with 1,211, followed by Ukraine with 442 and Romania with 233. Taking into account excess mortality linked to Covid-19, the WHO estimates the overall death toll could be two to three times higher. Spain’s medicines agency has authorised Catalonia-based pharmaceutical group Hipra to test a vaccine it is developing on more than 1,000 volunteers, the prime minister Pedro Sánchez has said. Hipra will carry out the so-called phase 2 trial – the second stage of a three-round trial process – on volunteers at 10 hospitals around Spain, Sánchez said. Speaking at an event to present how European Union recovery funds will be channelled into health investments, Sanchez described the vaccine development as “extraordinary news”. “It demonstrates that Spain can position itself at the forefront of the response to Covid,” he said, adding that the government had given a €15m (£12.78m, $17.17m) grant to develop the drug. Hipra, a pharmaceutical lab that mainly researches and manufactures veterinary vaccines, has been working on two shots. One is based on the same RNA messenger technology used in shots made by Pfizer and Moderna, while the second, which has just received approval for trial, uses a recombinant protein like that of US-based drugmaker Novavax. Hipra has said on its website that it anticipates being able to produce 600m doses in 2022 and double that figure the following year. Stormont is facing renewed calls to introduce vaccine passports after escalating pressures on the health system saw ambulances diverted away from a main hospital. Craigavon Area hospital in County Armagh stopped receiving ambulances carrying patients with non-life-threatening conditions on Sunday night due to severe capacity issues in its emergency department. At one point, there were 108 patients waiting in A&amp;E, 32 needing hospital admission. However, the hospital, which had 123 Covid-19 inpatients last night, had only three available beds. As a result, the British Medical Association called on the Stormont Executive to revisit the issue of vaccine passports as a priority. Making certification a legal entry requirement for hospitality venues has been credited with driving up vaccination rates among young people in the Irish Republic. In Scotland, the executive has recommended that nightclubs and other venues carry out Covid entry checks and an official app has been developed to enable people to show proof of their vaccine status. However, the administration has stopped short of making it a legal requirement of entry. A “blizzard” of cases coming from Europe could derail Christmas plans unless people in the UK take up the offer of booster jabs, Boris Johnson has warned. The prime minister said there was a “storm of infection” in mainland Europe, but the top-up vaccinations offered the best form of protection for the UK. He stressed there was nothing in the domestic data that suggested a need to increase restrictions in England. Ministers have set out contingency measures – a “plan B” – if there is unsustainable pressure on the NHS. The use of face coverings could become mandatory, vaccine passports could be required for some busy venues and people could be asked to work from home where possible. But Johnson said: We don’t see anything in the data at the moment to suggest that we need to go to plan B, we’re sticking with plan A. But what we have certainly got to recognise is there is a storm of infection out there in parts of Europe, you can see those numbers ticking up very sharply in some of our continental friends. And we’ve just got to recognise that there is always a risk that a blizzard could come from the east again, as the months get colder. The best protection for our country is for everybody to go forward and get their booster. The UK’s Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) has made two significant announcements, recommending rolling out booster vaccines to those aged between 40 and 49, and recommending a second dose of the Pfizer vaccine to people aged 16 and 17. England’s deputy chief medical officer, Prof Jonathan Van-Tam, has said the country may still face “a bumpy few months ahead” and that “everyone has a key role to play in achieving as safe and disruption free winter as possible. Wear face coverings in crowded places if it is practical to do so. Increase indoor ventilation whenever you can. Make sure you are vaccinated.” Dr June Raine, of the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA), said that studying the data from the booster programme for over-50s in the UK there were “no new safety concerns” and “the booster doses are effective”. Outsourcing company Serco said profits would be higher than expected in 2021 thanks to greater demand from the UK government for its Covid-19 services, including test and trace. Conservative party chairman Oliver Dowden has backed AstraZeneca’s controversial announcement that it is moving to seek a profit from its Covid vaccine sales. Dowden also ruled out the UK government following the example of Austria and imposing lockdown conditions on people who are unvaccinated. Germany’s coronavirus infection rate has risen to its highest level since the start of the pandemic, as the three parties in talks to form a new government plan an expansion of measures to tackle the pandemic. The seven-day incidence rate – the number of people per 100,000 to be infected over the last week – rose to 303 from 289 the previous day, figures from the Robert Koch Institute showed. Austria’s lockdown restrictions on those who are unvaccinated came into force today. “My aim is very clear: to get the unvaccinated to get vaccinated, not to lock up the unvaccinated,” Chancellor Alexander Schallenberg told ORF radio. The government in Belgium has moved a meeting to debate new measures against Covid from Friday to Wednesday in order to have them in place for the weekend, as hospital admissions in the country are up 30% on a weekly basis. China is battling the spread of its biggest Covid-19 outbreak caused by the Delta variant as case numbers in the north-eastern city of Dalian outpace anywhere else in the country. The Dalian outbreak has prompted China to confine nearly 1,500 university students to their dormitories and hotels in the city. Florida lawmakers will meet on Monday for a week-long special legislative session called by the Republican governor, Ron DeSantis, with the goal of thwarting coronavirus vaccine mandates imposed by businesses or government agencies. Israel gave the green light on Sunday to start vaccinating children aged between five and 11 against Covid-19 using Pfizer/BioNTech jabs, following the example of the US. Cambodia reopened its borders to fully vaccinated travellers on Monday, two weeks earlier than originally planned, as it emerges from a lengthy lockdown bolstered by one of the world’s highest rates of immunisation against Covid-19. Classrooms across the Philippines are filling up with students again for the first time in nearly two years. Children have been allowed back for face-to-face learning from Monday as the country begins its pilot implementation of limited in-person classes. That is your lot from me, Martin Belam, today. Kevin Rawlinson will be here shortly to take you through the rest of the days coronavirus news from the UK and around the world. Belgium’s government is bringing forward a meeting to decide on tighter measures to control the spread of Covid-19 amid a rapid increase in infections and hospital admissions. The meeting, originally set for Friday, was brought forward to Wednesday so that any measure approved midweek could be operational by the weekend, the government said this morning. Associated Press notes that hospital admissions are up 30% on a weekly basis, and the number of patients in intensive care have risen to more than 500, putting more strain on hospitals in the nation of 11 million. Belgium has just gone through an extended holiday weekend and no precise new caseload figures were published on Monday. Authorities reimposed some pandemic restrictions three weeks ago after relaxing them just a few weeks earlier. They also expanded a nationwide use of the Covid-19 pass. But infections have continued to rise, and the government is expected to look into further areas where face mask-wearing should be made mandatory. It is also set to consider turning its advice on working from home into a mandatory order to prevent employees from mingling. It will be too soon to judge what impact Austria’s lockdown that targets the unvaccinated will have on the vaccination rates in the country, but I’ve just seen this picture from this morning in Salzburg, where there is a large queue to get the jab at the “Impfbus”. One of the questions for England’s deputy chief medical officer, Prof Jonathan Van-Tam, at that press briefing was around the ethics of using vaccine doses to deliver booster shots in a wealthy country like the UK, when there are developing nations struggling to even put one dose into people’s arms. He said: Nobody working in public health would question for one second the ethos that until we’re all safe from this virus, no one is fully safe. And there is of course a global public health concern about making sure that as many countries and as many people around the world have access to these vaccines. But equally, our job as advisors to the UK government is to give advice relevant to the UK, and that is what we do when we advise our ministers and the UK has a massive programme of vaccine donation underway in parallel to our own vaccine programme, which is advised by JCVI. This is another key stat that Jonathan Van-Tam gave in his message – looking at the hospitalisation rates. Pippa Crear, political editor at the Daily Mirror, sums it up in one tweet: The precise numbers given were: The rate of admission to hospital with Covid is 1.4 per 100,000 if double vaccinated, but 7.8 for 100,000 if unvaccinated, which is fivefold higher. And for those aged 30 to 39, those rates are 4.1 per 100,000 for the double vaccinated and 17.3 per 100,000 for the unvaccinated, which is four times higher. England’s deputy chief medical officer, Prof Jonathan Van-Tam, has said the country may still face “a bumpy few months ahead”. At this morning’s Downing Street briefing he said: The UK Covid programme is evolving as the data evolves, with further evolutionary steps announced today. And this is how we go forwards. Wait for the data. Move the dial, wait again for more data, move the dial. Develop confidence and certainty with every step. People keep asking me about Christmas. I think for Christmas and the winter period, we can expect respiratory viruses to be around and we are particularly concerned that flu will come back and cause us problems, and it could be quite a bumpy few months ahead. But everyone has a key role to play in achieving as safe and disruption free winter as possible. Wear face coverings in crowded places if it is practical to do so. Increase indoor ventilation whenever you can. Make sure you are vaccinated. And like any medicine, make sure you finish the course. And when you are called for your booster, please come forward so that we as a whole UK can get on and finish this job. England’s deputy chief medical officer, Prof Jonathan Van-Tam, has made the following comments at a Downing Street briefing on the coronavirus. He was delivering his comments remotely from a clinical setting. The key points he made included: I believe that if the booster programme is successful, and with very high uptake, we can massively reduce the worry about hospitalisation and death due to Covid at Christmas, and for the rest of this winter, for literally millions of people. It really is as simple as and decisive as that. Whilst vaccines have fundamentally changed the course of the pandemic in the UK, and the high uptake of the initial programme has saved countless lives and help restore our freedoms in an unprecedented way. It is also clear that protection will wane over time. The JCVI has acted decisively and recommended that the booster programme is now extended to 40-to-49s and 16- to-17-year-olds. I’ve full confidence in both of the decisions that have been announced today. The UK expects it to have enough supplies of vaccine to implement these changes. The details of how to access the boosters for these extra two layers of protection will be announced in due course by the NHS. I want to make another plea to people who have not been vaccinated or have only had one dose. It is now very clear indeed that one dose is not enough of any of the UK deployed vaccines and that no doses at all massively increases the risk of hospitalisation. Prof Wei Shen Lim of the UK’s Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) summed up his announcements like this. In summary, there are two updates we’re giving today. The first is for a booster dose for persons age 40 to 49 years old, and a second dose of the Pfizer vaccine for 16- to 17-year-olds. Both of these updates are important to maximise our protection against this virus. And I strongly urge anyone who is eligible for these vaccines to come and have those vaccines. I’ll have some quotes from England’s deputy chief medical officer, Prof Jonathan Van-Tam in a moment, he is following the technical announcements with what he said were some “over-arching comments”. Dr June Raine of the MHRA also spoke on the safety of vaccine delivery to younger people. She said: We’ve closely monitored the safety of Covid-19 vaccines in individuals under 18. Our review of reports of suspected side-effects does not raise any additional safety issues specific to this age group. As is set out in our summary report, there have been a small number of reports of suspected myocarditis heart inflammation associated with Pfizer and Moderna vaccines in both the UK and internationally. This is a recognised very rare potential risk with these two vaccines. We’re closely monitoring it and importantly, now that we have more experience of use in the under-30s. In the UK, we are not detecting any increase in risk with the second dose. So our messages to people aged 16 and 17 is it’s safe to have a second dose of the Pfizer vaccine. And if you’re called for your second vaccination, please come forward and this ensures that you’re further protected again There will be a difference with the dose of Moderna delivered as a booster, said Prof Wei Shen Lim of the JCVI. He said: I’d like to just mention the dose use for the Moderna booster. The dose used is 50 micrograms, which is half the dose used in the primary cause which is 100 micrograms. This use of a lower dose of vaccine for the booster dose is a recognised method of boosting vaccine-induced immunity. It has been used for years and is continuing to be used now in other routine immunisation programmes, such as the booster doses used in against diphtheria, tetanus, and pertussis. This is not an unusual thing to do. A lower dose for the booster dose is a very usual method of boosting the immune system. Chairman of the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) Prof Wei Shen Lim has just made the following announcement at a Downing Street press briefing: the booster jab programme in the UK is extended to people aged 40 to 49. Either Pfizer or Moderna can be used, regardless of the type of vaccine received for the first two doses. The gap again will be six months from the second dose of vaccine. Dr June Raine has just given an update in the UK from the perspective of the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA). She stated that the safety of vaccines is their top priority, and that they remain confident that the Covid vaccines available in the UK are “very effective and acceptably safe”. She said: Since the booster doses began to be rolled out in people aged 50 and over from September. We have identified no new safety concerns. Our careful review of the data at the time of approval found that the booster doses are effective. Our ongoing safety monitoring has found the majority of adverse effects to be mild to moderate relating to reactogenicity such as a sore arm or headache or tiredness. When you’re called for your booster dose. In the next phase, you can come forward confident that the benefits in preventing serious Covid-19 far outweigh any risks. In the UK, we are expecting shortly a press briefing from England’s deputy chief medical officer, Prof Jonathan Van-Tam, alongside chairman of the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) Prof Wei Shen Lim and chief executive of the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) Dr June Raine. The assumption is they are going to announce that booster jabs will be made available for the under-50s in the UK. The outsourcing company Serco said profits would be higher than expected in 2021 thanks to greater demand from the UK government for its Covid-19 services, including test and trace. Serco raised its full-year revenue guidance from £4.3bn to £4.4bn on Monday, helping underlying profits rise to at least £225m, up from previous forecasts of £200m. The Hampshire-based company said the uplift could be explained by the fact the volume of its Covid-related work in the UK and Australia “have been higher, and have continued for longer, than we anticipated”. Serco runs large parts of the UK’s largely privatised test-and-trace service, which is labelled NHS test and trace. The firm runs a fifth of Covid-19 testing sites and half the tier 3 contact tracers, who are mostly required to phone the contacts of people who have tested positive. That work was extended in June, when the company won a £322m contract to keep Covid-19 test centres running in England and Northern Ireland for another 12 months, with an option to add another six more. Read more of Kalyeena Makortoff’s report here: Serco expects bigger profits thanks to Covid test-and-trace work Andrew Sparrow has just gone live with our UK politics live blog for the day. I’ll be continuing here with the top Covid lines from the UK and around the world. Russian authorities have issued the latest Covid numbers from the country which has been in the grip of a coronavirus wave that led to the government calling a national paid week off work to try and break the chain of transmission. They are now waiting to see if has had an effect. Russia on Monday reported 1,211 deaths from Covid-19 in the last 24 hours, close to the all-time high of 1,241 reported last week. There were 38,420 new coronavirus cases. “My aim is very clear: to get the unvaccinated to get vaccinated, not to lock up the unvaccinated,” Chancellor Alexander Schallenberg told ORF radio as he explained Austria’s lockdown on the unvaccinated. Many Austrians are sceptical about vaccines, a view encouraged by the far-right Freedom party, the third-biggest in parliament, which is planning a protest against the government’s coronavirus policies on Saturday. There has been a rise in first vaccinations since the unvaccinated were barred from places including restaurants, cafes, theatres and ski lifts last week. Police are conducting extra checks and interior minister Karl Nehammer said on Sunday they would check the vaccination status of all members of the public they interact with. Francois Murphy reports for Reuters that there are widespread doubts including among Schallenberg’s conservatives and the police about whether this lockdown can be properly enforced. It can be hard to verify, for example, whether an unvaccinated person is on their way to work, which is allowed, or going to shop for non-essential items, which is not. The UK’s vaccine advisers are understood to have approved the rollout of Covid booster jabs to people under 50, with a minister saying an announcement was due on Monday. The Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) was scheduled to set out the next steps in the booster programme “later today”, Oliver Dowden, the Conservative party co-chair, told Sky News. Dowden said: “It’s up to them but I would hope that we would see a further expansion of the booster rollout. But we’ll wait for their announcement.” While Dowden did not set out what changes were expected, it is understood that the JCVI has already decided that the scheme for boosters – a third injection to top up potentially waning immunity – should be extended to younger age groups. Those currently eligible for a booster, which is usually given six months after the second dose, include those aged 50 or over, or anyone younger seen as clinically very vulnerable to Covid. Others who are eligible include frontline health and care workers, or those who care for someone at high risk from Covid. There is a separate programme of third injections for people who have a compromised immune system, for whom vaccines are often less effective. Read more of Peter Walker’s report here: UK vaccine advisers ‘set to approve Covid booster jabs for under-50s’ Germany’s coronavirus infection rate has risen to its highest level since the start of the pandemic, public health figures showed on Monday, as the three parties in talks to form a new government plan an expansion of measures to tackle the pandemic. The seven-day incidence rate – the number of people per 100,000 to be infected over the last week – rose to 303 from 289 the previous day, figures from the Robert Koch Institute showed on Monday. Paul Carrel notes for Reuters that the number of deaths increased by 43 to a total of 97,715. The three parties in talks to form a coalition plan to tighten proposed measures to tackle the spread of the new wave of infections, Greens co-leader Robert Habeck said before their plans go to parliament on Thursday. “We are expanding the toolbox compared to the proposals introduced in the first reading,” Habeck told broadcaster ARD. The measures will include contact restrictions, an amendment seen by Reuters showed. Florida lawmakers will meet on Monday for a week-long special legislative session called by the Republican governor, Ron DeSantis, with the goal of thwarting coronavirus vaccine mandates imposed by businesses or government agencies. DeSantis recently announced he is running for re-election in 2022 but is seen by many as a potential presidential candidate in 2024 – particularly if Donald Trump decides not to run again. The special legislative session will be about “a combination of policy and politics”, said Aubrey Jewett, a political science professor at the University of Central Florida, adding that DeSantis is following Trump’s lead in being staunchly against mask and vaccine mandates. According to an agenda released by the governor’s office, a body of legislators dominated by Republicans will consider four bills to impose penalties on businesses and local governments that require workers to be vaccinated against Covid-19. “No cop, no firefighter, no nurse, nobody should be losing their job because of these jabs,” DeSantis said in a media release, echoing a previous plea for first responders from other states to relocate to Florida if they do not wish to be vaccinated by mandate. “We’re going to be striking a blow for freedom,” DeSantis said. Read more here: Florida lawmakers’ special session aims to thwart Covid vaccine mandates In the UK, Conservative party chairman Oliver Dowden has backed AstraZeneca’s controversial announcement that it is moving to seek a profit from its Covid vaccine sales. Britain’s biggest pharma firm late last week said it expects the vaccine to move to “modest profitability” as new orders are received. This morning on Sky News, asked about it, Dowden said: Well, I think the drug companies like AstraZeneca, who invested huge amounts of money into the vaccine programme, are entitled to have a profit from their investment. Actually, if you look at the Oxford AstraZeneca model, and contrast it to others around the world, the number of very, very low cost doses that are made available particularly to developing countries is an exemplary model. Mike Tildesley, the professor who specialises in infectious diseases at Warwick University and who has been a media regular during the pandemic in the UK has been on Sky News this morning. He was asked about his views on the outlook for Covid in the UK for the next few weeks and said he was “cautiously optimistic”: If we look at his year, compared with where we were last year, of course it’s not just the overall number of cases, hospital admissions and deaths we need to look at, but also the trends. If we look at that, we can see that although there has been quite a lot of variation over the past few weeks, and we’re still reporting very high numbers of cases, the total number of daily hospitalisations and the total number of deaths are quite long way below where we were in November last year, which should give us some level of confidence. Questioned on the situation with rising caseloads on the European continent overall, he said: If we look at the situation in Germany, for example, over the past couple of weeks cases have been rising in a really concerning way. And that’s the really key thing in terms of whether we need to react in response to what’s going on in Europe. When we already have a high number of cases, it doesn’t necessarily mean we need more restrictions to prevent what might come in from Europe, but really what it actually is, is a message that really shows us how important it is to get vaccinated so that we do prevent cases starting to rise again and of course that’s spilling over into hospital admissions. He was also asked about the vaccination of children, with the news that Israel is following the lead of the US and other countries like Austria in sanctioning jabs for the five- to 11-year-old age group. On this he said: I think there’s some really tough decisions that have to be made actually over the next few weeks. When it gets to younger people what they have to look at is the benefits and the risks to the individual. And the thing with very young children is generally they don’t get very sick. But by vaccinating them it protects the rest of the population indirectly, so that’s the decision that the government guided by Joint Committee for Vaccinations and Immunisations are going to have to make over the next few weeks Prof Tildesley’s long-term prediction remains that “Covid is probably likely to become endemic and we probably are going to have to manage it with repeated vaccination campaigns for years to come.” Agence France-Presse has an update from Cambodia, where prime minister Hun Sen made an unexpected announcement last night that all fully vaccinated international travellers, tourists and businesspeople could visit the whole of Cambodia freely without quarantine from today. The decision overrode the previous reopening plan, under which popular beach spots Sihanoukville and the island of Koh Rong, as well as Dara Sakor – a Chinese-developed resort zone – were set to welcome visitors from 30 November. And the reopening of Siem Reap – the gateway to the world heritage-listed Angkor Wat complex – is brought forward from January. Hun Sen said travellers would have to show two negative Covid tests - one taken no less than 72 hours before travel and one on arrival in Cambodia. “When they arrive and we see they have received two doses of vaccine, we will take swabs for rapid tests. After results show they are free of Covid-19, they are allowed to travel across Cambodia,” Hun Sen said in an audio message posted on his Facebook page. “I order the ministry of health, the ministry of tourism and relevant sectors to implement these measures from 15 November 2021 onwards,” he said, adding that the move was a quick way to re-open the country. During his interview with Sky News this morning, Conservative chairman Oliver Dowden ruled out the UK government following the example of Austria and imposing lockdown conditions on people who are unvaccinated. He told Sky News: That’s not something we’re currently contemplating. Of course it is the case – although it’s an entirely separate matter – that in relation to very high risk areas such as care homes, we are requiring people to have those those double jabs. It’s always been a British tradition, I think, to move on a consensual voluntary basis. So we have no plans to have that kind of differentiated approach between the vaccine and non-vaccine. There were a couple of bits of Covid interest in Conservative chairmen Oliver Dowden’s first interview of the day in the UK, which was on Sky News. He – not quite definitively – ruled out any further Covid restrictions being imposed before Christmas. Although he did concede that this was the case last year, only for the government to change tack at the very last minute. He said this year the vaccine was the difference, and urged people to take booster jabs when called forward for them. He said: I can assure you there are no plans or anything else to stop Christmas happening. The huge difference this time is the vaccine, and the huge impact of the vaccine. And the way we keep that vaccine topped up, the way that we keep that wall of defence protected, is to get your booster when you get the all. Because if you compare to where we were last year, zero people had the vaccine. We’re now at around 89-90% of adults with the vaccine. So that is what is protecting us from going back to what we had at Christmas. It’s in our hands, so if all of us, all of your viewers, if you get the booster when the call comes that is the biggest wall of defence that we have against Covid. And if you look at some of the numbers, at the end of October infection numbers were roughly comparable to where they were mid–January last year. Remember that was really at the height last year, but hospitalisations were 74% lower. Now that shows you the power of the vaccine. So I’m confident that if we stick the course, if people take the boosters when they’re asked to do so, that vaccine will hold up and we’ll be able to have a decent Christmas this year. Hello, it is Martin Belam here in London, taking over from Samantha Lock in Sydney. I’ll be bringing you any Covid lines that emerge from the UK media round this morning as well as coronavirus news from around the world. Oliver Dowden, chairman of the Conservative party is doing the interviews for the government in the UK. Here are the latest UK figures. China is battling the spread of its biggest Covid-19 outbreak caused by the Delta variant as case numbers in the northeastern city of Dalian outpace anywhere else in the country, Chinese authorities said 32 new domestically transmitted infections with confirmed symptoms were reported for 14 November, which is a drop from the 89 reported the day earlier. However, most of the reported cases were in Dalian. That brings the tally of local cases since 17 October to 1,308, Reuters calculations based on official data showed, surpassing the 1,280 local cases from a summer Delta outbreak. This marks China’s most widespread Delta outbreak, which has affected 21 provinces, regions and municipalities. While it is smaller than many outbreaks in other countries, Chinese authorities are anxious to block any further transmissions under the government’s zero-tolerance guidance. Since Dalian’s first local symptomatic patients from the latest outbreak was reported on 4 November, the port city of 7.5 million people has detected an average of about 24 new local cases a day, more than any other Chinese cities, according to Reuters calculations. The Dalian outbreak has prompted China to confine nearly 1,500 university students to their dormitories and hotels in the city. The order was issued Sunday after several dozen cases were reported at Zhuanghe University City and hundreds of students were transferred to hotels for observation, the Associated Press reports. Students have been attending class remotely and having their meals delivered to their rooms. Israel gave the green light Sunday to start vaccinating children aged between five and 11 against Covid-19 using Pfizer/BioNTech jabs, following the example of the United States. “The director general of the ministry of health... authorised the vaccination of children aged five to 11 years,” the health ministry said in a statement. Israel was one of the first countries to launch a vaccination campaign last year using the jabs thanks to a deal with Pfizer that gave it access to millions of doses in exchange for data on the vaccine’s efficacy. The vaccination campaign allowed the health authorities to fully vaccinate 5.7 million of the country’s 9 million population. The authorities had already begun vaccinating minors aged 12 to 17 but decided to lower the age threshold in the wake of trials by Pfizer and recommendations from a panel of Israeli scientists. The ministry will announce the date for the start of inoculations for young children in coming days. Classrooms across the Philippines are filling up with students again for the first time in nearly 2 years. Children have been allowed back for face-to-face learning from Monday as the country begins its pilot implementation of limited in-person classes. This makes the Philippines one of the the last countries in the world to return to in-person classes after Venezuela reopened schools in late October. President Rodrigo Duterte initially approved 120 basic education schools for the dry run, with 20 private schools scheduled to begin their limited in-person classes on 22 November, local publication ABS-CBN reported. Students are checked for their body temperature, required to fill out a health declaration form, proceed to hand washing stations and sit in chairs with installed plastic barriers inside classrooms. During recess time, students are given meals that they eat on their respective seats. They were not allowed to leave their seats unless they needed to go to the restroom. In September, the United Nations children’s agency UNICEF urged education authorities to reopen schools as soon as possible in countries where millions of students were still not allowed to return to classrooms 18 months into the Covid-19 pandemic. Hello and welcome back to our Covid blog this Monday as we start the week. I’m Samantha Lock and I’ll be with you to deliver all the latest headlines. As Europe battles its fourth and fifth wave of the virus, Austria is the first nation in the region to place millions of people not fully vaccinated against coronavirus in lockdown as of Monday. The drastic move is part of an effort to deal with a surge in infections, the country’s chancellor has said while describing the nation’s vaccination rate as “shamefully low”. Anti-vaccination demonstrators protested against the annoucement at the Ballhausplatz in the capital of Vienna on Sunday. Meanwhile, Israel will go ahead with a vaccination drive for children aged 5 to 11 against Covid-19. The decision, announced by the health ministry on Sunday, followed approval by an expert panel last week after the US Food and Drug Administration granted emergency use of Pfizer’s and BioNTech’s vaccine for the age group at a 10-microgram dose. Britain expected to extend Covid booster programme to under 50s. Brazil reports lowest end of week Covid death toll in over a year. Egypt’s national research body said on Sunday that it will start clinical trials for a domestically made coronavirus vaccine. UK firm to trial T-cell Covid vaccine that could give longer immunity against Covid-19. An Oxfordshire-based company Emergex will soon start clinical trials of a second-generation vaccine against Covid-19, an easy-to-administer skin patch that uses T-cells to kill infected cells and could offer longer-lasting immunity than current vaccines. UK officials have compiled a ‘Covid exit strategy’ from April called Operation Rampdown, leaked documents reveal. Under the plan, the government could wind down testing and people would no longer be forced to isolate if they are ill from April, leaked documents reveal. Three snow leopards died of complications from Covid-19 at the Lincoln children’s zoo in Nebraska. Germany to return to work from home amid rising infections. The measure is being reintroduced under draft legislation seen by AFP on Sunday, after the home working restriction was lifted at the beginning of July. In the UK more than two million people received their Covid-19 booster in the past week, with health officials describing the numbers as record-breaking. NHS England said 2.1 million boosters were delivered between November 6-12, an increase on the 1.7 million boosters given out during the previous seven days. China donated 500,000 doses of Covid-19 vaccine on Sunday to Syria, which has one of the world’s lowest inoculation rates and what the UN called an alarming rise in cases. Japan’s economy has shrunk much faster than expected as supply shortages hit and global production bottlenecks pose increasing risks to the export-reliant nation. Outcry in China after Covid health workers kill a pet dog while owner was in quarantine. China reported 52 new confirmed coronavirus cases for 14 November compared with 89 a day earlier, its health authority said on Monday. There were no new deaths, leaving the death toll unchanged at 4,636. Cambodia reopened its borders to fully vaccinated travellers on Monday, two weeks earlier than originally planned, as it emerges from a lengthy lockdown bolstered by one of the world’s highest rates of immunisation against Covid-19.A suspected terrorist who blew himself up outside Liverpool Women’s hospital at the weekend has been named as 32-year-old Emad al-Swealmeen. Counter Terrorism Policing North West said they “strongly believe” al-Swealmeen was the passenger who died when a taxi exploded shortly before 11am on Sunday. According to reports, al-Swealmeen is believed not to be British-born and to have had Syrian and Iraqi heritage. He is said to have converted to Christianity after moving to the UK from the Middle East and was later briefly taken in by Christian volunteers Malcolm and Elizabeth Hitchcott in Liverpool. Al-Swealmeen had changed his name by deed poll to Enzo Almeni, in honour of Italian race car legend Enzo Ferrari, to sound more western on his asylum application, which subsequently failed in 2014, Hitchcott told the Daily Mail. Hitchcott told the newspaper: “He first came to the cathedral in August 2015 and wanted to convert to Christianity. He took an Alpha course, which explains the Christian faith, and completed it in November of that year. That enabled him to come to an informed decision and he changed from Islam to Christianity and was confirmed as a Christian by at least March 2017, just before he came to live with us. He was destitute at that time and we took him in.” Pictures posted on Hitchcott’s Facebook profile showed the suspect smiling and posing alongside the couple during a walk a few years prior, including a picture showing al-Swealmeen during a service at Liverpool’s Anglican Cathedral. Speaking to the BBC, Elizabeth Hitchcott said: “We’re just so, so sad. We just loved him, he was a lovely guy,” adding she and her husband were “very” shocked by the incident. Searches are under way at the Rutland Avenue address and a second address in Sutcliffe Street, which officers have said al-Swealmeen previously lived at, and police said they had recovered “significant items”. “We continue to appeal for any information about this incident and now that we have released his name any information that the public may have about al-Swealmeen, no matter how small, may be of great assistance to us.” Detectives have declared it a terrorist attack but said the motive was unclear. Official sources previously confirmed to the PA news agency the suspect was not previously known to the security services.Amazon has agreed to pay a $500,000 fine and be monitored by California officials after the state’s attorney general said the company failed to “adequately notify” workers and health authorities about new Covid-19 cases. Amazon employs about 150,000 people in California, most of them at 100 “fulfillment centers” – sprawling warehouses where orders are packed and shipped. The agreement, which must be approved by a judge, requires the Seattle-based retailer to notify its workers within a day of new coronavirus cases in their workplaces. Amazon also agreed to notify local health agencies of new virus cases within 48 hours and will stop issuing notices that Rob Bonta, California’s attorney general, said do not adequately tell employees about Amazon’s safety and disinfection plan and workers’ rights related to the pandemic. “As the company enjoyed booming and historic sales with its stock price doubling, Amazon failed to adequately notify warehouse workers and local health agencies of Covid case numbers, often leaving them unable to effectively track the spread of the virus,” Bonta told reporters in San Francisco at an event held across the street from an Amazon warehouse. Bonta added: “This left many workers understandably terrified and powerless to make informed decisions to protect themselves and to protect their loved ones,” such as getting tested for the virus, staying home or quarantining if they have been notified of a potential workplace exposure. Bonta said the judgment is the first of its kind in the US and complies with a state “right-to-know” law that took effect last year. An Amazon spokesperson, Barbara Agrait, said in a statement that the company was “glad to have this resolved and to see that the AG found no substantive issues with the safety measures in our buildings”. Xavier Becerra, the former California attorney general who now heads the US Health and Human Services Department, last December asked a judge to order Amazon to comply with subpoenas his office issued nearly four months earlier as part of its investigation into how the company was protecting workers from the coronavirus at its facilities. It is not known how many Amazon employees have been exposed to the virus at work during the course of the pandemic. In October 2020, the company disclosed that nearly 20,000 of its frontline US workers had tested positive or were presumed infected. The judgment, which applies only in California, requires the company to allow monitoring of its virus notifications by the attorney general’s office for a year and to pay the half-million-dollar settlement that will go to enforce the state’s consumer protection laws. California’s “right-to-know” law requires employers to notify employees of coronavirus cases at their worksites, tell the workers about pandemic-related protections, benefits, disinfection and safety plans and to report cases to local health agencies. The agreement came as Amazon gears up for the holiday crush of package deliveries. Bonta said compliance is particularly important as the state prepares for another possible winter surge in cases as people gather indoors for the holidays. California this year also became the first state to prohibit big retailers from firing warehouse workers for missing quotas that interfere with bathroom and rest breaks. That law prohibits Amazon and similar companies from disciplining workers for following health and safety laws, and allows employees to sue to suspend unsafe quotas or reverse retaliation.Australia’s attorneys general have agreed to formulate a plan to raise the age of criminal responsibility from 10 to 12 years old, but the move has been criticised by justice advocates as a “nothing” decision that will do little to reduce the juvenile detention population. In a statement released late on Monday, the Meeting of Attorneys-General agreed to “support development of a proposal to increase the minimum age of criminal responsibility from 10 to 12, including with regard to any carve outs, timing and discussion of implementation requirements”. The decision was announced as part of “other business” and was being considered “informally”. But justice groups have claimed that, based on data from the Australian Institute of Health and Welfare, raising the age to 12 would make little difference to the number of children imprisoned. They say raising the age to 12 would only reduce the number of children under 14 in detention from 499 to 456. In NSW there are currently 105 under-14s in jail. The law change would mean 99 remained in jail. And in the Northern Territory all 16 of the kids currently in detention would remain there. The National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Legal Service labelled the announcement “futile and deceiving”. “This announcement does little to better the lives of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children, who make up a staggering 65% of the kids in the criminal legal system,” NATSILS said. “It has been over three years since Attorneys General committed to exploring options to raise the age. Three years of inaction is damaging the lives and futures of our kids – and we are sick and tired of meaningless statements.” Amnesty International Australia welcomed the commitment to raise the age of criminal responsibility, but said the age should be 14. “It’s a kick in the guts to the kids languishing in detention and everyone who has campaigned for the chance for our kids to live happy and healthy lives free of the criminal justice system,” Amnesty’s Indigenous rights campaigner Maggie Munn said Munn said the UN’s Committee on the Rights of the Child recommended 14 as the minimum age of criminal responsibility in 2019. “And here we are two years later talking about raising the age to 12 – it’s devastating the Attorneys-General think so little of our kids and their futures.” The Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service said it was “nothing short of devastating” for Aboriginal children. “That this country’s leading legal officers choose to ignore human rights norms, indisputable medical evidence, and Aboriginal voices is shocking,” said VALS’s community justice leader Lee-Anne Carter, a Wiradjuri and Noongar woman. “You can’t celebrate the Closing the Gap agreement and the establishment, in Victoria, of the first Australian truth and justice commission, while simultaneously filling prisons with Aboriginal children.” The Northern Territory had already committed to raising the age to 12 to reflect the recommendation of the Don Dale royal commission, but the ACT is the only jurisdiction to commit to raising the age to 14 in line with international standards set by the UN. ‘Still losing their baby teeth’ In NSW, Greens MP David Shoebridge has introduced a bill into parliament to raise the age to 14 and prevent any child under 16 from being locked up. “At ages 10 and 11 children are still losing their baby teeth, they don’t have their pen licenses let alone drivers licenses,” Shoebridge said. “Some of these young people spend their first night away from their families in a prison cell”. “Locking young children up isn’t just cruel, it doesn’t work. Children need our protection, help to learn and grow [and] break cycles of offending and disadvantage.” The age of criminal responsibility is the age at which a child is considered by law to have understood that their actions were wrong and can face criminal charges. All Australian states and territories have this age set at 10 years old. Australia has faced repeated criticism for not raising the age of criminal responsibility to 14.That’s it for us on this busy Monday. Here’s what happened: Biden signed the $1.2tn infrastructure bill into law at a White House ceremony attended by Democrats and Republicans. The CBO announced that it would finish scoring the Build Back Better Act by Friday, setting up a potential House vote on the second piece of Biden’s legislative agenda this week. Pelosi said she expects the House to vote “this week” as members of her caucus previously agreed. Steve Bannon “self-surrendered” to the FBI this morning after being charged with two counts of contempt of Congress. He was released without bail and will be arraigned in court later this week. Democrat Beto O’Rourke announced that he is running for governor of Texas. Current Texas governor Greg Abbott immediately went on the offensive. Democrat Patrick Leahy of Vermont, currently the longest serving senator, announced he will not run for re-election next year, setting up a potentially competitive race for his seat. The US State Department said Russia’s anti-satellite missile test into space was “reckless” and threatens the interest of all nations. Spokesperson Ken Price said the test has so far generated “1,500 pieces of trackable orbital debris”. Wyoming Republicans voted to stop recognizing Rep. Liz Cheney as a member of the party. Cheney is among the 10 House Republicans who voted to impeach Trump, who has endorsed an opponent running against Cheney in the primary. Trump also announced his endorsement of John Gibbs in the Michigan primary. Gibbs is running against Rep. Peter Meijer, another one of the Republicans who voted to impeach Trump. The Pentagon chief has ordered the military to brief him on a 2019 airstrike on Syria that killed dozens of women and children. A New York Times investigation previously found that the military sought to conceal this attack and has never publicly acknowledged it despite reports of it being one of the largest civilian casualties during the years-long fight against the Islamic State. – Johana Bhuiyan and Lauren Gambino Senior Democrats are thinking about censuring Arizona’s Republican representative Paul Gosar for posting a video of an animation altered to depict him killing Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez and using a sword against Joe Biden, sources told Politico. The decision is not yet final though Politico sources say Democrats feel strongly there should be consequences. Another option they’re considering, those sources said, was to remove Gosar from his committees. While Nancy Pelosi said in a statement that it was up to Republican leadership to monitor “the questionable behavior of their members,” Ocasio-Cortez on Monday night said she expressed to Pelosi and the leadership that it’s “ very important for there to be a concrete response to the congressman’s threats.” Politico is reporting Democrats plans to discuss this with caucus before making a final decision. Defense secretary Lloyd J Austin III has asked for a briefing on what is reportedly one of the largest civilian casualties in the war against Islamic State fighters, the New York Times is reporting. The 2019 airstrike, which killed dozens of women and children, has never been publicly acknowledged by the military. A New York Times investigation found the military sought to conceal the airstrike on Baghuz, Syria on 18 March 2019. A Pentagon spokesperson told the Times that while he was not going to re-litigate something that happened in 2019, the head of the military’s Central Command, Gen Kenneth McKenzie Jr, plans to brief Austin “specifically on that particular airstrike”. More from the New York Times: The Times investigation showed that the death toll from the strike was almost immediately apparent to military officials. A legal officer flagged the bombing as a possible war crime that required an investigation. But at nearly every step, the military made moves that concealed the catastrophic strike. The death toll was downplayed. Reports were delayed, sanitized and classified. U.S.-led coalition forces bulldozed the blast site. And top leaders were not notified. An initial battle damage assessment quickly found that the number of dead was about 70. The Times investigation found that the bombing by Air Force F-15 attack jets had been called in by a classified American Special Operations unit, Task Force 9, which was in charge of ground operations in Syria. The task force operated in such secrecy that at times it did not inform even its own military partners of its actions. In the case of the Baghuz bombing, the air command center at Al Udeid Air Base in Qatar had no idea the strike was coming, an officer who served at the command center said. The Defense Department’s independent inspector general began an inquiry, but the report containing its findings was stalled and stripped of any mention of the strike. Senate banking chairman Sherrod Brown was told the White House expects to announce Biden’s pick for Federal Reserve chair “imminently”, Bloomberg is reporting. “I hear it’s imminent,” Brown, an Ohio Democrat, told Bloomberg on Monday. “I’m not going to speculate who I think it might be now. I assume the decision’s been made and they haven’t announced it, but I don’t even know that,” he said. From Bloomberg: Biden’s choice has been expected before Thanksgiving. Current Chair Jerome Powell’s term ends in February, and Biden interviewed both he and Fed Governor Lael Brainard for the top job earlier this month. Powell was elevated to the chairmanship by Donald Trump. Brainard, a Democrat, has won backing from progressive elements for her stronger stance on financial regulation. From what he’s heard from different people at the White House, Brown said “I’m pretty sure it’s Powell or Brainard.” Read more from Bloomberg here. Trump is making the rounds, working to settle scores with Republicans who voted to impeach him. The former president announced on Monday that he was endorsing John Gibbs, a former housing official in the Trump administration and an opponent running against Michigan Representative Peter Meijer in the upcoming primary. Meijer is one of 10 House Republicans who voted to impeach Trump for his role in the Capitol riots. “Meyer [sic] has been a terrible representative of the Republican party and beyond,” Trump’s statement announcing his endorsement of Gibbs read. Gibbs is not without his controversies, however. CNN previously reported that Gibbs circulated a conspiracy theory that claimed John Podesta, the presidential campaign chairman of Hillary Clinton’s 2016 run for president, took part in a satanic ritual. He also called the Democrats the party of Islam and “gender-bending” and defended a Twitter user who was banned for making anti-semitic remarks. The Wyoming Republican party voted to censure the state’s sole US representative, Liz Cheney, for voting to impeach Donald Trump for his role in the 6 January insurrection. The state’s GOP central committee voted 31-29 to pass a resolution to stop recognizing Cheney as a member of their party. The resolution, however, does not strip Cheney of any tangible powers. Cheney has repeatedly come under fire for her criticism of Trump, who she said “incited the mob” and “lit the flame” of the Capitol riots. “She is bound by her oath to the Constitution. Sadly a portion of the Wyoming GOP leadership has abandoned that fundamental principle and instead allowed themselves to be held hostage to the lies of a dangerous and irrational man,” Cheney spokesman Jeremy Adler told the Associated Press. This symbolic vote could hurt Cheney’s road to reelection in the 2022 primary. Cheney is facing at least four Republican opponents including a Trump-endorsed candidate, attorney Harriet Hageman. “It’s fitting because Liz Cheney stopped recognizing what Wyomingites care about a long time ago. When she launched her war against President Trump, she completely broke with where we are as a state,” Hageman said in a statement. And more from the US state department: The agency called Russia’s recent anti-satellite missile test “reckless” and “dangerous”. On Monday, the US space command confirmed that a “debris-generating event” had taken place. A US official said a ground-based missile was launched at a target in orbit, according to CNN, which would be one of just a handful of successful anti-satellite tests conducted by US, China, Russia and India. However, the state department spokesperson Ken Price said the US warned Russian officials against conducting such a test because of the potential dangers on multiple occasions. “The test has so far generated over 1,500 pieces of trackable orbital debris and hundreds of thousands of pieces of smaller orbital, orbital debris that now threaten the interests of all nations,” Price said during a state department press briefing. Britain’s defence minister Ben Wallace also expressed his concern and said Russia showed “a complete disregard for the security, safety and sustainability of space.” To focus on resettling Afghan evacuees, the US state department said it will limit admissions of refugees from other parts of the world who do not meet specific qualifications. “This temporary prioritization of new bookings will allow resettlement agencies and community partners to provide necessary services to the Afghans that will be leaving US safe havens in the coming weeks and months as well as to receive refugees already booked for travel in November and December,” the state department said in a statement according to CBS. Afghans will be prioritized for resettlement through 11 January with the exception of some refugees including those who need to reunite with family in the US, who have urgent cases, or those whose medical or security screenings will expire soon. They will continue to be admitted. CBS sources say this move was requested by local non-profit refugee settlement agencies. The groups have struggled to resettle the more than 70,000 Afghan refugees who escaped Afghanistan after the Taliban reconquered the country. Latest government numbers show that about 46,000 Afghans are currently living at eight military bases that are serving as temporary housing for these evacuees across the US. Johana Bhuiyan here reporting for duty from foggy San Francisco. In non-infrastructure news, a judge in the Kyle Rittenhouse trial threw out a weapons charge before closing arguments even began. Rittenhouse shot and killed two men and wounded another during anti-racism protests last year in Kenosha, Wisconsin. Here’s the Guardian’s Maya Yang with more on the decision: Discussing instructions that would be provided to the jury, judge Bruce Schroeder dismissed a count of possession of a dangerous weapon by a person under 18, saying that he had a “big problem” with the gun statute as written. Rittenhouse was 17 when on 25 August 2020 he traveled from his home in Antioch, Illinois, across the state border to Kenosha, a city in the throes of protests following a white police officer’s shooting of Jacob Blake, a Black man, after a call to a domestic disturbance. Bystander video captured the critical minutes when Rittenhouse, armed with a Smith &amp; Wesson AR-style semiautomatic rifle, shot and killed Joseph Rosenbaum, 36, and Anthony Huber, 26, and wounded Gaige Grosskreutz, 28. Rittenhouse is white, as are the three men he shot. But the case has raised questions about racial justice, policing, firearms and white privilege that have polarized people far outside Kenosha. Rittenhouse faced charges ranging from intentional homicide – punishable by life in prison – to the underage weapons charge, which could have sent him to jail. But in court on Monday, Schroeder said: “If the barrel length is less than 16in or an overall length less than 27in, then I’ll deny either motion. If it does not need those specifications then this was defense. Motion will be granted.” According to Schroeder, the shorter barrel size of the rifle Rittenhouse carried meant he did not violate the law, as it does not fall into either category. Schroeder also said the relevant Wisconsin law was vaguely written. Rittenhouse was left facing five counts, including two of homicide, one of attempted homicide and two of recklessly endangering safety, for firing his weapon near others. He has argued self-defense, leaving prosecutors with the burden of proving that his fear for his safety and his use of deadly force were unreasonable. Some legal experts said the prosecution struggled to do so. Read more: Biden signed the $1.2tn infrastructure bill into law at a White House ceremony attended by Democrats and Republicans. The CBO announced that it would finish scoring the Build Back Better Act by Friday, setting up a potential House vote on the second piece of Biden’s legislative agenda this week. Pelosi said she expects the House to vote “this week” as members of her caucus previously agreed. Steve Bannon “self-surrendered” to the FBI this morning after being charged with two counts of contempt of Congress. He was released without bail and will be arraigned in court later this week. Democrat Beto O’Rourke announced that he is running for governor of Texas. Democrat Patrick Leahy of Vermont, currently the longest serving senator, announced he will not run for re-election next year, setting up a potentially competitive race for his seat. What’s in the infrastructure bill? The legislation includes billions in funding to” upgrade and repair nation’s aging highways, bridges and roads improve public transit, making it greener and more accessible for people with disabilities modernize the nation’s electric grid, making it greener and more resilient improve America’s national rail system, with substantial investments in Amtrak, which suffers from a maintenance backlog, as well as upgrades to existing rail lines and funding for news ones. fund broadband access and improve internet services for rural areas, low-income families and tribal communities. fund climate resiliency that would help regions prone to extreme weather better prepare for future catastrophes. Replace lead pipes and modernize water systems to eliminate contaminated drinking water that has harmed residents in communities across the country. build electric vehicle charging stations, which the administration believes are critical to accelerate the adoption of electric vehicles as a climate mitigation strategy “Folks, I’ve been looking forward to this day for a long time,” Biden said, animatedly before finishing his remarks. He moved to the table next to the rostrum and held up a pen, as Harris, his cabinet officials, and elected officials of both parties crowded behind him. “Here we go,” he said and signed his name, finally signing into law the $1.2tn infrastructure bill. Joe Biden is taking a major victory lap before signing the infrastructure bill. “My message to the American people is this:America’s moving again and your life is going to change for the better,” he said, speaking on a windy afternoon from the White House lawn. The president was ebullient as he relished this moment, a campaign promise fulfilled in his view. “I promised we couldn’t just build back as it was before. We literally had to build back better,” he said. He called the bill a “blue collar blueprint to rebuild America.” “It leaves no one behind,” he said. Thanking the elected officials in attendance, he singled out Republican senator Rob Portman, who helped negotiate the deal. “Senator Rob Portman is a hell of a good guy. I’m not hurting you, Rob, because I know you’re not running.” He called calls senator Kyrsten Sinema the “most determined person I know.” He also thanked Mitch McConnell, the Senate minority leader who voted for the bill but was not in attendance. To organized labor, Biden said promised: “Jobs, jobs, jobs, jobs!” He also thanked his wife and Harris’ husband, the second gentleman Doug Emoff, who will also travel to promote the bill. “These guys travel all over the country together, I’m getting worried, you know,” he joked. “Doug’s one hell of a lawyer, besides.” Vice president Kamala Harris praised the president as a “believer and a builder” for envisioning the infrastructure bill – and the bipartisan team that shaped it. She also called on Congress to pass the Build Back Better Act, the domestic policy and climate change bill. “This bill, as significant as it is, as historic as it is, is part 1 of 2,” Harris said. “To lower costs and cut taxes for working families, to tackle the climate crisis at its core, the Congress must also pass the Build Back Better Act. The work of building a more perfect union did not end with the railroad or the interstate and it will not end now.” Harris will travel the country promoting the legislation, the White House said today. Her first stop will be in Ohio on Friday. In a moment of levity, but one that the White House probably regrets as it defends Harris’ importance to the team, the announcer introduced “Heather Kurtenbach” as Harris stepped to the microphone. “In a moment,” Harris said laughing. Kurtenbach, organizer and political director at the Iron Workers Local 86, who spoke the vice president about how the legislation would be a boon for American workers and unions. House Speaker, Nancy Pelosi, speaking at the White House signing ceremony, said she hopes to pass the Build Back Better act “this week.” The CBO said it would release the final cost analysis of the legislation on Friday. Of course, we’ve seen deadlines come and go, so we’ll take it with a very large grain of salt. The White House signing ceremony for the bipartisan infrastructure bill is underway. Speaking before the president is Arizona senator Kyrsten Sinema, one of the Democratic co-negotiators of this bill and a holdout on the other piece of Biden’s agenda, touted the bipartisanship that yielded the infrastructure bill. “Our legislation represents the substantive policy changes that some have said are no longer possible in today’s Senate. How many times have we heard that bipartisanship isn’t possible anymore or that important policy can only happen on a party line,” Sinema said. “Our legislation proves the opposite.” It was a popular theme. “This is what can happen when Republicans and Democrats decide we’re going to work together to get something done,” senator Rob Portman, the retiring Ohio Republican and co-negotiator. We can expect Biden to hit the same notes when he speaks in a moment. Bringing the country together was a major theme of his campaign. He was often mocked by more progressive and younger activists in the party for his belief that bipartisanship was still possible in the post-Trump era of zero-sum politics and partisan tribalism. And though investing in roads, bridges, ports and waterways was long considered the last realm of common ground between the parties, the issue nevertheless eluded past presidents and Congresses. But this achievement hardly foreshadows a new golden era of bipartisanship. Republicans who voted for the measure are now facing intense backlash from conservatives who view their vote as a betrayal to Trump, who repeatedly promised to pass an infrastructure bill but never seriously tried. Meanwhile, Democrats are pushing ahead with an expansive domestic policy bill over unanimous Republican opposition. Since Leahy announced his retirement, there has been a lot of speculation about who might run to replace him in the Senate. Democratic congressman Peter Welch, of Vermont, is seen as a likely contender. Welch, who is at the infrastructure bill signing ceremony at the White House on Monday, was asked about his plans and definitely did not say no. The state’s Republican governor Phil Scott has repeatedly ruled out running for the seat and did so again this morning, via a spokesman. Nevertheless, Leahy’s retirement opens the door to the possibility that a Republican could pick up the seat, especially if the forecast remains dour for Democrats. Such a defeat would likely doom the Democratic majority in the evenly divided Senate. Bannon was released without bail after he “self-surrendered” to the FBI, after being charged with two counts of contempt of Congress for his refusal to comply with subpoenas issued by the House committee investigating the 6 January invasion of the US capitol. According to Hugo Lowell, Bannon will be arraigned on Thursday, 18 November, and not today as was expected. His case will be heard by US district judge Carl Nichols, an appointee of Donald Trump. Bannon will not be detained pre-trial. As part of the agreement, he agreed to surrender his passport, submit to pretrial supervision and inform the court of any domestic US travel. Bannon was defiant as he left court, having claimed that he and his allies were “taking down the Biden regime.” “This is going to be the misdemeanor from hell for Merrick Garland, Nancy Pelosi and Joe Biden,” he said. “We’re going to go on the offense on this. Stand by.” The nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office said it hopes to publish a complete cost estimate of the sprawling Build Back Better Act by Friday. Earlier this month, a half-dozen House centrists staged a revolt and refused to vote for Biden’s domestic policy plan until they saw an independent cost analysis. According to a deal brokered by the president, centrists said they would vote for his legislation this week if the CBO’s estimate matched the White House’s cost analysis. The timing of a House vote remains unclear, but this likely means it wouldn’t be before Friday at the earliest and possibly into the weekend. The CBO has already released estimates for portions of the legislation, but major pieces are still pending. As for when the Senate might take up the legislation, that is anybody’s guess. Biden is going to New Hampshire because “there is a broken down bridge that needs to be repaired,” Psaki said. It’s an opportunity to highlight how the infrastructure bill will help communities and “show people visually what the impact will be.” In terms of who is coming to the signing, Psaki said: “He invited everybody who supported it. Whether they come or not, that’s their choice.” As for how sustained the president’s tour of the country will be, Psaki said Biden, Harris and cabinet officials will be making the case for weeks to come. “No one loves a bridge or rail more than president Biden,” she said. Biden still doesn’t consider Xi a longtime friend, Psaki says with a laugh. But the president views the Chinese leader as someone “with whom he can raise directly areas where we have concern, whether it’s security issues, whether it’s economic issues, whether it’s human rights issues - and he will certainly do this during the call. but he will also looks for areas where we can work together.” Asked about the reports of tensions between the West Wing and the vice president, Psaki said: “They don’t reflect his view or our experience with the vice president.” She called Harris a “key partner” and “bold leader” who wasn’t looking for a “cushy role”. She insisted that Biden relies on Harris for counsel and that she is a “valuable member of the team” who will be on the road selling his agenda. On inflation, Psaki was adamant that Biden’s agenda – the infrastructure bill and the domestic policy and climate change bill – would address the short-term and long-term economic pain felt by the American public. Asked about Biden’s aforementioned dip, to put it politely, in polling, Psaki said they White House views the upcoming PR blitz as an opportunity for the president to sell his popular agenda. Democratic haggling on Capitol Hill over Biden’s agenda detracted from the touting the benefits of his legislative policies, Psaki said, pointing to the internecine feuding as a reason for his low poll numbers. She also cited pandemic fatigue. “You don’t design a communications around infighting within the Democratic party in Washington,” Psaki said. “That has been a necessity in order to get this legislation done. and looking back the president would have done the same thing because the president wants to deliver for the American people.” Earlier, she said that the president, like voters, was “also frustrated by the negativity and the infighting that we’ve seen in Washington over the last couple of months. He’s tired of it too.” She said he’s excited to get on the road and highlight his agenda. He’ll travel this week to New Hampshire and Detroit, Michigan. Psaki said the virtual meeting between Biden and Chinese President Xi Jinping is an opportunity for the US to “set the terms of the competition with China in a way that reflects our interest and values.” She said the meeting is expected to run for two hours and told reporters in the briefing room to prepare for a late night call recapping the conversation. “The president is coming into this meeting from a position of strength,” Psaki adds. She said the infrastructure bill is part of the effort to counter the rise of China and prove that democracies can work, as Biden frequently says. “For the first time in 20 years we will be investing more in infrastructure than China.” Jen Psaki is at the podium to brief reporters before Biden’s infrastructure signing ceremony. She begins with the executive order, signed by the president this morning, to guide the implementation of the sprawling public works bill. The guideline encourages domestic manufacturing, puts an emphasis on distributing the funding equitably and promotes unionization. Former New Orleans mayor Mitch Landrieu will lead the implementation, the White House announced. Psaki said the attendance list has yet to be finalized. Elected officials are still RSVPing, she says. But expect a bipartisan showing from the Senate, where 19 Republicans voted for the legislation. Psaki said Biden is very attentive to how the funds are dispersed and prioritizes the prevention of “waste, fraud and abuse.” “They call him Sheriff Joe for a reason,” she said. One publicly mourned the “moral tragedy of abortion”. Another suggested that same-sex marriage “imperils civic peace”. A third tweeted negatively about Hillary Clinton using the hashtags #CrookedHillary, #basketofdeplorables and #Scandalabra. James Ho, Stuart Kyle Duncan and Cory Wilson are among six judges appointed by Donald Trump to the US court of appeals for the fifth circuit, skewing one of the most conservative – and influential – courts in America even further to the right. The consequences of Trump’s reshaping of the federal judiciary are being felt acutely at the fifth circuit on issues ranging from abortion to immigration to the coronavirus pandemic. The court’s willingness to entertain Republican extremism has effectively made it their principal legal bulwark against Joe Biden. Speaking of Jon Karl of ABC, his reporting that the Senate Republican leader, Mitch McConnell, decided not to invite Donald Trump to Joe Biden’s inauguration, only to have the House GOP leader, Kevin McCarthy, tell Trump, thereby allowing the disgraced president to pretend it was his idea not to go, has drawn an intemperate response from … you guessed it, Donald Trump. You know it would, and you knew Trump would say it really was his idea not to go, but nonetheless here’s some of it all the same: The decision was mine and mine alone. The old broken-down Crow [capital Trump’s own] Mitch McConnell had nothing to do with it. Trump also calls Karl a “third-rate” reporter and says if McConnell had said he shouldn’t go to the inauguration, he would have “held my nose and gone”. In truth, it wouldn’t have been Trump holding his nose had he turned up for Biden’s big day, what with the continued whiff of Trump’s lies about electoral fraud (repeated in today’s statement, obviously) and indeed the lingering, acrid stench of the Capitol riot, around which five people died two weeks before Biden was sworn in on the very same steps, an outcome the rampaging Trump supporters very much tried to prevent. So there’s that. Oh, and that Trump accuses McConnell of being “probably too busy working on deals with China for his wife and family”. McConnell’s wife, Elaine Chao, was Trump’s transportation secretary – until she resigned, after the Capitol riot. And breathe. Fun History Dad fact: Trump was the first president not to attend the inauguration of his successor since Andrew Johnson refused to show for Ulysses S Grant in 1869. Johnson was in a huff because he was the first president to be impeached. Trump outdid him, being impeached twice. So, as this chap had it, it goes. More on Karl and his book: An aide to Mike Pence when he was vice-president has claimed she was told not to listen to the music of Taylor Swift, lest someone high up in the Trump administration find out, disapprove and fire her. Olivia Troye was Pence’s homeland security, counterterrorism and coronavirus adviser but left the administration before its electoral defeat, establishing a media presence as an anti-Trump Republican. Speaking to MSNBC last week, she said she was listening to Swift’s music in her office when a colleague told her: “Are you trying to get fired?’” “For being blunt in meetings or for what?” Troye said she answered. “I don’t think she’s a fan of Trump’s,” Troye said her colleague replied, referring to the star. “And so, if somebody hears that, you should really watch your back. You should be careful on that.” Troye was speaking after the Atlantic published an excerpt of Betrayal, a new book by Jonathan Karl, in which ABC’s chief Washington correspondent describes alarm elsewhere in the Trump administration when an unnamed but low-level aide “liked” a social media post in which Swift endorsed Joe Biden and Kamala Harris. Karl writes: “The first photo in the post was of Swift with the word vote superimposed on it in large blue letters. But a swipe revealed a second photo, of Swift carrying a tray of cookies emblazoned with the Biden-Harris campaign logo. “… Never mind that nearly 3 million other people had liked the post or that the young woman was a Taylor Swift fan who liked just about everything Swift had ever posted. To the enforcers of Trumpian loyalty, this was a sign of treachery in the ranks.” White House chief of staff Mark Meadows is reported to have said: “We really can’t have our people liking posts promoting Joe Biden.” Karl’s reporting, in this instance about efforts to instill loyalty to Trump led by his close aide Johnny McEntee, is rather remarkable, as is the rest of the book, which the Guardian has read. See here, for an interview with Karl by our own Washington chief, David Smith, and here, for a review by Lloyd Green. Betrayal is published tomorrow. Joe Biden is having a terrible, horrible, no good, very bad couple of months – at least according to new polling. A Washington Post/ABC survey released over the weekend found the president’s approval rating was just 41%, continuing a downward slide since August, when a resurgence of the coronavirus and the US withdrawal from Afghanistan hit him hard. He struggled to recover ever since, according to the new poll, which was taken after the House gave final passage to the bipartisan infrastructure bill which Biden will sign today. Perhaps most alarming for the administration is that 63% of respondents said Biden had accomplished “not very much” or “little or nothing”, despite a mass vaccination campaign and a historic relief package that sent $1,400 checks to most Americans, even before the infrastructure win. Economic discontent, as inflation causes the cost of consumer goods to rise, seems to be driving the dismal polling, with 70% rating the economy as “not so good” or “poor”. Biden’s low approval isn’t helping Democrats, who already face significant headwinds in their attempts to defy a historical pattern in which the president’s party suffers heavy losses in the first midterms of the new administration. Among registered voters, 51% said they would vote for the generic Republican candidate if the elections were today. That’s the strongest result for Republicans in the four-decade history of the question being asked in the poll, including in years that preceded Republican waves, as in the midterms of 2010. The White House hopes his political fortunes will begin to reverse today, when Biden the infrastructure bill and the House returns, in theory, with renewed momentum to pass the second pillar of his domestic agenda, the Build Back Better domestic spending package. But even if the House gives swift approval to that, a political and procedural slog awaits in the Senate, where Democratic holdouts have promised to pare down the bill. The Trump Organization has reportedly agreed on a $375m deal to sell its hotel near the White House in Washington DC. The Wall Street Journal first reported the long-in-the-offing deal, with CGI Merchant Group, a real estate investment firm from Miami. The New York Times said the buyer was exploring a renaming of the hotel, replacing the Trump brand with Waldorf-Astoria, under a deal with Hilton. Any deal must be approved by the federal government, which leased the Old Post Office building on Pennsylvania Avenue to Donald Trump in 2013. Full story: Biden is speaking now at the tribal nations summit, the first to be hosted by the White House since 2016 this morning. “This is a big day,” Biden said, opening the two-day virtual event that brings together leaders from 570 tribes in the US. He began by thanking Deb Haaland for being his Secretary of Interior. A member of the Pueblo of Laguna, Haaland is the first Native American to serve as a cabinet secretary. He also invoked the legacy of the late Hawaii senator Daniel Inouye, a revered, longtime chairman of the Senate committee on Indian affairs. Biden said Inouye taught him that, “tribal nations do better when they make their own decisions.” He said the first lady would speak shortly, joking: “She’s visited the Navajo Nation so many times I’m worried she’s not going to come home.” He touted the American Rescue Plan, which included $31bn for Tribal nations, calling it the “most significant investment in the history of Indian country.” He also noted that the infrastructure bill includes more than $13nm in direct investments to Indian country, including funding to improve drinking water and high-speed Internet. He then signed five executive orders that he said would take new steps to improve public safety and advance justice for Native Americans as well as banning on oil and gas drilling on New Mexico’s Chaco Canyon, an ancient Native American heritage site. “I’m proud to sign it – it’s long overdue,” Biden said, surrounded by cabinet officials, as he signed a measure that aims to address “the crisis of missing and murdered indigenous people.” According to the Association on American Indian Affairs, American Indians and Alaska Natives are 2.5 times more likely to be victims of a violent crime and at least two times more likely to be raped or sexually assaulted compared to other races. Far-right conspiracy theorist Alex Jones was found guilty by default in a defamation case brought by the families of the children and educators killed in a 2012 mass shooting at Sandy Hook Elementary School in Newtown, Connecticut. The judge in a Connecticut superior court ruled that Jones was guilty by default as a result of his refusal to turn over documents ordered by the court. The decision marks the latest victory for families of the victims of the mass killing. For years, Jones has spread baseless conspiracy theories on his Infowars website about the shooting, which killed 20 first graders and six school staff members, including that it was a government plot to confiscate Americans’ firearms. The ruling in Connecticut follows a decision by a Texas judge last month, who found Jones liable for damages in three defamation lawsuits brought by the parents of two children killed in the Sandy Hook massacre. In a statement, a lawyer representing the families said that they are “grateful” for the today’s decision but “remain focused on uncovering the truth.” “While today’s ruling is a legal victory, the battle to shed light on how deeply Mr Jones has harmed these families continues,” lawyer Chris Mattei of Koskoff, Koskoff &amp; Bieder, said in a statement after the ruling. Michael Flynn, Donald Trump’s first national security adviser, has been widely condemned after calling for the establishment of “one religion” in the US. Religious freedom is enshrined in the first amendment to the US constitution, which says “Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof”. Regardless, at a rally staged in San Antonio on Saturday by the Christian “nonprofit news media network” American Faith, Flynn said: “If we are going to have one nation under God, which we must, we have to have one religion. One nation under God and one religion under God.” In response, the Minnesota Democrat Ilhan Omar, one of the first Muslim women elected to Congress, said: “These people hate the US constitution.” The veteran reporter Carl Bernstein told CNN Flynn, one of the “knaves and fools and dangerous authoritarian figures” with whom Trump surrounded himself, was “saying out loud things that have never been said by an aide or close associates to the president of the United States”. Bernstein added: “It should be no surprise to know that Michael Flynn is saying the kind of things that he is saying, but what’s most significant here is that much of the Republican party … something like 35% in in exit polls said they favour Trump because Christianity is being taken away from them. “So Michael Flynn is not that far away from huge numbers of people in this country.” Full story: As we reported earlier, Steve Bannon is expected to make his initial court appearance later this afternoon in the US District Court for the District of Columbia. At this hearing, which will be held virtually before magistrate judge Robin Meriweather, Bannon may be arraigned on the contempt charges. The White House is defending vice president Kamala Harris against a devastating new report that describes an office adrift, with no clear focus or direction, mired in conflict and dysfunction. A lengthy CNN report, based on interviews with “three dozen former and current Harris aides, administration officials, Democratic operatives, donors and outside advisers,” reports that the White House has become “worn out by what they see as entrenched dysfunction and lack of focus” in her office. Harris’ assignments include some of the thorniest issues facing the administration, among them the handling diplomatic relations with the Northern Triangle nations, in hopes of addressing the root causes of migration to the US, and passing voting rights legislation, which is stalled in Congress. Harris’ supporters are frustrated. They believe she is being underutilized at best and set up to fail at worst. As the first woman and first woman of color to serve in the role, she has faced a constant barrage of sexism and racism – some explicit and some coded. She has also become a target of Republican ire, in no small part, perhaps, because she is viewed – or was, according to this piece – as the most likely heir to the presidency in 2024 or 2028. The attacks from the right are relentless, and sometimes bizarre, such as claims last week that she spoke with a French accent while in Paris. “Kamala Harris is a leader but is not being put in positions to lead,” CNN quotes “a top donor to Biden and other Democrats” saying anonymously. “That doesn’t make sense. We need to be thinking long term, and we need to be doing what’s best for the party.” As if speaking to the president, the donor says: “You should be putting her in positions to succeed, as opposed to putting weights on her. If you did give her the ability to step up and help her lead, it would strengthen you and strengthen the party.” Read the full report on CNN here. Senator Patrick Leahy of Vermont announced on Monday that he will not seek re-election in 2022. The 81-year-old is currently the longest-serving senator in the chamber, having served since 1975. “It’s time to put down the gavel,” he said. “It’s time to pass the torch to the next Vermonter.” As Senate pro tempore, he is currently third in line to the presidency, after the vice president, Kamala Harris and the House Speaker, Nancy Pelosi. In the role, he presided over the second Senate impeachment trial of former president Donald Trump earlier this year. (The chief justice is only constitutionally obligated to preside over impeachment trials of current presidents.) Leahy announced his plans during a press conference in his home state of Vermont. His retirement means a promotion for the state’s junior senator, Bernie Sanders, 80, who was re-elected in 2018. Though Vermont exists in popular imagination as a pastoral bastion of progressivism, Leahy is the state’s first and only Democratic senator to date. Sanders is an independent who caucuses with Democrats. He is also, as far as we know, the only member of the Senate to appear in a Batman film – five to be exact – and an accomplished photographer. Steve Bannon, a close ally and onetime senior advisor to Donald Trump, surrendered to federal authorities on Monday after being charged with contempt of Congress for defying a subpoena request from the House committee investigating the 6 January attack on the US Capitol. Bannon, who served for a time as White House chief strategist, was indicted by a federal grand jury on two counts of contempt of Congress on Friday. The two counts are related to his refusal to appear for a congressional deposition and his refusal to provide documents to the committee. Reporting for the Guardian, Hugo Lowell, says a source close to the attorney’s office said Bannon would appear in a DC court this afternoon. The source said Bannon may not appear at the hearing, even if he’s in the courthouse. The case is being investigated by the FBI’s Washington field office, where Bannon surrendered on Monday morning, and prosecuted by the public corruption and civil rights Section of the US attorney’s office for the District of Columbia. It comes days after former White House chief of staff Mark Meadows defied his own subpoena from the committee. If the House voted to hold Meadows in contempt, the case would then be referred to the justice department, where the former North Carolina congressman could face a similar fate. Beto O’Rourke, the former El Paso congressman and one-time presidential aspirant, announced on Monday that he is running for governor of Texas. “I’m running for governor, and I want to tell you why,” O’Rourke says in a video message. He begins by recalling the anger, fear and frustration when the state’s power grid failed, leaving Texans without heat in freezing temperatures. “Those in positions of public trust have stopped listening to, serving and paying attention to — and trusting — the people of Texas,” he said. The long-anticipated announcement comes after O’Rourke energized the state’s young, liberal voters in a closely-fought but ultimately unsuccessful bid for Senate in 2018. O’Rourke, a national figure with a small-dollar fundraising juggernaut, enters the race as a potentially formidable opponent to the state’s incumbent Republican governor Greg Abbott. Actor Matthew McConaughey has also been coy about a potential run, though it’s unclear whether he would run as a member of a political party or as an independent. Still, O’Rourke, like all Democrats this cycle, faces difficult odds in a national environment that has turned sharply against the party in power. Texas is a traditionally conservative state, and largely remained so in 2020, despite massive investments by Democrats. But demographic change and population growth are reshaping the state’s politics, changes O’Rourke seized on in his 2018 run, which convinced many Democrats the state was on the verge of turning blue. Texas has become ground zero in the fight over abortion rights and voting rights, as the state’s conservative majority and governor push some of the harshest, most restrictive laws in the nation. A Texas law taken up by the Supreme Court effectively bans abortion in the state. In the video, O’Rourke condemns what he calls the “extremist policies” of the state’s Republicans. “It’s a really small vision for such a big state, but it doesn’t have to be that way,” he said. “And I know that together, we can get back to being big again.” Good morning and welcome to our coverage of all things politics. My name is Lauren Gambino, stepping in today for Joanie Greve. Today Joe Biden will sign into law the $1tn infrastructure bill that the House sent to his desk earlier this month, with notable bipartisan support. New polling released this weekend show economic discontent hurting Biden’s approval rating, with voters giving him little credit and plenty of blame. The signing ceremony is part of a concerted push by the president and his party to champion the legislative feat that had bedeviled past administrations and Congresses alike. During last week’s recess, lawmakers returned to their districts to tout the infrastructure projects that would receive funding under the massive public works bill. Before the ceremony, Biden will participate in a Tribal Nations Summit coinciding with national Native American Heritage Month. And this evening he will hold a virtual summit with China’s president, XI Jinping. Members of both chambers return today from their Veteran’s Day recess, with Democrats hopeful they can pass Biden’s sweeping social policy and climate change bill through the House by the week’s end. White House press secretary Jen Psaki will brief reporters at 1.30.Communities in western Canada who were forced to flee their homes this summer by wildfires and extreme heat are once again under evacuation orders after overwhelming floods across the region. The heavy rainfall and pounding storms are also taking a toll on the US Pacific north-west, where flooding and mudslides in Washington state have also forced evacuations and school closures. Helicopters were dispatched on Monday to Highway 7, more than 100 kilometres (62 miles) east of Vancouver, to rescue about 275 people, including 50 children, who had been stranded on the road since it was blocked by a mudslide late on Sunday. Footage from the area shows stranded travelers heading toward a yellow emergency helicopter during the rescue operation. The surrounding landscape is littered with debris from a landslide blocking access to the highway. “I definitely heard people screaming for help,” Adam Wuisman, who was driving the section of the highway when a landslide hit, told CBC News. “It’s kind of helpless to feel like you’re between a very vulnerable mountainside on one side and the Fraser River on the other side. And there’s really nothing you can do about it, but hope nothing comes down on top of you.” Images of surging rivers, mudslides, flooded cities and destroyed highways circulated on social media as officials scrambled to assess the full extent of the damage, warning residents the situation could deteriorate further as winds picked up throughout the day. According to Environment Canada, 225 millimetres of rain fell on the community of Hope since the storm began Saturday and 180 millimetres had fallen around Agassiz and Chilliwack in the eastern part of the Fraser Valley. After two bridges and its water treatment facility were overwhelmed by flood waters, the city of Merritt issued an evacuation order to all residents, warning that “continued habitation of the community without sanitary services presents risk of mass sewage back-up and personal health risk”. Merritt last issued evacuation orders this summer after the wildfire that destroyed the village of Lytton came dangerously close to the city. Since June, the province has experienced a record-setting “heat dome”, huge wildfires that destroyed two towns and choked the air for weeks, extreme events that experts say were worsened by the climate crisis. Last week, Vancouver, British Columbia’s largest city, was briefly placed under tornado watch, a rare event for the region. In Washington state, the National Weather Service warned that winds nearing hurricane strength were possible in the region, which has seen nearly ceaseless rain for about a week. A wind gust of 58mph (93km/h) was reported on Monday at Sea-Tac international airport in Seattle. More than 158,0000 customers were without power in western Washington at one point Monday, the Seattle Times reported. Parts of the region have seen more than 6in (15cm) of rain in the past several days. Less than halfway into the month it is already the third wettest November that Seattle has seen in more than a century, according to the Washington Post, with rainfall records likely to be broken. A state of emergency was declared over the weekend for the town of Hamilton, about 80 miles (129km) north-east of Seattle, and residents were urged to evacuate as soon as possible, the Skagit Valley Herald reported. As the water was making its way down the Skagit River, people were warned to expect flooding in the cities of Sedro-Woolley, Burlington and Mount Vernon. Just south of the Canadian border in Sumas, Washington, officials said city hall was flooded and that the flooding event was the worst in decades. Nicole Postma, who owns a coffee stand in Sumas and is president of the Sumas Chamber of Commerce, told the Bellingham Herald on Monday that people are nervous. “We knew that the flood was imminent, but had no idea it would be like this,” she said. The Associated Press contributed reporting • The headline of this article was amended on 19 November 2021 to be more accurate about the area affected by these events. The Pacific north-west, which was the only area highlighted in an earlier headline, generally refers just to the US. To make clear that parts of Canada are also affected, “British Columbia” has now been added.More than 500 people have been hospitalised by scorpion stings in southern Egypt after storms forced the creatures out of their hiding places and into houses, state-run media has reported. Over the weekend, the province of Aswan was hit by rare downpours, hail and thunder in which three people died, governor Ashraf Attia said. However, those who were stung by scorpions were given anti-venom doses and were later discharged. Acting health minister Khalid Abdel-Ghafar confirmed in a statement that no deaths were reported from scorpion stings. Photos and video footage circulated on social media showed flooded streets and damaged houses, vehicles and agricultural farms. School classes were suspended and power outages were reported across the region. Marine traffic on the Nile was also paused, and roads closed during the storms on Friday before resuming on Saturday. Doctors were recalled from annual leave and hospitals were put on high alert, the Al-Ahram daily reported Ehab Hanafy, the Health Ministry’s undersecretary in Aswan, as saying. The Ministry of Health reassured the public that it had enough anti-venom doses, with more than 3,000 available in Aswan. Extra doses were sent near mountain and desert areas, Hanafy said. Those stung by the scorpions said their symptoms included severe pain, fever, sweating, vomiting, diarrhoea, muscle tremors, and head twitching. The Aswan mountains are home to the Arabian fat-tailed scorpion, or Androctonus crassicauda, which translates from Greek to “man-killer”, Al Jazeera reported. They are considered among the most dangerous scorpions in the world, with a highly toxic venom but cause only several human deaths a year. With Associated PressThe Victorian government has agreed to water down its controversial pandemic legislation after lobbying from key crossbenchers. Upper house MPs including Reason party’s Fiona Patten, Greens leader Samantha Ratnam and Animal Justice party’s Andy Meddick, who negotiated the changes, have faced abuse and death threats in the lead up to parliament’s vote on the bill. The three MPs say the negotiated amendments will give the community “real-time advice” behind public health decisions and condemned the protests that have continued since last weekend. The bill will be debated for the first time in the upper house today after passing the legislative assembly last month. It is likely to be passed later in the week The Coalition has called the laws the “most dangerous” in Victoria’s history. Here’s what you need to know about the agreed upon changes. Significant reductions in fines for breaching public health orders Fines for breaching pandemic orders will be halved for general offences and aggravated offences. The hefty charges had been labelled extraordinarily high and excessive by the Law Institute of Victoria. Prior to the amendments, fines of up to $21,800 for people and $109,000 for businesses could be applied for people who failed to comply with orders under general offences. The maximum fine for a person who failed to comply with a health order, knowing it could cause serious health risks to others, will also be halved from $90,500 for aggravated offences. Businesses faced fines of up to $452,500 for breaching the rules. The harsher powers were only intended to be used rarely for the most egregious breaches. The government has said these penalties would be used rarely. Declaring a pandemic There will be a stronger threshold for declaring a pandemic, a power which has been transferred from the chief health officer to the premier of the day and is one of the most controversial parts of the proposed legislation. Under the amendments, a clause has been added to the bill so the premier can only declare a pandemic if they are satisfied it is justifiable to do so “on reasonable grounds”. Victorian health minister, Martin Foley, said the change would provide “higher benchmarks” for accountability. Prior versions of the law omitted the need to have reasonable grounds to pull the trigger on the declaration. The reporting period for public health advice and public health orders to be published and tabled in parliament will also be shorter, to provide greater transparency. Documents associated with pandemic orders will have to be published within seven days, not two weeks, and within four days for tabling in parliament. A fully resourced independent oversight committee The Scrutiny of Acts and Regulations Committee (Sarc) will also be able to consider any pandemic order when it is made, not just when it is tabled in parliament, under the agreed upon amendments, and there will be “guaranteed resourcing” for the independent oversight committee. What will it mean for human rights? Human rights protections will be strengthened, with the application of Victoria’s Charter of Human Rights and Responsibilities to apply to all orders made under the legislation. Human Rights Law Centre legal director, Daniel Webb, had been lobbying for the Victorian government to make clear in the bill that the health minister needed to act consistently with the state’s human rights charter when imposing restrictions. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning How a pandemic order may differentiate between classes of people based on characteristics, attributes or circumstances, must now be clarified, made transparent and relevant to the public health risk. Human rights organisations and legal groups had expressed concern the bill may discriminate based upon specific classifications of people – like their jobs, where they live, their age or vaccination status. The right to protest will also be protected and enshrined in the regulations. What hasn’t changed? There is greater oversight on the declaration a pandemic, however the powers of the government of the day will still remain very broad under the bill. An independent oversight committee will be able to provide recommendations, but the health minister still has sweeping powers to enact any pandemic orders believed “reasonably necessary” to protect public health. Authorised officers will be able to detain people under pandemic orders for quarantine or when it is reasonably necessary to eliminate or reduce the risk to public health, with no timeframe for the maximum period of detention. The declaration of a pandemic will still be able to be extended on a three-month basis indefinitely, which has raised alarm from the Law Institute of Victoria for the wide powers it confers on the premier, health minister and authorised officers. The Victorian Bar recommended the bill be delayed until issues raised by legal groups and human rights organisations had been properly considered.Cuban authorities have snuffed out protests planned by activists to call for nationwide demonstrations for democracy and more freedom of expression. After being caught off guard by unprecedented protests in July, the government acted in advance to ban the demonstrations planned for Monday, ran a media campaign arguing it was a US attempt at regime change, and placed protest leaders under house arrest. Edel Pérez, 35, a television actor arrested in the July protests, was prevented from leaving his house by two plain-clothed state security agents. “I feel impotent and angry,” he said. “They are violating my constitutional rights.” Cubans posted videos of arrests on Facebook, while activists who dared to go out were driven away in police cars, and others were bundled into vans. “Acts of repudiation”, in which government supporters shout revolutionary slogans at alleged “counter-revolutionaries”, were reported outside many protest organiser’s homes. In Havana, where plain-clothed state security officers were out in force, a tense calm prevailed. Though schools finally reopened after a long lockdown, many parents opted to keep their children at home. One 22-year-old university student, who did not give his name for fear of retaliation, trekked across the capital looking for a protest to join. “Nothing’s happening,” he said. “I feel satisfied for having done this, but I’m also sad about how scared people are,” he said. Having avoided the spectacle of mass protests, the government will feel it won this round. The Biden administration, it hopes, will now conclude that July’s protests were a blip, that the regime is stable, and that sanctions ought now to be eased. The Biden administration has so far left all the Trump-era sanctions in place. These powerful sanctions coupled with Covid have halved foreign currency inflows over the last two years, leading to shortages of basic goods and fomenting discontent. But the desire of young Cubans for greater freedoms will not disappear. “There will now be other attempts to march – and more repression,” the university student said.Australia’s frontier history is still being pieced together, errors are still being corrected and new information is coming to light, according to emeritus professor of history Lyndall Ryan and her research team at the University of Newcastle’s massacre map project. Nowhere is this more apparent than in western Victoria, where Ryan says the “mass of dots” denoting massacre sites has remained, despite researchers correcting locations and even removing some sites from the map. These updates, amendments and corrections are reflected in Guardian Australia’s Killing Times map. In the latest update, one new site has been added. Researchers also corrected the coordinates and renamed other sites, while 23 others have revised narratives. Five sites in western Victoria have been removed, and two in the Northern Territory, either due to inconclusive evidence, disputed accounts or because the evidence is being reassessed. “Western Victoria, in particular, could be labelled a killing field because of the [number of] massacres that are recorded there,” Ryan says. “Certainly there’s more than 30 of them that took place, largely over a 10 year period, and really destroyed much of Aboriginal life in that area.” A site is only removed after a rigorous process of verification, according to Bill Pascoe, lead researcher and digital humanities specialist at the University of Newcastle. “I would never want to understate the importance of every individual incident, and that’s why we do take it very seriously to add or remove anything that shouldn’t be on the map. Because obviously it’s the most important thing for the people it [affects] directly and their descendants, and the people who live there who want to know what happened in the place they live. “The whole point of historical research is to find out more about the past, to get closer to the truth about the past. So it’s inherent in that activity that we’re going to be updating things as we learn more and understand more about the past.” Amendments and corrections are usually made when each new stage of the map is released. Covid-19 border closures and lockdowns interrupted that schedule. Stage three of the map was released in November 2019 “which seems like 100 years ago now”, Ryan says. “Covid has certainly impacted on the preparation of stage four,” she says. “What we’ve done in this long period of stage three is made some special upgrades, and that’s what we’re doing at the moment, because information has accumulated.” Ryan says it can take a week or more to retrieve archival documents, and lockdowns and border closures have made travel to interstate libraries impossible. Colonial newspapers are an important source. Ryan says time and time again she found a “code of silence” among perpetrators in the immediate aftermath of a mass killing, but it was common for them to talk to journalists long afterwards – as if the “need to tell” had “weighed heavily” on them in the intervening years. Massacres were often covered up in the immediate aftermath by perpetrators who destroyed physical evidence, Pascoe says. “There are usually few witnesses, and the code of silence that Lyndall alluded to is usually involved. And even if you know someone’s not necessarily bound by a code of silence with their fellow perpetrators, there’s a reluctance to talk about this sort of thing.” Making corrections to a digital map is time consuming for both academic and technical reasons, Pascoe says. The research team welcomes community input and feedback, especially from local and regional historians and families of descendants. “For some time now we’ve been operating on a part-time casual basis with volunteers. And because it is a national-scale project, a big project with a lot of logistical challenges to our resources, we’ve always welcomed feedback and contributions from the community, and we’ve got a feedback form for that [on the site]. That actually helps us out quite a lot when people can point out issues with the website, or any new information they found.” Stage four of the project is now due in coming months and is likely to be the last. The team expects to add dozens more sites to the map, particularly in Western Australia and the Northern Territory. But the process of truth-telling never ends, Ryan says. She hopes other historians will continue to work towards a more complete history of the frontier in Australia. The Killing Times is based on data from the Colonial Frontier Massacre Digital Map Project led by Prof Lyndall Ryan at the University of Newcastle’s Centre for the 21st Century Humanities For more information about the analysis conducted by Guardian Australia and the research methods of the University of Newcastle’s colonial frontier massacre research team, please read the about section hereMainstream criticisms of the Andrews government’s proposed pandemic laws have been co-opted by protesters, including some from the far right, to give weight to a long-running campaign against public health laws, experts say. The Public Health and Wellbeing (Pandemic Management) Bill 2021 was being debated in the upper house on Tuesday. The legislation as introduced by the Andrews government would allow the premier to make an indefinite declaration of a pandemic and state of emergency, give the health minister power to make broad public health orders, and grant authorised officers the power to detain people under quarantine. It will pass with the support of crossbench MPs, who late Monday announced they had negotiated amendments to the legislation which will address some of the concerns raised by civil liberties groups. It follows weeks of protests against the proposed bill, which escalated on Saturday, with thousands of people marching through central Melbourne in a demonstration that included a gallows prop, protesters posing with nooses, and chants of “hang Dan Andrews”. On Monday night, a Daniel Andrews blow-up doll was put on the gallows prop in the CBD. Last Thursday night a group of protesters also gathered outside the house of Animal Justice party MP Andy Meddick, one of the three key crossbenchers, according to a message posted by him on social media. Meddick, who said he and his family have received death threats over the legislation, said he is concerned that hostilities towards politicians could escalate to the point seen in the United Kingdom earlier this year, with the alleged murder of Conservative MP Sir David Amess. He said the amended bill “will ensure Victoria has the most transparent and accountable pandemic management framework in the country”. Amendments negotiated by the crossbenchers include that parliament will be given immediate ability to scrutinise any order, public health orders must explicitly relate to risk, and the maximum financial penalty for the worst breaches of public health orders has been halved – it’s now $45,000 for individuals down from $91,000. In a group statement with fellow crossbenchers, Reason party leader Fiona Patten and Greens leader Samatha Ratnam, Meddick defended the decision to pass the bill. “While the official opposition and some prominent shock jocks and tabloid commentators knowingly, dangerously incited and fanned unduly angry civil unrest with lies, the crossbenchers focused on improving the bill to better protect and support the Victorian community,” they said. Imperfect bill an opportunity to create better law The legislation has been criticised by the Law Institute of Victoria, the Victorian Bar Association, and the Human Rights Law Centre, who say it grants the government an unlimited power to declare a pandemic, allows the health minister a very broad range of powers during a pandemic, and is lacking oversight mechanisms and transparency. Bar Association president Róisín Annesley QC said on Tuesday that the amendments negotiated by crossbenchers “address low priority issues and not the most fundamental problems with the bill”. But despite this criticism, most agree with the need for new legislation. The Human Rights Law Centre’s legal director, Daniel Webb, said some commentary around the bill had been “very misleading”. “While it’s definitely not perfect, this bill would significantly improve the current law in Victoria,” Webb told Guardian Australia. He said threats and abuse directed at crossbench MPs was “appalling”. “The easy thing for these crossbench MPs to do would have been to just grant another extension under the existing law,” he said. “Instead, they’ve taken advice from a range of experts and worked with the government to try and make the law better.” The legislation has also faced opposition in advertisements funded by high-profile Melbourne business figures, led by Kilara Capital managing director Ben Krasnostein. Krasnostein’s company, Climate Smart Investments Pty Ltd, authorised advertisements that appeared in newspapers owned by Nine and News Corp Australia urging people to contact the office of key upper house crossbenchers, including Patten, who was called on to delay the vote on the legislation as put by the government, or “pass key amendments that honour the Reason Party promise and senior lawyers say are vital”. Krasnostein told the Australian Financial Review the ads were funded by a group of people who were disputing sections of the legislation, but did not oppose the Andrews government as a whole. Krasnostein was also quoted in the AFR saying: “We are not anti-vaxxers, and we agree we need legislation to govern pandemics, we agree with that, and it’s better to have the power in the hands of ministers rather than unelected bureaucrats, we agree with that too … But we don’t need clauses which, for example, give the power to have authorised officers enter into homes without a warrant and detain people, and a complete lack of judicial oversight.” Some protesters have adopted the criticisms of the legislation without adopting the nuance, playing into an increasingly polarised political environment. Capitalising on political polarisation Deakin University senior research fellow Dr Josh Roose, whose work includes researching extremism, said protesters in Melbourne have capitalised on legal and humanitarian criticisms of the legislation to maintain the momentum on anti-government protests, which began as anti-lockdown protests last year, morphed into anti-vaccine mandate protests in July, and were briefly fuelled by outraged construction workers in September. “They are certainly seeking to capitalise on the bill and potential legislation because what they’re able to represent it as is a power grab,” Roose said. There have also been attempts to bring in other activist groups in Melbourne to bolster support for the protests. Meriki Onus, a Gunai and Gunditjmara woman and community organiser, was approached to speak at Saturday’s rally, as was fellow organiser and Yigar Gunditjmara, Bindal, Yorta Yorta and Torres Strait Islander woman Tarneen Onus-Williams. Both declined. The central theme of the protests has been freedom from government control – over movement, vaccine mandates, and now from laws which have been framed by some legal and political critics as allowing unchecked government interference in people’s lives. “There is a legitimate fear out there that this puts more power in [the government’s] hands, and there’s been very little effort by the government to communicate what this bill is about to the wider public,” Roose said. It appears that some rightwing politicians are willing to capitalise on that polarisation, Deakin University lecturer Dr Imogen Richards said. Craig Kelly, recently of the Liberal party and currently representing Clive Palmer’s United Australia party, spoke at the protest on Saturday, telling protesters “we are coming after the Labor and the Liberal party because you cannot trust them”. Victorian Liberal MP Bernie Finn placed an ad in the Herald Sun urging people to attend the protest, with slogans such as “RISE UP! MELBOURNE” and “stop the power grab!”. Finn, who has opposed lockdown measures, has previously expressed support for the anti-vaccine mandate sentiments of some protesters, writing on Facebook in September: “There is no justification for violence but if any government tried to force medical treatment on me against my will, they’d see a fighting fury.” “I don’t think it’d be inaccurate to say it is, in a sense, [a] kind of ‘unite the right’ protest event,” Richards said. “And ironically, some of those interested in the mobilisations of these disparate groups are the very same political entities they’re professing to oppose.” The protesters “are being, to a degree, co-opted as a part of Clive Palmer’s political campaign”, which, as Palmer has previously made it clear his party will preference the Liberal party federally, is arguably a campaign to help re-elect the current federal government. At the same time, the presence of Kelly and other sympathetic politicians lends legitimacy to the protests. In response to questions by Guardian Australia, Kelly dismissed concerns about the increase in violent rhetoric at the protests, saying he had not heard the “hang Dan Andrews” chant, or seen the nooses, and that it may have been meant “metaphorically”. Influence of the far right? The broad swathe of opposition to the proposed pandemic laws has made drawing concrete links between the Melbourne protests and elements of the far right a complex exercise. But like most of the protests in the city during the pandemic, there were elements of hard-right groups among the crowd as well as an increase in overtly violent rhetoric and QAnon-inflected protest signs. “There’s obvious examples of a far-right presence at these protests which are obviously trying to exploit this for the purpose of recruitment,” Richards said. Anti-fascist group the White Rose Society posted material online alleging that an individual working as part of Craig Kelly’s personal security for the event was a longtime member of a series of neo-Nazi groups. There is no suggestion by Guardian Australia that Kelly was aware of the individual’s alleged neo-Nazi links and when approached for comment Kelly told Guardian Australia that he did not remember his security guard’s name, and that he was unaware about any political affiliation he might have had. “As far as I know he was qualified, he did a good job, he was efficient and professional and that’s all that should matter,” Kelly said. Organising material distributed on social media sites in the lead up to the Saturday’s demonstration came from established, self described “libertarian and populist activists” – groups like the Melbourne Freedom Rally, led by serial protester Harrison McLean, whose personal engagement with far-right groups online has been previously reported. McLean has previously denied being involved in the far right. The protest was also pushed by the anti-lockdown protest group Reignite Democracy, which has been accused of spreading various Covid misinformation throughout the pandemic, and has recently announced a collaboration with Kelly and the United Australia Party on what Rebel News described as “a similar pro-freedom, anti-lockdown, pro-vaccine choice platform”.I’m terrified that phone calls are becoming obsolete. Some could say there are bigger things to stress about – don’t worry, I’m almost certainly panicking about those too – but this newfound terror has really surprised me. As a shy and anxious child who grew into a shy and anxious adult (just a bit taller), I spent most of my life dreading phone calls. They seemed to bring out my most awkward idiosyncrasies, and I joined the mass of people who actively avoided phone calls. As technology encouraged us to book appointments online, email colleagues and text mates, phone calls became less of a chore to overcome and more of a symbol of days gone by. So, as landlines now inspire the same sentimental awe of a butter churner, generationally many of us became phone haters. But now? I could talk on the phone all day and all night. Friends, family, phone scammers who regret to inform me that the tax office is actively hunting me for sport – if they’re willing to chat, I’m willing to listen! Especially, especially, if the alternative is Zoom. My newfound love of phone calls corresponds directly to the rise of video conferencing. In offices, it’s long been a joke that “that meeting could have been an email”. The modern reiteration of that is “that Zoom could have been a phone call”. In my part-time job, lately some colleagues and I have opted for a phone call instead of a Zoom meeting, and folks – it feels like a freaking holiday. A wonderful holiday from staring at my own face and colleagues’ kitchens. If you are one of those managers who focuses on KPIs and targets and bottom lines, you can bet your big ol’ bottom line that these calls are absolutely more productive than if we were to attempt problem-solving while simultaneously entering a staring competition. Here is a non-exhaustive list of things you can do while on the phone: pace around energetically. Write things with your human hands. Look out a window. Go outside and breathe air that isn’t recycled from your own mouth or manufactured via machine (I do not know how air conditioners work). Lie on your back to stretch out the mass of thick, knotted meat once referred to as your “back”. Do a little dance. Slice a fig. Need I go on? Conversely, here are some things you can do over Zoom. Peer at your colleague unblinkingly. Stare at your own reflection until your face becomes not that of a human but of a strange creature that does not have a name. Now your face is a dark orb, sucking everything around into its gaping abyss. Congratulations, you now have body dysmorphia. Phone calls are energising and invigorating. I feel like how I imagine Alexander Graham Bell felt when he first had a yarn on the blower (or Antonio Meucci, but that’s a conversation for another day). I can imagine the sensation Bell felt while giddily chatting with a pal, toying with his shirt buttons excitedly, discovering the efficiency of quickly exchanged information, gossip and smallpox updates. That is to say: positively delighted. Innovation is great, when it doesn’t involve contributing to climate change or catapulting billionaires into space, and flexible work and telehealth have opened up opportunities for people previously shut out. That’s not being discounted or debated here. But please don’t let us wipe out phone calls altogether. In my freelance work, interview requests seem to be automatically via Zoom or email. But never a phone call. Why, I sob, slopping makeup on to hide my allergy redness, why can’t I just give them a ring? Hastily carrying my clothes horse to another room lest the interviewee discover I like washing my socks, I attempt to use a virtual background, but this somehow removes my entire body and I float there, a suspended blotchy head, a single tear falling down my face like a droplet of water on a freshly plucked tomato. During lockdown, phone calls with loved ones were a saving grace. I genuinely love the sound of people’s voices. Voice memos, too, allow for this specific intimacy. These conversations make us feel connected, uplifted, a part of something. It’s a real dialogue with natural spontaneity and without the automatic filtering and editing that comes with texting. This may sound as though I’ve only just discovered something that’s been around for many years, or that I’ve bravely overcome something that made me highly anxious. It’s actually neither. My anxiety has just been transferred to a new platform, Zoom. And in a few years it will be whatever newer, mandated form of communication (Russian chatbot holograms?) will hold that feeling. So, until then, give me a call.The Morrison government has been accused of neglecting to assess the impact of the pandemic on young children, with current policies labelled “a series of crisis responses”. Jay Weatherill, the former Labor premier of South Australia and chief executive of Minderoo Foundation’s Thrive by Five initiative, made the comments at the Senate’s Covid-19 inquiry on Tuesday. Weatherill was one of several advocates who called for the government to do more to consider the interests of children, including developing a specific Covid-19 plan for them and a standing agenda item at national cabinet. He said there needed to be “careful monitoring of health and wellbeing in children’s first five years”, warning the pandemic has seen “stress levels” in families rise, affecting children. “The first thing the commonwealth could do is to fund the Doherty Institute to carry out modelling in relation to [the] 0-5 [age group], it’s inappropriate that that hasn’t happened already.” The Doherty Institute modelling contained some estimates of infections, admissions and deaths for the under-16 age group, but their vaccination rates were not considered in the overall national target. In September the Queensland premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, called for more research into the impact of reopening on children, but was knocked back by the federal government arguing there was no excuse to delay the national plan because no vaccine had yet been approved for the under-12s. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning On Tuesday Weatherill said current policies towards children were “a series of crisis responses” and more systemic solutions were needed, including monitoring international vaccine developments and standardising testing regimes for children aged nought to five. He also called for universal early childhood education, and additional subsidies for up to 600 hours of care for children in the year before school. The Murdoch Children’s Research Institute’s professor Andrew Steer, a paediatrician, refuted the suggestion Covid-19 is necessarily always mild in children, noting he had treated children that required admission to hospital and oxygen. Of the 79,000 positive Covid cases from 30 August to 10 October in Australia, 21,000 were children, he said, with 636 of those (3%) admitted to hospital. There were no deaths. In that period the hospitalisation rate of children reduced from 4.4% in the first fortnight to 2.1% in the last, reflecting higher vaccine coverage and a shift in the location of admissions. In early September the majority of child hospitalisations were in New South Wales because children’s parents were unwell and they are admitted “with rather than for Covid”, Steer said. Now, the majority are in Victoria. Steer said international evidence suggests about 0.7% of children who contract Covid-19 require admission to hospital and 0.07% require intensive care. Steer said it was “pleasing to see” that Pfizer results for children aged five to eleven show that it is an effective vaccine and there is “every reason to think it will be safe” but there is still reason for caution because there is “not enough information about risks”. He noted there were some cases of mild myocarditis (inflammation of the heart), but children had recovered. Researchers want to see results from the 400,000 children under 12 who have had Pfizer in the US and Canada. On Sunday the health minister, Greg Hunt, said that children aged between five and 11 would not be able to access a vaccine until at least early 2022. On Tuesday, Murdoch’s professor Sharon Goldfield said there was some evidence the pandemic had caused more frequent suicidal and self-harm ideation and presentations to the emergency department, especially at the end of 2020 and beginning of 2021 when Victoria was “in and out of lockdown”. Australian Research Alliance for Children and Youth chief executive, Penny Dakin, noted that children are not represented at the cabinet level in Australia, arguing that because it is “everybody’s job” it becomes “nobody’s job” to represent them. Unicef Australia, director of child rights, Nicole Breeze, said there had been some “mainstreaming” of the approach to children, with policy not designed specifically for their needs. Labor’s Katy Gallagher said it “might shock most Australians” that Australia ranks 32 of 40 countries on Unicef’s Worlds of Influence report on children’s wellbeing, scoring poorly on mental health (35th) and physical health (28th). Guardian Australia contacted Hunt and Scott Morrison for comment.Lawyers have launched a class action investigation into what they believe could be hundreds of “unlawful” strip searches by New South Wales Police of patrons at the Splendour in the Grass Music Festival. In May last year Guardian Austraelia revealed law firm Slater and Gordon and the Redfern Legal Centre had begun investigating the possibility of a class action against New South Wales police, alleging “systemic” misuse of strip searches in the state. It came after concerns about the use of strip searches stemming from watchdog investigations, coroner’s reports and internal police documents. Now, more than a year later, the two firms have announced the class action will go ahead focused on police actions at Splendour in the Grass, one of the largest music festivals in Australia. Slater and Gordon’s senior associate, Dr Ebony Birchall, said investigations carried out by the firms had uncovered what they say is evidence “hundreds of people who were searched by police at Splendour may have been subject to unlawful searches”. “An unlawful police search is classified by law as an assault and gives rise to compensation,” she said. The decision to focus the class action solely on police searches at Splendour in the Grass comes after an inquiry by the NSW Law Enforcement Conduct Commission (LECC) heard evidence of six children being subject to potentially unlawful searches at the music festival in 2018. The evidence was heard during a public inquiry into strip searches, and included a 16-year-old girl was left fearful and in tears after she was forced to strip naked in front of police. Sam Lee, the Redfern Legal Centre’s police powers solicitor, told the Guardian that the LECC’s investigations, as well as initial findings from its investigations, had prompted it to focus on Splendour in the Grass. “From those cases there was a prima facie overview where we found that the searches at Splendour have a lot of common features,” she said. “It’s also a family event so it takes in a wide spectrum of cases. This was a large group of people with very common aspects to their story which found common patterns of behaviour by both police and clientele.” The LECC’s inquiry heard detailed evidence about police strip search practices at the music festival, including an admission from one officer that 19 searches that he conducted at the event in 2018 may have been illegal. When the watchdog handed down its report last year it called on the NSW parliament to clarify the laws around strip searches, and while the NSW Police have since taken steps to update its policies and procedures, no changes to the legislation have been made. That, Lee said, was one of the aims of the class action. “There are two aspects to the action. One is most certainly seeking compensation for those who were searched but the other aspect is that through the case we’re shedding light on the legislative inadequacies,” she said. “Although police have made changes, the law still allowed for children as young as 10 to be strip searched and it still allows for things like breasts to be lifted, and for kids to be strip searched without a parent or guardian present. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Until you change the law we’re not going to see those aspects of strip searches that are causing the most amount of pain removed.” Strip search laws in NSW began making headlines in 2019 after Guardian Australia revealed police had searched hundreds of children including girls as young as 12. The police minister David Elliott said at the time that he’d be happy for his children to be strip searched if they were at risk of doing something wrong. The LECC’s inquiry was cut short after the NSW government decided not to renew the watchdog commissioner’s role two days before Christmas in 2019. Before his departure, the former commissioner, Michael Adams QC, published a report calling on the parliament to clarify the legislation in relation to whether police were legally able to force people to squat or move their genitals during a search. Splendour in the Grass co-founder Jessica Ducrou told SBS the festival “had no insight into NSW Police search processes at our festivals” and would “support our patrons who wish to come forward to call out and help stop unlawful conduct”.You could see how the westerlies churned through the autumn trees, and it was most striking among the big mature beeches, up in the canopy, where the orange and gold foliage twisted like a tidal current. There was also a heavy fall of thousands – if not millions – of leaves but flighting in separate gusts, so on one occasion, while I recognised a lower shower of five-fingered plates as sycamore leaves, there was a higher squall of beech that I initially mistook for a flock of finches. Here, by the Angler’s Rest pub, the River Wye was super charged with last week’s rain, and fallen foliage was drifting everywhere in the current. I noticed that a grey heron had just speared what looked to be a little bullhead, but had simultaneously spiked a big yellow sycamore leaf. Among a shallower section mid-river, however, where the limestone gravel normally breaks the surface, the whole patch was overtopped by the current. Many of the leaves had got jammed behind these rocks or had somehow got trapped on the riverbed by the weight of the flow, and it was so strewn with submerged foliage that these shallows looked yellow. A dipper had found rich pickings among this riverine litter. I watched it for several hours and was most astonished by the way a 60g bird negotiated the torrent with such aplomb. The instant it dived, a black bird was turned into a wriggling jet of silver, sheathed in displaced water. Its other technique was to brace its strong legs and upend, wings forced back to push it down, when it looked like a tiny headless chicken. The proceeds of the efforts elicited two responses. Caddis larvae sheathed in their little stone casings were taken ashore for a good beating on a rock. But other caseless caddis larvae, possibly from the family Hydropsychidae, were clamped in its beak. These primeval beasts wriggled and twisted vigorously, but the dipper swallowed them whole. Most evident was the sheer relish that it showed in all its works. I went back the next day amid rain and the dipper was in exactly the same melancholy spot. But singing. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryAustralia remains well-placed to weather a “perfect storm” of inflationary pressures triggered by the Covid pandemic without resorting to an early raising of the cash rate, although how the labour market responds remains uncertain, the reserve bank governor has told a meeting of economists. Philip Lowe on Tuesday maintained his view that a recent jump in consumer prices did “not warrant an increase in the cash rate in 2022” as markets have been betting. “The economy and inflation would have to turn out very differently from our central scenario for the board to consider an increase in interest rates next year,” Lowe said. There would be a case, though, to lift the cash rate – now at a record low 0.1% – before 2024 as currently flagged by the RBA if the “global inflation shock” turns out to be more persistent than expected. A key unknown is how quickly the labour market will tighten as swathes of the economy recover from lengthy lockdowns. That could determine how rapidly wages rise and whether they feed expectations of further prices increases to come. “We are expecting the [economic] recovery to continue and the unemployment rate to trend lower, reaching 4% by the end of 2023,” Lowe said, noting that level hasn’t been seen in Australia for half a century, giving the reserve bank “little historical experience” of how the labour market works at such a low rate. Mortgage holders and other borrowers are among those listening carefully for any hint from the RBA that rising prices – for used cars to petrol to coffee – will prompt it to lift the cash rate soon. Lowe said there was “a very low probability” the current surge in inflation would trigger an early increase in the official rate. Australia is far from alone in facing higher inflation. Covid disruptions limiting the supply of some goods and services, combined with pent-up demand from households and businesses alike, are common in many nations. Lowe, though, was at pains to highlight Australia’s differences with similar market-based economies such as the US. One difference was the greater disruption to the American workforce because of the pandemic. Labour-force participation there remains about 2 percentage points below pre-pandemic levels. “In contrast, in Australia, we were hitting record highs for participation just before the Delta outbreak and are expected to return to these highs in the coming months,” Lowe said. Australia’s participation rate perked up 0.3 percentage points in October, nudging the jobless rate temporarily to 5.2%. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The jobkeeper income-support payments also maintained ongoing links between businesses and employees, unlike the “significant shock” to labour supply experienced in the US, the RBA governor said. While wages will probably pick up “gradually” in Australia as employers scramble to attract and retain staff, the existence of multi-year enterprise agreements and the annual minimum wage case “impart a degree of inertia” into salary outcomes. Lowe said that he would be worried if household debt continued to grow at double-digit annual rates but incomes only rose 4-5%. Australia has also been shielded from some of the higher energy prices stirring inflation in northern hemisphere economies, lately buffeted by wintry blasts. Energy prices in Australia have been trending lower for a number of years, as zero fuel cost renewable sources increase their share of supply. Among the trends that could throw forecasts off is how Australia’s labour market will change once borders open up. While many potential short-term workers may be attracted to visit Australia, young Australians would also be heading overseas, depleting the domestic labour pool. Home-bound consumers also spent more on goods than services during the lockdowns at a time when factory output was disrupted. With modern supply chains operating on a ‘just-in-time’ basis with stocks kept to a minimum, it didn’t take a big shift in demand and supply to create the “perfect storm” for pressure on prices. “Looking ahead, an important question is whether consumption patterns will normalise over time, and if so what effect will this have on prices,” Lowe said on Tuesday. “There is genuine uncertainty here. It is likely, though, that consumption patterns will return to something more normal,” he said. “This is not only because we can once again consume many services, but also because households are unlikely to make repeat purchases of durable goods.”When Russia fired a missile at one of its own satellites on the weekend, the explosion generated many thousands of pieces of shrapnel that are now zooming around in space at breathtaking speeds. It added to a sizeable volume of debris already in space, intensifying concerns over the risk that rubbish poses to the International Space Station (ISS) and satellites. The danger lies in a possible collision between objects that are hurtling around at 17,000 mph (27,400km/h). Jonathan McDowell, an astrophysicist at the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, said there were about 4,000 active satellites and since the Russia test, as many as 19,000 pieces of space debris in low Earth orbit. This is the region of space stretching from about 120 miles to 1,200 miles (200km to 2,000km) above Earth. He said the test would have generated other pieces of shrapnel, too small to show up on radar, that could number in the hundreds of thousands. All up, the explosion probably increased the number of debris objects by around 10%. “It’s not a huge increase, but it’s worrying. We have a problem with space junk. So don’t deliberately create more,” he said. The concern is that flying debris may collide with the ISS or a satellite, with the latter helping with a range of things from internet relay to weather services, imaging, studying climate change and spying. At the speed the debris travels, McDowell said it would “pulverise instantly a satellite and completely destroy it”. In the worst-case scenario, there could be so many collisions that low Earth orbit becomes too cluttered with debris for satellites to operate. McDowell said while this is a “danger”, it’s not something that would happen immediately. “It’s like most environmental problems, it’s not like the oceans are wonderfully clear and then one day they are full of plastic. Things get slowly worse and worse.” The astrophysicist said the number of near-misses in space is rising, and the number of collisions – while still rare – is also rising. In March, a piece of Russian debris hit a Chinese satellite, generating a spray of fresh junk. Tracking debris can help avoid mishaps but ultimately, some of it will need to be removed. Some progress has been made on this in recent years. McDowell said many involved in space are operating in a “cleaner” way and there are processes that naturally reduce some of the debris. But all of that is wiped out in a day with a collision like the Russia test. “At some point we’re going to have to have space garbage trucks that go up and take some of this stuff,” he said. “That’s going to be expensive. The technology is just about there now, the money is not. But I think it has to come.” Adding to his concerns is a steep ramp-up in commercial activity in space which McDowell said had begun to dominate government activity in recent years. Many thousands of new satellites have been launched and up to 100,000 could be added in the next few years. “There’s a real concern that we’re getting a real environmental problem in outer space. Commercial activity isn’t being regulated adequately … it’s happening faster than regulation,” he said. “It’s largely US and Europeans but even China now is starting to have a true commercial space sector. It’s a bit of a wild west out there.”There is no good reason to exclude children from the right to vote. Indeed, I believe there is a strong case for lowering the voting age to six, effectively extending the franchise to any child in full-time education. When I have made this case, as I have done in recent years in a variety of different forums, I am always struck by the reaction I get. It is incredulity. What possible reason could there be to do something so seemingly reckless and foolhardy? Most audiences recognise that our democracy is growing fractious, frustrated and frustrating. Our political divisions are wide and our institutions seem ill-equipped to handle them. But nothing surely could justify allowing children to join in. Wouldn’t it simply make everything worse? It would not. In fact, it might make things better. But to understand why, we first need to understand the nature of the problems our democracy faces, and in particular, the generational divide that has become an increasingly important factor in politics over recent decades. We have never been more divided. And yet we have never had more in common. Britain, like other western democracies, is split down the middle on most of the big political questions. Brexiteers square up against remainers. The north opposes the south. It’s the city v the countryside. Graduates confront non-graduates. But at the same time, we increasingly share a single frame of reference. We watch the same TV shows, circle round the same topics of conversation and obsess over the same celebrities. When Oprah interviewed Harry and Meghan, responses to what they said were conditioned by political tribalism. Tell me how you voted in the Brexit referendum and I’d have a good idea of whether you were team Meghan or team Kate. Still, we all tuned in together. And when it was broadcast, we were all under lockdown together. The contours of this new landscape – politically divided, socially connected – are most stark when it comes to intergenerational conflict. If the franchise at the 2019 UK general election had been limited to the under-30s, Jeremy Corbyn would have won the biggest landslide in Labour’s history. If it had been limited to the over-60s, the Tories would have won almost every seat in the land. The old and the young have become two separate political nations. But they are not, as Disraeli once said of the rich and the poor, “two nations between whom there is no intercourse and no sympathy, who are as ignorant of each other’s habits, thoughts and feelings, as if they were dwellers in different zones, or inhabitants of different planets”. Young and old interact at almost every level of their lives. Family life is built on that interaction. Far from inhabiting separate planets, the different generations often inhabit the same homes. Of course, families can be places of deep antagonism, too, especially when young and old are forced together under one roof. No society has ever been free of intergenerational conflict. What makes our society different is that the generations diverge so profoundly over politics while coming together over so much else. When I was a child in the 1970s, pop music was primarily for the young. Older generations were more likely to listen to classical music, or big bands, or show tunes. Kids swore, but not in front of their parents. Their parents swore, but not in front of the children. Young people wore jeans, but their grandparents didn’t. They still wore jackets and ties, or skirts and dresses. When the weather got warmer, the young would strip off, but that was a privilege of youth. The old had to sweat it out. Go to any high street now on a hot summer’s day and count the men in shorts, regardless of age. The sixtysomethings will often be dressed like the children. What, then, explains the widening political divide that lies behind our growing social conformity? The answer is a combination of demography and geography. Ours are now rapidly ageing societies in which older voters have come to outnumber the young. This is the case across Europe, in the US and increasingly in Asia, too. The traditional dynamic of intergenerational conflict was that even if the older generations had the wealth and the power, the young had the numbers. In all democratic societies, from ancient Athens to 1970s Britain, there were many more voters under 40 than over 60. That is no longer the case. Our growing social conformity is not simply because the old are aping the habits of the young. It is because in any society where the middle-aged and elderly are the dominant economic and political blocs, their interests predominate. Pop music used to be for the young because that’s where the market was. Now it is people like me who are being catered for (I’m 54). It’s my 12-year-old son who is finding himself listening to the music of my youth, not the other way round. The reason that the outcome of the 2019 general election looked more like the map of an elderly political nation than a youthful one is simple weight of numbers. The over-65s, who at the dawn of modern mass democracy 100 years ago made up barely 5% of the electorate, are now closer to 20%. What’s more, older voters tend to turn out in far higher numbers than the young. The conventional lament of progressive politicians was that if only people in their 20s voted with the same dedication as people in their 70s, they could tip the balance. It was assumed that elections kept going against younger voters’ interests because they failed to show up at the polls. Now it’s as plausible to argue that they fail to show up because elections keep going against their interests. Why bother if the system is stacked against you? This effect has been exacerbated by geographical movement, which congregates significant numbers of younger voters in cities and university towns, where they relocate for work and education. The concerted expansion of higher education from the 1980s onwards has led to a large-scale migration of those in their late teens and early 20s from their home towns, often never to return. The places they go to – Brighton or Bristol, Canterbury or Cambridge – have become far more likely to return Labour MPs, because there the young can tip the balance. But as their votes pile up in densely populated metropolitan areas, the places they leave behind have started returning Conservative MPs in ever-greater numbers. The “red wall” seats that turned blue in 2019 have been left behind in this sense at least: the average age of their constituents is far higher that it was before so many students departed. There is now a set of vicious circles at work. Once politicians representing older voters start winning elections time and again, the young are discouraged from voting, which only makes the political imbalance worse. If young people pursue social mobility by moving to places where other young people are, they increase the likelihood that older voters will dominate electoral outcomes everywhere else. The result will be governments and policies that work against the sorts of social mobility that younger voters tend to favour. This has been the pattern in Britain for the best part of a generation. Pensions will get protected while student debt goes unaddressed. The interests of mortgage payers will be prioritised over the interests of renters. A country in which more than 70% of the under-30s voted to remain in the EU will still choose to leave. Once the old outnumber the young, the political divisions between them will grow. Even if everyone is watching Bridgerton. * * * When the pandemic arrived, it briefly seemed likeas if these generational divisions might be somewhat healed. We all faced a common enemy. The lockdown rules applied to everyone, and the experience of being stuck at home generated a whole new set of common reference points. Griping about Zoom – for work, for family calls, for anything – became a habit for young and old alike. Being cooped up, getting used to wearing masks, trying to understand the new rules – these were all things we endured in common, with the same dates in our calendars and the same sense of disappointment as they came and went without clear resolution. Our social connectedness has never been more vividly on display than when we went into enforced isolation from each other. But this sense of connection simply hid a more familiar pattern. In a society where demography and geography are widening the political divisions between the generations, the pandemic has done nothing to bridge them. It has made them worse. The worst consequences of the virus are very unevenly distributed. The chances of dying from Covid-19 are vastly greater for the over-70s than the under-30s. That of course is why the old have been prioritised throughout: for protection, for treatment, for vaccination. Neither politicians nor the public have had much choice about this: the profile of the disease meant there was no other option. In this, the effects of Covid-19 are part of a longstanding trend. As the population ages, healthcare becomes more and more of a political priority. Older people have a greater need for it, and the working population is required to pay for it. Because older people determine the results of elections, politicians do everything in their power to maintain this equation. The totemic status of the NHS throughout its existence conceals a profound shift in its primary purpose. When it was founded in 1948, its priority was infant health, in a society in which infant mortality was high, childhood diseases were still rife and children made up a far higher proportion of the overall population. Now the NHS is required to focus on elderly people, and their interests come first. Covid has not skewed our political priorities when it comes to health. It has simply revealed them. The pandemic has highlighted generational imbalances without doing anything to resolve them. Politicians talk about rewarding the young for the sacrifices they have made, but our political system does little to incentivise politicians to turn those words into actions. The young can plausibly claim that democracy presently discriminates against them in more ways than one. Not only are their votes regularly outweighed, but their representatives are rarely from their own generation. The average age of members of the House of Commons has barely changed in a century: it moves up and down from parliament to parliament, but never far away from 50. It is currently 51, roughly where it was after the first world war. It is true that there are more MPs in their 20s in the parliament elected in 2019 than ever before. But it is only 21, and still vastly outnumbered by the 300 MPs in their 50s and 60s, and fewer even that the number of MPs over 70. Yet there is another source of democratic discrimination that is rarely, if ever, discussed. The reason the over-60s outnumber the under-40s at the polls is not because they represent a higher portion of the overall population. They don’t. The median age in the UK is 40.4, which means there are almost as many people under 40 as there are older than that. The over-60s, though far more numerous than they used to be even a generation ago, are still only a minority of the total. But democracy does not work like that. There is no cutoff at the top end, so that the over-60s includes the increasing number of people in their 70s, 80s and above. But we do exclude anyone under the age of 18 (or 16 in Scotland) from full democratic citizenship, including the right to vote. We do this because that is the way it has always been. When it comes to democracy, children don’t count. Why not? * * * The arguments against allowing children to vote always start with the basic question of competence. But what that means is that we are applying standards to children that we have given up applying to anyone else. It is true, of course, that many children would struggle to understand complex political questions, especially younger children. It is hard to envisage a group of six-year-olds getting to grips with fiscal policy. But many adults also struggle with complex political questions, and all of us have big gaps in our political understanding. (I say this as someone who studies politics for a living, and not because I have studied the ignorance of others, but because I am reminded daily of my own.) The fact is that we don’t apply a test of competence before granting the right to vote to anyone other than children. So why start with them? Setting imaginary tests before allowing enfranchisement is an essentially 19th-century idea. The basis of the principle of universal suffrage that replaced it is that we no longer believe voting is a right that belongs to individuals on the grounds of their competence to exercise it. Instead, it is a right that belongs to each of us because we are members of a democratic political community, and will have to live with the consequences of the decisions that are made by politicians on our behalf. If we suffer the consequences of those decisions, we should have a right to express a view about who gets to decide. That applies to children just as much as adults. Perhaps, instead, the argument against letting children vote is less a principled one than a pragmatic one. Surely more adults are likely to understand what is at stake in an election than a group of schoolchildren. But that depends a great deal on how we conceive of the groups in question. It is striking how often sceptical audiences jump to the conclusion that lowering the voting age to six would mean giving six-year-olds a decisive say in the running of the country. That is absurd: the lower age group would be a small minority of children overall, just as children would still be a minority of the overall electorate. Older voters in any instance can always outvote the young. But if we take children in education as a whole, there is a good chance that some groups will be better informed than many adults. They have the time and the resources to learn what is at stake if they want to. No one can be obliged to take an interest in politics, but that is as true of adults as of children. The difference is that children in school are better placed to make up the gaps in their knowledge. The question of competence – and the difficulty of using it as an argument against extending the vote to children – is especially acute in ageing societies such as our own. As the population ages, so the number of voters suffering from dementia and other forms of cognitive decline rises. But we don’t take the vote away from old people, and we don’t apply tests of competence to individuals in their 80s and 90s. Again, it is very striking how often I find that when pressed on this point, audiences will say that rather than giving votes to children it would be better – safer? – to disenfranchise elderly people. The 19th-century assumption that we ought to discriminate on grounds of competence has not gone away. Yet it would not be better – certainly not safer – to disenfranchise elderly people. As soon as anyone suggests a programme of mass disenfranchisement, we should always ask how it would be done. By doctors? By going into care homes and asking the residents to take a test? By simply arriving at some arbitrary cut-off point, say the age of 80? How would the many actively engaged and extremely well-informed voters in their 80s take to being told that they have lost the right to vote because others of their age have been deemed unfit to exercise it? There is a lot to be said for the principle of universal suffrage, not least that it sticks to the basic democratic idea of one person, one vote. It does not play around with quotas and competencies and tests. Taking the vote away from elderly people would violate that principle. Giving the vote to children upholds and extends it. * * * There are plenty of other arguments that are made against allowing children to vote. One of the commonest is that they would simply do what their parents say. In the early years of the 20th century it was often said that it would be pointless to give women the vote because they would just do what their husbands say. This was not true, of course. Women were as capable of making their own choices as men, and they often voted differently from their husbands. Would children be any less independent? We might think that they would be more susceptible to parental pressure than adults are to spousal pressure, but in truth we have no idea because we have never tried to find out. Do children follow their parents’ views on other matters than politics? Sometimes, but not always. Do children ever decide to embrace the opposite of what their parents think? Not always, but often enough. It seems just as likely that children would be influenced in other ways. Perhaps by their grandparents, especially since many school-age children of working parents spend as much time with grandparents as with parents. Perhaps by their teachers, or by their friends, or by their favourite YouTube stars, or by footballers, or by superheroes. So, you might say, I am admitting that children would be susceptible to all sorts of external pressures. Of course – but so are adults. There is overwhelming social science evidence that all voters, old and young, educated and uneducated, make their political choices on the basis of loyalties, identities and forms of peer pressure that often have little or nothing to do with politics, and certainly are far removed from the political issues that are the focus of high-level debate. We are all politically tribal in one way or another. Do we know whether six-year-olds might turn out to be more conservative than their parents? We don’t, but there is only one way to find out. Let them vote. But shouldn’t children be protected for as long as possible from having to deal with the harsh realities of the adult world? Shouldn’t we preserve them from grownup responsibilities? These are also familiar arguments, and ones that were made against giving votes to women: why burden anyone with unnecessary responsibilities when the hard work of taking difficult decisions can be left to others? Simone de Beauvoir had a clear response to this line of thought in The Second Sex: it’s always the people with power who say they want to protect others from exercising it. Men say it. Women don’t. Colonisers say it. The colonised don’t. Adults say it. Children don’t. People without a say don’t want to be protected from the burden of having a say. They want to experience it. And once experienced, they don’t want to give it up. Are children a special case? It is often assumed that getting children involved in politics would corrupt them because politics is such a nasty business. But I believe the opposite is the case. Bringing politics into schools wouldn’t make schools worse. It would make politics better, precisely because we take the protection of children seriously. Consider this thought experiment. Think of an adult political debate: BBC Question Time, for example, with all its grandstanding and rabble-rousing and howling partisanship. Then think of a similar debate, discussing similar issues, taking place in front of an audience of primary-aged schoolchildren, with their teachers watching on. Would the conversation be worse-tempered? Or would it be conducted better? Would it perhaps even be better informed? * * * What’s left of the argument against letting children vote is more straightforwardly partisan. Given the competing, age-based electoral maps that divide the UK into the Corbyn/remain nation of the young and the Johnson/Brexit nation of the old, extending the franchise in this way can look like blatant gerrymandering – a desperate way to reverse Labour’s seemingly grim electoral prospects. Lowering the voting age to 16, which has happened in Scotland, sometimes appears to be a piece of naked political engineering. Because younger voters tend to be left-leaning on a range of issues, increasing their number could be expected to tip the balance in favour of particular causes. Wouldn’t lowering the voting age to six be more of the same? No. First, because we don’t know how children would vote: they don’t tend to get polled, so no one has really asked them. Second, because large-scale enfranchisements rarely have the anticipated effect. Lowering the voting age by two years would be a piecemeal reform that could be seen as gerrymandering. The great advantage of lowering the voting age by 12 years is that it would be far less predictable. It would be comparable to the other great enfranchisements, including working men in the 19th century and women in the 20th. These changes created opportunities for all political parties and required a far more inclusive and imaginative conception of the electorate. In both cases – contrary to expectations – the Conservative party discovered how to broaden its appeal. I am not saying that would happen in this case. I am simply saying we don’t know. Why, then, have an arbitrary age threshold at all? Why not make voting a human right – or even a birthright – and give the vote to everyone from the first day of their lives to the last? Though some political theorists have argued for this, it falls down on practical grounds, because babies and small children would need someone to exercise that vote for them. Once voting becomes a system of proxies and surrogates, it loses the simplicity and clarity of one person, one vote. I do believe in a very basic competence threshold, which is the ability to express a preference in the first place. Being in full-time education seems a reasonable way of establishing that – if you can go to school, you can put a cross against a box or press a button on a voting machine. That means you can vote. The right to vote goes along with having a share in the fate of a democratic community and having to live with the consequences of the decisions that are made by those in power. Children will have to live with those consequences longer than anyone. If it is argued that they nonetheless do not share in the life of the community in the same way as adults, because they do not earn, or pay tax, or perform public service, we must remember that we stopped making those prerequisites of enfranchisement a long time ago. Adults can vote regardless of the taxes they do or do not pay, of the public services they do or do not perform, of whether they are net contributors to or net beneficiaries of the public purse. They can vote because we all have things in common that transcend our individual contributions. We have preferences and opinions and hopes and fears. Voting is one way – not the only way, and by no means always the most effective, but still one of the most important – to be heard. Children deserve the same. There is clear evidence that children feel more strongly about some questions than older voters. Education ranks highly as a priority for young and old, but environmental concerns are a far greater priority for the young. This may be because younger people – with a life ahead of them – have longer time horizons. Or it may be something else: fashion, peer pressure, groupthink. It doesn’t matter. Preferences are preferences, interests are interests, and the fact that they emanate from children does not invalidate them. All preferences should count. It would be better for everyone if they did. * * * Giving children the vote would not, contrary to many people’s expectations, be transformative. Mass enfranchisements rarely are. The same kinds of people still end up getting elected, because the incentives for becoming a politician do not change. As the old saying goes, if voting really changed anything, they would abolish it. But voting still matters. I am not arguing for six-year-olds to be in parliament, which would be revolutionary (and, frankly, a little mad). I simply believe that everyone should be able to take part in the electoral process, and to have an opportunity for politicians to ask them what they think and to take account of what they say in constructing their political programmes. Put that way, it is a far less radical idea than it sounds. Some things would change. Climate politics would probably rise more rapidly up the political agenda. Time horizons for some political decisions might alter. Politicians would have a wider range of views to consider. I do not believe that anyone involved in this newly expanded democracy would become a better person as a result. Politics would still be a cutthroat business. Children would no more be improved by taking part in elections than adults are. This is not about giving children a civics lesson – electoral democracy has never been about that. Giving children the vote would not let children control the future – the adults would still be in charge. But it could invigorate our democracy, improve it, vary it, leave it a little less ossified, a little less predictable, a little less stale. It might also help bridge the generational divide. In some ways, children do inhabit a different planet from the rest of us. We don’t watch the same TV programmes as they do, unless we have no choice. The lives of six-year-olds are deeply mysterious to most adults. That is a large part of why democratic politics should at least be open to their perspective. But at the same time, children don’t live apart from older generations. They don’t migrate to places where they can pursue the lives they want to lead. They are forced to coexist with the grownups. However much they might prefer it otherwise, they have to listen, if only because the grownups still get to call the shots. Children talk to their parents and grandparents, their teachers and guardians. The adults don’t always listen in return, though it would be far better if they did. But the conversations are real, which is the precondition of democratic politics. The political theorist John Wall, in his forthcoming book Give Children the Vote, writes of the enfranchisement of the roughly one-quarter of the population to whom it is routinely denied: “It is vital to making contemporary societies more democratic. It is the only way to pressure political leaders to respond to the lived experiences of all instead of just some of the people. It is the only way to make the franchise fully just and effective … It is not the answer to everything. But it must be part of the solution. Things need realigning and this is arguably our best hope for doing so. No politics is ever perfect. But if societies want to be truly democratic, they need to overcome their engrained biases and embrace the whole human community.” The pandemic has given an opportunity to rethink assumptions that we take for granted. Political choices that would have seemed impossible two years ago have become routine. Why, then, does universal suffrage remain out of bounds? • Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread, listen to our podcasts here and sign up to the long read weekly email here.Over early morning coffee at his Oxfordshire farmhouse, Jeremy Clarkson is talking about his new nemesis, badgers, and the fact that they constantly urinate, usually on his grass. “If they’ve got TB and a cow eats that bit of grass, then you, the taxpayer, pay for that cow to be killed. A quarter of the world’s badgers live in the UK, causing chaos. But if you say, ‘I’m going to shoot a badger’, you can expect to find your house on fire within 10 minutes. Carrie Johnson is a badger enthusiast, so the government aren’t likely to do anything while she’s running around.” Your understanding of why badgers, and the leanings of Boris Johnson’s wife, have got Clarkson’s Levi’s in a twist may depend on how far along his career you’ve travelled. Since leaving the BBC’s Top Gear in 2015, he has co-hosted four series of The Grand Tour (basically Top Gear with 300 times the budget) on Amazon Prime Video. In his most recent Amazon venture – Clarkson’s Farm – he attempts to cultivate the 1,000 acres of land he’s owned since 2008 but didn’t give an agricultural hoot about until the actual farmer who worked them retired in 2019. “I didn’t have a clue what was growing in my fields,” he says, gesturing all around. “Now I know what’s in them all.” Clarkson’s Farm has delighted Clarksonphiles by showing TV’s leading boor/buffoon utterly out of his comfort zone and sinking fast. “I had the most awful accident last week,” he says at one point. “I hit a telegraph pole with a very expensive piece of borrowed equipment. So I’m in deep shit.” But there has, inevitably, been criticism from Clarksonphobes, whose existence he acknowledges with the words: “A lot of people don’t like cars, or me, and certainly don’t like the combination of the two.” Clarkson doesn’t grant many interviews. “You inevitably say something stupid. Then they say, ‘He’s stupid.’ So it’s easier not to bother.” But there is a reason why I’m sitting in front of this mud-splattered figure: he’s got a book out, a collection of his newspaper columns on farming. “I look like a farmer,” he says. “I’ve even bought a check shirt and a pair of steel-toed boots, which are incredibly heavy. I don’t know how farmers walk about.” Clarkson’s Farm split the Guardian’s TV writers. “Unlike his motoring shows,” wrote Stuart Heritage, “where his stock reaction to any problem was to blast out of it in an orgy of explosive cluelessness, the Clarkson we meet here is actively willing to learn. Better yet, he isn’t the in-your-face alpha of this show, because everyone else knows so much more than him.” However, in her one-star review, Lucy Mangan called the show, which she renamed Jeremy Buys a Tractor, “wearisome, meretricious rubbish”. Clarkson is 61 now. When I ask him how he hopes to die, he pops a piece of Nicorette in his mouth and says: “I used to think I’d put out my last cigarette age 107 and just die. But I stopped smoking four years ago. When my dad died at 61, I thought, ‘That’s a pretty good innings.’ Now I’m 61, if I died, I’d be furious. I’m nowhere near finished. So, yes, I think about dying every day. There’s your headline. In 40 years, I shall be dead and nobody shall remember me.” Although some channel will probably still be showing Top Gear repeats, I suggest. “No blue plaque,” he agrees with a laugh, “but I’ll be on Dave.” Clarkson found himself in hospital with pneumonia in 2017 and, last Christmas, feared he would “die alone in a plastic tent” after contracting Covid. How’s his health now? “I’ve got my first medical for two and half years next week – the full anus – and I’m terrified. They begin with a prostate exam and it gets more undignified as the day goes on. Then a doctor summons you into this dimly lit surgery to look at your results. You sit there thinking, ‘Have I got cancer?’ That’s all I care about. I don’t listen to the rest – drink less, lose weight. You’d have thought with all the exercise, I’d look like a whippet.” With The Grand Tour now appearing only as specials (but still carrying on a lot longer than the Guardian would hope, he says) and his agricultural adventure now filming its second series, is the farm Clarkson’s retirement plan? “No. I’m not farmer stock. You spend 30 years blowing everything up” – this included his own farmhouse in a 2016 episode of The Grand Tour – “then make this rather gentle programme with some lovely people from a village. It’s so far removed, like David Attenborough doing a programme on jet-skiing, or Nicholas Witchell saying, ‘I’m going to be a cage fighter.’ But I’m still the same person. I kind of know about cars, so I can be bombastic. I don’t know anything about farming, so you’re watching me learn. I was nursing a semi yesterday because I was driving past one of the fields in a tractor.” A semi? “Priapic,” he says. “Tumescent.” Oh, I see. “And then I noticed a strip that hasn’t been seeded. So I busted Kaleb for making his first mistake in two years.” That’s Kaleb Cooper, Clarkson’s 22-year-old farming assistant. “I haven’t seen him all morning. He’s in a sulk.” One of the most enjoyable things about Clarkson’s Farm is that absolutely everyone treats him with a genuine, complete and utter lack of awe. “Why would they do otherwise?” he says. “I’m just one of those rich fuckers who moved to the Cotswolds.” Local opinion is certainly divided, though. The taxi driver who takes me to his house is a fan, referring to him as “Lord Clarkson”. But a person I talk to in the pub, who has met him once, describes him as “clearly a massive knob”. Clarkson doesn’t seem too concerned and mentions that he has set up a Google alert on himself. “If I get up in the morning and there’s no alert,” he says, “I’m thrilled. But the red trousers brigade object to everything. One turned around last night at the parish council meeting and said, ‘It’s not your job to be rude.’ I said, ‘It kind of is.’” There is also something quite refreshing about seeing Clarkson doing an actual hard day’s graft. “I definitely sleep better after a day on the farm,” he says. “There’s no cameras here today, though. I’ve had to write a column and I’m seeing you. But as soon as you’re gone, weather permitting, I’m back on the tractor.” The week after we speak, Clarkson scores a win at the British Farming Awards, in the Flying the Flag for British Agriculture category. He dedicates it to Cooper, saying he couldn’t have done it without him. This echoes recent remarks made by the sheep farmer and author James Rebanks, who said Clarkson had done “more for farmers in one series than Countryfile achieved in 30 years”. If Clarkson really has become the new voice of British farming, no one is more surprised than him. “If somebody said to me two years previously, ‘The president of the National Farmers Union wants to take you out for lunch’, I’d have thought, ‘What is going to happen in my life to cause that?’” Does he think an OBE could be on the cards? “You’re very sweet. But I’m more annoyed I’ve never won a Bafta. I’ve done some bloody good shows over the years: a good one on Brunel and some military documentaries. You’d think the Bafta committee might think, ‘We should at least nominate him. Drag him to London to disappoint him.’ But as soon as the newspapers say, ‘Jeremy Clarkson, friend of David Cameron’, that’s it: ‘He’s not having a Bafta.’” He goes on: “I can’t imagine in a million years that the honours committee are going to go, ‘Right, everyone, he’s just the man.’ Come on. Go through the cuttings. You’ll quickly discover I’m not.” Diddly Squat: A Year on the Farm is published by Penguin (£16.99). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Social care workers should receive an immediate bonus of up to £1,000 to stop them quitting before the winter and putting even more pressure on the NHS, ministers are being urged. The Association of Directors of Adult Social Services (ADASS) and NHS Providers, which represents hospitals, say emergency payments would help tackle worsening staff shortages. Their plea comes as new figures show that hospitals across the UK cannot fill almost half of the number of consultant posts they advertise – the highest number for eight years. Growing numbers of care home personnel and domiciliary care workers in England are leaving to work for delivery firms such as Amazon, in hospitality, or in other sectors, leading to warnings that already fragile services may become unsustainable unless the exodus is halted. Stephen Chandler, the president of ADASS, said: “Paying a £1,000 bonus to care workers over the winter would show that we prize their skills and dedication as a society.” He added that care workers in England were the only ones not to receive a bonus for working during Covid. NHS Providers suggested a lower figure – at least £500 – but pleaded with ministers to accept the urgency of the need to stem the loss of so many personnel from the sector before it was too late. “With 1.5 million social care staff that [a £500 bonus] comes to a total of £750m, which is a huge amount of money. A sum of this size would need to be a draw on the government reserve,” said Chris Hopson, the organisation’s chief executive. “It’s this kind of immediate, emergency action that government needs to be thinking about in the next fortnight because our health and care system has to stop the current flow of people leaving social care into other industries like retail, hospitality and logistics.” With Amazon and other firms offering bonuses to help them recruit workers for the Christmas rush, a “retention bonus” was vital because “if we don’t stop the loss of social care staff, that will be a real issue and it needs to be looked at really quickly”, Hopson added. A new census of hospital doctors across the UK found that 48% of posts for consultants (senior doctors) went unfilled last year, up from 36% in 2013. The Royal College of Physicians, Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh and Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Glasgow said the main problem was a lack of applicants. Wales had the highest proportion of unfilled posts (59%). In England it was 46% but that masked significant regional variation. While only 38% of posts in London stayed vacant, in the east Midlands it was 63% and 61% in the West Midlands. “We’re being hit by a perfect storm of high demand for services and not enough staff. This can’t go on,” said Prof Andrew Goddard, president of the Royal College of Physicians. “The fact that so many posts were unfilled because there were no applicants shows the supply of doctors falls woefully short of demand.” He asked ministers to agree to fund an expansion of medical school places in order to train more homegrown doctors to help boost the workforce. There is also concern that almost 14,000 nurses and midwives stopped working in the NHS between April and September, a big increase on the 11,020 who did so in the same period in 2020. Andrea Sutcliffe, the chief executive of the Nursing and Midwifery Council (NMC), said it was “concerning” that the number of UK nationals becoming nurses and midwives had fallen from 14,410 between April-September 2020 to 13,078 in the same six months this year. She welcomed the fact that the total number of nurses and midwives on the NMC’s register had risen again, this time to 744,929. But, she added: “In the face of rising needs across the UK there are worrying signs this pace of growth won’t meet demand.” The former health secretary Jeremy Hunt will on Tuesday try to force the current holder of the office, Sajid Javid, to publish an independent projection every two years of how many staff the NHS needs and update on progress towards delivering the numbers needed. Hunt, who chairs the Commons health select committee, will lay an amendment to the health and care bill that is going through parliament. Almost 50 health organisations and 38 MPs – including 19 Tories, all opposition parties and eight select committee chairs – are backing the move. “With shortages in every single medical speciality and lots of additional money going into the NHS it makes no sense to ignore the elephant in the room, which is that there are not nearly enough doctors or nurses to do the work the government and the public wants,”, Hunt said.Michelle Wacek was a TikTok fan years ago, back when the video-sharing app was called Musical.ly. “I went on it for a laugh,” she says. “And then I got sucked into the vortex.” She took part in lip-syncing challenges, and followed the influencer Evie Meg, who raises awareness about Tourette syndrome among her 14 million followers. In April 2020, Wacek was messing around in the kitchen when her husband accidentally clipped her in the face. The then 25-year-old chef had a panic attack. “It triggered a PTSD response from a previous abusive relationship I was in,” she says. Over the next few weeks, Wacek noticed that she was having tics. “They were just little noises,” she says. “Nothing to write home about.” She would scrunch up her nose, or huff. The tics escalated from sounds into words and phrases. Then the motor tics kicked in. “I started punching walls and throwing myself at things,” she says. By July, Wacek was having seizures. She had to stop work. “Being a chef with seizures is not safe at all,” she says. Her GP referred her to a neurologist, who diagnosed her with functional neurological syndrome (FND). People with FND have a neurological condition that cannot be medically explained, but can be extremely debilitating. “In a general neurological clinic, around 30% of the conditions we see are not fully explainable,” says Dr Jeremy Stern, a neurologist with the charity Tourettes Action. In Wacek’s case, FND manifested in verbal and motor tics, not dissimilar from how Tourette syndrome appears to lay people, although the two conditions are distinct. Wacek has up to 20 seizures a day and currently has to use a wheelchair. Like Meg, she is now a TikTok influencer, using her platform to raise awareness of FND. “Knowing that I am going through the same crap as other people out there makes me feel better,” Wacek says. “Without all these platforms, I would be quite isolated.” This month, Wacek’s Facebook groups and online communities lit up. The source: a Wall Street Journal report about the rise in young women developing sudden-onset tics that doctors thought could be linked to TikTok. The article prompted a swift backlash from many in the Tourette’s and FND community. “I read the article and thought it was a load of crap,” says Wacek. “TikTok is not giving people Tourette’s.” The fact that she followed Meg before developing tics herself, says Wacek, is a “coincidence”. But there is a rise in young women presenting with unexplained tics that come on suddenly, far later in life than the usual presentation for Tourette syndrome. Some of these young people are social media users, some are not. What on earth is going on? The neurological journal Brain isn’t typically the locus of international controversy. But times are changing. “Journals are more open-access than ever before,” says Dr Seonaid Anderson, a research psychologist and neurodiversity consultant who specialises in Tourette syndrome. “People with neurodiverse conditions can access what is being written about them far more freely. Webinars often feature patients in the audience.” In August, Brain published a paper with the incendiary headline: “Stop that! It’s not Tourette’s but a new type of mass sociogenic illness”. In it, clinicians from Hannover Medical School in Germany speculated that a mass sociogenic illness (MSI) that resembled Tourette’s but was not Tourette’s, was spreading among German teenagers. A sociogenic illness, explains researcher Dr Kirsten Müller-Vahl, “is when people who are in close contact develop similar symptoms, but without any underlying cause”. A mass MSI outbreak was seen in the UK at a Lancashire school in 2015, where 40 pupils received medical treatment for dizziness thought to be brought on by anxiety after a handful of children fainted during an Armistice Day service in a warm assembly hall. MSI is currently in the news as a possible cause for the mysterious Havana syndrome, which is affecting diplomats at US bases across the world. But experts did not believe MSI could be spread via social media – until the Hannover team’s research. MSI ripples outwards from a “patient zero”, infecting the people around that person in waves of anxiety-induced illness. “People now use social media so intensively that it more or less replaces our normal context,” says Müller-Vahl. “You can be in close contact with someone via social media, it can be very emotional, and you can identify with that influencer. We believe that spread can happen solely via social media.” In this case, Müller-Vahl identifies this patient zero as a German YouTuber, Jan Zimmerman, who has Tourette syndrome and runs a channel with 2.2 million subscribers. In 2019, Müller-Vahl says, teenagers began to present at her clinic with functional Tourette’s-like symptoms, a subset of FND. Typically, Tourette’s starts during childhood, with six the average age of onset. But the mean onset age of Müller-Vahl’s patients was 19. Their symptoms also escalated more quickly than typical Tourette’s. In all, since 2019 Müller-Vahl has seen nearly 50 young people; all of them confirmed that they watched Zimmerman’s channel. She believes FND was spread via social media contagion, in much the same way that a fainting fit ripples through a packed school hall. Müller-Vahl is not accusing young people of faking illness. “I know no expert who feels this is malingering,” she says. But the title of her paper – Stop That! – was interpreted that way. “People criticised our title because it was a bit provocative,” says Müller-Vahl, sounding exasperated. “But we are not saying to the patients: ‘Stop that.’ It’s addressed to medical doctors. Stop diagnosing this as Tourette’s, when it’s FND.” Be that as it may, says Anderson, “It’s easy for the public to think people are saying that you should stop your tics. We want people to get away from that view, which is linked to the dark days of previous years.” The phenomenon Müller-Vahl’s team observed – young people with sudden-onset tics, thought to be FND and possibly linked to social media exposure – has been observed by clinicians globally. With the exception of Müller-Vahl’s own study, most of those with the symptoms are female. “We’ve seen groups of teenage girls from the same school who develop almost identical tics,” says Dr Tammy Hedderly, a paediatric neurologist at Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS trust. Stern has likewise heard of outbreaks in UK schools. “They shout ‘Baked beans!’ or hit their parents on the head,” says Hedderly. “When a 15-year-old girl walks into my clinic shouting ‘Baked beans!’, my first question is: ‘Have you been watching this influencer? Because I know all the names of the influencers. So it’s important to recognise that social media does play a role and the scale of the problem is wide, across the UK.” In the US, Dr Caroline Olvera, a neurologist, has also seen an increasing number of young people, mostly girls, presenting with sudden-onset tics. She wrote a research paper based on her study of more than 3,000 videos of TikTok Tourette’s influencers, observing: “Despite our study cohort spanning different countries, 67.9% of the cohort mentioned their TikTok tics were from other content creators, and the majority had the same vocal tic.” Olvera’s research has not gone down well in some quarters. “I’m frustrated,” she says. “I’ve tried to stop reading a lot of what is written out there.” She’s received “lots” of angry emails. “My colleagues have had a positive response to my research,” she says, “but I don’t know if it’s been perceived appropriately by the public. The last thing I would want is for my patients to walk away from this thinking that their disorder is fake or not worthwhile.” Much of the controversy arises from the misapprehension that doctors are accusing young people of faking Tourette’s for attention, or arguing that TikTok is giving people Tourette’s. Neither claim is true. “What the media has boiled it down to,” says Olvera, “is that if it’s not Tourette syndrome, it’s fake. But just because it’s not Tourette syndrome doesn’t mean it’s fake. This is a real condition. Even though it’s not typical Tourette’s, it’s very disruptive and stressful.” Meg Jones, 17, began experiencing tics in February this year. “I was really stressed out,” she says. Her puppy was sick, and Meg was behind at school. “I had teachers phoning me non-stop, asking me where my work was,” she says. “At one point I broke down.” The tics started with neck jerks and escalated within weeks. Meg would hit her friends and head-butt things. By May, she was having seizures. Meg was recently diagnosed provisionally with Tourette’s – over the phone. “The call was less than five minutes long,” she says. “The neurologist didn’t say much. He just said, ‘I believe you have Tourette’s.’” (A diagnosis of Tourette syndrome requires a person to have had verbal and motor tics for at least one year.) She is on the child and adolescent mental health services (Camhs) waiting list. “If I was to look at my life and think of all the things I can’t do at this point, and how uncertain the future is,” says Meg, “I would become extremely depressed.” After she developed tics, Meg started to follow TikTok influencers with Tourette’s. She is a fan of @UncleTics, a New Zealand influencer with 3.2 million followers. “Finding people who are going through the same thing helps a lot,” she says. “But I also noticed that watching other people tic made me tic.” She picked up specific vocal tics from these TikTok accounts, such as blurting out the word “lesbian”. It is widely accepted by experts that tics are “suggestible”, meaning that people with tics often trigger new tics in each other. “We know that when people with Tourette’s get together in support groups,” says Anderson, “they may pick up each other’s tics, although it’s usually for only a few hours.” It is not that TikTok is giving people tics; rather, it may be triggering tics in people who are searching social media for information about their condition. “Social media can’t create tics,” Anderson argues. “What it might do is trigger someone who is already susceptible.” “The safety and wellbeing of our community is our priority,” a TikTok spokesperson says. “We’re consulting with industry experts to better understand this specific experience. We’re proud that people living with Tourette syndrome have found a home on TikTok where they can fight stigma, find community and express themselves authentically.” Meg, meanwhile, isn’t consciously imitating the influencers she sees on TikTok. “I’ve had people at my school tell me that I’m an attention seeker,” she says. “But if they were put in my shoes, they’d know that’s not true … Imagine straining your neck for hours a day and not being able to move. As much as I find myself hilarious and laugh about it with my friends, I would 1,000% choose not to have this over having the attention, any day.” Suggestibility can trigger tics even in the classroom. Chloe (not her real name), 14, received a diagnosis of Tourette syndrome in July. “The tics started 18 months ago,” says her mother, Jill (also not her real name). “But she’d been suppressing them, until everything came out in September last year. The stress of the pandemic made it too difficult to hold them in.” Chloe had to take time off school this year. “During the time she was off,” says Jill, “another girl in her class developed tics.” Now both girls are in the same classroom, which poses a problem. “They set each other off,” Jill explains. It should not be surprising that the stress of the pandemic is causing young people to present with tics, which are often exacerbated by stress and anxiety. It should also not be surprising that social media use may worsen tics in people with an underlying predisposition, in the same way that social media is known to correlate with other negative mental health outcomes. Stern advises patients to limit social media exposure for this reason. What is surprising, and dispiriting, is the extent to which stigma persists around little-known conditions such as FND, and the lack of support available to people with tics. “Regardless of why these tics are happening,” says Jess Thom of the blog Tourette’s Hero, “whether they are functional (FND) or Tourette’s, the symptoms are real and not the fault of these young people who are in need of support that doesn’t really exist.” NHS mental health services are at breaking point due to a post-pandemic backlog. “I’ve heard of families waiting between two and four years to be seen by Camhs,” says Anderson. Chloe is on a two-year waiting list to see a neurologist. Wacek is waiting to see a neurotherapist; in desperation, she called 111 recently, only to speak to a brusque and unsympathetic doctor. “He said I was doing it to myself,” she recalls. “Which made me feel worse, which made me have more seizures.” In Wales, there is currently no paediatric neurologist who specialises in Tourette syndrome. “It’s shocking,” says Helen Reeves, 42, from Pembrokeshire. Her 13-year-old daughter developed sudden-onset tics in August. “You go to the paediatrician with symptoms and they ask me what I think it might be.” Reeves is campaigning for better provision: a petition she started has more than 7,000 signatures. It is a similar story in much of the UK. “There are hardly any pathways through to consultants,” says Paul Stevenson, 58, of Berwick-upon-Tweed. His son developed sudden-onset tics last year. “All these people are going through this traumatic period, and doctors are not fully understanding what is going on.” In the absence of specialist support, young people can only hope their tics become more manageable with time. A couple of weekends ago, Meg went away with friends to Cardiff. It was the first ordinary thing she has managed since her tics came on. “That was a major thing,” she says. “To be a normal independent teenager.” Next year, her friends will apply to university. She wants to apply too, but is worried. “What if I had a seizure and no one knew what was going on?” says Meg. “The unknown is scary. But I don’t want to be afraid of my life.” • This article was amended on 16 November 2021 to attribute the following quote to Seonaid Anderson, instead of Tammy Hedderly: “I’ve heard of families waiting between two and four years to be seen by Camhs.”This should be the moment: it’s the best chance in years for a shot at the “high wage, high skill economy” that Boris Johnson promised. The ratio of job vacancies to unemployed people is at its highest since the 1960s, meaning employers are in theory competing for workers rather than the other way around. If not now, when? Wherever you go, spot the “staff wanted” signs in shops, care agencies, minicab offices, cafes, hairdressers, on the back of buses and vans. At last, is the boot on the worker’s foot – a deserved reward for pandemic heroism? There’s scant sign of it. The Bank of England says actual pay has risen about 3%, while the City expects Wednesday’s Office for National Statistics inflation rate to hit 4%. Highly skilled workers may manage to keep up, their wages following the cost of living, but the low-paid won’t. On Monday, the “real living wage” – a voluntary scheme – rose to £9.90 an hour outside London, which equates to £1,930 more a year than the government’s so-called national living wage (NLW). The Living Wage Commission sets this rate, unlike the government’s, to reflect the rising price of rent, food and fuel. The good news is that a third more companies became accredited living wage employers during the pandemic, committed to paying this rate. Now almost 9,000 employers, including half of the FTSE 100, have signed up, covering 300,000 staff. By setting the pace, Gavin Kelly, chair of the Living Wage Commission, says their rate pushes governments to keep raising the official rate. Even so, almost 5m jobs, or one in six nationally, pay below the real living wage. If Johnson seriously meant his “levelling up” to make the country less unequal, he would start here: in the south-east of England 12.8% are low paid; that figure rises in the north, with the highest, at 21.3%, in Northern Ireland. Yet what the budget gave, it took back: while the NLW rose, 55p in each extra pound is lost as a result of changes to universal credit. Since the end of the £20 a week “uplift”, the Resolution Foundation finds that despite the minimum wage rise, the lowest-paid fifth of households will lose £280 a year. But in the wretched world of low pay, the hourly rate is deceptive. For those on zero-hours contracts, what matters most is the number of hours worked: a week with too few can plunge families into debt. The government’s long-delayed employment bill needs to make guaranteed contracted hours a right. Will that bill include the power to stop the “self-employment” sham that denies security, or sick and holiday pay? A regulator needs to enforce rights. Will it ban monstrous forms of control, such as algorithmic systems that make employees work like robots, harming their mental health? Any serious project of levelling up would adopt Labour’s plan for fair pay agreements in each sector, starting with social care. Winston Churchill created wage councils, which fixed payment thresholds in each sweatshop occupation, but John Major abolished them to let the market rip. Decades after Margaret Thatcher eviscerated the unions, it’s time to oblige employers to let them recruit in every workplace. There’s no levelling up without rebalancing the power between employer and employee. That means between gender too, as two-thirds of the low-paid are women. This Thursday is Equal Pay Day, the dismal point in the year when, metaphorically, women stop earning: this year they earned almost 12% less than men. Deep sexism in social attitudes traps women in a downward pay spiral for all the bad old reasons: they work in low-pay sectors – caring, cleaning, catering, checkouts – in traditional women’s roles, traditionally underpaid because women do them. Worse, the Fawcett Society points to research indicating that when women move into a sector, pay falls. “Change jobs to let the labour market work its magic!”, say economists with their dud models. They need only venture into the real world to understand why few low-paid families dare take the risk – the typical level of savings among the poorest fifth of households, before the pandemic, was £473. A mother dashing to work, then home to collect children, has no time to job hunt. Is that job nearby, do its hours fit childcare times, how can she go for an interview? It could mean queueing at agencies to collect and then bring back forms with photos and certificates; a delayed start-date and the wait for the first payday mean she risks pennilessness in the meantime. What if the job doesn’t work out? The high-skilled may leverage themselves to keep up with inflation, but not the insecure low-paid. “Upskill and aspire!” urge Tory politicians. But five out of six people on low pay are still low paid a decade later, finds the Institute for Employment Studies, with women least likely to progress through training or promotion. Sadly, this doesn’t look set to be a golden era where the underpaid call the shots. The Office for Budget Responsibility projects an imminent decline in household income, with inflation outpacing earnings, which are 1% lower than this time a year ago. By 2024 the Resolution Foundation predicts only a pitiful 0.5% increase in real incomes, which would make this parliament the very worst on record for wage growth. That’s after virtual stagnation since the 2008 crash. Ipsos Mori reports exceptional pessimism about the rising cost of living. Voters won’t judge levelling up by a handful of reopened northern railway lines: it’ll still be the economy, stupid. Polly Toynbee is a Guardian columnistSpecialist NHS clinics for severely obese children and young people are to be set up in England as part of an early intervention scheme to help tackle an issue costing about £6bn a year. A pilot of 15 clinics across the country will provide more than 1,000 children a year, aged between two and 18, specialist treatment to support weight loss. Tailored care packages developed with their family will include diet plans, mental health treatment and coaching, with early action aimed at preventing long-term health problems such as type 2 diabetes, health attacks, strokes and cancer. The rollout of the pilot delivers on the NHS Long Term Plan ambition to treat children for severe complications related to their obesity, avoiding the need for more invasive treatment. Obesity affects one in five children in the UK and can increase the likelihood of a child developing serious health issues such as type 2 diabetes, liver conditions and early heart disease. Children who are severely obese can also develop difficulties such as breathing problems, sleep issues and mental health problems. In England, the number of children living with obesity doubles from the start of primary school to the end of primary school – with latest data showing that one-fifth of children aged 10-11 are obese in England. At the new clinics, group sessions will be provided with a full clinical team, including support from dieticians, psychologists, specialist nurses, social workers, youth workers and a paediatrician. The services will identify the factors causing obesity in children, considering their mental and physical health. Amanda Pritchard, the chief executive of NHS England, said: “The pandemic has shone a harsh light on obesity – with many vulnerable young people struggling with weight gain during the pandemic. Left unchecked, obesity can have other very serious consequences, ranging from diabetes to cancer.” The new services “are a landmark moment” in efforts to help children and young people “lead longer, healthier and happier lives”, she said. The pilot is based on an existing service in Bristol Royal hospital for Children, which has been supporting children in the area since 2018. The Care of Childhood Obesity (CoCO) clinic has treated thousands of children from across the south-west since its launch. Julian Hamilton-Shield, a professor of diabetes and metabolic endocrinology at the Bristol hospital, said: “Using a team of experts from many disciplines, including specialist dieticians, social support workers, and mental health professionals, we can pinpoint the exact causes of weight gain and create tailored treatment plans for each child to help accelerate weight loss and address the complications caused. “The creation of these 15 new clinics across the country demonstrate the NHS’s commitment to help tackle obesity and provide more local access to specialist weight management support for children in England.” Available evidence shows younger generations are becoming obese at earlier ages and staying obese for longer, putting themselves at greater risk of 13 different types of cancer, heart attacks, strokes and type 2 diabetes. Children living in the most deprived areas are more than twice as likely to be obese than those living in the least deprived areas.There are 247m million fewer house sparrows in Europe than there were in 1980, and other once ubiquitous bird species have suffered huge declines, according to a new study. One of every six birds – a net loss of 600 million breeding birds in total – have disappeared over less than four decades. Among the common species that are vanishing from the skies are yellow wagtails (97m fewer), starlings (75m fewer) and skylarks (68m fewer). The study by scientists from the RSPB, BirdLife International and the Czech Society for Ornithology analysed data for 378 of 445 bird species native to countries in the EU and UK, finding that the overall abundance of breeding birds declined by between 17% and 19% between 1980 and 2017. The total and proportional declines in bird numbers are particularly high among species associated with farmland. The house sparrow has been hardest hit, losing half its population, while its close relative, the tree sparrow, has seen a fall of 30 million birds. Both species have declined because of changing farming practices, but house sparrows have also vanished from many cities for reasons that have not yet been established but are likely to include shortages of food, diseases such as avian malaria, and air pollution. While agricultural intensification causing habitat loss and chemical farming triggering big declines in insects that feed many birds is a cause of many population falls, long-distance migrants, such as willow warbler and yellow wagtail, have declined proportionally more than other groups. Shorebirds such as lapwings and dotterels have also slumped. “Our study is a wake-up call to the very real threat of extinctions and of a Silent Spring,” said Fiona Burns, lead author of the study and a senior conservation scientist for the RSPB. Burns said next year’s meeting of the UN convention on biological diversity was crucial to creating a strong framework for preventing extinctions and recovering the lost abundance of many species. She added: “We need transformative action across society to tackle the nature and climate crises together. That means increasing the scale and ambition of nature-friendly farming, species protection, sustainable forestry and fisheries, and rapidly expanding the protected area network.” While 900 million birds vanished in total, 203 of the 378 species studied increased in number. Sixty-six per cent of the 340 million additional birds were from just eight booming species: blackcap, chiffchaff, blackbird, wren, goldfinch, robin, woodpigeon and blue tit. Numbers of 11 species of birds of prey have more than doubled since 1980, including peregrine falcon, marsh harrier, buzzard, white-tailed eagle and golden eagle, although such species are relatively rare and so their populations are still mostly small. Scientists say these raptors have benefited from increased protection and reductions in harmful pesticides and persecution, as well as specific species restoration projects. The EU’s Birds Directive and Habitats Directive have also provided legal protection to priority species and habitats that have been found to benefit bird species. While rates of decline in many species have slowed in the last decade, the declines are not just a hangover from the damaging practices of previous decades, and the study supports previous research that reveals substantial recent losses in biodiversity. The scale of losses and types of bird disappearing are comparable with declines in North America, where 3bn birds were found to have disappeared since 1970. Anna Staneva, interim head of conservation at BirdLife Europe, said: “This report loudly and clearly shows that nature is sounding the alarm. While protecting birds that are already rare or endangered has resulted in some successful recoveries, this doesn’t seem to be enough to sustain the populations of abundant species. “Common birds are becoming less and less common, largely because the spaces they depend on are being wiped out by humans. Nature has been eradicated from our farmland, sea and cities. Governments across all of Europe must establish legally binding targets for nature restoration. Otherwise the consequences will be severe, including for our own species.”A change of wind direction altered the course of English history on 16 November 1688. It enabled the Protestant William of Orange to “invade” England and oust James II, who had become unpopular trying to reintroduce the Roman Catholic faith. Although William had been invited by the Protestant English nobility to land in England, the “Popish” westerly wind had kept his force of hundreds of ships and 28,000 troops pinned on the Dutch coast during October. On 10 November, after much Protestant praying, the wind changed to east and William’s fleet was seen in the strait of Dover. The British navy, still loyal to James II, was unable to engage the enemy because the easterly wind was pinning them in the Thames estuary. Despite this piece of good fortune, William nearly came to grief. Partly because of a navigational mistake and the continuing Protestant wind his fleet was being driven into the Atlantic. Fortunately for him, and the “glorious revolution”, the Popish wind returned and he was able to make a swift about-turn and head for Tor Bay in Devon. William landed unopposed and set off with his soldiers to march the 166 miles to London. James had the sense to realise the game was up and abdicated, thus avoiding any bloodshed.Miriam and Alan: Lost in Scotland 9.15pm, Channel 4 “Gird your loins, Miriam … ” We’re off on a three-part campervan adventure around Scotland with TV’s new golden odd couple, Miriam Margolyes and Alan Cumming. Retracing their childhoods, the pair reveal their guarded vulnerable sides – one scene where Cumming recalls his troubled relationship with his father leaves his companion in tears. But these two can’t go too long without tickling an audience: Margolyes soon shares an anecdote about her knickers “falling off” moments before her driving test. It’s a cheeky carry on, warmed up with tender storytelling and wholesome tasks such as making tartan (but they do manage to crack a joke about vibrators in the factory). Hollie Richardson The People vs Climate Change 8pm, BBC Two After the end of Cop26, this documentary observes the 108 members of the UK’s first ever citizens assembly on climate change – all regular Britons going about their ordinary lives. It looks at what tangible changes they say we need to make in our everyday lives to ensure we reduce the nation’s impact on the climate crisis. HR The Great British Bake Off 8pm, Channel 4 It’s the semi-final, but who is going to flake out of patisserie week? To make it into the final three, bakers must excel at delivering a delicate layered slice signature, a regional French classic technical, and an entremets display showstopper. HR Who Wants to Be a Millionaire? Celebrity Special 9pm, ITV Jeremy Clarkson returns with a celebrity lineup – Rob Rinder and Scarlett Moffatt – trying to win £1m for a charity of their choice. There’s a pandemic twist: no studio audience means contestants get two phone-a-friend lifelines. Henry Wong Impeachment: American Crime Story 9.10pm, BBC Two Should you clean a stained dress? In Monica Lewinsky’s case, probably not. As Linda Tripp (Sarah Paulson) points out, who knows when you’ll need some evidence? As the soapy Bill Clinton saga continues, Monica (Beanie Feldstein) and Linda are still just about on the same page. However, as the stakes rise, their friendship begins to creak. Phil Harrison Stath Lets Flats 10.15pm, Channel 4 When hapless estate agent Stath is secretly filmed showing a cramped rat trap with “very present ceilings”, the online fallout pushes his firm into crisis mode. Might staging some wacky stunts for charity help their brand? At least it gives creator and star Jamie Demetriou a terrific excuse for yet more deft pratfalls. Graeme VirtueRock art that has lasted tens of thousands of years is being destroyed by the climate emergency in a matter of years. Coastal erosion, fires, floods and cyclones are among the extreme events predicted to get more severe with global heating. Archaeologists and historians are now warning that serious damage has already been done. A Flinders University symposium was held on Tuesday in reaction to the sixth Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change report, which warned of a “likely” global temperature rise of more than 1.5C, bringing more extreme weather events. Some of the changes are now inevitable and “irreversible”, the report warned. Dr Daryl Wesley, a multidisciplinary archaeologist from Flinders, told the forum about the destruction wreaked by Cyclone Monica, one of Australia’s most severe tropical cyclones, which smashed through Arnhem Land in 2006. It blew down half the trees in a 50km wide swathe, pushing some into rock art sites and destroying them. After that, fire came, made more intense because of the fuel load Monica left behind. Rock art is also often painted on sandstone, which sucks up lots of water. The heat from the fires expands the water, exploding the rock, and the sites are gone. Wesley said a range of environmental and human factors were already degrading rock art – he has documented changes over the past 56 years. But he said the climate crisis was “probably going to push that over an edge” as weather including cyclones gets even more severe. “Today, we’re in sort of a critical situation or critical juncture,” he said. A Griffith University archaeological scientist, Dr Jillian Huntley, has discovered salt crystals are collapsing rocks in the world’s oldest paintings, as the crystals expand and contract in changing weather. Huntley studies rock art in the Australasian monsoon domain, which stretches from Australia’s north up into Indonesia, and she specialises in rock art in Sulawesi. She said the same effect caused by the salt can be seen through Australia’s top end and in the Pilbara in Western Australia. The crystallisation effect is being accelerated by climate change, she said, which is worse in the tropics. “Those temperature increases are felt at a rate three times the rest of the world,” she said. “A 2.4C warming would be a 6C warming in the tropics, which would be absolutely catastrophic.” She said the IPCC report was “conservative” and that a “severe, drastic and short-term cut in emissions” was necessary immediately. “Not net zero by 2050,” she said. “Net zero as soon as possible.” A symposium organiser and Flinders archaeology lecturer, Dr Ania Kotarba, said it was important to look to the past to plan for the future. “Humans have been dealing with environmental challenges, climate extremes and natural disasters for millennia,” she said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “While the severity and speed of changes now is new and pressing, archaeological and historical research can, and should, excavate examples of communities adapting to rapid change, often in a sustainable way, and offer insights for the future.” A Flinders University environmental historian, Dr Alessandro Antonello, said in the meantime: “Humanity must both drastically reduce carbon emissions and adapt our lives to these rapidly changing circumstances.”The Coalition has radically revised its proposed religious discrimination bill, scrapping the so-called Folau clause and removing the ability for health providers to refuse treatment on the basis of “conscientious objection”. The revised bill – which has been signed off by cabinet and was briefed to government MPs on Monday – still includes a controversial “statement of belief” clause which would override other commonwealth, state and territory anti-discrimination laws. It is also understood to retain a clause that allows faith-based institutions, such as religious schools, to positively discriminate against people who do not share their faith, something the prime minister, Scott Morrison, has said is necessary to maintain their “distinctive faith-based ethos”. Guardian Australia understands the attorney general, Michaelia Cash, has briefed MPs on the proposed changes to the bill, agreeing to drop the divisive Folau clause, which would have protected employers from claims of indirect discrimination if they sanctioned employees for misconduct for expressing religious beliefs. However, a similar clause relating to professional or qualifying bodies remains in the bill, which would protect someone from being disqualified based on their religious expression. The moderate MP Katie Allen and conservative MP George Christensen both told Cash at the meeting they reserved their right to cross the floor on the legislation, with Allen concerned it could still enable discrimination, and Christensen concerned it did not go far enough. Other moderate MPs, including Warren Entsch and Trent Zimmerman, are also understood to be reserving their right to cross the floor. The legislation is expected to go to a full meeting of the Coalition party room next Tuesday before it is introduced into parliament. Entsch said he had not yet seen the revised legislation but was confident Cash had made “significant changes”. “I am sure there is still going to be some criticism on both sides, but I know she has done some very good work there in making some significant changes,” Entsch said. He said the “proof of the pudding is in the eating” and he would wait to see the legislation before deciding his position. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The Australian Christian Lobby had been pushing for the inclusion of the Folau clause for employers, which refers to the controversial sacking of rugby player Israel Folau after he wrote on social media that hell awaits “drunks, homosexuals, adulterers, liars, fornicators, thieves, atheists and idolaters”. Christian groups have also been agitating for faith-based institutions to be able to discriminate against someone based on their religious beliefs, with schools wanting the ability to have a hiring preference without falling foul of anti-discrimination laws. The ability of the new “statement of belief” clause to override state anti-discrimination laws has angered equality advocates, particularly in Tasmania where laws prevent speech that offends, insults or humiliates people based on protected characteristics. In September 2019, the Tasmanian independent senator Jacqui Lambie said she saw no case for the Coalition’s bill as Tasmanians already enjoyed religious freedom and did not want their discrimination laws changed. In October this year, the Australian Christian Lobby’s managing director, Martyn Iles, said the bill would contain “a Folau clause” that was “not perfect but it’s not bad”, signalling the ACL would reluctantly support it because “it does make a few key offerings that make a difference in this country”. Labor has reserved its position on the religious discrimination legislation until it sees a final version of the bill. Chris Bowen, a senior right faction frontbencher, criticised an earlier version of the bill as “friendless” in November 2019. Since then the Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, has said only that he doesn’t support discrimination based on religion but won’t support measures that “increase discrimination in other areas”. On Tuesday, the National Catholic Education Commission, headed by the former Labor senator Jacinta Collins, called for the federal legislation to be finalised “as quickly as possible” to ensure religious schools’ ability to set their own ethos was protected against state legislation, including proposed reforms to Victoria’s equal opportunity laws. Collins said “both federal major parties have indicated that religious schools, and parents of students, are entitled to require employees to act in their roles in ways that uphold the ethos and values of that faith, and that this requirement may be taken into account when a person is first employed and in the course of their employment”.Xi Jinping warned Joe Biden in a virtual summit that China was prepared to take “decisive measures” if Taiwan makes any moves towards independence that cross Beijing’s red lines. Xi also warned the US president that any support for Taiwanese independence would be “like playing with fire”, according to a Chinese state media account of the summit, adding that “those who play with fire will get burned”. The language represented stock Chinese nationalist rhetoric, given extra potency by being delivered in person at the most extensive talks to date between the two leaders. In response, Biden said the US remained committed to the “one China policy” that recognises only one sovereign Chinese state, and that Washington “strongly opposes unilateral efforts to change the status quo or undermine peace and stability across the Taiwan Strait”. The phrase was a reminder to the Taiwanese not to declare independence but also to China not to contemplate invasion. Biden told Xi that both countries had a responsibility to ensure the rivalry between their two nations did not “veer into open conflict”. While both leaders restated longstanding policy positions, on Taiwan and other issues, the overall cordial tone of the video conference exchange, with Xi referring to Biden at one point as “my old friend”, gave an immediate boost to financial markets in Asia. Chinese state media described the talks as “frank, constructive, substantive and fruitful”. “The two leaders really did have a substantial back and forth and ability to sort of interact with one another in a way that they’ve not quite had in their phone calls, and so it really did facilitate a different kind of conversation.” a senior US official said. “I would say that the the conversation was respectful and straightforward and it was open.” However, the official was cautious about what the virtual summit had achieved. “We weren’t expecting a breakthrough. There were none to report,” the US official said. “This was really about developing ways to manage competition responsibly, ensuring that as we go forward, the United States and China have a steady state of affairs where we take a series of competitive actions, but we’re able to keep open lines of communication. We work with our allies and partners and we confront China where we need to, and at the same time that we are able to work together where our interests intersect.” One of Biden’s aims in the summit was to establish regular dialogue between US and Chinese officials on a range of issues. It was unclear how far the two leaders had gone to achieve that, however. The US official said the establishment of “guard rails” for the behaviour of both nations over Taiwan was not even discussed. The video conference meeting between the two leaders, which lasted more than three-and-a-half hours represented their most substantial discussion since Biden took office in January, and comes at a time of particularly high tension. There is growing apprehension of a confrontation over the fate of Taiwan, and over freedom of navigation in the South China Sea. The meeting also comes against a backdrop of global outrage over China’s treatment of its Uyghur Muslim population and Hong Kong, and a proliferation of cyber-attacks the US has blamed on China. There are also deep divisions over what each country should do to mitigate the climate emergency, and the US is increasingly nervous about the rapid development of Chinese conventional and nuclear military forces. The US president said he hoped the two men would have a candid and forthright discussion “like all of the discussions we’ve had thus far”, and establish “rules of the road” for their future behaviour. “We need to establish a commonsense guardrail, to be clear and honest where we disagree and work together where our interests intersect, especially on vital global issues like climate change,” Biden, seated at a table at the White House with senior aides, told Xi, who could be seen on a large screen facing the US president. Both leaders had the Chinese and American flags behind them. “It seems to be our responsibility, as leaders of China and the United States, to ensure that the competition between our countries does not veer into conflict, whether intended or unintended,” Biden said, saying the two nations should pursue “just simple, straightforward competition.” In his opening remarks, Xi struck a conciliatory tone: “Although we can’t see each other face to face, this is not bad, either. I feel very happy to see my old friend.” According to Chinese state media, Xi told Biden the earth was big enough for the development of both China and the US, and that leaders should not play zero-sum games. He echoed Biden’s sentiments about the hopes for the call. “Humanity lives in a global village and we face multiple challenges together,” the Chinese president said. “China and the US need to increase communication and cooperation.” The summit began at 7.45pm Washington time and lasted until just before 11.30. Biden was flanked by his secretary of state Tony Blinken, national security adviser, Jake Sullivan, treasury secretary, Janet Yellen, Kurt Campbell, his Indo-Pacific coordinator, Laura Rosenberger and Jon Czin, senior director for China. Xi appeared alone on screen for the introductory remarks, but according to an official list the other Chinese participants were Ding Xuexiang, director of the general office of the Communist Party, vice premier Liu He, the party’s foreign affairs chief, Yang Jiechi, Wang Yi the foreign minister and his deputy, Xie Feng.Top story: ‘Utter miracle’ of taxi driver’s escape with life Hello, Warren Murray here with your news rundown this Tuesday morning. A suspected terrorist who blew himself up outside Liverpool Women’s hospital at the weekend has been named as 32-year-old Emad al-Swealmeen. Counter-terror police have said they “strongly believe” al-Swealmeen was the passenger who died when a taxi exploded shortly before 11am on Sunday. Police have declared the incident a terror attack with the home secretary, Priti Patel, announcing the threat level would be raised from substantial to severe, meaning another attack was “highly likely”. According to reports, al-Swealmeen was believed to be of Syrian and Iraqi heritage. He is said to have converted to Christianity after moving to the UK from the Middle East and was later briefly taken in by Christian volunteers Malcolm and Elizabeth Hitchcott in Liverpool. Police said they could not be sure if the hospital was the intended target or if the device he had constructed had ignited prematurely but the NHS has advised all hospitals to review their security arrangements. Four men who had been arrested in the Kensington area of Liverpool were released without charge by counter-terror police on Monday night. The taxi driver, David Perry, was treated for serious injuries and released on Monday, having stumbled from the cab just as it went up in flames. Perry’s wife, Rachel, said he was “lucky to be alive”, adding “how he managed to escape is an utter miracle”. * * * ‘Object’ – Boris Johnson’s attempt to draw a line under the sleaze scandal engulfing the Conservative party has fallen apart after a single backbencher, later named as Christopher Chope, shouted “object” to stop parliament endorsing the report that deemed Owen Paterson in breach of lobbying rules. Speaking to the Guardian, other Tories were furious at Chope, calling him among other things a “Jurassic embarrassment” who should retire. Chris Bryant, a Labour MP and chair of the standards committee, said he had been assured the motion would be retabled today with a one-hour debate to try again to endorse the Paterson report. Chope was contacted for comment. * * * ‘Prevent 100%’ – UK and French authorities are determined “to prevent 100% of crossings” over the Channel and make the route “unviable” for migrants hoping to enter Britain from France, it was announced on Monday. Last Thursday an estimated 1,185 people crossed the Channel by boat, a record for crossings in a single day. Three people were feared drowned. More than 23,000 people have made the journey so far this year. The UK home secretary, Priti Patel, and the French interior minister, Gérald Darmanin, agreed to “accelerate the delivery” of their mutual commitments. The British government has accused France of failing to control the situation. Darmanin told CNews the British government needed to change its laws to discourage migrants being attracted to the UK. * * * Biden, Xi spar over Taiwan – Xi Jinping has warned Joe Biden in a virtual summit that China was prepared to take “decisive measures” if Taiwan’s takes any moves towards independence that cross Beijing’s red lines. In response, Biden said the US remained committed to the “one China policy” that recognises only one sovereign Chinese state, and that Washington “strongly opposes unilateral efforts to change the status quo or undermine peace and stability across the Taiwan Strait”. Biden said they both had a responsibility to ensure their two nations’ rivalry did not “veer into conflict”. It comes at a time of high tension over everything from Taiwan, the South China Sea, Hong Kong and the Uyghurs, to Chinese hacking against the US, divisions over the climate crisis and China’s rapid development of its conventional and nuclear military forces. The US president said he hoped they could establish “rules of the road” for their future behaviour. In his opening remarks, Xi said: “I feel very happy to see my old friend … China and the US need to increase communication and cooperation.” Earlier, Biden signed his hard-fought $1tn infrastructure deal into law before a bipartisan, celebratory crowd on the White House lawn. The president hopes to use the infrastructure law to build back his popularity, which has taken a hit amid rising inflation and the inability to fully shake the public health and economic risks from Covid-19. * * * Care worker bonus urged – Social care workers should receive an immediate bonus of up to £1,000 to stop them quitting before the winter and putting even more pressure on the NHS, ministers are being told. The Association of Directors of Adult Social Services (ADASS) and NHS Providers, which represents hospitals, say emergency payments would help tackle worsening staff shortages. Figures show hospitals across the UK cannot fill almost half of the number of consultant posts they advertise – the highest number for eight years. * * * Lesser spotted – There are 247m fewer house sparrows in Europe than there were in 1980 and other common bird species have also suffered huge declines, a study has found. One of every six birds – a net loss of 600m breeding birds in total – have disappeared over less than four decades. Among the common species that are vanishing from the skies are yellow wagtails (97m fewer), starlings (75m fewer) and skylarks (68m fewer). The house sparrow and its close relative the tree sparrow have declined because of changing farming practices; house sparrows have also vanished from many cities for reasons that are unclear but likely to include food shortages, diseases and air pollution. Many species have been hit by agricultural intensification causing habitat loss and killing the insects they feed on. Today in Focus podcast: The cricketer and the ‘banter’ When Azeem Rafiq went public with the claim that he had faced a series of racist incidents throughout his time at Yorkshire cricket club, the incidents he described were written off as “banter”. But that defence has crumbled – and now he is ready to give evidence to MPs. What will he reveal about his experiences of bigotry in cricket? Lunchtime read: ‘Like Attenborough doing jetskiing’ How has TV’s petrolhead-in-chief Jeremy Clarkson been reborn a son of the soil? As the presenter wins a farming award for Clarkson’s Farm, he talks about his new enemies: badgers, Bafta and “the red trousers brigade”. Sport Gareth Southgate praised England’s hunger and mentality after Harry Kane scored four first-half goals and they qualified for the 2022 World Cup by thrashing San Marino 10-0. European champions Italy must go into the play-offs after being held to a goalless draw by a brilliant Northern Ireland side at Windsor Park, while goals from John Souttar and Che Adams helped Scotland to a superb 2-0 victory over Denmark at a rapturous Hampden Park that secured a home play-off by virtue of seeding. Michael Vaughan is battling to save his reputation ahead of the evidence session in parliament on Tuesday where Azeem Rafiq will outline his experiences of racism at Yorkshire and has English cricket braced for the names that could emerge. Toto Wolff has described Lewis Hamilton’s victory at the Brazilian Grand Prix as one of the world champion’s best performances but the Mercedes team principal also hit out, expressing anger at how he believed his team were harshly treated by some “laughable” decisions at Interlagos. England are preparing for Saturday’s World Cup final rematch against South Africa without their captain Owen Farrell and facing a front-row crisis after Eddie Jones was dealt a huge double injury blow on Monday. Nick Kyrgios has called for the Australian Open to be cancelled rather than enforce a “morally wrong” vaccine mandate on players at 2022’s opening grand slam. A growing movement including Chinese feminist groups and international tennis stars is raising concern over the whereabouts of the former Chinese doubles pro Peng Shuai after she accused a senior government figure of sexual assault. And reforms in Qatar have stalled with a year to go before the World Cup, leaving thousands of migrant workers trapped and exploited, according to a damning new report by Amnesty International. Business The prospect of a pre-Christmas increase in interest rates has loomed larger after the Bank of England governor told MPs he was troubled by the UK’s rising inflation rate. Andrew Bailey said he was “very uneasy” about rising prices and that he could vote for a hike at December’s policy meeting. The pound is up at $1.343 and €1.180, and the positive vibes from the Xi/Biden summit looks like ensuring the FTSE100 will open in positive territory this morning. The papers The splash in our Guardian print edition today is “Terror threat raised after Liverpool suicide attack”. Down the page is “Plan for Covid passes to need proof of three jabs”. Those eligible for booster jabs would need them in order to qualify as being fully vaccinated in areas where people must prove their status, such as travel or avoiding mandatory isolation. The requirement could be in place in England by the early spring. Page one also has pictorial coverage from the humanitarian crisis on the Poland-Belarus border. The Daily Mail leads with “Revealed: hospital bomber a Christian convert” and the Express has much the same headline, as do the Times and Telegraph. The Mirror says he “targeted new mums and babies” while the Metro says the taxi driver David Perry is “lucky to be alive” after what the paper calls the “Poppy Day bomb attack”. The Times also carries “Pre-school children to have NHS anti-obesity coaches”, which you can read about here this morning. The i’s front page today says “Get booster jabs to save Christmas, PM tells over-40s”. The top story in the Financial Times is “Shell plan to move tax base to UK spurs Dutch into last-ditch action” – here is our own Nils Pratley’s take on that. It also has Steve Bannon appearing in court charged with contempt of Congress for failing to appear before the Capitol attack investigation. For now, he has been bailed with his passport taken away. Sign up The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekend‘Reintroducing beavers is like throwing petrol on to the bonfire when it comes to nature recovery – it really speeds things up,” says Chris Jones, farmer and communities director of the Beaver Trust. We’re on a tour of Woodland Valley Farm, near Ladock, his home and the site of the Cornwall Beaver Project, where a family of the semi-aquatic mammals live in a five-acre woodland enclosure. Dressed in wellies, camouflage jacket and floppy hat, Chris speaks with the enthusiasm of the late David Bellamy, pointing out how the landscape has been reshaped. Impressive dams made of wood, stone and mud have slowed the flow of water, new channels have created large pools and new wetland habitat. It feels wild and alive, with signs of recent beaver activity seen in the odd felled tree and piles of woodchip. “The change is dramatic in just four years,” says Chris. “They engineer the landscape in a way that reduces flooding, helps store water for drought, and boosts wildlife – and wetlands are great carbon sinks.” Once roaming free across our countryside, the Eurasian beaver became extinct in the UK more than 400 years ago – hunted for fur, meat and glands that contain salicylic acid (prized as a medicinal cure-all). But now, with discussions of how land use and nature restoration can help tackle the climate emergency, and interest in “rewilding” spreading, beaver reintroduction is a hot topic. While recognised in Scotland as a native species, with the largest wild populations living on the River Tay, in England and Wales only licensed enclosures are permitted (there are currently around 20 private and NGO sites) – although a wild population on the River Otter was recently granted permission to stay. A consultation process on beaver reintroduction to England’s rivers is currently going through parliament (anyone can add their voice before 17 November). “Beavers can do the job of rewilding river and wetland environments with hardly any expense,” says Chris. “The Trust is working with stakeholders, farmers and local communities to see what we can do and listen to everyone’s point of view. There’s a lot of misconception – like they eat fish, for example – and of course some places aren’t suitable, but they should be at the heart of a healthy river environment as they are in much of mainland Europe. We’ve just got used to not seeing them.” With £2.6 billion spent by the UK government on flood defences between 2015 and 2021, beaver enthusiasts argue they could help at a fraction of the cost, and it was regular floods in Ladock that inspired Chris to explore how he could hold more water on his land. He introduced two beavers in 2017 and, impressed by the results, co-founded the Beaver Trust in 2019 with a team of conservationists, education being a key aim. Besides offering tours, there are converted barns for groups to stay in and wild camping is even allowed in the beaver enclosure. We wander the site, learning more beaver facts: the second largest rodent in the world (after the capybara), they can weigh up to 30kg, love willow, and their teeth, orange because of iron content, never stop growing. As we stop by a dam, Chris dips a branch into the water slowly flowing downstream and pulls it up covered in silt. “They even do the work of the water companies by stopping many pollutants getting into the water system,” he says. Chris’s farm is well placed to explore mid-Cornwall – it’s 20 minutes from the Eden Project and close to Truro and St Austell – but our next stop is Cabilla Cornwall, a 300-acre former upland hill farm in the middle of Bodmin Moor with its own ambitious regeneration plans, where beavers also play a part. Bought by explorer Robin Hanbury-Tenison in the 1960s, and now run by his son Merlin and wife Lizzie, Cabilla opened to guests for the first time in June, offering wellbeing retreats and a place to stay in the wild. There’s a straw-bale cottage to rent and 12 wooden huts will replace the current safari tents from next spring. Besides the remote, beautiful location, Cabilla has a particularly enchanting attraction: more than 80 acres of temperate rainforest – a habitat rarer globally than tropical rainforest, and today only found in small pockets on Europe’s Atlantic coast. Merlin guides us through a fairytale scene: a forest of gnarled oaks covered by mosses, ferns and lichens, with a meandering river. We climb Cabilla Tor for views over the valley. The air feels so fresh. There’s a sense of this being an ancient place – remnants found of hut circles suggest people lived in these woods 4,500 years ago. “I used to play in the woods as child,” Merlin says, “but I only realised how healing they are when I was recovering from PTSD after being in the army. I want people to be able to come here and recoup, to simply enjoy the peace and quiet.” Grand eco-restoration plans for the farm include reforesting another 100 acres with 60,000 trees, while keeping glades and meadows for grazing and wildflowers, with cattle and ponies roaming free. Long-term dreams include bison, wildcats and even lynx. A first step was the introduction of two beavers last summer – Sigourney Beaver and Jean Claude Van-Dam (who now have two kits, Beavie Wonder and Beavie Nicks) – and the benefits are being seen already. “Creatures have returned that we haven’t seen for years,” says Merlin. “Bird species, reptiles, amphibians, small mammals and fish. The insect explosion has been so exciting as well. Beavers are the foundation of a healthy ecosystem and now that we have them, the valley can finally start to regain the true health and biodiversity it deserves.” After our woodland tour we return to the heart of Cabilla, a slick, modern conversion of old barns – with open-plan space for yoga, a living room and long wooden tables for dining, where we feast on a colourful plant-based supper. Dawn and dusk are the best times for beaver watching (and they’re harder to spot in winter), so before first light we join Merlin again to venture into the woods. We negotiate paths through the trees in the beaver enclosure in silence, following a stream until we catch sight of a dam and stop and wait. It’s not long before, in the demi-light, what at first appears to be a floating log morphs into a rather plump creature gliding gracefully through the water. She climbs on to a bank and is joined by a kit. We watch as they groom, feed and swim. It’s a magical sight – and one that could become commonplace in Britain’s native landscape, if the beaver champions and rewilders get their way. • The trip was organised by the European Nature Trust. A two-hour tour of the beaver site at Woodland Valley farm costs £20pp (twice a week April-September, by arrangement other times). The Keep, a two-bedroom cottage at Cabilla Cornwall, costs from £175 a night for four; new cabins, available from next April, will cost from £165 a night. Visit the Beaver Trust for more information about its work.Can you please help me to find out what has happened to my son’s provisional driving licence application to DVLA? We filled in the form and sent off all of the supporting ID documents – birth certificate and national insurance notification letter – in August. More than two-and-a-half months have passed, and there is no sign of his licence, or the documents. There is no way to find out why it is taking so long, no way to complain, no way to ask for another form, or to find out if it is just stuck in a backlog. We were hoping to start teaching him to drive but without the licence we are stuck. CG, Bristol Regular readers will know DVLA – and its customers – have had a torrid pandemic that has led to staff strikes and long delays in the processing of licence applications. While basic licence renewals are being carried out promptly, anything that requires human intervention has been taking months. It is a massive problem for those who have been cleared to drive after their licence was previously taken away for medical reasons. Simple name changes for people who have married takes months – along with applications from first-time drivers. Happily, I can report DVLA was able to find this application, and it has now been processed and sent out. The agency continues to blame the problems on the Covid safety measures introduced at its Swansea HQ. However, I can’t be alone in feeling that these excuses are starting to wear thin, and if things are not resolved soon, ministers really need to intervene. Happy ending over fine I recently featured a letter from MB of Falmouth whose 91-year-old neighbour was being sent letters about a parking fine, addressed to another man, but at his home. It was being handled by a firm of solicitors called QDR, with the threat of bailiffs. At the time, I said I had contacted QDR, which had not responded, and advised him not to worry as there was nothing the firm could do as he was not the person it was chasing. Having seen the article, QDR has confirmed that no further correspondence concerning this matter will be sent to his address. We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Please include a daytime phone number. Submission and publication of all letters is subject to our terms and conditions.Jan Grue knows that he is running out of time (which is what we are all doing, of course, though we don’t usually live with the knowledge). He is intimately aware that his body is frail and vulnerable (all our bodies are perishable things, sites of pain and bound for extinction, but his is more so). We live in our bodies in the world and in time. As Grue writes in his stunning memoir, there is “no I outside the embodied self” and no “me apart from the body”. When we are young, we take this body for granted; we are blind to ourselves and time is not visible. Grue never had such unfettered childhood joy. He was always conscious of himself as someone who was different and therefore “defective”. At the age of three, a child living in Oslo with his parents and sister, he was diagnosed with spinal muscular atrophy, an incurable and progressive condition. The stash of documents he inherited shortly after he became a father himself describe in clinical language what this means in fact: he cannot walk more than a few paces, his feet are twisted, his body is weak, he uses a wheelchair, he will always need help, he often hurts and what is thoughtless for most of us (getting up from a chair, putting on clothes, making a meal, going into a shop) is a matter of planning and excruciating labour for him. How, then, to get through doors, up stairs, into planes; how to go to college, have relationships, fall in love, have a child, have a life that he wanted in a world that sets obstacles, often literally, in his path. I Live a Life Like Yours is not an account of suffering and deprivation, nor is it a redemptive tale of survival against the odds. It is a restrained, dazzlingly intelligent and self-excavating examination of what it has meant to be disabled and visibly different, not “normal”. It beautifully describes “the work of being myself in the world” and this work becomes a meditation on what it is to be human, what it is to be lonely and full of hope and yearning. The memoir is not arranged chronologically, but proceeds by its search for “a different kind of language to the one I was offered”. He turns to Borges, Foucault, Erving Goffman, the disabled poet Mark O’Brien, but carefully, never recycling them, more pondering their words before finding his own. The past, he writes, is a projection of memory and therefore always now; we are all “palimpsests”, manuscripts that are forever being written over. Every life contains alternative lives, ghosts of what might have been, in Grue’s case, the self that could run and leap and be unconstrained. Vivid memories are set into the book, some sad and a few that are radiant. I will never forget his description of skating in his wheelchair, skaters one by one attaching themselves to him like iron filings to a magnet, until a ribbon of people snake and flow in his wake. From a very early age, Grue was never alone: he was always accompanied by an adult and therefore always looked at. He experienced this gaze – anxious, curious, speculative, medical – as an act of power over him. Through his childhood and teenage years, he was examined, measured, prodded, weighed, assessed, written up. Under the controlling institutional gaze and the penetrating medical gaze, he learned to despise his own body. He lived in a version of Jeremy Bentham’s panopticon, the imagined model of the perfect prison system where prisoners never know when they are being observed and therefore “behave as if they are always being observed”. The evaluating “clinical gaze” still awaits Grue in the mirror now, showing him a version of himself he has dreamed of slipping free from, like one of the superheroes he was obsessed with as a boy. This gaze, he writes, brings stigma, which is a sign of a “spoiled identity” and a self that is damaged or tainted: “sick, broken, rotten”. You cannot escape stigma and its accompanying shame by any action, because it is not rooted in what one does but “who one is”. Yet Grue’s memoir, in its circling motion, finds a way through shame and “corporeal self-loathing” to something kinder, which is grief. “Grief,” he writes, “is the recognition that something or someone is gone forever” and this “someone” can be a self or a version of a self. In therapy, he at last admitted: “I want the same thing as everyone else. But I’m not like everyone else.” He finally allowed himself to feel sad and this sadness for what he could not have and “the body that was not” will never go away. “I dream of another world,” he writes and the closest he has come to that world is within his little family, the one “into which I was born and the one I have received as a gift… the one I have created… It is a fiction, it is an empty space in the world. Breathe in.” I started off by writing everything that most profoundly moved or excited me in I Live a Life Like Yours into my notebook, but quickly found I was almost copying out the book verbatim. Every sentence works hard for its place. It is smart, moving and original (and superbly translated). It clears a space for itself, brushing worn-out language and familiar ideas to the margins and forging its own “secret history” in order “to take back the world”. It makes you read carefully and think feelingly and I’m grateful that it is now in my head and heart, working change. • I Live a Life Like Yours by Jan Grue (translated by BL Crook) is published by Pushkin Press (£14.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyA water company fined a record £90m for dumping raw sewage is facing a ratepayers’ revolt over its continued discharges into the sea. A non-payment campaign against Southern Water, initiated by four residents of Whitstable in Kent, is understood to be growing. The protesters this week were given the support of Bob Geldof, who lives in nearby Faversham. According to the Kent Online website, Geldof told an audience in the town: “Don’t pay your water bills to Southern Water – they can fuck off. God bless the people of Whitstable. I’m straight there to join them. In fact, I’ll join them immediately.” Those refusing to pay their bills include a local Conservative councillor, Ashley Clark. In a letter to the water company, he wrote: “I have no intention of contributing to the £90m fine recently imposed on that company for criminal activity. “Throughout the summer Southern Water has continued to send my untreated sewerage, along with that of other local people, directly into the sea, which I use on a daily basis to swim from April to October. “I find the thought of swimming in a mixture of local sewerage and seawater totally abhorrent and not something that I should be charged for. If I paid someone to clear out my garage and take rubbish away to the tip but instead they fly-tipped it into the countryside, I would be upset. Canterbury city council prosecutes offenders for that type of activity. “Yet Southern Water continues to fly-tip sewage into my bathing water with impunity.” Southern was fined £90m in July for spilling billions of litres of raw sewage into the sea around Whitstable and the Hampshire coast. Mr Justice Jeremy Johnson, sentencing the privatised water company at Canterbury crown court, said the offences showed a shocking and wholesale disregard for the environment. He said the company had a history of criminal activity for its “previous and persistent pollution of the environment”, with 168 previous offences and cautions. But he said: “There is no evidence the company took any notice of the penalties imposed or the remarks of the courts. Its offending simply continued.” Beaches in Kent have been closed three times in the past three months because of releases of raw sewage by Southern Water. The company said the bills customers paid were “absolutely crucial” to allow it to make the investments needed to deliver environmental benefits, better customer service and boost local economies. It announced that it was setting up a taskforce to cut sewage releases via storm overflows by 80% by 2030. “Southern Water’s customers have made it clear the use of storm releases is no longer acceptable,” the company said. The Whitstable author Julie Wassmer is another of the non-payers. In a letter she told the company she was withholding the wastewater treatment charge of £168.08 on her bill. “It cannot be right for criminal activity to be rewarded; for families to have been forced from beaches and out of the sea, for residents to have had to sweep sewage from a footbridge so that local children do not have to tread in excrement on their way to school, and for Southern Water and its shareholders to continue to make huge profits from all this … so I am therefore exercising my consumer rights by withholding payment to Southern Water.” Demonstrations were held in Margate and Whitstable this autumn calling for an end to raw sewage releases into the sea. Geldof, speaking to an audience at a climate change event at Faversham Assembly Rooms, was reported as saying: “I can’t understand why this giant utility company can’t be held to account. I really don’t understand it.” The company publicly releases information on discharges of sewage and wastewater from its storm overflows via the Beachbuoy service, which Southern said had an important role in making people more aware of when and where the releases took place. A spokesperson said: “Southern Water is determined to deliver environmental improvements for our customers. We are spending £2bn on improvements between 2020 and 2025 and we’ve promised to cut pollution incidents by 80% by 2025.”In the great scandal pile-up of the current government, it can be hard to prioritise. What is more important, Jacob Rees-Mogg’s undeclared £6m low-interest loan to himself or Boris Johnson putting himself forward as the footstool, or the throttle – or the toadstool, or whatever the hell his libidinous analogising was trying to get at – to Jennifer Arcuri’s career? Which is more inappropriate – Chris Grayling’s £100k gig with Hutchison Ports or Andrew Mitchell’s six consultancy jobs with investment banks and accountancy firms? In the avalanche of dirt, it can be hard to tell which way is up. Yet a new reality is beginning to emerge. We have hit the tipping point, where all the things that previously didn’t matter suddenly do: from 2019 until now were the “priced in” years; so Johnson invited Arcuri to his house, left her there to take selfies while he ran out to buy cheese, may or may not have engaged in sexual activities on his family sofa … isn’t that exactly what we expected of this oft-divorced, unknown-number-of-children politician? And doesn’t it naturally follow that standards of probity and transparency will be pretty lax in his party overall, that rich people gonna rich, and Tories gonna crony? It has not been hard to find impropriety in Conservative ministers’ and MPs’ behaviour: infidelity during office hours, gargantuan contracts going to spouses and friends, that very distinctive whiff of people looking out for number one. It has been extremely hard, by contrast, to get anyone to react. Opposition lines about “one rule for them, another for us” have fallen flat. Conservatives have defended one another’s impunity with great gusto and been met hitherto with a collective: “Meh.” Arguably, the Owen Paterson affair was a new low, his colleagues not only ignoring the rules but trying to overturn them. But was there anything new about that low, or have they been bumping along the sea bed for ages? It may be that we all just hit the hard limit of what we could swallow. Now every new detail hits the nation’s gag reflex. This could end in an elegant intra-Tory coup where they replace the leader and start again; or it could be much messier and altogether better. But it doesn’t have the feel of a tipping point that will easily tip back. Zoe Williams is a Guardian columnistNo one could accuse Stellan Skarsgård of sloth. The father of eight (including Alexander, Bill and five other boys and one girl) has one of the most wide-ranging and well-populated filmographies of an actor still working. Yet until he was 45, his was a largely unfamiliar name to those outside the cinema of his native Sweden. That changed in 1996 when he starred alongside Emily Watson in Breaking the Waves: the film which marked a breakthrough for both actors, as well as its director, Lars von Trier. Skarsgård has since collaborated with Von Trier on Dancer in the Dark, Dogville, Melancholia and Nymphomaniac, but quickly spread his wings across a broad range of genres in US cinema, too: before the end of the century he’d also featured in Amistad, Good Will Hunting, Ronin, Deep Blue Sea, Timecode and Kiss Kiss (Bang Bang). He channelled Max von Sydow for a couple of Exorcist films in the early 2000s, then got rolled in cockles for a couple of Pirates of the Caribbean adventures. He was one of Meryl Steep’s old flames in 2008’s Mamma Mia! (and the 2018 followup) and then began his stint as a sometime-nude astrophysicist in assorted Avengers movies, beginning with Kenneth Branagh’s Thor and ending with Joss Whedon’s Age of Ultron. Other films included The Railway Man, opposite Colin Firth, David Fincher’s The Girl With the Dragon Tattoo, Branagh’s Cinderella and John le Carré adaptation Our Kind of Traitor. More recently he’s been seen in Terry Gilliam’s The Man Who Killed Don Quixote, horrific war movie The Painted Bird, the TV show Chernobyl and Denis Villeneuve’s Dune. Next up is Hope, the Norwegian entry for the Oscars earlier this year, in which he plays a man whose wife is diagnosed with a brain tumour. As well as being an enormously respected actor, Skarsgård has earned a considerable reputation for fun-loving, irreverence and loyalty. Although he played a heap of snow in a school play, he grew up wanting to be a diplomat, before early encounters with the opposite sex made acting seem a more attractive option. His friend, Paul Bettany, who named his son after him, has called Skarsgård “the all-time heavyweight vodka-drinking champion of the world”; sample quote from the man himself includes “I have a very relaxed relationship with my genitals.” Last month he went viral for a forensic explanation of why market forces – rather than Marvel or Netflix – are destroying cinema. Post your questions for Skarsgård below; comments will close at midday on Wednesday and his responses will be published in Film&amp;Music on 26 November (and online the previous day). Hope is released in the UK on 10 December.Indigenous communities facing an upsurge in land grabs, water shortages and human rights violations as a result of the Cop26 deal have accused world leaders of sacrificing them in order to postpone meaningful climate action and shield corporate profits. The Glasgow deal creates a regulated global carbon trading market – a move widely supported by the world’s biggest polluters including the US – allowing countries to partially meet their climate targets by buying credits representing emission cuts by others. Critics warn that carbon markets incentivize countries and corporations to offset – rather than cut – emissions responsible for global heating by investing in so-called green energy projects like biofuel monocrops and hydroelectric dams, which are linked to environmental destruction, forced displacement, arbitrary arrests and even murder. In addition, such carbon credit schemes often rely on sequestering land, forests and rivers relied on by indigenous and local communities for food, water, medicine and spiritual traditions, and there is little evidence to suggest they lead to a genuine drop in emissions. In fact, global emissions have continued to soar since carbon credits were first incentivized under the voluntary Kyoto protocol in 1997, as have abuses against indigenous and rural communities defending land rights and natural resources. Now, indigenous communities fear what’s coming next as the scope and scale of the new global carbon market – introduced in article 6 of the Paris accords – is much wider. Far more countries and industries, including the US, Saudi Arabia and civil aviation, will participate. “Cop26 leaders signed an agreement that will entrench sacrificing Indigenous people … [but] failed to include real solutions to meet the climate chaos that many of our frontline Indigenous communities are facing,” said Thomas Joseph from the Hoopa tribe, located in California. “The leaders pushing for market-based solutions and the commodification of our Mother Earth are signing a death sentence.” Andrea Xieu, a spokesperson for the Mexican collective Futuros Indígenas (Indigenous Futures) described the deal as an embarrassment that illustrated the murky influence of fossil fuel companies in Glasgow. More than 500 fossil fuel lobbyists, affiliated with some of the world’s biggest oil and gas companies, were granted access to Cop26 – a larger number than any single country delegation. Meanwhile, indigenous people were mostly excluded, and their traditional knowledge on sustainable land and water management sidelined. “Indigenous nations were not part of the negotiations despite the fact that 80% of the planet’s biodiversity survives in our territories. The problem is not only the blah, blah, blah of politicians, but the bang, bang, bang of greenwashing that will continue to destroy our lives and territories,” said Xieu. At least 1,005 environmental and land rights defenders have been murdered since the Paris accords were signed six years ago, according to the international non-profit Global Witness. One in three of those killed were indigenous people. The dead include the Lenca leader Berta Cáceres, winner of the prestigious Goldman prize for environmental defenders, who was shot dead at her home in Honduras in March 2016 for opposing the construction of an internationally financed dam. Carbon trading is one of the so-called nature-based solutions to the climate crisis heavily promoted by big polluters at Cop26 as the silver bullet to achieve net zero emissions by 2050 with little pain for people in the global north. But critics say offsetting carbon is a false solution as it essentially allows polluters to keep polluting and thus net zero is not actually zero. “Net zero is a scam. It is used as a smokescreen to avoid actual transition away from fossil fuels and carry on business as usual by relying on unproven carbon capture technologies and offsets,” said Sebastien Duyck, senior attorney from the Centre for International Environmental Law (CIEL) and an official observer. At the last minute, activists helped secure a handful of new safeguards for article 6 such as an independent grievance mechanism. But according to Duyck, carbon markets remain counterproductive and fundamentally harmful. Investors will still be able to qualify for incentives without complying with international treaties that require indigenous people to be properly consulted. “Article 6 creates a way for public and private investors to weaponize the Paris agreement for the sake of profits at the cost of local communities and indigenous people’s rights,” added Duyck. Another nature-based solution popular with polluters is the creation of carbon sinks through massive reforestation and afforestation programs. While not part of the official Cop26 deal, according to some calculations countries collectively pledged to plant enough trees to cover a landmass the size of Australia. However, that threatens livelihoods, food security and sacred traditions of indigenous communities and small-scale farmers who use much of the land being earmarked for tree planting. “Nature-based solutions sound nice, but they won’t solve the climate crisis even if you’re willing to sacrifice indigenous people and local communities,” said Sophie Grig from Survival International. “Net zero is disingenuous and a diversion from doing what needs to be done now: stop burning fossil fuels and protect indigenous land rights.” Also gaining traction is the UN’s 30 by 30 initiative – a plan to conserve 30% of the planet’s land and seas by 2030 through conservation measures like doubling protected nature reserves, which Joe Biden has promised to implement as part of his climate strategy. Speaking in Glasgow last week, Tom Goldtooth, executive director of the Indigenous Environmental Network, said 30 by 30 would be the biggest planet grab in history, leading to millions of people being displaced. Another big worry for indigenous communities is Cop26’s failure to help those on the frontline recover, rebuild and adapt to global heating. Rich polluting countries succeeded in obstructing the creation of a loss and damage fund to compensate communities who have already lost their homes and livelihoods from floods, droughts, heatwaves and rising sea levels. After almost 15 years of discussion and delays on loss and damage, the Glasgow deal mandates further dialogue. “The results of this Cop are not a surprise, but they represent the state of the governments and their feelings, which are completely at odds with wider civil society demanding concrete actions and urgent measures,” said Calfin Lafkenche, a Mapuche organiser with the Minga movement, an indigenous solidarity network. In response to the acts and omissions at Cop26, the women of the Kichwa Indigenous People of Sarayaku, located in Ecuador, declared a state of emergency, citing the summit’s failure to address the existential threats posed to them by fossil fuel companies and the climate crisis. In a statement, the women said: “Indigenous peoples resist the extraction of natural resources with our bodies, with our lives. Our contribution to tackling climate change must be recognized. Our solutions must be heard.”By and large, the segregation of 20th-century America was documented in black and white, storing our collective memory in stoic, colorless images of violence and exclusion. The late Gordon Parks, however, a titan of 20th-century photography, had taken a decidedly different approach. In 1956, as the first Black staff photographer of Life magazine, he traveled in and around Mobile, Alabama, on assignment to capture the realities of Jim Crow. He chose to shoot in color, aiming his lens at both the more vibrant and quotidian moments of Black American daily life: the church picnic, the trip to the ice cream shop, the hanging of laundry out to dry. “His color renderings were beautifully poetic,” documentary film-maker John Maggio tells the Guardian, “almost like Rockwell paintings, until you look closer.” Aside from the mastery of Parks’s composition, each image had also captured prodding, daily indignities in minute but poignant detail – a young Black woman and her niece standing in their finest clothes, for example, standing below the blaring red neon of a “colored entrance” sign. The simple detail of a strap of her slip having fallen from her shoulder is the small crack in a painstakingly maintained facade, potently distilling a deep-seated, simmering frustration. Parks, a groundbreaking photographer, film-maker, writer and musician who died in 2006, is the subject of A Choice of Weapons: Inspired by Gordon Parks, a new HBO documentary directed by Maggio, and co-executive-produced in part by the art philanthropists Alicia Keys and Swizz Beatz. Across a wide-ranging career, the film’s underlying focus is on Parks’s investment in the humanity of his subjects, particularly the tenderness in his depictions of Black life that had previously been hidden from view. “Gordon allowed us to see the elegance of the lives that we live,” director Ava DuVernay says in the documentary, reflecting on the painterly qualities of Parks’s photographs, and the myriad ways in which he has influenced her approach to film. “When I look at his work, I think, ‘How did he get that, the ease and the intimacy?’ With actors, you’re trying to achieve the same ends – of intimacy, of a connection, of an understanding.” DuVernay appears in an all-star cast alongside fellow director Spike Lee; writers Jelani Cobb and George Nelson; and photographers Devin Allen, LaToya Ruby Frazier and Jamel Shabazz, all of whom extol the breadth of his legacy through the impact he has made on their respective careers. “I wanted to include a broad range of artists with different weapons,” Maggio explains, adding, “‘Choice of Weapons’ was Gordon’s term.” Parks had titled his own 1966 memoir Choice of Weapons, an apt metaphor describing the power he found in photography in his own fight for justice. “I might have turned to the gun or the knife,” he had said in a televised interview, “but by then I had chosen the camera.” Gordon Roger Alexander Buchanan Parks was born in 1912 in Bourbon county, Kansas, the youngest of 15 children, in a small, segregated town mired by poverty and racial violence. He taught himself how to use a camera, and after eventually settling in Harlem, collaborated with the novelist Ralph Ellison on a landmark series depicting the highs and lows of their community. In a manifesto, Ellison had directed Parks to approach the imagery as both “document and symbol”, infusing the photographer’s work with a distinct gravitas for the rest of his career. After establishing himself as a steady freelancer at Glamour and Vogue by the mid-1940s, Parks joined the staff of Life in 1948, having arrived on the magazine’s doorstep with a sensational idea: to shoot a photo essay on the leader of a Harlem gang. His ensuing depiction of 17-year-old Red Jackson of the Midtowners crew eschewed caricature in favor of a three-dimensional portrait of a young man: violent altercations appeared alongside scenes of mourning of a murdered friend, of a pensive gaze through a broken window, of a dutiful son drying the dishes in his mother’s kitchen. “Gordon Parks had the ability to humanize people, and I really respected that about him,” the featured Baltimore-based photographer Devin Allen tells the Guardian. “Where my own peers and friends get demonized, he’s what inspires me to shed a different light on my community.” Parks stayed on staff at Life for more than 20 years, shooting fashion, Broadway, Malcolm X and Muhammad Ali, meanwhile transcending photography as a respected cultural figure. As he wrote more than a dozen books and frequently appeared on TV, the charisma that disarmed his subjects (along with his impeccable personal style) granted him entry into the ranks of high society. For more than 40 years, he even maintained a romantic relationship with the railroad heiress Gloria Vanderbilt. “I always knew there was more to their relationship than just a family friend who would spend weekends in Long Island with us,” the CNN anchor Anderson Cooper recalls in the documentary, vaguely alluding to the true nature of his mother’s longtime friend. He later adds: “He had the ability to tell other people’s stories, and the ability to enmesh yourself in somebody else’s life … I wouldn’t be a reporter today if it weren’t for Gordon Parks.” In 1969, Parks broke new ground as the first Black man to direct and produce for a major Hollywood studio with The Learning Tree, a Warner Bros film based on his own coming-of-age novel, with a fully integrated cast and crew. In 1971, he directed and scored Shaft, a pioneering film in the blaxploitation genre about a suave Black detective that multiple figures in the documentary identify as the director’s alter ego. “As a Black man with agency, Shaft for me is the logical apotheosis for Gordon,” Maggio says. Unfortunately, however, as the box office success of blaxploitation waned, so did Parks’s film-making opportunities. “The sad truth is that there was a ceiling for Gordon in Hollywood,” Maggio adds. “No one was calling him to make great World War II pics.” Maggio says that he was inspired to create this film in light of recent events that resonated with Gordon’s work – namely the social movements that arose from the imagery of Sandra Bland, Eric Garner and George Floyd – which underscore both how much and how little has changed. “I remember the solidarity march we had for Michael Brown in Baltimore, and how much it felt like the civil rights movement,” Allen says, although he keeps an optimistic view. “Gordon Parks laid the foundation for Black photographers to tell more Black stories. He’s inspired so many of us to pick up the camera as a weapon.” A Choice of Weapons: Inspired by Gordon Parks is now available on HBO with a UK date to be announcedNick Kyrgios has backtracked on comments supporting unvaccinated tennis players, saying it would not be “morally right” to let them play at the Australian Open. The 26-year-old generated headlines in Australia on Tuesday morning after using his podcast, No Boundaries, to call for the cancellation of his home grand slam in 2022 to limit the risk of a new outbreak in Melbourne. He also said it was “morally wrong” to force athletes to get vaccinated. “I don’t think the Aus Open should go ahead, just for the people in Melbourne – you’ve got to send a message,” Kyrgios said. “How long did [Melbourne] do in lockdown? Two hundred and seventy-five days or something?” But on Tuesday afternoon Kyrgios rowed back on his remarks via a video post on his Instagram account. “To say that I’d want the Australian Open cancelled, I think that was the sentence that got taken out of context,” he said. “It’s more so for the people of Melbourne who have gone through hell and back. “I think it’s been ... nearly 300 days of lockdown and your freedom has been, you know, taken away from you. I don’t think it’s morally right to accept players from overseas that aren’t vaccinated to come into our country.” The tournament is due to go ahead as planned, starting on 17 January, but there is still uncertainty as to whether players who have not been vaccinated or won’t reveal their vaccination status will be allowed to compete. Authorities are yet to reveal final rulings over a vaccination policy for players – they are likely to be presented to Tennis Australia in the coming week – even though Victoria’s premier, Daniel Andrews, is standing firm on his state’s stance that no exemptions will be given to unvaccinated athletes. The World No 1 Novak Djokovic, who would be aiming to win a fourth straight Australian Open, has refused to reveal whether he has taken the vaccine and his appearance at Melbourne Park remains in doubt. On his podcast, Kyrgios had indicated he supported those players who have not had the jab or were unwilling to disclose their vaccination status. He expressed sympathy in particular for Djokovic and the Melbourne-born basketball star Kyrie Irving, who has missed the start of the NBA season due to his refusal to have the vaccine. Kyrgios was an outspoken critic of Djokovic after last-year’s ill-fated charity event, the Adria Tour, which ended with the Serb and other high-profile players testing positive for Covid-19. “Kyrie, Novak … these guys have given so much, sacrificed so much,” he said. “They are global athletes who millions of people look up to. I just think it is so morally wrong to force someone to be vaccinated. I’m double vaccinated but I just don’t think it’s right to force anyone and say, ‘You can’t come and play here because you’re not vaccinated.’ “There are other solutions around it, [such as] to get tested every day. In the States I know they’ve got rapid tests, and it’s coming to Australia. It’s 85% success rate, you wait 15 minutes, you get a negative test and then you’re allowed to play.” Victoria’s sports minister, Martin Pakula, rejected Kyrgios’s call to cancel the tournament and said he found the player’s comments confusing. “I really like Nick Kyrgios and I cheer for him every time he plays and I certainly don’t want to have a beef with Nick Kyrgios but I actually couldn’t follow the logic of his comments,” Pakula said. “We’ve had a long lockdown so the Australian Open shouldn’t proceed? I’m not sure I follow that. I think the opposite applies. Melburnians, Victorians and, frankly, all Australians, are absolutely gagging for major events. “Our economy needs it, our state psyche needs it. It’s a global grand slam, it’s going to go ahead.”A wetland without water is a melancholy sight. The fish are dead, the birds have flown and a lifeless silence hangs over the place. “Everything you see around you should be under water,” says Ecologists in Action’s Rafa Gosálvez from the lookout in Las Tablas de Daimiel national park. The park has been dry for three years and where there were once aquatic species such as ducks, herons, egrets and freshwater crayfish, as well as tree frogs and the European polecat, now the wildlife has mostly vanished. Las Tablas de Daimiel is a unique wetland in the vast, almost treeless plains of Castilla-La Mancha in central Spain. But the park has had the life sucked out of it to slake intensive agriculture’s insatiable thirst. Sixty-seven per cent of the water used in Spain goes to agriculture, according to the OECD, but this rises to as much as 85-90% in the south-east, says Julia Martínez-Fernández, technical director of the New Water Culture Foundation, which promotes the sustainable use of water. Las Tablas’ ecosystem relies on water from rainfall, the Guadiana river and a huge aquifer, but the climate crisis has resulted in Spain’s periods of drought getting longer. The Guadiana is drying up, while agriculture has depleted the aquifer and polluted the groundwater with phosphates and other chemical fertilisers. In 2009, the wetland was so dry that subterranean peat fires broke out. The 3,000 hectares (7,400 acres) of Las Tablas are all that remain of what, according to the World Wildlife Fund, was once a system of 50,000 hectares of wetland in Castilla-La Mancha. Gosálvez says the water needed to irrigate Castilla-La Mancha’s vines, olives, pistachios, onions and melons exceeds available resources and short of a run of several years of heavy rain, the wetland can only be saved by transferring water from the Tagus river – except the Tagus is overexploited and almost dried up four years ago. Much of the problem dates from the 1970s, when the Spanish government embarked on a plan to turn Murcia and Almería in the south-east into Europe’s market garden. The plan had one major flaw: there was no water. Spain’s south-east is arid and none of the country’s three major rivers flows near it. The Douro and Tagus both rise in north-central Spain and flow west into the Atlantic at, respectively, Porto and Lisbon, while the Ebro rises in the north-west and empties into the Mediterranean nearly 400km (250 miles) north of Murcia. The solution was to transfer water from the headwaters of the Tagus through almost 300km of pipeline to irrigate the barren south. However, rather than satisfy demand, the transfer has served to incentivise unsustainable intensive agriculture that has led to the exploitation of groundwater, with disastrous environmental consequences. The spectacle this summer of thousands of dead fish floating in the Mar Menor, a saltwater lagoon in Murcia once known for its crystal-clear waters, was the result of fertiliser polluting the groundwater that drains into the sea. The nitrates trigger vast algae blooms that deprive the fish of oxygen. “The Mar Menor disaster is the result of intensive agriculture which continues to expand in a manner that isn’t sustainable, both in Murcia and in many other parts of Spain,” says Martínez-Fernández. Neighbouring Almería – where the greenhouses making up the famous “sea of plastic” are visible from space – produces an estimated 3.5m tonnes of peppers, tomatoes, cucumber and melons a year. Together with Granada, it supplies about 50% of the European market. Every year Almería also produces thousands of tonnes of plastic waste, much of which ends up in the sea. The Tagus water transfer is not enough to meet the growing demands of agriculture in Almería, however. Over the past 40 years the amount of water that reaches the Tagus headwaters has fallen by about 40% according to estimates, and is continuing to fall. So Almería is increasingly reliant on desalinated seawater for irrigation. In an attempt to deal with the problem, in 1985 the Spanish government brought in a new water law to regulate its use. But it was forced to concede that anyone who had a well or access to water had the right to exploit it. Today, the government recognises that the situation is unsustainable. Teresa Ribera, minister for ecological transition, is under pressure for Spain to conform to European standards on water quality and quantity that come into force in 2027, and knows this can only be achieved by reducing irrigation. In presenting the country’s five-year water plan, Ribera recognised that water resources are in decline and parts of Spain face desertification. “In this context, water plans can’t continue to support the sort of practices that have led to the overexploitation of aquifers, the contamination of groundwater and the deterioration of our rivers,” she said. Although agriculture only accounts for about 3% of GDP and 4% of jobs, the farming industry has considerable political clout. When Ribera announced reductions in the amount of water that could be transferred from the Tagus, there was an outcry from farmers. Lucas Jiménez, president of an association of farmers that depend on the transfer, warned Ribera “faces a battle in the courts and in the streets”. “The problem is that the solution to the water issue will put any government in conflict with numerous sectors such as agriculture, hydroelectricity and property developers,” says Miguel Ángel Sánchez, a spokesperson for the Platform in Defence of the Tagus. “Madrid knows this can’t go on, but they won’t take the bull by the horns and it’s the regional governments that have authority over water,” says Gosálvez. He says the EU’s common agriculture policy is partly to blame for encouraging intensive farming that is both environmentally damaging and wasteful, leading farmers to dump produce to maintain prices. “The EU pays farmers to plant more, leading to overproduction with the result that the market price barely covers the cost of production,” he says. “We need to wake up to reality, there is simply not enough water to meet the demand for irrigation. The farmers are digging their own graves.” Find more age of extinction coverage here, and follow biodiversity reporters Phoebe Weston and Patrick Greenfield on Twitter for all the latest news and featuresCop26 delivered no big climate deal. Nor, in truth, was there any reason to expect one. The drastic measures that might – at a stroke – open a path to climate stability are not viable in political or diplomatic terms. Like climate breakdown itself, this is a fact to be reckoned with, a fact not just about “politicians”, but about the polities of which we are all, like it or not, a part. The step from the scientific recognition of a climate emergency to societal agreement on radical action is still too great. All that the negotiators at Cop26 could manage was makeshift. When it comes to climate finance, the gap between what is needed and what is on the table is dizzying. The talk at the conference was all about the annual $100bn (£75bn) that rich countries had promised to poorer nations back in 2009. The rich countries have now apologised for falling short. The new resolution is to make up the difference by 2022 and then negotiate a new framework. It is symbolically important and of some practical help. But, as everyone knows, it falls laughably short of what is necessary. John Kerry, America’s chief negotiator, said so himself in a speech to the CBI. It isn’t billions we need, it is trillions. Somewhere between $2.6tn and $4.6tn every year in funding for low-income countries to mitigate and adapt to the crisis. Those are figures, Kerry went on to say, no government in the world is going to match. Not America. Not China. We should take the hint. There isn’t going to be a big green Marshall plan. Nor are Europe or Japan going to come up with trillions in government money either. The solution, if there is to be one, is not going to come from rich governments shouldering the global burden on national balance sheets. So, how does Kerry propose to close the gap? As far as he is concerned, the solution is private business. Hence the excitement about the $130tn that Mark Carney claims to have rallied in the Glasgow Financial Alliance for Net Zero, a coalition of banks, asset managers, pension and insurance funds. Lending by that group will not be concessional. The trillions, Kerry insisted to his Glasgow audience, will earn a proper rate of return. But how then will they flow to low-income countries? After all, if there was a decent chance of making profit by wiring west Africa for solar power, the trillions would already be at work. For that, Larry Fink of BlackRock, the world’s largest fund manager, has a ready answer. He can direct trillions towards the energy transition in low-income countries, if the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank are there to “derisk” the lending, by absorbing the first loss on projects in Africa, Latin America and Asia. Even more money will flow if there is a carbon price that gives clean energy a competitive advantage. It is a neat solution, the same neat neoliberal solution that has been proffered repeatedly since the 1990s. The same solution that has not been delivered. Talk of carbon pricing evokes the bitter memory of shock therapy in eastern Europe and the developing world. BlackRock’s backstop idea is the logic of the 2008 bank bailouts expanded to the global level – socialise the risks, privatise the profits. At this point those promising trillions in private funding to fight the climate crisis reveal themselves to be the true utopians, just utopians of a neoliberal variety. Carbon pricing – a fee placed on emissions – may be the economists’ favourite. The one place where it may work, ironically, is in Europe, where energy is already heavily taxed and the most sophisticated welfare states in the world can cushion the impact. China is experimenting with the largest carbon market yet. But as a global proposition, a single minimum carbon price is a non-starter, first and foremost in the US, whose economists invented the idea. Nor is Congress or any European parliament about to vote in favour of hundreds of billions of dollars to backstop BlackRock. Western states carried out bailouts in 2008 and again in 2020. But those were desperate efforts, faute de mieux, to save the status quo at home. And that was toxic enough. Stretched to a global scale, it has zero political appeal. However, the risk is not that Cop26 opens the door to some gigantic neoliberal climate stitch-up, but instead that we remain locked in our current impasse, careening towards catastrophe. Faced with that prospect, both the US and the EU seem less preoccupied with grand schemes of carbon pricing and blended finance, than with pushing a case-by-case approach. Four separate initiatives show the direction of travel. The deal on aluminium and steel announced by the EU and the US ends one of Trump’s more absurd trade wars and turns it into a process for agreeing on accounting rules for carbon. What seems to be envisioned is a hi-tech, clean-steel trade zone, with tariffs imposed on high-carbon imports from China, Russia and Ukraine. It isn’t a global carbon price, but a sectoral rich-country buyers’ club. On coal, though the final declaration was disappointing, the US is working with India to promote the rollout of renewables. This involves a three-way partnership with the UAE to provide technical assistance and finance to speed up the move away from coal. India is not the only emerging market with a coal problem. One of the best pieces of news out of Cop26 was the multinational $8.5bn package to support the winding down of coal burning by Eskom, South Africa’s bankrupt and dysfunctional power utility. To accelerate the pace of industrial change, history tells us that the key is to incentivise first movers – leading firms that adopt new technologies and thus send the message to their competitors: innovate or be left behind. In unleashing a race to the top, the announcement of the First Movers Coalition in November, backed by the US and the World Economic Forum and involving firms like shipping giant Maersk and Cemex and Holcim, two of the world’s leading cement makers, is potentially a significant step. Finally, there is the deal to cut emissions of methane, the long-neglected but deadly greenhouse gas, by 30% by 2030. That will involve a technological push across the oil and gas industry worldwide. Advocates of the Green New Deal have long urged big government-led industrial policy. The approach of Kerry and his team seems to follow a more low-key, pragmatic script. As Danny Cullenward and David Victor write in their book, Making Climate Policy Work, rather than attempting a contentious grand bargain, the key is to find coalitions of the willing and drive change sector by sector, raising ambition through repeated rounds of bargaining. Like the Paris agreement of 2015, which first demonstrated this pragmatic approach in action, the Kerry initiatives face two big questions. Will a series of ad hoc measures add up to an adequate overall solution? Furthermore, not every deal can be win-win. How will the tough trade-offs be fought out? Whose interests will be served? The reply by the pragmatists is that no general answer can be given in advance. The proof of the pudding is in the eating. It is not much of an answer. But, as Cop26 attests, it may be the only realistic one. If that is the case, then the response of the climate movement should be to keep up the pressure. In political terms, pragmatic ad hocery may be realistic, but there is no negotiating with the dwindling carbon budget. Given how deeply entrenched the status quo is, the temptation to conservative wishful thinking is everywhere. Someone has to pound the message home. The biggest risk is not to change. Adam Tooze is a professor of history at Columbia UniversitySitting alone in her small flat in Bulgaria, Mohadese Mirzaee contemplates the future. Three months ago, she left behind her family, and her dream job, in Afghanistan. At 23, Mirzaee was the country’s first female commercial airline pilot. “Today, I don’t know where to go, but I’m not giving up. I’ve started applying for pilot jobs anywhere because I know I need to get back to flying,” she says by phone from the capital, Sofia. When news broke that the Taliban had seized Kabul, Mirzaee was already at the airport in her uniform, preparing for her evening flight to Istanbul. She had left home early that morning, waving goodbye to her mother and two sisters. The flight never took off. As thousands of Afghans stormed the city’s international airport, desperate to leave the country, Mirzaee was diverted to a flight to the Ukrainian capital, Kyiv – this time as a passenger. “It was dark when we took off, that’s all I remember,” she says. “It was a rollercoaster of emotions because everything happened so quickly. I couldn’t believe Kabul had fallen. When I left my house in the morning and said goodbye to my family, I couldn’t have imagined that by evening time, I’d be permanently leaving home. “I saw my country crumbling,” she recalls. Just months earlier, Mirzaee had made headlines as one of the pilots of a Kam Air Boeing 737 – the country’s first flight with an all-female crew. “It was a huge accomplishment for Afghanistan and for the male-dominated aviation industry in general,” says Mirzaee. She believed then that change within the country’s conservative society was possible, and that she and the airline would be part of it. But when the Taliban established an all-male government that saw hundreds of women removed from their jobs, Mirzaee says she was robbed of her hopes for the future. “Afghan women have done amazingly over the past decades. We’ve used any opportunities given to us. We fought for our rights and scored big achievements. I was hopeful that a window had opened. I was approached by many young women who also dreamed of becoming a pilot,” Mirzaee says. “With the Taliban takeover, it all disappeared. They are the same barbaric group they have been in the past and they want to silence women. If I give up on my passion, they have achieved their goal.” Mirzaee attended Kabul’s Afghan-Turk Maarif school but finished her final year in Port Colborne in Canada, where she first considered a career in aviation. She stayed in Canada for another year after her studies, working as a cashier and barista to scrape the money together for flying lessons. “My flight instructor told me, ‘you have control, so fly the plane’ before taking off on my first ever flight. I was nervous, but I also felt free. I figured, if I can get a plane into the sky, I can do anything,” she says. Back in Afghanistan, Mirzaee talked to airlines to see if she could continue her training, but they all initially said no. “I kept annoying them,” she laughs. “Kam Air, one of Afghanistan’s carriers, decided to give me a chance – and I took it very seriously.” She became Afghanistan’s first female commercial airline pilot in September last year, flying to Turkey, Saudi Arabia and India. Mirzaee was able to travel to Bulgaria on a pre-existing visa. It has just expired and she has been advised to claim asylum. Her mother and sisters were also evacuated from Afghanistan, flying to Albania on the same day an explosions ripped through the crowds outside Kabul airport, killing almost 200 people and injuring hundreds more. Most of her friends are now scattered across the globe. “When I was studying, my mum always told me to come back to Afghanistan and work for my country. I shared her conviction. But today, even though I’d like to go back, I can’t. There is no space for women like me in Afghanistan any more. I lost my job, my home, my crew – everything.” But she says: “I’m hoping another airline will give me a chance to continue my career. A lot has been taken from me, but I will fight for my passion. That is what makes me, me.” Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:It was the eighth goal that felt most primitive of all. All night long at the Parc des Princes, France had been flaying Kazakhstan with a baying relish that seemed to skirt the boundary between sport and ritual. Three minutes from time, with the score 7-0 and France’s passage to the World Cup long since secured, Kylian Mbappé chased after Moussa Diaby’s through pass with the Kazakh centre-half Nuraly Alip also in pursuit. At which point, it’s worth telling you a little about Alip. He’s 21 years old. He plays for FC Kairat in the country’s largest city Almaty. That’s about all I could find out about him on the internet. (Like most young footballers, his Instagram page appears to consist largely of pictures of him doing the thumbs-up in various training settings.) In the wider context of the global game, he’s one of the unseen thousands, a foot-soldier, a name in the Football Manager database. And yet for these few seconds, he was about to share the same air with one of the greatest footballers on the planet. And so as they both converge on the ball, there’s this poignant sense of worlds colliding, of orbits crossing, of disparate journeys that for this fleeting instant in time are knotted together. Will Mbappé remember this moment? Almost certainly not, and not because he barely feels the challenge before finishing first time to make it 8-0. Will Alip remember it? Probably forever. Whatever happens to him in the rest of his career, that little blur of blue stepping across his path – the sensation of bouncing off something incredibly hard that seems to weigh nothing at all – will stay with him. It’s worth bearing this in mind as we near the end of what we so euphemistically term the “international break”: a phrase we use to describe something not happening, a hiatus, a measure of time, a manager-sacking window. Certainly it can feel that way from within the overheated hamster wheel of the European club game. For coaches and fans of one of the big teams, and sometimes even for journalists, the arrival of international week can feel like a sort of unwelcome decompression: a sense of air and life being sucked out of the room. We interrupt the greatest show on earth to bring you live coverage of England 5-0 Albania. If you’re extremely lucky, Aaron Ramsdale might start. Then you have the mismatches. And the first thing to be said is that drubbings in international football are not like drubbings in the club game. When some Championship team gets beaten 7-1 at home, there’s a horror and pathos to it. Angry fans rip up season tickets. Inquests are held. The manager rarely survives the week (particularly if the dreaded international break is coming up). At international level, on the other hand, mismatches are gentle, natural, almost soothing, like watching The Blue Planet. Malta 1-7 Croatia. France 8-0 Kazakhstan. Turkey 6-0 Gibraltar. Germany 9-0 Liechtenstein. This is merely the predator at work, the law of the universe asserting itself. The trouble is that international football itself has plenty of natural predators. It’s no exaggeration to describe this moment as a sort of crossroads for the international game, hemmed in on all sides not just by the dominance of club football (which is not new) but by the increasing pressure on the post-Covid calendar and the welcome focus on player welfare and climate change (which is, a bit). These days, it’s no longer enough to regard international football as an irritant. Instead, we’re encouraged to see it as an active source of harm. How dare Fifa ask Phil Foden and Jude Bellingham to waste their precious ankle ligaments on this bunch of part-timers from eastern Europe? The opposition to Arsène Wenger’s idea of a biennial World Cup seems to have sharpened the dividing lines here. On one level it feels like the latest of Fifa’s naked power grabs, this time fronted by a kindly septuagenarian in a big coat. Throw in the Nations League with its pointless third-place play-off, the expanded 48-team World Cup, and it’s relatively easy for international football’s many detractors to paint the whole edifice as a cynical revenue-generating exercise. And perhaps in a more efficient sport, Germany 9-0 Liechtenstein would have been left to wither long ago. But to apply the law of the market here is to ignore the fact that football doesn’t simply exist to serve the biggest nations, the best players and the richest clubs. On some level, you feel the sport has been trying to shake itself free of this concept for some years now. The European Super League was merely an attempt to concretise the accepted orthodoxy of modern football: that the biggest and wealthiest should be allowed to do as they please without the grotesque indignity of playing teams beneath their level. But there’s another dimension to all this, and perhaps you only really glimpse it when you see Kylian Mbappé of Paris Saint-Germain going up against Nuraly Alip of FC Kairat. And for all the gulf in skill and fame between them, there’s a shared purpose there too: football in its very purest form. Neither player was bought or sold by their team. Their presence in a national jersey came not at the whim of some billionaire or as a result of a super-agent’s manoeuvring. Neither will ever play for anyone else. After the international break is over they will return to their separate worlds. But for these few seconds their fates are entwined: two men, one ball, and the same human desire to reach it.My boyfriend and I first met in person a month ago, though we had been video chatting for many months before. We’re in tune about most things but sex is complicated. He told me he doesn’t feel sexually satisfied and I don’t feel like having sex when I’m not horny. Could you help me better understand what we could do here, because we both want to continue our relationship. If you don’t feel like having sex, then don’t. It takes time to get to know a person sexually, and to trust them enough to share your own sexual needs. And it is simply not useful to tell someone you “don’t feel satisfied” without going into detail about how exactly you would like your partner to help remedy that. Ask for clarification. Likewise, it is not useful to go through with sex when you are not aroused. You are probably expecting a little too much of each other at this stage. Take the time to mutually communicate your needs and desires, and do only what feels good. Focus simply on pursuing pleasure rather than trying to achieve something. Sex is supposed to be fun. Pamela Stephenson Connolly is a US-based psychotherapist who specialises in treating sexual disorders. If you would like advice from Pamela on sexual matters, send us a brief description of your concerns to private.lives@theguardian.com (please don’t send attachments). Each week, Pamela chooses one problem to answer, which will be published online. She regrets that she cannot enter into personal correspondence. Submissions are subject to our terms and conditions: see gu.com/letters-terms. Comments on this piece are premoderated to ensure discussion remains on topics raised by the writer. Please be aware there may be a short delay in comments appearing on the site.Among other things, the story of LGBTQ+ liberation is a story of spaces. For as long as the LGBTQ+ community has sought freedom and equality, it has been essential for this group to have places both concrete and metaphorical where they can safely gather, emote, care for one another and understand their identities. Those spaces have not always been so easy to find, and creativity has been essential. No Straight Lines: The Rise of Queer Comics, the Peabody award-winning film-maker Vivian Kleiman’s latest documentary, is about how comics became a site in the struggle for queer people to have room to exist. It tells how a foundational generation of artists, including Howard Cruse, Mary Wings, Jennifer Camper and Rupert Kinnard, fought against censorship of their very existence by creating and distributing their own comics in the 1960s and 70s. It then follows that story down through the generations, integrating the careers of later creators like Alison Bechdel and the Gen Z artists who are again redefining how the LGBTQ+ comics world looks and where it is found. “I’m amazed about how much material is in the film,” said Bechdel, whose New York Times bestselling 2006 graphic novel Fun Home was adapted into a Tony Award–winning Broadway musical. “It’s mostly about this generational transmission and the political changes that have happened over the past 40 years or so. [It’s] a generational story about recent progress.” No Straight Lines starts in the 1950s, when gay and lesbian artists found that censorship made it impossible to tell their stories in the comics section of newspapers. Cruse, whose groundbreaking 80s series Wendell was one of the first to speak to the Aids crisis, explains how prestige venues like newspapers and newsstands self-censored via the Comics Code Authority, explicitly forbidding any mention of homosexuality. According to Cruse, this made the comics world into a “bland” space of cis-het individuals that subscribed to heavily binary, limited ideas regarding gender roles and sexuality. So-called underground comics rode in on the countercultural revolution of the 60s, priming the 70s to be a transformational decade. The pioneering artist Mary Wings explains how the lackluster representation of a lesbian coming out in the 1972 Wimmen’s Comix anthology inspired her to tell a more authentic story in her groundbreaking Come Out Comix. Self-printed and self-distributed by Wings, it was noteworthy for being the first to portray a lesbian protagonist as a fully fleshed out human being, as opposed to just a sexualized object. As Kleiman introduces these foundational stories, she intersperses the words of contemporary comics artists like Meggie Ramm, who explains that “I was just so grateful that these people had come before and had helped me get to the point where I am today where I can make comics about being a queer person and have people acknowledge them and take them seriously.” Throughout, Kleiman structures the film so that it feels like a series of intricate, intimate conversations across the generations, resulting in a rich tapestry of interwoven voices and images. Commenting on this aesthetic, she said: “In film-making I try to construct a simulated conversation among the different people that I’m including in the film. When it works it’s really quite dynamic.” Throughout the interplay of voices, No Straight Lines begins to answer a central question: why have comics become such a powerful site for queer culture? Ineluctably, the documentary finds itself again and again returning to one answer to this question: comics have a remarkable capacity to provide a space for self-definition that many in the LGBTQ+ community do not otherwise possess in their day-to-day life. “When I got started as a cartoonist in the early 1980s,” said Bechdel, “I was conscious of it as a form that nobody was going to criticize, and that just gave me a great sense of freedom and possibility. It’s just really super accessible, not only in the ways it can be distributed but in the ways it’s assimilated, the ways we read it, the ways we ingest these words and images.” No Straight Lines is a testament to how, with just ink and paper, LGBTQ+ artists can envision profoundly validating bodies, identities and relationships that often have no space in the cis-het world. Kleiman’s cornucopia of images from the strips themselves lets viewers experience first-hand the very idiosyncratic, forceful presences that these artworks conjure in the minds of readers. A notable example of the power of these comics is the story of Rupert Kinnard, a Black, disabled artist who began his career telling the story of his protagonist, the Brown Bomber, in the pages of Cornell’s student newspaper. Seemingly without even intending it it, Kinnard discovered that when he made his Brown Bomber come out, it became entwined with his own coming out, elegantly making the case for the substantial impact that queer comics can make in the lives of those who participate in them. As Kinnard narrates his story, Kleiman leads us around the mostly black squares of the strip with which he and his character came out, artfully popping in text and images in conversation with Kinnard’s voice. No Straight Lines is also a story of media. It begins with queer voices on the outside of the mainstream media of the 50s and 60s, then shows how they eventually made their own media through self-printed publications and the rise of LGBTQ+ newspapers, then portrays how the scene had to remake everything all over again as those LGBTQ+ newspapers began to disappear and the web became ascendant. Bechdel’s story is instructive: her long-running Dykes to Watch out for was originally carried in the alt-paper Funny Times and syndicated in queer newspapers, but as it became increasingly difficult to stay afloat financially in that format, she was forced to embrace the graphic novel form. This transition proved to be the beginning of a major new chapter in her career, as the resultant book Fun Home broke through barriers to become a smash success and bring her stories to entirely new audiences. “I feel hopeful when I saw the young people that [Kleiman] talked to for this movie,” said Bechdel. “I didn’t know until I saw the show that there’s this whole strand of younger artists. That really does make me hopeful. I feel like I have some kind of connection to these younger people, and that is really pleasant as someone who doesn’t really have that in a familial way.” If the documentary ends on a high note – with testaments to the community that exists in the queer comics world and the openings it creates for complexity and different ways of being – the entire film evokes the special way that generations of creators have intermingled in this space, trading inspiration and gratitude. “The thing that surprised me when I interviewed the young people,” said Kleiman, “was how grateful they were to the pioneers of queer comics. They were totally recognizing the struggles of the prior generations and including that sensitivity and awareness in their own consciousness.” No Straight Lines: The Rise of Queer Comics is playing at the Laemmle Glendale in Los Angeles now and will be touring festivals globally before a wider releaseAustralia’s deputy prime minister, Barnaby Joyce, took to the airwaves on Tuesday to argue, among other things, that Labor would “jack up interest rates” if they took power at the next federal election. The Coalition’s attack line – echoed lately by prime minister Scott Morrison – extends to a Labor government inflicting higher prices on voters for petrol and power. Joyce told ABC’s RN Breakfast listeners the cost of borrowing would be higher because under Labor, Australia would get “excessive mismanagement of debt”, perhaps compared with the current levels of mismanagement. By his logic, interest rates would be higher under Labor because Australia would export less and the Australian dollar would be lower. The currency’s value, he argued “controls inflation, or your internal fiscal capacity”. “If you lose sight of basically how much you owe the world or you lose sight of the capacity to repay it, then the only way to try and draw that money back into government coffers is to jack up interest rates,” Joyce concluded. How do Joyce’s comments on debt match his past musings on debt, and do his latest ones make sense? How it started Joyce, it’s often forgotten, was a “hawk” on debt in the past. Almost 12 years ago, Joyce warned in his “debt hangover’” opinion piece in The Australian that “if you do not manage debt, debt manages you”. Back then Australia’s gross government debt had risen to $125.483bn, up about $2.5bn from a recent Senate estimates hearing, a pace that worried Joyce. “If we keep borrowing at this rate Australia and all who rely on the government to provide a basic service of health, defence, subsidised medicine, childcare, unemployment benefits, pensions, are all going to arrive at a point of reckoning,” Joyce wrote. “Stresses will be placed on the government budget because we did not manage the debt at a point where it was manageable.” He went on: “It is a statement of the bleeding obvious that we cannot have government debt growing the way it is growing. The Labor party does not want to grasp the nettle to manage the debt.” How’s it going? If Joyce didn’t like government debt at $125bn, you’d have to wonder what he makes of the current government forecasts. According to the latest projections, Australia is on track for gross debt of $1.134t by June 2024, or not far shy of an extra “0” being added since his “nettle” comment. That about 40% of government debt is held by the Reserve Bank of Australia to keep borrowing rates low during the pandemic might also have disturbed Young Barnaby. Another oped opportunity for the deputy PM, perhaps. But will Labor ‘jack up’ those rates? Back to that radio interview. So, Joyce’s wider case was that because Labor would be beholden to the Greens for preferences, they would be more likely to hurt exports of our sacred fossil fuels. That in turn would push up rates because the government would face dwindling coffers – presumably from lower royalties – and would respond by lifting higher rates to fill its coffers, or so the argument seems to run. Mind you, if a Labor government passed policies that cut fossil fuel subsidies – globally running at $US11m a minute or $36.7bn over a decade in Australia – they might have less of a need to borrow. But either way, interest rates aren’t the responsibility of any government – Coalition or Labor – and haven’t been since soon after the Hawke government floated the dollar in 1983. Good time to borrow Most of the government debt has been accumulated since the Coalition led by Tony Abbott came to power in 2013, and Joyce hasn’t been talking about it that much lately. Economists such as Prof Warwick McKibbin, now at the Australian National University and a former RBA board member, aren’t overly fussed about the scale of the borrowing itself. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “It’s what it’s used for,” that matters, Prof McKibbin said, adding that it makes sense to accumulate debt if it generates a higher return than the borrowing cost. With global interest rates at record rates, including in Australia with the cash rate sitting at 0.1%, there’s probably never been a better time to borrow. State and federal governments have been lining up to invest in new roads, tunnels, and other infrastructure that should generate net benefits for the wider economy in excess of the interest rate. Similarly, there are benefits from investing in childcare, for instance that enables more women to enter the workforce. These deliver “a social rate of return that can’t really be monetised” but have lasting and widespread benefits just the same, McKibbin said.The first person infected with Covid linked to the St Basil’s aged care home outbreak in which 50 residents died has spoken publicly for the first time, telling a coroner she was cleared to work despite living in a high-risk suburb with relatives experiencing “throat discomfort”. The former personal care assistant at the home, identified only as “A” to protect her identity, said she was swabbed on 5 July 2020 at a drive-through testing clinic after she finished a shift at St Basil’s. She was tested with her husband, sister-in-law, brother-in-law and sister, as they all lived together in Moreland, an area the Victorian government had identified as high risk for Covid-19. All five were asymptomatic at the time, A told the coroner on Tuesday. She said staff who tested her knew she worked in aged care and told her because she was asymptomatic she could go to work. While she was not rostered on to work the following two days on 6 and 7 July, she told a registered nurse at St Basil’s, Jagmeet Nagra, on 7 July that two of her family members were starting to experience “throat discomfort”. None of the five had yet received their test result. At the time, Victoria was experiencing a second wave of the virus leading to delays in test results being returned. Earlier on Tuesday, Nagra confirmed to the court that she informed A she could come to work since she and her relatives were not displaying symptoms such as high temperature, runny nose, or cough. Nagra said this advice was also in line with the policy for staff at St Basil’s. Nagra broke down crying towards the end of her evidence after being questioned for almost three hours about infection control procedures at the home. At the time, Victoria department of health and human services guidelines stated only those living in a high-risk area or displaying fever or chills, or acute respiratory infection, should get tested for Covid. People without symptoms should not be tested except in special circumstances, the advice stated, such as if they were a recovered case returning to work in a high-risk setting. The care assistant A next worked at St Basil’s on 8 July, still asymptomatic and without her test result. But she said she received a text message from her husband during her shift which said her sister-in-law’s Covid test was positive. “Straight away I packed my bag and came to my manager, put a mask on and explained everything … she sent me home so I could stay in isolation,” A told the court. On 9 July, A received her test result which confirmed she had the virus. She texted and called the facility manager at St Basil’s, Vicky Kos, to tell her. Kos will give evidence to the inquest in the coming weeks. “She said to me … you have to now stay in 14 days’ isolation. The department of health will contact you every day,” A said. She disputed a statement from another St Basil’s staff member who said at the end of her shift on 5 July, A told other staff her family members had started to experience sore throats. A denied this and said she never experienced any symptoms – even after testing positive. By the time A finished her isolation period, the virus had swept through the home leading to all staff being furloughed and replaced by agency staff in an attempt to contain the spread. A did not return to work at the home for about three months for this reason. On Monday, the inquest heard there was an eight-day delay between A’s positive test result being reported to the state health department and the testing of all residents at the home. Guidelines recommended testing occur within four to six hours. A specialist emergency physician Dr Ian Norton, who provided the coroner with a report into the home, said this delay was a “root cause” of the virus sweeping through the home. Christine Golding, whose mother, Efraxia Tsalanidis, died after contracting the virus at the home, spoke of the “inhumane neglect” her mother experienced prior to her death due to staff being under-resourced and overwhelmed by sick patients. She recounted going to the home with other family members and banging on the doors of the home, desperate for managers to give them information. Throughout July and August 2020, 94 residents and 94 staff members were infected. While 45 residents died from Covid-19, a further five died from neglect during the same period as the workforce succumbed to the virus and gaps were revealed in infection control, the court heard. Over five weeks the coroner will examine how St Basil’s management and staff and the state and federal governments prepared for Covid in aged care; their responses when it hit; the timeliness of information provided to staff, residents and families; whether the state and federal governments coordinated their response to the outbreak appropriately; and the adequacy of the replacement workforce deployed to St Basil’s, among other issues. The inquest continues.And with that, it’s time to end this blog for the evening. We will, of course, be back tomorrow to do it all again. But before we say goodnight, let’s recap the big stories: Victorian crossbench MP Andy Meddick demanded the opposition leader condemn MPs who appeared at a controversial protest last night as changes were made to Victoria’s pandemic powers bill. New South Wales records 212 new Covid-19 cases and two deaths, while Victoria records 797 new cases and eight deaths, 12 in the ACT and zero in Queensland. People in Forbes were ordered to evacuate as the Lachlan River floods. New Zealand shortens isolation time for Covid-positive people. The Northern Territory announced there were nine new Covid cases - all Aboriginal Territorians. South Australia introduced vaccine mandate for school and childcare staff It was, as always, a total pleasure. When ABC journalist Mollie Gorman was doing her live cross earlier today the Lachlan River was slowly inching closer. A reminder that residents in low areas around Forbes need to be evacuating. More details on the SES website. Essendon football club’s chief executive, Xavier Campbell, is confident the club’s football program and training schedule can go ahead as normal despite him testing positive to Covid-19. Campbell developed mild symptoms on Monday afternoon and immediately got tested. The positive result was confirmed on Tuesday morning. Rock art that has lasted tens of thousands of years is being destroyed by the climate emergency in a matter of years. Coastal erosion, fires, floods and cyclones are among the extreme events predicted to get more severe with global heating. Archaeologists and historians are now warning that serious damage has already been done. This from AAP: A collapsed property investment scheme which cost elderly Australians their homes and life savings has been referred for possible criminal charges. The Australian Securities and Investments Commission has handed information about Sterling Income Trust to the commonwealth director of public prosecutions to weigh up criminal charges. Former ASIC investigator Niall Coburn told a Senate inquiry on Tuesday it was “incredible” the corporate cop took so long to start investigating and the delay allowed the scheme to “spread its tentacles”. The scheme lured Western Australian investors into signing long-term tenancy agreements, with returns from a lump-sum investment used to pay rent. Senators are scrutinising ASIC’s oversight and looking at what is needed to prevent it from happening again, as well as broader laws for financial misconduct victims. There’s been so much happening today around the Victorian pandemic bill. I’ve got two really good articles for those wanting to catch up / understand why it has created so much confusion. Here is Calla Wahlquist and Michael McGowan on how the bill became fuel for Victoria’s anti-government protests: And here is Caitlin Cassidy with everything you need to know about what changes were made today to the controversial bill: The Coalition has radically revised its proposed religious discrimination bill, scrapping the so-called Folau clause and removing the ability for health providers to refuse treatment on the basis of “conscientious objection”. The revised bill – which has been signed off by cabinet and was briefed to government MPs on Monday – still includes a controversial “statement of belief” clause which would override other commonwealth, state and territory anti-discrimination laws. The young family stranded in the Simpson desert have been rescued by police. I will bring you more details when I have them. Earlier I said we would chase up some further details on the report in The Australian that the NSW government has approved plans to extend the state’s Covid-19 emergency powers until March 2023. We now have a response from NSW Premier Dominic Perrottet, who we asked to comment on the story. “Only the health provisions that need to be extended will be extended,” he said. “I will be carefully considering this matter over the summer break.” NT Senator Malarndirri McCarthy earlier said one of the cases was her sister - on Twitter she has now revealed she is related to all the cases. I think it’s really important to highlight her point that catching Covid is not something to be ashamed of - it is a pandemic after all. We just need to work together to limit the spread. Earlier McCarthy said overcrowded housing in remote communities needed to be urgently addressed to protect Aboriginal Territorians. “This is a serious matter. This is a case of life and death here,” she said. “And unless families have an ability to be able to isolate in their own home — and how can they when you have 15-20 people, which is the case of my families. “[There is] absolute urgency that must be placed on housing for remote homelands and outstations with the federal government.” The search for the remains of William Tyrrell has continued but is yet to turn up any answers. Police have been going through a garden bed near the foster grandmother’s house. They are digging up the bed and sifting through it before putting it through a mulcher. There are hundreds of officers involved in the search. This from AAP: Police have dug up the garden at the Kendall home where his foster grandmother lived and where he was last seen in 2014. A mechanical sift was brought on to the property while in nearby bushland volunteers cut down trees to help in the search. NSW Police commissioner Mick Fuller confirmed there had been a significant breakthrough in the case, saying he was confident police would solve the mystery of the boy’s fate. “There is certainly one person in particular that we are looking closely at,” he told Sydney radio 2GB on Tuesday. Police minister David Elliott was asked about a report that police were investigating whether William died after falling from a balcony at the Kendall home. “With a mysterious incident like this, every single option has to be investigated, every scenario has to be reviewed and tested,” he said. The NSW government has approved plans to extend the state’s Covid-19 emergency powers until March 2023. First reported in The Australian, the paper said the decision prompted “heated backlash” from some MPs, who have argued that it is overreach. The emergency powers allow the government to limit movement between LGAs, require people to wear masks and put a curfew in place. We are chasing further details. Shadow assistant treasurer Stephen Jones is asked to comment and he takes the opportunity to have a dig at the Coalition for backing the Australian Space Agency. We are talking about investing billions of dollars in a program for space exploration. I’m not against space exploration but surely putting a roof over somebody’s head, getting fresh food into communities, is more important than some of these other things that we are spending money on at the moment. Liberal MP Jason Falinski, who is currently chairing the federal parliamentary inquiry into housing and supply is on Afternoon Briefing now. PK has asked him about concerns the outbreak in the NT will spread quickly because of overcrowding in homes. “I mean, how much time do you have?” He says the country’s housing issues were created by all levels of government and need to be fixed by all levels of government. I was going to quote it but that is pretty much it – there are no suggestions past we need all governments to work on it. Moving on then... Opposition whip Bernie Finn in the legislative council is up critiquing the Victorian government’s pandemic bill and commending the protesters who camped outside parliament house yesterday evening. Finn attended a rally on Saturday which he said was attended by “the most massive crowd” he’d seen in decades. Those people in the streets aren’t going to wear what this premier is trying to pull. You’ve got people prepared to sleep on the streets of this parliament as a vigil, such is their commitment. Daniel Andrews has given people a reason to be interested in politics, every cloud has a silver lining ... I wish them well, I hope it doesn’t rain, I commend them for taking a stand for freedom in this state. The people are marching in the street not because they’re some kind of left-wing or right-wing neo nazi or white supremacist, they’re people who have been ignored by Daniel Andrews for far too long ... they’ve been pushed to breaking point. I’m not sure there are self-described “left-wing neo nazis”, and it’s worth reminding that nooses and placards calling for violence against politicians were pictured among the crowds of protestors over the weekend, but anyway. Earlier, Finn dismissed a picture he posted of the premier depicted as Hitler as “a joke” because he replaced the swastika with an ABC logo. The Morrison government has been accused of neglecting to assess the impact of the pandemic on young children, with current policies labelled “a series of crisis responses”. Jay Weatherill, the former Labor premier of South Australia and chief executive of Minderoo Foundation’s Thrive by Five initiative, made the comments at the Senate’s Covid-19 inquiry on Tuesday. Reason Party’s Fiona Patten has just confirmed the Victorian government’s pandemic legislation, if it passes, will be reviewed within two years. This was one of the key recommendations the Law Institute of Victoria called for in its response to the amendments. Patten says it is a “delicate balance” protecting human rights and protecting health: Doing nothing seems to be what we’re saying ... let the disease run wild, let’s do nothing. It’s not acceptable here, it’s not acceptable in Australia, it’s not acceptable anywhere in the world. The ultimate human right is to protect life, and that is what we are doing ... I would not have accepted another extension of the state of emergency. I said in March, we needed pandemic specific legislation because otherwise we’re dealing with legislation designed to deal with floods ... fires ... not global pandemics ... we should not let the perfect get in the way of the good and I support this legislation. Bandt is asked about how ambitious everyone’s climate policies need to be – he is saying they need to be in line with the science. Australia’s leading climate scientists have said to limit global warming to 1.5 degrees, Australia’s fair share is a 74% cut by 2030. The Liberals have just been so terrible over the last few years that they have given us less time to turn the ship around and as a result, climate targets have to be 75% by 2030 to be consistent with the Glasgow pact. We have to have a plan to get out of coal and gas. We certainly can’t as Labor wants to do, open up new gas and coalmines. That is just a red line that can’t be gone below. PK has asked Bandt about CoP26 and he is taking the opportunity to attack both the Libs and Labor for “wanting more coal and gas”. Coal and gas are on death row now after the Glasgow climate summit. They have had their day and you can argue about whether it’s an orange light or a red light that is flashing after this summit but what is absolutely clear is that it is on its way out. And it is really countries like Australia under Morrison and Joyce and Russia and Saudi Arabia who are saying no, we think we can open up more. This is going to be a test for Labor as well because there is 116 new coal and gas mines currently in the pipeline that may – that are yet to be opened or expanded. Now post-Glasgow there is no room for more coal and gas but Labor and Liberal want more coal and gas. PK has asked Bandt what he makes of the report Perrottet is also pushing for extended powers. This is a balancing act that we’ve all had to go through and as the Greens, we have always been very concerned about making sure that there’s not government overreach when it comes to these powers. That in New South Wales, but also in Victoria, is exactly the debate that we’ve been engaging in parliament to ensure that there’s some more civil liberties protections built-in but at the same time that we protect public health. I think the community is now used to that debate and saying that it’s something that should result in people being hanged is just contemptible. And Adam Bandt is on Afternoon Briefing right now with Patricia Karvelas. PK has asked about the protests in Victoria the last few days, which have been exceptionally violent in rhetoric and symbolism. “When people are bringing nooses and gallows to parliament and giving speeches about how they want to see people hanged it doesn’t matter what part of the political spectrum the MP they are talking about is from, that should be condemned. We have heard nothing from the prime minister on this. He was very, very quick to come out and condemn Black Lives Matter protesters who were trying their hardest to be peaceful but we have heard not a whisper. This needs to be condemned by all political leaders and I think in terms of the frustration that you are feeling, there has been a lot of misinformation about the legislation that’s been proposed, there’s been a lot of fear-mongering. This is really very cool news: And it’s been announced today that living legend/national treasure Ernie Dingo will tour Western Australia, to encourage people to get the Covid vaccine. There are fears some Aboriginal communities will be left vulnerable when WA opens up to the rest of the country next year, as only 32.6% of the population have had both jabs. The federal government is funding the two-month tour. “I know that we can beat hesitation around vaccines and needles with this approach – that’s why I’m packing up and heading up north to have a yarn with local influencers and elders in each community,” Dingo said. “I’ll be having a cuppa and a yarn with countrymen over brekkie barbecues, listening to their concerns and encouraging them to be ready for the jab when the health teams come through the towns again. “It’s about knowledge, about making our communities feel ready for the vaccine when it comes around.” From AAP: Unions are fighting the NSW government’s “cheap and nasty” plan to roll back a special Covid-19 protection for frontline workers who kept the state going at the height of the pandemic. Unions NSW secretary Mark Morey urged the government to abandon its repeal of automatic Covid workers’ compensation coverage for exposed workers. Failing that, he’s calling on crossbench MPs to “block the attack on workers’ rights”. “This is a mean and nasty piece of legislation that is saying to every worker that kept the economy going: ‘You are on your own’,” he said. Premier Dominic Perrottet this week announced his intention to scrap a provision in the Workers Compensation Act allowing for the presumption that frontline workers who test positive caught the virus while on duty. The government estimates keeping the protection could invite 25,000 extra claims over the next 12 months, forcing insurance premiums up by an average of $950. Covid-19 claims could cost the workers compensation system as much as $638m in the coming year. The Law Institute of Victoria has released a statement on the amendments to the pandemic management bill. It says the changes go “some way” to addressing its concerns, but not far enough to be fit for purpose. The institute released its position paper on the bill on 11 November, which outlined 32 recommendations in full, six of which have been included in the proposed amendments. Law Institute of Victoria (Liv) president Tania Wolff said the amendments were moving in the right direction compared with the original bill: The Liv is pleased to see these amendments ... however, the Liv continues to have concerns over some aspects of the bill and urges members of parliament to continue working through amendments to the legislation to ensure it is fit for the purpose of protecting our democracy and safeguarding members of the community. The most significant of our concerns are that: the use and exercise of the powers should require effective independent oversight and scrutiny, such as by the ombudsman there should be accessible external merits review of all decisions relating to detention and that Vcat be given jurisdiction the bill should not include terms of imprisonment, and there needs to be stricter controls on the use of information gathered for public health purposes to protect individual privacy. If these recommendations ... are not adopted, then at a minimum, we call for a sunset clause so that the new part would expire in 18-24 months from its commencement. This allows the government to continue to meet the challenges of this current pandemic, but ensures an opportunity for further independent review so that the legislation is fit for purpose for any future pandemic. The corporate regulator asked for its ability to decide claims under a compensation scheme to be restored in 2016 but was knocked back by Treasury, a parliamentary inquiry has heard. Giving the Australian Securities and Investments Commission the power to decide claims under the Compensation for Detriment caused by Defective Administration scheme would have prevented a group of investors who are seeking $200m over a large corporate collapse from falling into a limbo where neither the watchdog nor Treasury will decide their claim. Parliament’s joint committee on corporations and financial services has been looking into the plight of the investors, victims of the collapse of the Prime Retirement and Aged Care Property Trust, following Guardian Australia’s coverage of the issue. https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2021/aug/22/stuck-in-limbo-investors-blame-asic-for-200m-loss-but-no-one-will-hear-their-claim Under questioning from Labor MP Julian Hill, Treasury assistant secretary Mohita Zaheed said Asic previously held authorisation to make decisions under the CDDA scheme. The authorisation lapsed when assistant treasurer Josh Frydenberg, who made the authorisation, left the post in September 2015. Asic asked for it to be restored but, Zaheed said, treasury refused the request because it took the view doing so would conflict with section 12 of the Asic act, which prohibits the government of the day giving the regulator instructions “about a particular case”. In letters to Treasury and the minister for financial services, Jane Hume, investors have said they do not accept this argument. Hill said: “The whole thing looks like a protection racket to stop citizens or investors or anyone in Australia lodging a CDDA claim against the corporate regulator.” Zaheed said investors had access to make a payment for an act of grace payment, which she said was a “very similar scheme”. Hill also became frustrated after Treasury first assistant secretary Simon Writer batted away his questions about why the decision not to renew the authorisation was made. “With respect, I know you’re an intelligent man, but you sound like a talking parrot and I’m pressing a button, saying the same thing without actually answering the question,” Hill said. And wham – NSW joins the fray. Queensland health authorities have automatically cancelled some long-running applications for compassionate and medical exemptions to enter the state, including cases where people had waited more than five weeks with no formal response. Last week, Queensland’s health directions exemption service wrote to hundreds of people who had been seeking to cross the state border, advising that their cases had taken so long to assess they would now be “closed”. And it is still a very wet November – in fact, it is fast becoming the wettest on record. Grab yer’ brollies people! Philip Lowe was speaking earlier today – the RBA governor said he doesn’t expect interest rates to rise until 2024. Given the global and domestic forces I have discussed, the inflation outlook is more uncertain than it has been for some time, but our central scenario is the underlying inflation reaches the middle of the target by 2023. If this comes to pass, it would be the first time in nearly seven years that we will be at the midpoint of the target range. This by itself does not warrant an increase in the cash rate. As I have said, much will depend on the trajectory of the economy and inflation at the time, so it is still plausible that the first increase in the cash rate will not be before 2024. Australia’s frontier history is still being pieced together, errors are still being corrected and new information is coming to light, according to the emeritus professor of history Lyndall Ryan and her research team at the University of Newcastle’s massacre map project. Nowhere is this more apparent than in western Victoria, where Ryan says the “mass of dots” denoting massacre sites has remained, despite researchers correcting locations and even removing some sites from the map. In Victoria’s Legislative Council, the Liberal MP David Davis is up chatting all things pandemic bill, or pandemic bill adjacent: We’ve got the terrible trifecta, the worst of all outcomes ... the longest lockdowns of any jurisdiction in the world, that has amazingly negative consequences on our business and kids, at the same time in Australia, we had the worst death rate by far ... We have still never seen the evidence for the curfew, the extraordinary decision ... to lock down the state with a sharp curfew ... who ever came up with the curfew? It was Andrews in his office – in the bunker, that’s what they call his office. The Labor MP Shaun Leane rises and asks why Davis’s points are relevant to debating the legislation. But the Reason party’s Fiona Patten rebukes him, saying “Mr Davis has an opportunity to go very broadly, which is what he is doing.” Davis returns to the bunker. The Australian Medical Association has released a statement about the attorneys general agreeing to raise the age of criminal responsibility to 12. Much like many advocacy groups, they say it is still far too young to put people in prison. “Last week’s meeting was a missed opportunity to make real progress in stopping harms to children,” the AMA president, Dr Omar Khorshid, said. “Agreement by MAG to consider a proposal that would raise the age to 12 falls well short of what is needed. It will result in more children being locked up and ignores the expert medical, legal and social advice on the real harm of the current laws, which in reality make kids more likely to reoffend. “Evidence shows the younger a child is at first contact with the justice system, the higher the rate of recidivism and children in contact with the criminal justice system at a young age are less likely to complete their education, find employment and are more likely to die an early death.” According to AIHW data, 456 out of the 499 children under 14 in prison in 2019-20 were aged 12 to 13 years old. “Raising the age of criminal responsibility only to 12 will do little to lower the number of children locked away behind bars.” The federal MP Andrew Hastie has announced the birth of his third child. “Ruth and I are delighted to welcome a beautiful baby girl into the world, Jemimah Faith Hastie!” the assistant minister for defence told party supporters in an email. “Jemimah was born at 11.11am yesterday, 3kgs, 49cm. “Mum and baby are both doing well. “Thank you to everyone who has offered their prayers and support over the last few months.” In South Australia, a vaccine mandate is being introduced that will force all staff and volunteers at schools and childcare centres to at least have their first vaccine by 10 December. Exceptions include people with medical exemptions, students, parents or carers that are dropping off/picking up children and incidental visitors at school. The government also says masks will remain optional for adults and high school students in school. The education minister, John Gardner, made the announcement, saying it was an important move to “ensure that we will be able to keep our children safe”. The Victorian attorney general Jaclyn Symes’ motion for the pandemic bill to be declared “urgent” has just been passed in the Legislative Council 19 votes to 18. Symes has now called for the bill to go through a second reading. It comes as the Victorian Bar has released a statement saying the amendments don’t go far enough to protect the rule of law. The Victorian Bar president, Roisin Annesley, said: The proposed amendments largely address low-priority issues and not the most fundamental problems with the bill. The major issues include the lack of effective parliamentary control over the minister’s pandemic orders and the lack of provision for an independent review of authorised officers’ exercise of power. Victoria’s Legislative Council is back after a lunch break to continue to debate the government’s pandemic legislation. Before lunch, the attorney general, Jaclyn Symes, raised a motion for the bill to be declared urgent. The Liberal MP Gordon Rich-Phillips says there is no justification for the bill to be deemed urgent when the state of emergency declaration isn’t due to expire until 15 December: All Victorians have cause to be concerned when the attorney general comes in here as she did this afternoon with an argument the Victorian community will benefit from certainty, seeks to sweep aside parliamentary process and ram this through. I’m reminded about the purpose of urgent bills ... one that is needed to fix an urgent problem of governance in the state of Victoria ... this is not an urgent legislation. We have two sitting weeks to deal with this situation before changes to the current framework is required. At least half a dozen questions have been put by Sarc to the relevant minister. Those questions have not been answered ... even Sarc, with its feeble scrutiny has further situations for the government. When you look at the ways urgent bills have been used before ... really urgent matters that need to be dealt with quickly ... every single time this chamber has sought to declare a bill an urgent bill, it has been done with the unanimous support of the House ... this is not one of those situations. This is a highly contested bill with enormous ramifications for the people of Victoria. There are genuine reasons people are marching on the streets and the front steps of parliament. A reminder nooses and signs inciting violence against parliamentarians have been spotted among those people marching, even if they’re doing so for “genuine reasons”. The Victorian Equal Opportunity and Human Rights Commission has welcomed today’s news the state government will amend the Public Health and Wellbeing Amendment (Pandemic Management) Bill 2021. The commissioner, Ro Allen, said “the amendments and clarity announced today strengthen the bill and its human rights commitments”. Allen had raised her concerns with Victoria’s attorney general Jaclyn Symes, highlighting a clause that would allow the government to make targeted pandemic orders based upon people’s attributes. The clause has been amended as part of crossbench negotiations. Another of the commission’s key demands – that the bill would require pandemic orders to be compatible with the human rights charter – has also been secured. Supplies of the Pfizer vaccine have begun to trickle into pharmacies across the country, as the sector prepares to administer booster shots to early recipients. Government data shows about 3,690 Pfizer doses were ordered for delivery to community pharmacies in the first week of the month. Last week, about 150,000 doses were expected to be delivered to community pharmacies. There are currently about 3,434 pharmacies participating in the vaccine rollout. They will be able to administer booster shots to the high-priority recipients who received the vaccine early this year. Pharmacies can also administer first and second doses. “This means from today, all primary care sites around the country will progressively be able to offer all three Covid-19 vaccines approved for use in Australia, increasing choice and making it easier for whole families to get vaccinated at the same time,” the health department said in its most recent weekly update. The Pharmacy Guild of Australia has previously expressed concern about the take-up of the Pfizer vaccine by its members. The Sydney Morning Herald reported earlier this month that only about 20% of Australian pharmacies had ordered Pfizer doses. The Guild expressed concern in an email to its members, saying only 1,156 of the then 3,416 participating pharmacies had placed orders. And that is it for the Northern Territory Covid presser – but I will bring you more on the story as it develops throughout the afternoon. Pain says health authorities do not think the transmission is widespread in Katherine. However, we cannot be absolutely confident of that. With the testing, although it has not been desirable, we wouldn’t have had the testing rates we would have liked. Even with those tests we would have expected to pick up cases if it was widespread, but I don’t want to give any false reassurance about that. We are in a desperate fight now to identify new cases in Katherine and I do need people to come forward and get tested. Pain says the woman in her 60s who is in hospital is not in ICU. “She did need hospitalisation, so is acutely unwell, but at this stage not requiring intensive care.” He says the hospitals have good capacity for the number of cases “we are expecting”. We have the ability to expand that capacity as well. We can more or less double our capacity if we need to. Obviously an assessment will be made of our needs for that as the numbers of cases rise, if they do. Dr Charles Pain says Katherine hospital has four beds for Covid patients. They do have some limited capacity to manage Covid patients but at this stage, with the small numbers, our priority is to get them up either to the CNR or Royal Darwin hospital if they need treatment. The Northern Territory police commissioner, Jamie Chalker, says this is a worst-case scenario but they have planned for it. “As I’ve mentioned on many occasions, the harsh reality of overcrowding is something that leads this particular Delta strain to be very problematic.” He says “additional resources” have been sent to Borroloola, which may have to go into lockdown if cases have spread there. He says there have been a few events in recent days, including funerals of key community figures, that meant people have travelled around. He says police will be across the NT in the coming days and they will not tolerate protests. “I can’t be bothered dealing with your rubbish in the interim. There is just too much at stake. Compliance ... in Katherine has been pretty good, although there are already some people pushing the boundaries.” The Northern Territory deputy chief health officer, Dr Charles Pain, is now speaking: We are now in a clearly very serious situation. We have 11 cases now associated with this second cluster. Nine of those, we’re informed, notified to us overnight. There is clearly a significant spread in two households. We can see how fast it can spread. We don’t know how far it is spread. We really need our community, please, to come forward and get tested at this stage. He says everyone has been compliant with contact tracing: If you are still waiting to get vaccinated you could be exposed to the virus at any time. You’re taking that risk of being exposed to the virus unvaccinated and the consequences of that, particularly for the communities in the Territory, could be dire. On the contact tracing, please, it is extremely important, we’ve had very good cooperation. I would like to thank all those two who have helped us with the contact tracing and giving their information. Much of that is very confidential. We treat it as highly confidential. Gunner is now speaking about Robinson River, the remote community where cases have been detected. Our rapid assessment team arrived last night and are hard at work. Their top two priorities – to offer the vaccine to anyone who needs it and test for new Covid cases. We have conducted about 20 priority tests in Robinson River that should soon leave for Darwin and we should have results in the morning. We have enough tests to test the whole of that community. We are under no illusions that the risk there remains real and there is more testing to do there today. I mentioned yesterday they have a good vaccination rate – 87% first dose and 77% full vaccination. As per our rapid response plan, additional supplies of the vaccine have been offered to anyone who is eligible ... and this measure can save lives. Gunner urges everyone to get the vaccine. The vaccine rate for Katherine overall and within vulnerable pockets is not at a level where we can consider lockout as an option. This is our challenge to the people of Katherine. This is how you can best help us, yourself, your loved ones and the community. We need to see a vaccine response in Katherine, we need to see a testing response in Katherine. I know you can do this. Not in theory, in fact. You have done this before, let’s smash this, Katherine. Gunner says there will be daily wastewater testing in Alice Springs, Tennant Creek, Katherine and Darwin. A positive wastewater result in one of these locations may be enough to trigger a lockdown or lockout decision. These are tough times for Katherine. I thank you all for complying with last night’s snap lockdown direction. This is the third time Katherine has had to be locked down. I feel for the people of Katherine and Katherine businesses. We do not want to have to lock you down. You have done everything we have asked and made sacrifices for every Territorian. Gunner says the Katherine lockdown has been extended to 6pm Monday 22 November. All Territorians have a call to action. There will be a mask mandate for all Territorians until 6pm Monday 22 November. You must wear a mask whenever you leave the home. You are permitted to remove your mask if undertaking vigorous exercise. If clusters one and two are linked, there is a significant gap between the last case on 4 November and the first case of cluster two on 13 November. There is a chance the virus has seeded and moved. I need all symptomatic Territorians to get tested. We want to see a testing response across the territory. Gunner is now listing the exposure sites and says there are currently 161 close contacts. I want to touch on two important exposure sites separately so I will run through the other exposure sites now. These are all close contact sites. So if you have been to these places at these times, you must immediately self-quarantine, call the Covid hotline and we will organise a test. Captain Jack’s Fish and Chips yesterday, 15 November, from 12pm to 12.35pm. Again close contact site. Wurli health service main clinic yesterday from 10am to 11.45pm. Kirby’s pub, Katherine hotel, Friday 12 November from 12pm to 4.30pm. Two important exposure sites I want to run through now, and they are the Katherine hospital and the MacFarlane primary school in Katherine. First Katherine hospital. The times and specific locations we are still working on. Please keep monitoring the coronavirus website as we provide that information shortly. Please pay close attention. Second MacFarlane primary school. I encourage parents whose kids normally attend MacFarlane primary school but because of the lockdown are not at school today to please get your kids tested today. That is a request. Gunner says the nine new cases are concerning: This is obviously a serious escalation in the Covid-19 situation in the Northern Territory. A major contact tracing effort has been under way since the first case we reported yesterday. The Northern Territory chief minister, Michael Gunner, is speaking – he is listing the age of each case. A 71-year-old man, a 65-year-old woman who has been admitted to Royal Darwin hospital, a 62-year-old woman, a 40-year-old woman, a 38-year-old woman, a 22-year-old woman, a 16-year-old girl, two five-year-old girls – twins. “I don’t have vaccination status details yet. Bar the 65-year-old woman who is at Royal Darwin hospital, all other cases are going to the centre for national resilience. We’re going to Darwin, where Northern Territory authorities have announced there are nine new Covid cases. They are all Aboriginal Territorians. Victoria’s attorney general, Jaclyn Symes, has just raised a motion to label the pandemic bill “urgent” in the Legislative Assembly. A motion under this standing order can’t be amended and debate can’t be adjourned: The Victorian community will benefit from certainty ... debating this legislation in a timely manner will provide time for preparations as we reach our second opening up target. This legislation should be afforded adequate time to be debated and scrutinised by this chamber ... [but] when the opposition want to make a point rather than just vote against it, they want to make sure there is the theatre they are opposing the bill at every juncture ... it’s a flawed strategy, the bill has been available for 20 days, I’m not sure what an additional two will seek to deliver to those opposite. The public already know we’re debating this week, I’d like to get on with it. Symes says if the bill is not passed, the ability to contain Covid-19 will be significantly hindered. The state of emergency is due to lapse on 15 December. The Liberal MP David Davis has called it an “extraordinary” move, that has been used just nine times since 1996. On those occasions, on each occasion, it has been used without a vote. This occasion the government is using it to override the normal procedures of the House ... completely unreasonably and undemocratically ... the government’s arrogant approach typified by this inappropriate use of an urgency provision. The government couldn’t even wait one or two days to deal with this properly. The Labor senator for the Northern Territory Malarndirri McCarthy has revealed her sister was the first case of Covid-19 in Robinson River. McCarthy’s sister came forward for testing when she developed symptoms and it was currently unknown how she picked it up. Yesterday afternoon the premier, Michael Gunner, said authorities would not have picked up the fact Covid had entered a remote community if the woman had not come forward. We are expecting a Covid update from the NT soon – the time keeps getting pushed back. We reported earlier that Forbes residents have been asked to leave – emergency services are now warning residents “it may be too dangerous to rescue you” if they remain. We have the full story here: The Victorian government’s controversial pandemic legislation is currently being debated in the Legislative Council. Liberal MP David Davis says the Scrutiny of Acts and Regulations Committee, Sarc, has “dropped the ball badly”: Forcing it through the lower house was appalling, refusing to have Sarc look at the bill before the assembly had the opportunity ... was fundamentally undemocratic. Sarc needs to lift its game ... it needs to properly inquire into these bills and it can’t continue to sweep the abuses of this government under the carpet. This committee has lost its way. The Reason party’s Fiona Patten responds to Davis, saying, as a member of Sarc, she takes “great offence” to his comments: But I would also like to note the liberal members of Sarc are rarely there. Mr Smith, we haven’t seen him for quite some time, Mr Burgess I’d have to note was relatively silent on this bill. Sarc discussed and scrutinised this bill for two and a half hours and the report reflects that scrutiny. I would suggest if the opposition wants to play a role in Sarc, turn up. From AAP: NSW police could face a large compensation bill if a class action lawsuit alleging unlawful searches took place at a popular music festival is successful. Hundreds of people who attended Splendour in the Grass from 2016 to 2019 in northern NSW may have been unlawfully searched, according to law firm Slater &amp; Gordon and the Redfern Legal Centre. “This ground-breaking class action will seek redress for the many people subjected to invasive and traumatic searches,” Redfern Legal Centre principal solicitor Alexis Goodstone said on Tuesday. The legal centre and Slater &amp; Gordon claim they have evidence “systemic and unlawful police searches” were carried out. An investigation by the Law Enforcement Conduct Commission last year reported NSW police performed unlawful strip searches at the 2018 Splendour in the Grass, including on a 16-year-old girl. Looks like AAP journo Benita Kolovos spoke to Human Rights Law Centre about the amendments to the pandemic laws. Australia’s attorneys general have agreed to formulate a plan to raise the age of criminal responsibility from 10 to 12 years old, but the move has been criticised by justice advocates as a “nothing” decision that will do little to reduce the juvenile detention population. There will be a Covid update from the NT very soon - and we are hearing reports that there will be more cases announced. Expected shortly after 11 am ACST. A police helicopter is on its way to rescue a Perth family who have been stuck in the Simpson Desert since Wednesday last week. On Friday they put out a beacon saying the need to be rescued. They do have food and no one is injured but they have two young children with them. The helicopter left about 10am, South Australian time, and stopped on the way to refuel. It should reach the family within the next 20 minutes. They will be taken to Olympic Dam, which is a remote mine next to Roxby Downs in the state’s far north. I will bring you updates on the rescue and families health when we have them. I’ve got some more information on the Forbes evacuation warnings. About 800 properties are impacted, of which 500 are homes. The river peaked overnight upstream at the floodgate and was about 1 metre higher than the peak in September 2016. That resulted in damaging flooding for the area. It is expected to peak tomorrow. If you have Twitter follow @NSWSES and @BOM_NSW for updates and warnings. If you don’t, the SES website has updates. Thank you, Matilda. As always impossibly large blog shoes to fill. Cait Kelly here, I will be taking you through the afternoon news. An Evacuation Order has been issued for low lying areas of #Forbes. There is more information below and I will bring you updates throughout the afternoon. With that, I shall hand you over to the amazing Cait Kelly who will take you through the rest of the afternoon in news. See you all tomorrow! More on the Victorian opposition’s opposition to the new pandemic powers bill: https://twitter.com/benitakolovos/status/1460411601836597249 The Australian Capital Territory has recorded 12 new local Covid-19 cases. There are now four people in the territory hospitalised due to the virus, one of these people are in the ICU and require ventilation. Jay Weatherill, the chief executive of Minderoo Foundation’s Thrive by Five, just told the Senate’s Covid-19 committee the government should commission a children-specific Covid plan, and make the impact on children a standing item at the national cabinet. Weatherill said the commonwealth should have commissioned Doherty Institute modelling of the spread and impact of Covid on children aged 0 to 5, and that it was “inappropriate” that hadn’t happened already. Weatherill said current policies towards children were “a series of crisis responses” but something more systematic needs to be in place for coming challenges, including monitoring international developments on whether a vaccine can be developed and approved for those aged 0 to 5, and standardising testing regimes for children. This is the end of days. Crowds outside Victoria’s Parliament House appear to have become hostile to media, forcing senior 7 News reporter Nick McCallum to retreat up the road. New Zealand has reported 222 new cases of Covid-19 in the community, the highest daily tally since the pandemic began. The ministry of health said there are 197 new cases in Auckland, 20 in Waikato, 2 in Wairarapa, 2 in Lakes District and 1 in Northland. There are now 5973 cases in the August outbreak. The ministry reported another death of a person with Covid-19 on Tuesday. The patient, who was in their 70s, was admitted to Auckland City Hospital on 11 November and subsequently tested positive for the virus. Our thoughts are with the patient’s whānau [family] and friends at this deeply sad time. We would also like to acknowledge the team at Auckland City Hospital and all health care workers for their continued hard work and dedication. There are 91 people in hospital, including 7 in intensive care. Of today’s cases, 87 are yet to be epidemiologically linked to the outbreak, bringing the total of unlinked cases in the past fortnight to 866. To date, 90% of the eligible population over 12 years old have had at least one dose of the Pfizer vaccine, and 81% are fully inoculated. Blog treat! You’ve earned it! At the Senate’s Covid-19 committee, experts from the Murdoch Children’s Research Institute have revealed the impact of coronavirus on children and current thinking on vaccines. Prof Andrew Steer said evidence in Australia and internationally suggests about 0.7% of children who contract Covid-19 require admission to hospital and 0.07% require intensive care. From 30 August to 10 October in Australia there were 79,000 positive cases, of whom 21,000 were kids (26%). Some 636 children were admitted to hospital, 3% of the 21,000. There were no deaths. Steer said in Australia there are higher rates of hospitalisation because in some jurisdictions, especially NSW, they are being admitted for social reasons – because their parents are unwell – and the children are admitted “with that rather than for Covid”. Steer said it was “pleasing to see” that Pfizer results for the under 12 show that it is an effective vaccine and there is “every reason to think it will be safe” but there is still reason for caution because there is “not enough information about risks”. He noted there were some cases of *mild* myocarditis (inflammation of the heart) - but children have recovered. Still, researchers want to see results from the 400,000 children under 12 who have had Pfizer in the US and Canada. Prof Sharon Goldfield was asked about the impact of lockdown on children and said there was some evidence of more frequent suicidal and self-harm ideation and presentations to the emergency department, especially at the end of 2020 and beginning of 2021 when Victoria was “in and out of lockdown”. The first plane full of travellers from Sydney to Queensland destined for home quarantine has touched down. Since the sunshine state reached a 70% double vaccination rate for its 16 and over population, they have launched a soft reopening of their borders, whereby travellers from NSW will be allowed to quarantine at home rather than in hotel facilities. Opposition leader Anthony Albanese has joined the calls for Liberal politicians to condemn the violent imagery present at recent demonstrations protesting proposed new Victoria pandemic powers legislation. This included multiple prop gallows being taken to Parliament House. NSW Health has released further details on the two people infected with Covid-19 who died in the last reporting period. Sadly, NSW Health is today reporting the deaths of two men. A man in his 70s died at Mercy Place aged care facility in Albury, where he acquired his infection. He had received one dose of a Covid-19 vaccine and had underlying health conditions. There have been 10 deaths linked to an outbreak at this facility. A man in his 70s from south-west Sydney died at Liverpool Hospital. He had received two doses of a Covid-19 vaccine and had underlying health conditions. NSW Health expresses its sincere condolences to their loved ones. It seems the recent amendments to the Victoria pandemic powers legislation haven’t been enough to win over the state opposition (although in fairness probably nothing would have been): OK, but you are telling me that the Queensland premier just tweeted this and DIDN’T include a photo of Mariah Carey? Missed opportunity. More very normal and not at all concerning news coming from Victoria: Satanists from the Noosa Temple of Satan have met with Queensland senator Amanda Stoker to discuss their objections to the third draft of the new religious discrimination bill. Robin Bristow, known as Brother Samael, said in a statement that the meeting with the (devoutly Christian) politician went well: It was an amicable meeting. Senator Stoker listened carefully to our objections and gave us a fair hearing. Satanic temples generally operate somewhere more as a semi-satirical political activist organisation than a traditional faith congregation and often work to highlight the need for a separation of church and state. The Noosa temple objects to the new bill as they fear it will allow religious organisations to discriminate against those of different faiths. In their statement, the Temple’s lawyer, Trevor Bell, outlined the organisation’s objections to the bill. We have no problem with the idea of protecting individuals from religious discrimination. Unfortunately, the proposed laws will do more than that. The new laws will enable religious institutions to discriminate against people of different faiths. For example, a Catholic school will be able to sack or refuse to hire a physics teacher just because she is not Catholic. Senator Stoker trotted out the usual argument that people of a faith should have the freedom to gather and form groups to the exclusion of others. If discrimination is bad then it doesn’t suddenly become OK just because a group of religious people want to do it. The temple said the senator assured them that smaller faith groups supported the laws as strongly as the larger faith groups, but Bell doesn’t agree. These new laws will favour the big established religions which have large institutions. We were shocked to learn that smaller religions have not joined with us Satanists in rejecting these proposed laws. Apparently, smaller religions hope to build institutions and conduct their own discrimination programs in future. Bristow closed out the media release with this kicker of a line: I fear Hell has frozen over ... Satanists are the only faith group willing to fight against this injustice. Queensland has recorded another day of no new Covid-19 cases. The renewed police search continues for the remains of toddler William Tyrrell who went missing in NSW seven years ago. Federal Labor has also come out to condemn politicians who have participated in the Melbourne anti-vaccination/anti-pandemic powers protests across the last week. Opposition frontbencher Andrew Leigh has condemned controversial MP Craig Kelly’s appearance on Saturday, suggesting that, despite him leaving the party early in the year, the Liberals were also implicated in this: Craig Kelly’s only in parliament because Scott Morrison stepped in to save his preselection at the last election. If not for that, Craig Kelly would not be a member of parliament. So he’s very much a creation of Scott Morrison’s and he continues to vote very strongly with the government. Certainly I think what we’re seeing with vaccination hesitancy is that it’s the latest tool of populists to try and marshal people against the government. We saw that with climate change, we’ve seen it with a range of fringe economic theories. We’ve also seen up with the attempt to deploy racist language. The way to counter it is is calm, sound science and just being very clear with people about the risks of not being vaccinated right now. People that haven’t been vaccinated are now accounting for the substantial majority of deaths. A NSW central west town is preparing to evacuate as flooding from days of heavy rain raises rivers across the state, reports AAP. Of prime concern to authorities is the swollen Lachlan River, with more than 8,000 people in the town of Forbes in its path. The Bureau of Meteorology forecast major flooding in the town from Tuesday, with the river expected to peak on Wednesday morning at a level similar to or higher than the September 2016 floods. The NSW SES deputy zone commander, Barry Griffiths, says an evacuation order for low-lying areas in Forbes is likely to be issued on Tuesday morning. He says the river is expected to peak overnight but an evacuation order will be issued earlier than that “to try and give the community as much time as they can to evacuate safely and calmly”. SES and Rural Fire Service volunteers are door-knocking and delivering about 10,000 sandbags to residents as well as helping prepare properties. Griffiths told Nine’s Today show on Tuesday morning: We are confident that the actions we are taking at the moment are suitable enough for the predicted flood event, but it is going to be a bit of a waiting game over the next 24 hours. We need to see what the water actually does. Moderate flooding has occurred upstream at Cowra, and major flooding occurred at Nanami on Monday night, with the river peaking at more than 12.4m. The river there reached levels higher than in September 2016 but lower than in August 1990. It was too early to tell how high the river will rise when those floodwaters reach Forbes, the BOM said on Monday, but the SES has warned locals in up to 800 homes to prepare to leave before they hit the town. Downstream from Forbes, major flooding is also expected at Cottons Weir and Jemalong. BOM hydrologist Justin Robinson said: One fortunate thing about the floods in western NSW is that they’re a slow moving, evolving event. Hopefully we’ll be able to provide them adequate warning and leave time for them to prepare ahead of the floods actually arriving and impacting their personal properties and communities. St Andrews Church in Forbes has been set up as an evacuation centre as residents are urged to be on high alert for an SES evacuation text message. The Macquarie, Paroo, Macintyre, Belubula, and Snowy rivers have also flooded, after parts of the state copped a month’s worth of rain in days. Yesterday meteorologist Agata Imielska said: Some of those locations (received) even two to three times what you would get in November. Catchments are wet, dams are full. This is exactly what we’ve been talking about for this season, with the elevated flood risk. It is a really important time to really be keeping very close eye on any flood warnings. Residents of the town of Nundle are calling on the New South Wales government to impose the same standards of community consent for existing renewable development proposals as it has for the state’s new renewable energy zones. As the first two of five REZs were declared in the central west-Orana and New England regions, the NSW government’s electricity infrastructure roadmap mandated that “renewables are developed where regional communities want them”. There has been an overwhelming expression of interest in response. As a result, the member for Northern Tablelands and NSW agriculture minister, Adam Marshall, said the government had “the luxury of supporting only the best projects that benefit the community, maintain the highest and strictest development standards and maximise local renewable jobs and investment in the region”. You can read the full report below: A minor to major flood warning has been issued for communities along the Lachlan River including Forbes, Cottons Weird and Jemalong. New Zealand will allow vaccinated Covid-positive people to self-isolate for shorter times, as vaccinations and case numbers across the country rise. For those who are fully vaccinated, the isolation time has been reduced from 14 days to 10 days, and must include 72 hours symptom-free. “If you are vaccinated and catch Covid-19, by day 10 of infection you will pose a very low risk of passing on the virus – and do not need to isolate for as long as someone who’s unvaccinated,” associate health minister Ayesha Verrall said. Those who are considered a “close contact” of a case and are vaccinated will have to self-isolate for seven days, or 10 days for those unvaccinated. As of Monday, New Zealand’s total outbreak was at 5,751 people, an increasing number of whom are self-isolating at home. According to the Ministry of Health, 90% of eligible New Zealanders (those aged 12 and over) have now had at least one dose of the vaccine, and 81% are fully vaccinated. Andrews has also hinted at imminent announcements on further easing of restrictions in Victoria as the state nears its 90% double-vaccination milestone. These will likely include the removal of mask mandates in office settings. A little later this week we’ll be able to have a chat about when we’ll move from these settings to new settings, when that switch will happen. That means we go down to masks in sensitive settings only, for instance, public transport, hospitals, aged care, things of that nature. So no masks in the office, which will be important in terms of getting people back into the office and density quotients and other caps go, other than for the 10 biggest venues in the state. Andrews has attacked the Victorian Liberals, accusing them of trying to have it “both ways”, with some MPs attending anti-vaccination protests, while the party campaigns to open the state up. We’re back to just political games. You’ve got the opposition who are wanting to have it a bit both ways, you know, standing with people who are anti-vaxxers, sharing a podium with people who are anti-science, anti-vaccination, whilst at the same time talking about the place being closed. The reason we’re open and the reason we’re going to stay open is that people have got vaccinated and I am extremely proud of Victorians and deeply grateful to them for having kept their end of the bargain and now we’re keeping ours. Speaking of the protests in Victoria, the premier, Daniel Andrews, is speaking now from the back doors of Parliament House. He has been asked about his government’s decision to amend some of the most controversial elements of the new pandemic powers legislation following negotiations with key crossbenchers. We have a process where we engage in good faith and this is not unusual, that after discussions with crossbenchers and the normal parliamentary process there are some changes made. More often than not, they’re about putting things beyond doubt. For instance, the characteristics changes that we’ve made, those terms that some have played political games with, of course those characteristics always related to the pandemic. It is a bill for the control of a pandemic after all. But just to put those matters beyond any doubt at all, some amendments have been put forward and I think the minister for health has spoken to you about earlier. Report: Was that a mistake, though? Is it something you didn’t plan properly? It was too easy for people to grab that? Andrew: I wouldn’t put it in those terms. There are some who called for these measures a few weeks ago and as soon as the government did it they changed their position. That’s the definition of a political game. The thing about these laws and our management of this pandemic is it’s not a game. It’s very much about keeping people safe. That’s why this week there will be parliamentary debate about these matters, obviously. But also we’ll make exciting announcements about reaching our 90% double-dose target, a credit to every single Victorian who has gone and got the job, done exactly what we asked them to do. As you might know, there were some worrying scenes outside Victoria’s Parliament House overnight, including those protesting against the new pandemic power legislation bringing a mock gallows to the steps and chanting about hanging high-profile politicians. Well, the Victorian opposition has been fighting hard against the proposed emergency power bill, with some Liberal MPs even appearing at last night’s protests. Now crossbench MP Andy Meddick has come out this morning demanding that opposition leader Matthew Guy condemn those in his party who participated. The NSW case numbers are also out. The state recorded 212 new Covid-19 cases overnight. Two Covid-19 patients have died in the latest reporting period. There is good news and sad news coming out of Victoria today. The state has recorded just 797 new Covid-19 cases this morning, continuing what appears to be a slight downward trend in numbers. However, sadly eight people infected with Covid-19 have died in the latest reporting period. Very normal things happening in Victoria today. Nothing to see there. It was the proposal designed to take the heat out of when and where the leaders of the two major parties would debate each other in the lead-up to the election. But a take-it-or-leave-it model for an “Australian Debates Commission” circulated by the government – far from cementing the independence of the body – proposes six of its 10 members be appointed either by the government, opposition, Liberal or Labor head offices. The model also proposes that if consensus isn’t reached on when, where and how to engage, three debates will be slashed to just one outing in Canberra, overseen by the government-appointed “independent” commissioner or their choice of moderator. At the conclusion of the third leader’s debate in May 2019 Scott Morrison and the then opposition leader, Bill Shorten, both committed to set up “an independent debates commission”. You can read the full report below: I’ll be bringing you updates on the Northern Territory Covid-19 situation throughout the morning, but if you want to get all caught up on why the towns of Katherine and Robinson River are in lockdown, you can check up the article below: Hundreds of New South Wales police officers will descend on the area where missing boy William Tyrrell disappeared seven years ago in “high intensity” searches following new evidence in the investigation. Detective chief superintendent Darren Bennett says the searches will last two to three weeks and some would be “subterranean”. “It’s highly likely that if we found something it would be a body,” Bennett told reporters on Monday. “We are looking for the remains of William Tyrrell, there’s no doubt about that.” You can read the full report below: The deputy prime minister has labelled the idea that Australia can reduce coal exports without damaging the government’s ability to provide services “blatantly childish” Fran Kelly: Boris Johnson said that the Glasgow deal, quote, “sounded the death knell for coal worldwide”. Your colleague Matt Canavan says it’s a big green light for us to build more coalmines. That’s what he said the communique was. Who’s right, the British prime minister or the senator from Queensland? Joyce: I think Matt’s pretty smart. Look what he’s clearly saying is, if I look at Newcastle harbour and there are coal ships, taking away coal, and there are. If I got to Gladstone and there are coal ships taking away coal, and there are. If I got to Hay Point and there are coal ships taking away coal, and there are, then the world is still demanding coal. In fact they are demanding more of it at a high price, thermal coal, because of coal-fired power stations. Kelly: But that’s gonna change though, isn’t it? The government’s own modelling to net zero indicates that changes. Demand for coal cuts, I think it’s by 50% within two or three decades, so it’s changing. Joyce: Well, that will be determined by the global market. If people don’t want to buy it, they don’t want to buy it, but they’re now buying it, and we are lucky they are, because the money that we get from that is how we pay for hospitals and schools, your police force, your pharmaceutical benefits scheme, your ABC and on and on and on again. You can’t say ‘I’m going to reduce the money I get but I still want all the services that it pays for’. It is just blatantly childish. Barnaby Joyce has washed his hands of the Glasgow climate agreement. He slammed the climate commitments from the UK, using the country’s oil extraction operation in the North Sea, to suggest they are asking too much of Australia. He also seemed to imply that signing the Cop26 pack would mean that Australia wouldn’t have enough money to pay for hospital and police, which is ... an interesting take. In Australia, we had our discussions. The discussion for quite clear. We went to Glasgow with those discussions in mind. The whole Australia of knew about what we were taking to Glasgow. We went over to Glasgow, we’ve had those discussions. They say they’re going to have another one of these conferences next year. And for my part, I want to make Australians make sure Australians don’t make themselves poorer. If we kick out of the door our second biggest export in this nation, then quite obviously you’re not bringing into this nation the money you need can support all the services that you take as a birthright from the ABC to the NDIS, to your pensions to the Pharmaceutical Benefits screen, to your hospitals, your police service, the whole bang lot! We have got to understand that our economy is different to the French economy or the American economy or the UK economy which surprisingly enough if they ask us to close down our coal section of our economy, our second biggest export, they didn’t dare talk about their North Sea oil. No, that’s sacrosanct. So they are allowed to look after their economy, but we’ve got to absolutely boot ours to pieces. What this means is that we have to be super cautious. Speaking of Barnaby Joyce and his response to the Glasgow climate agreement, the deputy prime minister is on ABC radio now. He tells host Fran Kelly that the Nationals are not happy with the pact the Australian government signed on Sunday. We were not actually in Glasgow. Kelly: I mean, come on, you are the deputy prime minister of Australia. Joyce: I know I’m the deputy prime minister of Australia! I know that I am Fran. I know, you didn’t have to tell me that. The target that we have agreed to makes quite clear that we were not going to be changing out our 2030 targets. That was the process that we are on in Australia we have we’ve met and beaten every target now. Mr Albanese has a different plan ... We know that they are going to bring forth legislation. They just don’t intend to tell you about it. ... [Shadow treasurer] Dr [Jim] Chalmers is very charming, charmingly sneaky ... [He] says that they’re going to somehow deceive us in the next couple of weeks ... And they should be telling us now exactly what they intend to do. Good news for Townsville this morning! The Bureau of Meteorology has cancelled its severe thunderstorm warning for the regional city. The Nationals did not sign the final communiqué of the Glasgow climate summit that commits to doing more to cut medium-term emissions, deputy prime minister Barnaby Joyce has said, adding Australia is “happy with our targets”. Joyce, who was campaigning in the NSW coal town of Singleton on Monday, said the government had already determined its 2030 emission reduction target, and the Nationals had not agreed to the Cop26 pact signed by the Australian government on Sunday. “The Nationals did not sign it. I did not sign it,” Joyce told the ABC. “I am an executive member of this government. We are happy with our targets, with the negotiations the Nationals had with the Liberals (and) we said that we wouldn’t be changing our 2030 targets.” You can read our full report below: Good morning everyone, it’s Matilda Boseley here, ready to take you through all the news of Tuesday. Let’s start off in Victoria where the state government has made several changes to its controversial pandemic legislation to address legal and human rights concerns after it was criticised for being too broad and lacking in parliamentary oversight. This comes as the bill is headed for debate in state parliament’s upper house. A controversial clause that gave the Victorian health minister the ability to make orders based on a person’s “characteristics, attributes or circumstances”, such as age, location, vaccination status and occupation, also raised concerns. After negotiations with some key crossbench MP’s, the Public Health and Wellbeing Amendment (Pandemic Management) Bill 2021 has been altered to clarify that the premier will need “reasonable grounds” to declare a pandemic and that the application of orders based on characteristics “must be relevant to the public health risk”. The health minister will be required to confirm the role the Charter of Human Rights and Responsibilities has played in their decisions. The advice behind any orders issued must be made public within a week rather than a fortnight, while the parliament’s Scrutiny of Acts and Regulations Committee will be given the power to consider any order when it is made, instead of after it is tabled. Maximum fines for people who breach public health orders have been halved. Meanwhile, further north, the communities of greater Katherine and Robinson River in the Northern Territory have entered a 72-hour lockdown. NT chief minister Michael Gunner announced the lockdown on Monday after two people tested positive since spending time at the Robinson River remote community. One of the two new positive cases, a 30-year-old Aboriginal woman, lives in Robinson River about 800km from Katherine. It is believed she has been infectious since November 11. The woman’s case is the first Covid-19 infection reported in a remote Aboriginal community. A 43-year-old Aboriginal man, who lives with seven others in Katherine East, also tested positive on November 13, just four days after testing negative. Health officials believe the man has possibly been infectious since November 10, spends time in Robinson River and is a household contact of the woman. Alongside the lockdown, health officials have already been deployed to affected areas for a testing and vaccine blitz. Well, I will keep you up to date with that, and all the other important news of the morning, so grab yourself a coffee and why don’t we jump into the day.The former US vice president Al Gore has criticised the Morrison government for failing to increase the ambition of Australia’s 2030 emissions reduction target and warned coal workers to be deeply sceptical about “hollow words” from politicians. Gore told a virtual conference organised by Engineers Australia on Tuesday he was glad Scott Morrison took a pledge to achieve net zero emissions by 2050 to the Cop26 summit in Glasgow, given the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s most recent assessment of the climate crisis deemed the problem a “code red for humanity”. But he said a 2050 target “without a near-term pledge has very little meaning”. “I was disappointed that the 2030 target was not increased,” Gore said. “I do think Australia should do more.” Australia is the only major developed country that refused to increase its 2030 emissions reduction targets at the Cop26 in Glasgow. In an effort to blunt sustained international criticism about his government’s lack of climate ambition, Morrison used his national statement at the Cop26 to emphasise that Australia would probably overachieve on the Abbott-era 2030 target of a cut in emissions of between 26%-28% on 2005 levels. At the conclusion of Cop26, the Morrison government also supported language in the Glasgow communique pointing to a review of the 2030 target before the next United Nations’ led climate conference in Egypt. But in a statement issued in Australia shortly after the Glasgow summit finished, ministers Marise Payne and Angus Taylor declared Australia’s 2030 target was “fixed” and the Coalition had no plans to ratchet up ambition. A Cop26 spokesperson told Guardian Australia countries needed to step up their current commitments: “Over the coming year, the UK presidency will work hard to drive even greater ambition on the delivery of the Glasgow climate pact to lead the fight against climate change.” “Through working together at the summit we have kept 1.5 alive, though this will only survive if we keep our promises and translate commitments into rapid action,” they said. At the final Glasgow press conference, the Cop26 president Alok Sharma was asked what would happen if nations like Australia failed to update their targets. “All countries have signed up to this and at the end of the day this is an international agreement and every country will be judged by whether or not they stuck to the commitments they’ve made,” Sharma said. Given the international focus on 2030, and the diplomatic pressure on Australia from allies including Britain and the United States, Morrison attempted in the run up to Cop26 to secure agreement within the Coalition to increase the Abbott-era 2030 target. But that effort was vetoed by the National party. The Nationals leader and deputy prime minister Barnaby Joyce is continuing to insist the junior Coalition partner will not support a stronger 2030 target – even though the prime minister says regularly Australia will likely cut emissions by 35% by 2030 on current projections. “The Nationals have clearly stated that they aren’t changing the 2030 target,” Joyce told the ABC on Tuesday. “We’ve been honest and upfront about that … we’ve told you the truth about what our position is.” But Joyce did not directly answer a question about whether the Nationals would be prepared to support a new, more ambitious, 2035 target. A number of Liberals are urging Morrison to go to the election with a new emissions reduction target for 2035. Liberal backbencher Jason Falinski told the ABC on Tuesday afternoon he intended to keep campaigning for that landing point. “I’ll keep trying,” he said. Falinski said he thought Morrison could have increased the 2030 target to align it with the latest projections that show Australia could achieve a 35% reduction. But he said he understood the prime minister’s arguments that changing the 2030 target would breach a commitment made to voters at the 2019 election. The Liberal MP said the most recent government projections opened the opportunity for Australia to adopt a higher emissions reduction target for 2035. Falinski said he hoped Morrison would take a new commitment both to the next Cop meeting in Egypt and to the Australian people at the looming federal election. “We need to go to the next election with an updated target – a new plan.” But Joyce said Falinski and his Liberal colleague Dave Sharma – who has also championed a higher 2035 target – were “great people” who represented an affluent metropolitan constituency. While avoiding a direct answer on 2035, Joyce contended the view of voters in Sydney were different to the “view you get in Singleton or Muswellbrook”. Joyce said Liberals and Nationals needed to represent their respective constituencies. Joyce is continuing to insist Australia’s coal industry will continue to flourish despite the government’s own modelling pointing to a significant reduction in the coal sector by 2050. During his contribution to the engineering summit on Tuesday, Gore warned coal sector workers to be sceptical about “hollow words” about their job security by the political class. He said politicians spruiking the coal industry could not protect workers from automation or “from the market forces that are driving the cost of electricity from renewable sources so much lower than the cost of electricity from burning coal”. Gore likened politicians like Joyce to King Canute telling the tides to stop.After a bruising couple of weeks, the government was in need of some good news and that was provided by the latest jobless figures. Fears that the end of the furlough scheme would lead to rising unemployment have proved groundless. It is, of course, early days. There are still only flash estimates of what happened in October once the Treasury’s wage subsidies had come to an end but the signs are promising. But rather than the expected surge in redundancies as firms had to cope without government financial support, there was a 160,000 rise in the number of payrolled employees. In the three months from August to October the number of job vacancies hit a new record of close to 1.2m – up almost 400,000 on the pre-pandemic level. The Office for National Statistics said in the July to September period – the months leading up to the scrapping of the furlough – the number of people moving from job to job was higher than ever before, but this was the result of choice rather than people being forced to move because they had been dismissed. Rishi Sunak said the figures were tribute to the “extraordinary success” of the furlough and few would dispute that claim. The unemployment rate fell by 0.5 percentage points to 4.3% in the three months to September and is only marginally higher than it was when Covid-19 arrived in early 2020. Some of the workers who came off furlough in October may have gone into part-time rather than full-time jobs, but even so the labour market has shown resilience throughout the pandemic. Andrew Bailey, the governor of the Bank of England, said on Monday that he wanted to see what was happening to employment post-furlough before deciding whether to support higher interest rates. Nothing in the official data suggests the City is wrong in its belief that borrowing costs will rise from 0.1% to 0.25% next month. Indeed, the economy as a whole is now starting to go post-Covid. The inflation figures due out on Wednesday will still show the impact of the virus on global energy prices and on supply chains but in other respects it is as if the past 18 months never happened. There are two sides to that. The good news is that the labour market has emerged relatively unscathed. The bad news is that the problems of February 2020 – low investment, low productivity, weak underlying growth – are problems that remain to be tackled in November 2021.Let’s get one thing straight: satsumas will still be passed through the audience during the Old Vic’s traditional production of A Christmas Carol this year. There will be mince pies too – even if they won’t be heated this time (bah humbug!). Covid might have played havoc with the theatre industry over the last couple of years but Jack Thorne’s magical adaptation of Dickens’s classic is miraculously thriving against the odds. The Broadway incarnation just picked up five Tony awards and, with a slight twist in tradition during lockdown (when the show was live-streamed), this will be the fifth year in a row that A Christmas Carol runs at artistic director Matthew Warchus’s theatre. Stephen Mangan is its new star and he has found it “worryingly easy” to channel his inner Scrooge. When Warchus approached him about the role, the first thing Mangan thought about was his family. Rubbing his Scrooge-like scruffy beard as he talks over Zoom, Mangan explains: “That sense of doing something as a family is really important to me. My eldest son is 14 and is now the same height as me. It won’t be long before he’s able to beat me in a fight and then it’s all over. But I still feel like I’m 14 years old – and any story that speaks to the 14-year-old me and the 53-year-old me is a very good story.” While the original production remains intact, despite stringent Covid protocols, certain aspects of Thorne’s adaptation are proving particularly striking this time round. Mangan – who has a slightly wistful air about him even when he’s laughing – chuckles wryly as he observes: “A play about a man who shuts himself away, cuts himself off from his family and community, and tries to remove himself from everything except the business of business; that’s pertinent at the moment, just because it has been enforced upon us all.” Mangan is best known for his work in TV comedies including Episodes and Green Wing but the desire to entertain the whole family – and reach out across the generations – has informed a lot of his career choices, including voicing an animated version of Postman Pat and writing a children’s book, Escape the Rooms, with his illustrator sister, Anita. For Mangan, family entertainment and certain ceremonial aspects of faith have a lot in common: “I’m no longer religious but there’s something really special about those events where you get into the car as a family and do something together, like midnight mass. It’s the one thing that I miss about having faith: the excitement of going into a warm space, with candles flickering, music and some sort of sense of ceremony and celebration.” When we discuss family traditions at Christmas, Warchus expresses a zeal for pantomime. From the ages of 15 to 22, he crewed the infamous pantomime at York Theatre Royal and it is the spirit of panto, above all, that he has tried to channel throughout A Christmas Carol, with its giddy audience participation, live music, cross-generational appeal and informality that fills the theatre as soon as the audience steps inside. We talk before the controversy at the Old Vic over the cancellation of Terry Gilliam’s 2022 production of Into the Woods. Warchus lights up when he considers pantomime and the passion that he and Mangan have for big, bold and pretention-free theatre is palpable, even over Zoom. The two last worked together in 2008 on an exquisitely joyful production of Alan Ayckbourn’s The Norman Conquests. Mangan describes it as the “job of a lifetime” and remembers the excitement of performing in the round, a form of staging that is also used in A Christmas Carol. It was during Conquests that Warchus discovered the possibility for a new kind of Old Vic, with an “accessible, inclusive and informal” atmosphere that he has been trying to foster since becoming artistic director in 2015: “Suddenly the Old Vic became a very different kind of theatre. Everything had been thrown into the air and all the rules broken.” Warchus’s hit RSC show, Matilda, has just celebrated 10 years in the West End and a similarly youthful sense of anarchy is unleashed in A Christmas Carol: “There’s a section near the end of this production where I’ve handed over the reins to a 10-year-old version of me to direct. For about 15 minutes, it’s absolute mayhem – in the most childlike and playful way.” A Christmas Carol is at the Old Vic theatre, London, until 8 January.We are now more than halfwaythrough Succession’s third run. It remains a staggeringly brilliant show; an ice-cold snake pit of ever shifting loyalties, flecked with some of the most giddily baroque dialogue we have heard since Deadwood. Every episode is a thrill. And yet, if you were forced to explain exactly what has happened so far this season, chances are you would struggle. Because, really, what has happened? The season began with the fallout from Kendall’s unexpected public broadside against his father and, well, notwithstanding the FBI investigation, that is still where we are. Logan is stuck in a holding pattern of gruff plotting. Shiv and Tom’s marriage remains in a holding pattern full stop. Shiv and Roman are still bickering with one another. The only real movement from anyone this season has come from Kendall and his growing messiah complex. At this point, there is little need for HBO’s nicely packaged Previously on Succession pre-roll montages, because we all know what happened in the last episode. It was the same as the episode before that, and the episode before that. And yet we keep watching, and I think I know why. My theory is that something is coming. Something huge and dark and awful. Something that Succession won’t be able to reset the clock on. My theory is that all this stasis is deliberate, that season three of Succession is testing our patience because a killer blow is about to rocket out of nowhere and leave us all permanently winded. I don’t think I’m alone in noticing a small, but growing, amount of dread. Remember season five of Mad Men, where Don Draper suddenly found himself surrounded by images of death? Nooses were drawn in margins, lift doors opened to reveal nothing but long dark elevator shafts, record players had the same dimensions as coffins. Every conversation, no matter how mundane, felt like it existed explicitly to foreshadow something hideous. This is how I feel about season three of Succession. And let’s not forget, in the penultimate episode of Mad Men’s fifth season, Lane Pryce killed himself. The darkness at the heart of Succession, always present, if sometimes played for laughs, has decayed and expanded. The Roy siblings, who always managed to retain a loose bond despite their bickering, have been torn apart. Hypnotised by the promise of wealth and power, they have irreparably turned on each other. They are all twisting in the wind, quicker to anger and closer to acting upon their worst impulses. Kendall’s bond with his children has all but vanished. Shiv is sleepwalking through an unhappy marriage. Logan’s health, too, is on the decline. If season one of Succession was about overcoming your dislike of these characters, and season two was about feeling sorry for them, am starting to believe that season three is where we are actively supposed to start worrying about their future. At this point, it is an open secret that we are now in the back half of Succession. In an interview with the Times last month, the show’s creator Jesse Armstrong noted that “there is a certain promise in the title”, and said that viewers might feel cheated if the show kept spinning its wheels for ever. Brian Cox, too, admitted that there are only either one or two seasons left. So the series is definitely building to something. Right now, the uneventful first half of season three feels like the start of a velodrome race. The characters are moving tentatively, taking their time to feel each other out. Before we know it, someone will make a decisive lunge for glory. And then, God knows, all hell will break loose. We’re getting closer and closer to that moment. I haven’t been given access to the full season of Succession yet, so I don’t know if my theory is right, but I am a few episodes ahead of broadcast. One upcoming episode, I won’t say which, is so completely drenched in the sense of impending doom that it’s like watching a horror movie. The shadow of catastrophe looms so heavily over every scene that I sat through it with my stomach in knots. I watched it with my wife who, when it finished, remarked that the entire episode was like watching the first 20 minutes of Casualty. We might not know when or where, or how or to whom, but I’ll be amazed if we get to the end of Succession season three without something truly awful happening. Don’t say I didn’t warn you. Succession season three airs on Sky Atlantic/Now in the UK and HBO in the US.Once an author has attained a degree of shelf space, it seems fair to direct the oxygen of publicity towards lesser-known peers. But a couple of hit authors merit second fanfares. Onjali Q Rauf made a splash with the timely and compassionate The Boy at the Back of the Class in 2018. Three books later comes The Lion Above the Door (Orion, £7.99), in which intrepid year fours unravel the riddles behind a war memorial in Rochester Cathedral. Being the two kids who look different in their Kentish village is routine for Leo – whose family hail from Singapore – and Sangeeta (India). But when Leo discovers a plaque to an airman who shares his name, the friends join battle against limited internet access, bullies and the historical downplaying of the roles of people from all over the globe in the second world war. Rauf keeps it light but goes deep, drilling down into how Leo feels about his own father’s seeming appeasement of a tormenter. The Murderer’s Ape (2017) remains one of the most engrossing of contemporary children’s tales. Its sequel proper has finally arrived. In Jakob Wegelius’s The False Rose (translated by Peter Graves, Pushkin, £16.99) we join Sally Jones, the very human-like ape engineer introduced in The Murderer’s Ape, and her Chief as they restore their damaged vessel in 1920s Lisbon. Strange happenings are soon afoot, though, when they discover a dazzling pearl necklace. In an effort to reunite the troublesome jewel with its owner, the two friends become enmeshed in Glasgow’s gangland. Wegelius leans towards the upper end of the age range and some characters – a mafia boss, say – would be stereotypical if not for a gender switch. But this is a righteously old-fashioned yarn with bravery, compassion and decency at its heart. For as long as there has been wind of a climate crisis, children’s authors have responded: Dr Seuss’s The Lorax came out in 1971. As Cop26 closes, this season’s notable books combine the love for nature familiar from children’s storytelling with the environmental dystopias trickling down from older age ranges. At the younger end, two fables throw their arms around tree trunks. In the award-winning Natasha Farrant’s The Girl Who Talked to Trees (Zephyr, £12.99, illustrated by Lydia Corry), young, peculiar Olive sets out to save her favourite oak, destined for the chop. What ensues is a magic realist sequence of linked tales in which various species give up their secrets to Olive, so she emerges strong enough to defend them all. In Every Leaf a Hallelujah (Head of Zeus, £14.99), Ben Okri sets up a similar quest with all the authority of an established folk tale. This time the setting is African and young Mangoshi is on a more pressing mission: she must harvest a specific flower to save her mother’s life. But the forest has been ravaged and the task seems impossible until she, too, falls into a swoon and meets some chatty trees. Diana Ejaita’s saturated illustrations echo both Mangoshi’s fear and the trees’ variegated personalities. Richard Lambert’s The Wolf Road won YA prizes last year; Shadow Town (Everything with Words, £7.99) is his first for younger readers. There is a murder early on in this dystopia whose callousness lingers in the mind – but it’s nothing Marvel fans should balk at. Toby, whose parents have freshly split, wanders into this strange, burning kingdom chasing a cat through a tunnel. Everything is falling apart in this autocracy plagued by floods and earthquakes as well as fire. But who is this spectral girl he meets, and how can he ever get home? Zoologist Nicola Davies’s latest, The Song That Sings Us (Firefly, £14.99), is also set in a not unfamiliar world, where a corrupt regime seeks to vanquish nature. Three siblings are snowboarding down a mountain for their very lives: they don’t understand why the Automators have come for them and their mother, but they do know that young Xeno’s ability to talk to animals will seal her fate. Gradually, answers are revealed in this epic spanning environmental insurrection in the icy north and a showdown on a tropical island where the Automators’ deadliest weapon is set to be unleashed. If rebel plots are familiar, Davies’s is fast-paced, lyrical and utterly convinced of an electromagnetic unity that runs through all living things. • To order any of these books for a special price click on the titles or go to guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyA West Australian man who was incorrectly identified by the Seven Network as allegedly being involved in the abduction of Cleo Smith has launched defamation proceedings against the news organisation. Lawyers for Terrance Flowers, a 27-year-old Nyamal man who lives in the town of Karratha, on Tuesday filed a case in the WA supreme court after Seven mistakenly identified him in a series of broadcasts, articles and social media posts as having been a suspect in the case. Flowers uses his mother’s maiden name, Kelly, on Facebook. Police had arrested 36-year-old Terence Darrell Kelly, whose name is spelled differently, at the time. In a statement of claim filed on Tuesday, lawyers for the 27-year-old said Seven had obtained “four full screen colour photographs” from Flowers’ Facebook account “without his consent” and used them across its broadcast and social media accounts. “Given the public interest in the disappearance of Cleo Smith throughout Australia, it was the natural and probable consequence of the publication … that the allegations made about Flowers in that publication would be widely republished,” the claim states. It alleges Flowers had “been gravely injured in his character and reputation, and has suffered substantial hurt, distress and embarrassment and has and will continue to suffer loss and damage”. Seven incorrectly identified Flowers as a suspect in the case in broadcasts and an online article, tweet and Facebook post on 3 November. The social media posts contained the heading “PICTURED: the man accused of abducting Cleo Smith”. After it became aware of the mistake, Channel Seven issued an apology stating the images had been removed “promptly”. “Earlier on Wednesday 7NEWS wrongly showed images of a man that were incorrectly labelled as the person under arrest over the disappearance of Cleo Smith,” it read. “These were removed promptly but 7NEWS apologises for the error.” Lawyers for Flowers said in a statement that publication of his name and photo in connection to Smith’s high-profile disappearance made him “the subject of hate around the nation and the world and resulted in him being hospitalised with a severe panic attack”. “He had nothing to do with it and was never a suspect in the case,” his lawyers said. “Mr Flowers recently became a father and like everyone else throughout Australia, and particularly being a parent himself, he was hoping for Cleo’s safe return. Being identified as responsible for her abduction and disappearance was extremely distressing to him and his family.” Flowers is being represented by the high-profile Sydney defamation specialist Sue Chrysanthou, SC, who has previously represented the former federal attorney general Christian Porter in his case against the ABC and actor Geoffrey Rush against the Daily Telegraph. Filing the case in the WA supreme court means lawyers for Flowers did not need to wait the 28 days agreed to by other states as part of nation-wide reforms to defamation laws. The nationally agreed changes to the laws, which have been passed in other states but not WA, means lawyers must send a concerns notice and wait 28 days from the date it is received before filing a case. Seven was contacted for comment.Queensland health authorities have automatically cancelled some long-running applications for compassionate and medical exemptions to enter the state, including cases where people had waited more than five weeks with no formal response. Last week, Queensland’s health directions exemption service wrote to a number of people who had been seeking to cross the state border, advising that their cases had taken so long to assess they would now be “closed”. The email, seen by Guardian Australia, advises people they have seven days to advise whether the exemption is still required. Health authorities have been overwhelmed with border exemption applications – including 5,000 processed in the past month. Relatively few have been granted entry, and only in very limited circumstances. The closed border regime is popular in Queensland. But as the state takes its first steps towards reopening, the strict application of rules continues to create instances where hardline bureaucracy trumps compassion. This week, Queensland hit the milestone of 70% of the population having received two doses of a Covid-19 vaccine. In the process, the state will now allow people from Covid-affected areas to enter. People must arrive by air, provide evidence of a negative test, and quarantine at a residence for 14 days. But authorities admit that, with so many strings attached, the arrangement is not likely to be taken up by many of the thousands attempting to enter the state. “I think a lot of people are going to wait,” the premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, told reporters on Monday. Palaszczuk said Queensland was on track to reach its 80% double-dose vaccination target – and the full opening of the state borders to vaccinated travellers – a week ahead of the 17 December target. With the border changes imminent, the exemptions unit wrote to applicants apologising for long delays. People were initially advised they would hear back in three business days. Guardian Australia is aware of applicants who have been waiting longer than five weeks with no response. “We apologise for the delay in contacting you,” the email says. “As it has been some time since you lodged your request, can you please advise if you still require this exemption. “If we do not hear from you within the next seven days, we will assume your request is no longer required and will close this request on your behalf.” In a statement, Queensland Health said its exemptions team was contacting applicants to advise them that they may now be eligible for home quarantine. “This does not mean they are automatically cancelling applications,” the statement said. “In fact, they are managing every exemption request on a case-by-case basis and either calling or emailing the applicant to inform them they may be able to bypass the exemptions process and return to Queensland sooner.” The applicants who spoke to Guardian Australia said they had not been called prior to receiving the email. Health said its exemptions team had granted approval for 700 people to visit a dying relative between August and mid-November, 2021. “The Queensland Health exemptions team works incredibly hard, seven days a week, processing hundreds of applications every day, with priority always given to time-critical compassionate and medical exemption requests. “Today alone, they have resolved around 250 applications, many of which were no longer valid because the applicant was eligible for home quarantine. “We are doing everything possible to process exemption requests as quickly as we can.” • This story was amended on 16 November 2021. It previously stated “hundreds” of emails had been sent to people seeking exemptions. Queensland Health disputes “hundreds” were sent but has not provided Guardian Australia with a figure.A Mexican environmental campaigner has been declared missing barely a week after a savage attack on indigenous villagers displaced from the lands she was defending against illegal logging. Irma Galindo Barrios, a member of the indigenous Mixtec (ñuù savi) people who worked to protect forests in southern Oaxaca state, was last heard from on 27 October. She was scheduled to attend a virtual meeting so she could join a state mechanism for protecting journalists and defenders, but did not attend, according to Rosi Bustamante, a US-based activist who had been in close contact with Galindo. Earlier that same day, Galindo attempted to present a petition to President Andrés Manuel López Obrador at the National Palace in Mexico City, but said she was turned away. “There aren’t any government officials who will go and see how we live … They only send in money that is used to buy weapons that are used to kill us. If there are organizations or groups that want to help us, they end up being criminalized, threatened and harassed,” Galindo wrote on her Facebook page just before her disappearance. “Where does this end? What follows?” Galindo’s disappearance reinforces Mexico’s reputation as a country where environmental campaigners are frequently targeted for murder. The Mexican Centre for Environmental Law counted 65 attacks on environmental defenders in 2020 and 18 murders – a sharp increase from the 39 attacks in 2019 – with “structural and generalised violence against those who defend nature, land and territory”, according to the report. Meanwhile, deforestation continues across Mexico, despite a program from the federal government to pay inhabitants of rural areas to plant fruit and timber trees across southern Mexico. Galindo’s disappearance was preceded by a spate of horrific violence in her home municipality of San Esteban Atatlahuca. Over a three-day period from 21 to 23 October, attackers descended on the three communities being clearcut, leaving two people dead, four disappeared and 90 homes torched, according to the Oaxaca human rights lawyer Maurilio Santiago Reyes, who worked closely with Galindo. Oaxaca media outlets reported at least seven deaths, including a pair of 95-year-old residents, and described an assault carried out by 70 individuals wielding high-calibre weapons. Galindo previously served in the municipal government as a councillor responsible for cultural promotion in Esteban Atatlahuca, according to Santiago Reyes. But she later turned her efforts to defending pine forests in the mountains of the Mixteco region of Oaxaca – and developed enemies for her activism. In 2018, loggers moved into three communities in the municipality of San Esteban Atatlahuca – allegedly with protection from the local government. A group of neighbours burned down her house that year, forcing her to flee into the forest. She petitioned local, state and federal officials to intervene as the logging stripped the local forest. The deforestation was eliminating a source of income through sustainable woodcutting and removing a food source, as residents foraged the hills famed for mushrooms, which supplemented their diets. But no action was taken, according to Santiago Reyes. State and federal officials also failed to intervene. “The issue in Oaxaca is there is enormous complicity between groups with political power, who sometimes control an area, and people are supposed to benefit from these natural resources,” Santiago Reyes said. “Nobody ever responded to the complaints that were made.”Twenty years since the launch of the original Xbox, its manufacturer Microsoft remains the new kid on the block: no new competitor has entered the home games console field since. Before 2001, Sega and Nintendo were the main competitors to Sony’s ascendant PlayStation. Microsoft shoved both aside to eventually become Sony’s direct rival, and the battle for the space beneath your TV continues to this day. What separated the Xbox from other consoles of the time was not the power of its hardware or the appeal of its infamously chunky, almost brutalist design. It was the relationship between it, and the developers who made its games. The Xbox was easier to make games for than Sony’s or Nintendo’s consoles, and Microsoft went to previously unheard-of lengths to ensure that the Xbox’s launch titles were as strong as they could be. “People used to say that Microsoft was stealing the exclusives. There’s a certain truth to that,” says Lorne Lanning. In the summer of 2000, Lanning was overseeing development of Oddworld: Munch’s Oddysee – the third game in the lauded Oddworld series – for PC and PlayStation 2. But the studio was slowly sliding towards crisis. Threatened with budget cuts by publisher GT Interactive, the studio’s engineers were also finding the PlayStation 2 extremely difficult to program on. “The PS2 got supercomputing capability into an affordable consumer electronic box. But the expense of that was that no one knew how to use it,” Lanning explains. What’s more, Sony’s response to the developer’s tribulations was dismissive. “The attitude was kind of, ‘You’ll figure it out’.” While Oddworld Inhabitants was struggling with Sony, Bizarre Creations had its own problems with Sega. Since 1997, the Liverpool-based racing-game studio had been working on Metropolis Street Racer for the Dreamcast. But by the autumn of 2000, it was increasingly clear that Sega was on the wane as a hardware manufacturer – despite the company’s protestations to the contrary. “At this point Sega were refusing to admit to us they were going multi-platform,” says Martyn Chudley, founder of Bizarre Creations, and the company’s managing director until its closure in 2011. “As we had invested a huge amount into MSR (it was a year late due to a full scrap and redesign very late on), we weren’t likely to see a return on that investment, let alone a profit, on Dreamcast alone.” When Microsoft announced it was entering the console market, Chudley got in touch with the company about creating an “enhanced conversion” of MSR for the Xbox – which would go on to become Project Gotham Racing. For both developers, Microsoft offered greater financial security and a more collaborative development environment. When Lanning’s team encountered problems with the mathematics required for the jump between 2D and 3D game development, the Xbox team sent several engineers to the studio to help them resolve the issue – something that game publishers, let alone console manufacturers, hardly ever did. “They left their families and came down for months,” Lanning says. “They helped us to deliver.” This approach wasn’t exclusive to Munch’s Oddysee either. “There were always some Microsoft staff practically living in our office to get everything finished to the right quality bar,” Chudley says. “We were always made to feel special by the Microsoft team members, and felt (internally) that we were only second to Halo, which was clearly their flagship title.” Interestingly, Halo’s creators didn’t necessarily know that they were making the Xbox’s flagship game. Developer Bungie had been acquired by Microsoft in June 2000. But according to Bungie’s co-founder Alex Seropian, there was no sense at this point that the Xbox’s success rested on Halo’s shoulders. “We felt like ‘Hey, we’re an important game’. But we didn’t feel like we were the important game,” Seropian says. “We definitely did not have the expectation that we would be the No 1 game or that it would sell as well as it did and become as popular as it did.” The reason for this was that Halo was still in extremely rough shape, and would remain so until only a couple of months before launch. Seropian notes that at E3 2001, five months before release, Bungie “didn’t even have one map finished”. Indeed, much of the Xbox’s launch roster came together extremely late. Both Munch’s Oddysee and Project Gotham Racing only became Xbox titles about a year before the console’s launch. This is partly why Microsoft adopted such a hands-on approach with its third-party studio: the company needed to ensure that the games would be ready for the big day in November, or face an embarrassing flop. While the Xbox’s team’s assistance was essential in getting the launch roster into shape, it’s important to note that the Xbox itself was equally crucial in facilitating these tight development turnarounds. “The Xbox was really easy to program. After making our first PS2 game, it was like a breath of fresh air,” says Richard Garcia, whose company Monster Games produced NASCAR Heat 2002 for both PS2 and Xbox. “We felt that the Xbox was the first console with modern architecture and enjoyed programming it.” Bizarre’s Martyn Chudley agrees. “The Xbox hardware was exceptionally easy to code for – you could get great performance straight out of the box, unlike the PlayStation consoles which were powerful but notoriously complex.” All the developers I spoke to said that both Microsoft and the Xbox were easier to work with than the other manufacturers. But there were still points of friction with the development studios. With Halo, Bungie encountered issues with Microsoft’s publishing team, who were responsible for adding the “Combat Evolved” tagline to Halo’s title. “Nobody on the team really liked that,” Seropian says. “It’s like, why?! Halo, the symbol, the word, all the different meanings, why do you want to change that?” Lanning, meanwhile, sometimes questioned whether Microsoft fully understood the appeal of its own console. Like the PS2, the Xbox supported DVD video, but when Lanning saw Munch’s CG-rendered cutscenes running on the console’s development kit for the first time, they were so badly compressed as to be virtually unwatchable. This led to an intense meeting with Microsoft. “I started saying, ‘What DVD means to the public is higher video quality,’” he explains. “And someone said, ‘Well, do you have any marketing research data to support that?’ And I was like, ‘Oh, for Christ’s sake!’ I just totally lost it.” Moments like this made Lanning doubt Microsoft’s ability to handle a console launch. “When I heard things like that, at times I’d think ‘Maybe it’s not going to succeed.’” Lanning’s fears were not without basis. The original Xbox was a money pit for Microsoft: it lost somewhere over $5bn on it, according to Robbie Bach, who was in charge of the Xbox business at Microsoft at the time. But it laid the foundations for the Xbox 360, which made billions in profit, and helped to bring online gaming and first-person shooters from PC to consoles. Microsoft and the Xbox have been a driving force in console gaming for the last two decades. For the first Xbox developers, however, levels of success varied significantly. With Halo, Seropian and the team didn’t know what they had until about six months after launch. “We started doing well. But it wasn’t until many months down the line, when I think we probably surpassed a million units or something like that, and you could see the trend was going up,” he says. Other games flopped where Halo soared. One such was Arctic Thunder, a snowmobile racing game developed by Inland Productions and published by Midway Games. A coin-operated arcade game that was ported to the Xbox, Arctic Thunder was “compromised in almost every way from the beginning,” according to its producer Ken Allen. “The designer for the coin-op version was not accustomed to the kinds of constraints that come with developing for home consoles (tight budgets, timely feedback, immovable deadlines, change control, etc) so his involvement created a lot of friction and increased development costs,” Allen explains. Inland tried to absorb these costs in the hope of recouping them on launch, but the publisher lost faith in the project and shifted the game’s marketing budget to other titles. “Marketing had distanced itself from the product, and began circulating the joke that management ‘ordered a shit sandwich so don’t be surprised you got a shit sandwich,’” Allen says. “In the end, Arctic Thunder is but a footnote, a sad fate for those of us who poured our hearts and souls into the project.” While Arctic Thunder’s failure stemmed from internal issues, there were other games whose sales were at least partly inhibited by Microsoft itself. Europe was the most lucrative market for Oddworld, but Microsoft’s approach to pricing the Xbox in Europe meant that it was much more expensive in some countries than others. According to Lanning, this seriously damaged Munch’s Oddysee’s sales. “Going into [launch] Europe was our biggest success, that was our best performing territory. And it was nothing. We got almost nothing out of Europe.” After Munch’s Oddysee, the studio never worked exclusively with Microsoft again. Its next game, Stranger’s Wrath, would be multiplatform, as would all its following releases. Lanning cites Microsoft’s internal restructuring and the departures of major figures in the Xbox’s development, such as project visionary Seamus Blackley, as reasons behind the shift away from an exclusive partnership. “The culture was changing. And that was changing terms and agreements and things,” he says. But he still views the Xbox launch as his most exciting time in game development. “In terms of passion, the idea of going out there and trying to conquer the world, the Xbox release really stands out for me in history.”Facebook and Instagram are gathering data from under-18s by using software that tracks users’ web browsing activity, according to research. The platforms’ parent company had announced in July that it would allow advertisers to target young users based on three categories only – age, gender and location – rather than a range of options including their personal interests. However, research by a trio of campaign groups states that Facebook and Instagram have retained the use of software, known as conversion APIs, that gathers details of teens’ web browsing activities. Facebook and Instagram’s owner, Meta, denied the data was being used by the the company’s algorithm-driven ad delivery system to serve adverts on users who are under 18. The data gathering was flagged in research by environmental group Global Action Plan, Reset Australia, which seeks reform of large tech companies, and Fairplay, which campaigns against marketing to children. In an open letter to Mark Zuckerberg, the chief executive of Meta, 44 advocacy groups urged the Facebook founder to scrap the data gathering, saying that it was being used to enable “surveillance advertising” for young users. It added: “Replacing ‘targeting selected by advertisers’ with ‘optimisation selected by a machine learning delivery system’ does not represent a demonstrable improvement for children, despite Facebook’s claims in July. Facebook is still using the vast amount of data it collects about young people in order to determine which children are most likely to be vulnerable to a given ad.” The letter’s signatories include 5Rights, which campaigns for tighter online controls for children in the UK, and the US-based Center for Digital Democracy. The Facebook study set up three fake accounts, for a 13-year-old and two 16-year-olds, and researchers were able to view the data harvested by the company’s software across Facebook, Instagram and Messenger, as the “users” visited sites such as local newspapers and clothing retailers. The researchers found: “Facebook can collect data from other browser tabs and pages that children open, and harvest information like which buttons they click on, which terms they search or products they purchase or put in their basket (‘conversions’). There is no reason to store this sort of conversion data, except to fuel the ad delivery system.” Joe Osborne, a Meta spokesperson, said: “It’s wrong to say that because we show data in our transparency tools it’s automatically used for ads. We don’t use data from our advertisers’ and partners’ websites and apps to personalize ads to people under 18. “The reason this information shows up in our transparency tools is because teens visit sites or apps that use our business tools. We want to provide transparency into the data we receive, even if it’s not used for ads personalisation.”Bill Nighy might be one of the UK’s best-loved actors, known for roles from Love Actually’s Billy Mack to Davy Jones in the Pirates of the Caribbean. But he will be relegated to the marginalia in his next endeavour after signing up to read the footnotes in a new adaptation of Terry Pratchett’s Discworld series. Nighy will be part of a star-studded re-recording of all 40 Discworld audiobooks from Penguin Random House, which will see narrators read nearly four million words in total, over almost 150 days in the studio, to result in more than 400 hours of finished audio. Indira Varma, of Game of Thrones fame, will be narrating Pratchett’s books about his trio of witches, Fleabag’s Sian Clifford will narrate the titles in which Death plays a major role, and Andy Serkis will narrate Small Gods, with more casting to be announced. Nighy, meanwhile, will appear in all titles where there are footnotes; Pratchett was a sucker for a good annotation. “Ankh-Morpork had dallied with many forms of government and had ended up with that form of democracy known as One Man, One Vote. The Patrician was the Man; he had the Vote,” footnoting a line from Mort about the “accession of the Patrician”, is a classic of its kind, as is “Nanny Ogg knew how to start spelling ‘banana’, but didn’t know how you stopped”, footnoting “I have drawern a picture of a banananana dakry” in Witches Abroad. Nighy said he was honoured to “bring to life one of the funniest, quirkiest and best-loved aspects of Terry Pratchett’s world … They are his personal commentary on the action, little snippets of information or funny asides,” he said. “They feel very much like the voice of the great man himself commenting on the action. I’ve enjoyed it enormously.” Peter Serafinowicz will be voicing the part of Death. The hollow-voiced personification of death appears throughout the comic fantasy series, with his voice represented by Pratchett in capital letters, without quotation marks. “WELL, said Death in a voice with all the warmth and colour of an iceberg … WHY HAVE YOU SUMMONED ME?” writes Pratchett in 1983’s The Colour of Magic, which first introduced readers to his disc-shaped world, carried through space on the backs of four elephants standing on the star turtle Great A’Tuin. “Coming back to Terry Pratchett’s world after many years has been a pleasure,” said Serafinowicz. “I loved his subversive, absurdist humour when I was a teenager and reading the part of Death, who appears in nearly all the Discworld books, has given me a renewed appreciation of his comic genius.” Richard Lennon, PRH audio producer, said that although all the Discworld novels had been adapted as audiobooks before, “a lot of them came out when the books were originally published, and we decided it was time for something that felt a bit more contemporary”. The audiobooks are being produced and directed by Neil Gardner of Ladbroke Audio, who said he had bought Pratchett’s books “every year without fail” since 1987, describing it as “an immense pressure to do Terry and the fans justice”. Theme tunes for the novels have been composed by the Bafta-winning composer James Hannigan. The plans were unveiled in the week of the 50th anniversary of the publication of Pratchett’s debut novel, The Carpet People. “We couldn’t be more delighted to have such a fitting tribute to Terry ,” said Rob Wilkins, who manages the Terry Pratchett estate. “When the first finished audio files arrived at the Chapel – Terry’s writing room and centre of the Pratchett universe – I listened at full volume until the stone walls rattled and am beyond overjoyed with the results … Every single voice does justice to the wit, warmth and unique genius of Terry’s storytelling.” The new recordings will be published over the next two years, with Clifford’s reading of Hogfather out in December, followed by the Witches titles – including Equal Rites, Wyrd Sisters and the Tiffany Aching series – out in April 2022. Narrator Varma said she loved how the characters of the three witches, Granny Weatherwax, Nanny Ogg and Magrat Garlick, have an “unconventional style of magic [which] gently pokes fun at tradition … Terry Pratchett has a genius for using humour to make us think, which really appeals to me,” she said. Pratchett died in 2015, aged 66. His death was announced on his Twitter feed in the voice of Death: “AT LAST, SIR TERRY, WE MUST WALK TOGETHER.” Pratchett revealed his diagnosis with early onset Alzheimer’s disease in 2007, describing it “an embuggerance”. He sold more than 75m copies of his novels around the world, in a series that began as an affectionate lampooning of the fantasy genre but, as he told the Guardian in 2011, “as things progressed, both with adult and junior books, I found that in subtle kinds of ways, without being preachy at all, you could suggest rather interesting things”.The coronavirus pandemic may have “exacerbated” the number of people self-radicalising online, the UK security minister, Damian Hinds, said in the wake of the Liverpool bombing. Hinds said the security services had disrupted more than 30 late-stage plots in the last few years. Counter-terrorism police said they “strongly believed” the man killed in the bombing to be Emad al-Swealmeen, 32, who had travelled in a taxi to Liverpool Women’s hospital from an address he had recently rented a few miles away. The Guardian understands al-Swealmeen had previously changed his name to Enzo Almeni and is reported to have converted to Christianity from Islam in the last few years. Police said they could not be sure if the hospital was the suspected suicide bomber’s intended target, or if the device he had constructed had ignited prematurely. The hospital is close to Liverpool cathedral, where a Remembrance Sunday event was taking place. Hinds said there was a shift towards attacks becoming more self-directed. “We use the term ‘lone wolf’ a lot, sometimes it’s a bit … it can be a little misleading because it gives a certain picture of an individual,” he told Sky News on Tuesday. “But it certainly is true that we’ve seen a move over time, a shift from these what we call directed attacks, part of a bigger organisation where people are following instructions, sometimes quite complex in their organisation, and move from that to more self-directed, some self-radicalised individuals or small groups, rarely totally, totally alone.” Asked if it was right to lower the terror threat in February, Hinds said the decisions were taken independently. “But whether we talk about ‘substantial’ or ‘severe’, the threat level has been high for a long time now. As long as that is the case, there is of course the risk that a terrible event and atrocities such as this can happen,” he said. “It’s necessary to be alert throughout. I think it’s right that the level has now been raised and these things are kept under constant review.” The shadow home secretary, Nick Thomas-Symonds, said the government needed to launch a judge-led inquiry into “lone wolf” individuals to understand how better to prevent attacks. “I previously called, after the terrible stabbings that occurred in Forbury Gardens in Reading [Khairi Saadallah was found guilty of three murders and given a whole life sentence] that we needed specifically to be looking at the issue of lone actors,” he said. “We don’t know the specific conclusions in the case in Liverpool yet as to whether someone was acting alone or in concert, and I’m not for a moment drawing that conclusion too prematurely. “But I do think we need to be looking at the attacks that have taken place. Do we need something like a judge-led inquiry to look at the issue of lone attackers? And we need now, as I say, to get this investigation concluded as swiftly as possible, and then to look at the wider conclusions that perhaps we need to draw.” The man killed in Liverpool was not previously known to MI5, which keeps a list of 3,000 current suspects and just over 20,000 previous suspects, or to specialist counter-terrorism police officers. The dead man, who police believe built the improvised explosive device, is thought not to be British-born and to have had Syrian and Iraqi heritage. His status in the UK is under investigation, as is his time spent at a privately run asylum seeker hostel in Liverpool. The threat level had been at the lower level since 8 February after a “significant reduction” in the momentum of attacks in Europe, including those seen in Austria and France between September and November 2020. Announcing on Monday that the attack level would be raised, the home secretary, Priti Patel, said this was because there had been two attacks – Liverpool and the murder of MP David Amess – in the space of a month.Rob Beckett and Josh Widdicombe’s Parenting Hell You would think that the audience for this blokey, dad-based podcast would be primarily new dads. And yet, Beckett and Widdicombe’s mix of piss-taking and genuine introspection has drawn listeners from across the spectrum. You suspect that their dynamic might have something to do with this; quite often Widdicombe’s earnest efforts at parental self-improvement are met with raucous mockery from Beckett. If you worked on a desk next to them, there’s a chance that the non-stop banter would drive you up the wall, but in weekly, hour-long chunks it is an absolute delight. Scummy Mummies Sometimes all you need from a parenting podcast is to feel like you’re not entrenched in all the grot of it alone. And, if nothing else, Scummy Mummies are just excellent company. Hosted by comedians Ellie Gibson and Helen Thorn, usually accompanied by a guest, this podcast is best described as a played-for-laughs confessional, dealing with the sort of subject matter that you’d only share with friends you really trust. Whatever Gibson and Thorn happen to be going through – a traumatic birth, a divorce – they pull you in close and make you feel like part of their gang. Sometimes that’s all you need. Sleepy Time Podcasts are generally an incredibly inefficient way of communicating information, especially when you’re time-poor and surrounded by noise, which is why a lot of parenting podcasts are about as much use as a spaghetti stair gate. However, Sleepy Time bucks the trend by drawing your kids into the action. A collaboration between In the Moment magazine and MadeForMums.com, Sleepy Time’s eight short episodes are a godsend for parents with kids who refuse to settle. A calm, soothing voice will effectively talk your children down, depending on their age and level of activity, and if you play them with any regularity they should get them dozing in a matter of seconds. How Not to Screw Up Your Kids Again, podcasts that teach you to be a better parent are often quite unbearable; not only coming from a place of unhelpful sanctimony, but also too waffly and long-winded to have any actual benefit. That Dr Maryhan Baker’s How Not to Screw Up Your Kids avoids these pitfalls is nothing short of a magic trick. There is no irritating idealism here, just a sober yet tender exploration of issues most parents will face at one point or another. Navigating screen time, managing emotions, raising siblings, learning how to effectively co-parent: it is all covered. Obviously you’re still going to screw your kids up a bit, but this might provide some damage limitation. Read-Aloud Revival Sarah Mackenzie’s Read-Aloud Revival is a single-issue podcast with a completely joyous message: to reaffirm the importance of reading aloud to your kids, regardless of their ages. Mackenzie explains what happens to their brains when your children are read to, suggests books, and can help your children develop their own tastes. It is always encouraging, never preachy, and charming from start to finish.Yellow school buses are part of the American streetscape, familiar to families across the US and an easily recognizable symbol the world over. But the drivers of the vehicles that shuttle America’s children to and from school are now caught up in the wave of labor unrestsweeping across the US in the wake of the Covid-19 pandemic. Strikes, walkouts, protests or sick-outs among school bus drivers have taken place this fall in many states including North Carolina, New Mexico, Maryland, Florida, Indiana, Georgia Pennsylvania and New York among others. Some school districts have periodically closed schools due to bus driver shortages or changed school schedules to accommodate the shortage. Other districts have raised pay and offered sign-on bonuses to try to lure workers into vacant school bus driver positions. Nichole Marshall, a school bus driver in Bullitt county, Kentucky, is one of several drivers to have participated in protests and sick-outs over the past few weeks for pay raises amid driver shortages in the county. They are also advocating for drivers to be provided with any paid sick time they used to quarantine due to exposure or testing positive for Covid-19. Marshall explained that school bus drivers are driving buses packed with up to 70 students at once, often having to work multiple routes during a shift as routes were cancelled and consolidated due to the shortages. “A lot of us have been doing double runs and they’re making it permanent,” said Marshall. Her school district has offered bus drivers a $50-a-week stipend incentive, which Marshall argued does not make up for the low salaries drivers make, around $19,000 a year, in addition to the stipulations of attendance or having to work extra routes in order to receive the stipend. Drivers are also expected to pay for their own commercial driver’s license, background check and maintain a clean driving record. “We’ve been begging for better pay. All the counties around us are getting better pay at this point,” added Marshall. When Covid-19 shutdowns hit the US in March 2020, school bus drivers either quit, were furloughed, laid off, retired or got sick as schools transitioned to online learning. Though a shortage of school bus drivers was an issue before the pandemic, the problem has worsened in the beginning of the 2021-2022 school year and several school districts around the US are having trouble finding enough drivers. According to a survey published in August 2021 by the National Association for Pupil Transportation, 51% of school district respondents reported their driver shortages as “severe” or “desperate”. Every region in the US has altered student transportation services as a result of Covid-19. Seventy-eight per cent of respondents said their driver shortages were worsening. In Wake county, North Carolina, school bus drivers have been calling out sick en masse over the past few weeks, demanding higher wages amid driver shortages throughout the district. “What’s behind the sick-outs is our frustration with various administrations for their sluggishness in getting fair wages to the working class,” said Zac Campbell, a school bus driver in the district since 2019. He started at $13.25 an hour, which was raised to $15 an hour, but Campbell lived 30 minutes away from work and spent time between morning and afternoon shifts sitting in his car, with no working heater. He noted that the low wages are part of the state’s failure to fully fund public education in budget negotiations. “I felt utterly hopeless,” added Campbell. “After working through the lockdowns, delivering technology and lunches and doing basic maintenance in the summer heat, I’m still getting paid just $15 an hour. Considering inflation and the price of gas, it’s not a livable wage.” Tae Weldon, another school bus driver in the same county, argued drivers are not properly compensated for the license, training and background checks they have to regularly keep up-to-date out of their own pocket. “The license we possess is worth way more than what they are paying us,” said Weldon. “The school system never asks the drivers’ opinions on how they feel about things going on around the workplace.” “The problem is not a bus driver shortage, the problem is a bus driver salary shortage. If the salaries reflected the duties of a bus driver, there would be no shortages,” said Chonta Henderson, a school bus driver in Seminole county, Florida, where drivers have threatened to call a sick-out for better wages. “We can’t continue to work as a bus driver and still have to work other jobs to make ends meet. We need to be paid what we are worth.” Chardo Richardson, the executive director of the Seminole County School Bus Drivers’ Association, emphasized the shortage of bus drivers facing the county is a result of the low wages drivers receive for the work they do. School bus drivers work split shifts, in the morning and afternoon, around the school schedule which can start as early as 4.30am. They are responsible for supervising dozens of children while driving, exposing themselves to Covid-19. Many bus drivers are frustrated due to shortages, Covid-19 challenges and low pay. “I think the best way to resolve the bus driver shortage and to really improve the community and transportation that we offer to our children is to definitely raise the wages of our drivers across the nation, across the state and, especially here in Seminole county. Raising the wages will keep those folks that we need here,” said Richardson.This tribute to the Irish singer-songwriter Fergus O’Farrell is loving and competently made, but to be honest it’s a wee bit of a snooze, thickly dusted as it is with platitudes and piety. O’Farrell, who died in 2016 from muscular dystrophy (with which he was diagnosed as a child), had been the lead singer in a cult band called Interference, who never quite made it big back in the late 1980s/early 90s. You could posit all sorts of reasons for his lack of success, such as the fact that record companies were hesitant to sign an act whose front man was in a wheelchair, or that there was just too much competition in the rammed Dublin music scene at a time, when everyone thought they could be the next U2. Or perhaps – whisper it – it’s because the music isn’t all that great. O’Farrell certainly had a belter of a voice, and it’s touching to see him performing in his heyday when he was a strikingly handsome fellow with a hideous mullet. But there were scads of bands around at the time who could play and sing just as well, and O’Farrell’s songwriting was, to be generous, rather hit and miss. O’Farrell was also apparently a perfectionist who could never quite finish things, a point illustrated in the footage here of him finessing the same songs over and over again with friends and bandmates in his home studio for a second album he’s never satisfied with. Nevertheless, he had one huge hit with Gold, a tune he wrote in the 1990s but which he sings beautifully in an affecting scene in the 2007 film Once. That romantic drama starred O’Farrell’s old friend Glen Hansard as a struggling Dublin musician who meets a Czech flower seller (Markéta Irglová); the film went on to be a worldwide dark-horse hit, spawning a stage musical and many live performances, not least for O’Farrell, who made it to Radio City Music Hall in Manhattan to perform for a career-high moment. • Breaking Out is released on 19 November in cinemas.Born a month after the landmark 1973 supreme court decision establishing a constitutional right to abortion, Mini Timmaraju has never lived in an America without the rights enshrined by the landmark Roe v Wade supreme court ruling. Now she is helping lead the reproductive rights movement into an uncertain, “frightening” future where the federal right to an abortion may no longer exist. Just days into her new role as president of Naral Pro-Choice America, a conservative supreme court will hear arguments in a case that many advocates fear will be the death knell for Roe v Wade. “It’s frightening times for advocates of reproductive freedom – for all Americans,” she said in an interview. And yet, Timmaraju sees reason for optimism. “It can be the bleakest of times and it can be terribly scary,” she said. “It can also be an incredible opportunity.” Earlier this month, the supreme court took up two separate challenges to a Texas law effectively banning abortions in the second most populous state in the nation. But the more direct threat to Roe comes on 1 December, when the court will consider the constitutionality of a Mississippi law that bans abortions after 15 weeks of pregnancy – about two months earlier than Roe and subsequent decisions allow. These are the first abortion cases to be considered by the expanded, 6-3 conservative majority, which includes three appointees of Donald Trump, who had promised to nominate only “pro-life” justices. If Roe were to be overturned, there are 26 states that are “certain or likely” to ban the procedure, according to the Guttmacher Institute. The list includes nine states with abortion bans still on the books from before Roe, and 12 states with so-called “trigger” laws, which would be enacted if Roe is overturned. “With Scotus in mind and with the midterms at play,” Timmaraju said, “we have a real opportunity to wake up a big majority of the electorate that we know supports reproductive freedom and double down and ramp up that work to meet the moment we’re facing right now, this moment of crisis.” Timmaraju, the daughter of immigrants from India, is the first woman of color to lead the organization, which is one of the nation’s oldest and most powerful abortion advocacy groups. Most recently, she worked as a senior adviser for the Biden administration on diversity, equity, inclusion and accessibility. In 2016, she led efforts to mobilize female voters as a director for Hillary Clinton’s presidential campaign. She also led diversity efforts at Comcast Corporation, held leadership roles with Planned Parenthood and served as the national director of the National Council of Asian Pacific Americans. “I feel like I’ve been at the intersection of race and gender my whole career,” she said. Timmaraju said it was time to “raise the alarm” on the “very organized, concerted effort by the extremist right to whittle away at reproductive rights since the minute Roe became law of the land”. Exposing these tactics, she believes, will help energize voters, especially those who support abortion rights but may not have realized the extent to which abortion access is under threat, particularly at the state and local level. At the federal level, she called for the immediate passage of the Women’s Health Protection Act, which would effectively codify Roe and counter state-level restrictions on abortion. The House passed the bill in September, but it faces daunting odds in the Senate, where a Republican filibuster awaits. Naral has been outspoken in calling on Democrats to eliminate the filibuster, which requires 60 votes to pass most legislation. Yet it’s unclear the legislation would pass with just a simple majority, as two Democratic senators, Joe Manchin and Bob Casey, have not yet signed on to a Senate version of the bill. Nor have the two pro-choice Republican senators, Lisa Murkowski and Susan Collins. Nevertheless, Chuck Schumer, the Senate majority leader, has promised to bring the measure to the floor for a vote – a sign, Democrats believe, that abortion could be a potent issue in next year’s election. In her new role, Timmaraju hopes to build on the solidarity between progressive organizations, leveraging their collective power to resist the tide of abortion restrictions and voting rights restrictions, while fighting for LGBTQ rights and climate justice. “We know there’s a throughline of white supremacy throughout,” she said. “These are not new playbooks.” Furthermore, she said that overturning Roe would have a disproportionate impact on people of color, low-income people and people who live in rural areas, all of whom already experience higher barriers to accessing reproductive and maternal health services. Despite the myriad political and legal setbacks, she said the reproductive rights movement has made critical gains. Abortion is no longer a “taboo” topic, Timmaraju said, crediting the decades of work by activists and a new generation of female lawmakers who have publicly shared the story of their decision to have an abortion. “We need to not be afraid of talking about it. When we become afraid or we get, you know, uncomfortable with it,” she said, “that’s when we give all this opportunity for our opponents to push and spread misinformation.” Timmaraju said pro-choice advocates must be prepared to forcefully counter attempts by anti-abortion activists to portray the fall of Roe as “reasonable”, by pointing to medical advances or the availability of birth control, for example. “They’re going to downplay it,” she said. “And we’ve got to be very ready to say, absolutely not.” While the nation awaits a ruling from the supreme court next year, Timmaraju’s message to the movement is to keep the faith. “We may have some short-term losses – and we’re gonna fight like hell to avoid them,” she said. “But we also have some really significant long-term gains, the seeds [of which] are being planted now.”Second jobs can be incredibly lucrative – just ask any of the MPs who gained at least £6m collectively from their side gigs since the start of the pandemic. But it’s not only MPs benefiting from second jobs: ordinary white-collar workers have been getting in on the act. And these workers aren’t just taking on positions that might require a couple of days’ work a month. Instead, they are juggling several traditional full-time jobs, and keeping each one a secret from their other employers – leading, in effect, multiple lives. Among them is Jamie, a 25-year-old based in the UK. Over lockdown, Jamie found himself spending a significant amount of each working day playing video games. His role as a software engineer is undemanding and barely monitored by his company. It allowed him to live comfortably, but he was on what he considered a modest salary. Eventually, a thought occurred to him: what if he could put that spare time into earning more money? After noticing a rise in remote job vacancies amid lockdown, he decided to apply for a full-time role in software development without giving up his software engineering. A few months into working at both jobs, Jamie has managed to keep his double life a secret from both his bosses and is now making twice his original salary. “It was way easier than I thought it would be,” he says. “Both companies have very low expectations, so I’m not really struggling to get away with two jobs.” The boom in remote working brought on by the pandemic, in which the proportion of people working from home almost doubled between 2019 and 2020, has led to a rise in online communities of workers such as Jamie who moonlight in more than one, and in some cases as many as four, full-time occupations. Jamie is part of a growing online community of “overemployed” workers which functions much like a support group for those who have taken, or plan to take, the leap into overemployment. The community was founded by 37-year-old Isaac, a tech worker in the US, in April, when he launched overemployed.com: a site with articles extolling the benefits of having more than one full-time job and offering advice on everything from filing US tax returns to keeping managers’ expectations low. There’s also a subreddit forum, r/overemployed, and Discord (an instant-messaging platform where users can voice chat with members of different communities, called “servers”) group boasting 6,500 members, where users share experiences anonymously. Isaac started looking for other jobs after hearing about lay-offs in his company. After successfully landing a new job while holding down his primary occupation, he realised he could do both – and raise his salary from $160,000 (£120,000) to a combined $340,000, he claims. “Doing two remote jobs at once was already happening; it was the biggest open secret out there in tech,” says Isaac, who has been overemployed for more than a year now. “The pandemic just accelerated the trend, and made the environment more friendly to not just tech.” Taking on side hustles is a common feature of modern employment, particularly for gig workers who scrape together a living via apps such as TaskRabbit and Uber. But working at separate full-time jobs remotely is controversial, and carries specific risks. From a tax standpoint, overemployment is technically legal in the UK and the US. In the UK, having a second job could change a worker’s tax code, but this wouldn’t explicitly be flagged to the first employer’s payroll department as a second job and would probably go unnoticed in larger companies. In the US, it’s simpler, as the country’s tax system is based on the principle of self-assessment and voluntary reporting. However, overemployment could violate contracts or “non-compete” agreements. Getting caught could cost someone all their full-time jobs and potentially make securing another job in the future more difficult. Overemployment can thus be fraught: “I had a panic attack on my first day of working two jobs,” says Callum, a UK finance worker in his mid-20s. “Then I just had to toughen up and get on with it. Such arrangements are clearly very different from the second “jobs” that some MPs engage in, but overemployment can nonetheless raise ethical concerns for workers, given that an additional job could support someone else. It’s partly why Sam, a 23-year-old US worker, ended up giving his third job to his sister, who was struggling to find work. “I just gave her my corporate login and told her what to do,” he explains. “I attend the meetings to show my face, and she would do the bulk of the work.” Others say they feel guilty about deceiving their bosses. Yet there is a widespread feeling among overemployed workers that provided they meet employers’ expectations, they have no reason for misgivings. “I want my family to live comfortably, and I’m not exactly gambling or boozing. If both companies are happy with my performance, why should I feel guilty?” wrote one overemployed worker on Discord. Others are quick to cite the misplaced loyalty workers may have towards their employers. As another worker wrote on Discord: “They do not feel bad about replacing you in a second.” While some remote jobs lend themselves to overemployment more than others, it’s almost inevitable that there will be clashes. Simultaneous meetings are a problem overemployed workers often encounter, as are training and inductions, which can be particularly demanding on a worker’s schedule. “You have to either be muted on both and without a camera or act like you can’t attend one of them because you are super busy,” explains Jamie of how he gets around meetings. “I haven’t run into any problems, it’s quite chill.” For one worker, trying to juggle two meetings on mute backfired when both started asking him questions and he unmuted the wrong microphone to speak. “I didn’t blow it, but I freaked,” he said in a Discord post. Most agree that the key to avoiding such panics is making sure that at least one of the jobs is undemanding. If not, overemployment becomes virtually impossible. Isaac maintains that the chances of getting caught remain low, especially when workers take recommended precautions, which range from using separate computers across jobs to creating fake profiles. But there is the occasional horror story. Damien, in the US, ended up losing both his full-time jobs because his “J1” boss was good friends with his “J2” and his name came up in a conversation between them. “It went south fast as my employment agreements had ‘no J2 clauses’,” Damien explained in a post on Discord. Some overemployed workers have taken to using different nicknames at separate jobs to prevent debacles such as Damien’s. It might seem surprising that amid the so-called “great resignation”, in which a deluge of workers change or quit their jobs in pursuit of leisure, that people would actively be seeking out more work. Isaac is keen to stress that “overemployment is not overwork” – and many overemployed workers seem to agree. “It has definitely been less stressful this way and way more refreshing for my mind to be constantly busy,” says Jamie. Callum describes it as a “way for workers to take control of their lives and not need to be subservient”. He adds: “The nine to five is officially dead. Companies can accept this and give us freedom.” Others are seizing on overemployment as a chance to optimise their skillset, or to explore other professions. On his site, Isaac frames overemployment as a means of earning more now in order to achieve financial freedom later down the line. But Phil Jones, author of Work Without the Worker: Labour in the Age of Platform Capitalism, is sceptical about this. “Sacrificing one’s time for a payoff later is a promise that capitalism has made since the 19th century, and has only been realised for a rarefied few,” he says. In the context of a pandemic that has wreaked havoc on people’s livelihoods, that promise rings even more hollow. Jones also questions the idea that overemployment is a way for workers to regain control. “Work tends to offer an illusory sense of control in a world which often seems to be spiralling out of control,” he says. “It demonstrates, in quite a stark fashion, just how much work colonises our imagination [and is] symptomatic of a society-wide addiction to work.” For the overemployed worker: “Time off work doesn’t really seem to be given over to other leisure pursuits. Instead, when people are given more time each day, when they can get away with not working, what do they choose to do? To work more, to earn more.” Jones points to the fact that overemployed workers tend to represent a more financially secure demographic – such as tech employees, whose skills are in higher demand – and are therefore not necessarily people who need to work more, but are choosing to. Of course, this isn’t true of the entire overemployed community: Katya, 47, from Northern California, felt pushed to take on another job when her son died and the hospital bills she was left with plunged her into debt. “I couldn’t even put my next son in college, and it broke my heart,” she says. After being approached by other companies on LinkedIn, she decided to go for interviews for a second job in payroll, and was successful. This started six years ago, long before Katya discovered the overemployed community: “I thought I was the only one doing it and for a while felt really bad,” she recalls. “But I could finally pay my bills and get food without worrying about what else I needed my money for.” Yet it is inescapable that this kind of “overemployment”, based as it is on remote working, is out of the reach of many lower paid workers. An Office for National Statistics survey found that home working was concentrated in affluent parts of London with more than half of managers, directors, senior officials and professional staff working in this way, compared with fewer than 10% of cleaners, factory workers and drivers. Lower-wage jobs, even when they are remote, are more likely to be subject to heavier surveillance, making overemployment impossible. Call centres, for example, have been accused of intrusively monitoring home workers during Covid-19. “The fact that some people can choose to enjoy multiple jobs and make more income than any one person could possibly need, while others are forced to take on multiple jobs to make ends meet – and even then struggle to survive – demonstrates that the labour market is becoming increasingly irrational and lopsided,” observes Jones. “Without a significant change in the culture of work via policy or through a stronger labour movement, the labour market is going to become increasingly polarised between the over and the underemployed.” What, then, does overemployment signal about the future of work? “One way overemployment might be tackled by particularly zealous employers is by paying workers per project as opposed to taking on full-time staff,” says Jones. He suspects that higher-wage, white-collar jobs will increasingly be “parcelled out” in this way, such as the accountancy and translation jobs advertised on platforms such as Upwork. This is supported by a recent report from the Institute for the Future of Work which says that bosses are increasingly looking to jettison full-time staff in favour of gig workers who can complete on-call assignments. In this sense, overemployed workers might be seen as canaries in the coalmine of an increasingly fractured world of work. Indeed, it may well be the case that the nine-to-five as we know it is dying out. But if what emerges in its place solely benefits a subsection of white-collar workers, it risks replicating and entrenching existing inequalities. Some names have been changed • This article was amended on 16 November 2021. An earlier version said there had been a rise in moonlighting workers; this has been changed to make clear that this refers specifically to online communities of these workers.Derby County have been deducted a further nine points after admitting to breaches of the EFL’s profitability and sustainability rules over the £81m sale of Pride Park to their former owner Mel Morris, taking their total deductions this season to 21 points. The club’s administrators confirmed on Tuesday that they have agreed the deduction with the EFL, plus a further suspended three points. The decision brings to an end a long‑running saga of nearly two years, after Derby were initially charged in January 2020. A statement on Derby’s website also confirmed that their appeal against a 12-point deduction for entering administration has been dismissed, leaving them facing relegation to the third tier for the first time since the mid-1980s. “The EFL has confirmed that Derby County Football Club have received a nine-point sporting sanction with a further three points suspended after admitting to breaches of the League’s profitability and sustainability (P&amp;S) rules,” read the statement. “This matter has been determined under the terms of an ‘agreed decision’ reached between the League and the club and was formally ratified by an independent disciplinary commission chair as per the requirements of EFL regulations. “The club, via its administrators, has also agreed, following last week’s adjournment, to the dismissal of its appeal against the 12-point deduction imposed as a consequence of the club entering administration in September 2021, meaning that the sanction continues to apply. The new nine-point penalty has been applied immediately, resulting in the club having been deducted a total of 21 points from this season’s Championship table.” The decision leaves Wayne Rooney’s side bottom of the Championship on minus three points and 18 points adrift of safety. Carl Jackson, a joint administrator for Derby, said: “This has been a difficult matter to navigate bearing in mind the various issues concerned. Whilst point deductions are never ideal for any club, it was critical to the club’s future that all matters were concluded between the EFL and the club in relation to historical issues. This conclusion allows us to proceed with our restructuring strategy for the club with prospective interested parties.”Good morning. During a virtual summit China’s president told Joe Biden that China was prepared to take “decisive measures” if Taiwan made any moves towards independence that crossed Beijing’s red lines. Xi Jinping also warned Biden that any support for Taiwanese independence would be “like playing with fire”, according to a Chinese state media account of the summit, adding that “those who play with fire will get burned”. The language represented stock Chinese nationalist rhetoric, given extra potency by being delivered in person at the most extensive talks to date between the two leaders. In response, Biden said the US remained committed to the “one-China policy” that recognises only one sovereign Chinese state, and that Washington “strongly opposes unilateral efforts to change the status quo or undermine peace and stability across the Taiwan Strait”. Was the rest of the conversation tense? No: in fact, the overall cordial tone of the video conference exchange, with Xi referring to Biden at one point as “my old friend”, gave an immediate boost to financial markets in Asia. What did Biden want to achieve? One of his aims in the summit was to establish regular dialogue between US and Chinese officials on a range of issues. It was unclear how far the two leaders had gone to achieve that, however. Alex Jones liable for damages over Sandy Hook shooting claims, judge rules The conspiracy theorist Alex Jones was found liable on Monday for damages in lawsuits brought by parents of children killed in the Sandy Hook elementary school shooting, over Jones’s claim the massacre was a hoax. Twenty first-grade children, aged five and six, and six adults were killed in the shooting in Newtown, Connecticut, in 2012. The 20-year-old gunman killed his mother before the shooting and killed himself as police arrived at the school. The shooting was portrayed on Jones’s Infowars show as a hoax involving actors, aimed at increasing gun control. Jones has since acknowledged the shooting did occur. Families of victims said they had been subjected to harassment and death threats from Jones’s followers because of the hoax conspiracy broadcast on Infowars. They sued Jones and his companies in courts in Connecticut and Texas, for defamation and infliction of emotional distress. Alex Jones was, in a rare step, defaulted by Judge Barbara Bellis for his and his companies’ failure to disclose information related to the defamation suit. The default means the judge found in favor of the parents and will hold a hearing on how much damages Jones should pay. Ghislaine Maxwell jury selection begins in New York sex trafficking trial The British socialite Ghislaine Maxwell will come face-to-face with prospective jurors for her Manhattan federal court sex trafficking trial on Tuesday, as jury selection begins in earnest. Fifty potential panelists are expected to appear in the New York courtroom to answer questions. The process is meant to filter out possible jurors who might hold biases that could favor the defense or prosecution. Roughly 600 people completed pre-screening questionnaires earlier this month; of those, prosecutors and defense attorneys agreed that 231 should proceed to jury selection. Maxwell, 59, was arrested in July 2020 at a secretive, luxury estate in the small New Hampshire town of Bradford. She was charged with sexual offences, conspiracy and perjury related to the actions of the disgraced financier Jeffrey Epstein, who killed himself in a New York jail cell while awaiting sex trafficking charges. What is she accused of? Maxwell “played a critical role in helping Epstein to identify, befriend and groom minor victims” and “in some cases, Maxwell participated in the abuse”, Audrey Strauss, then the acting Manhattan US attorney, said after Maxwell’s arrest. Biden signs hard-fought $1tn infrastructure deal into law Biden has signed his hard-fought $1tn infrastructure deal into law before a bipartisan, celebratory crowd on the White House lawn, declaring that the infusion of cash for roads, bridges, ports and more would make life “change for the better”. The president hopes to use the infrastructure law to build back his popularity, which has taken a hit amid rising inflation and the inability to fully shake the public health and economic risks from Covid-19. “My message to the American people is this: America is moving again and your life is going to change for the better,” he said. However, the prospects are tougher for further bipartisanship ahead of the 2022 midterm elections as Biden pivots back to more difficult negotiations over his broader $1.85tn social spending package. The $1.2n infrastructure bill cleared the Senate 69-13 with Republican support, but scraped through the House last week with just 13 Republican votes – who have been called “traitors” by members of the party. The deadlock over part two of Biden’s agenda, known as Build Back Better, is not helping his approval rating, hovering around the 40% mark despite jobs growth. In other news … Prosecutors and defense attorneys delivered closing statements in the murder trial of Kyle Rittenhouse, the 18-year-old who has been charged with homicide after fatally shooting two men during racial justice protests last August in Kenosha, Wisconsin. The Wyoming Republican party will no longer recognize Liz Cheney as a member of the GOP in a rebuke over her vote to impeach Donald Trump over his role in the 6 January insurrection. The vote is the group’s second formal rebuke for her criticism of Trump. Several outbreaks of severe bird flu in Europe and Asia have been reported in recent days to the World Organisation for Animal Health, in a sign the virus is spreading quickly again. The spread of highly pathogenic avian influenza, commonly called bird flu, has put the poultry industry on alert. The US has accused Russia of “dangerous and irresponsible behavior” after it conducted an anti-satellite weapons test that threatened the lives of the seven astronauts. Russia fired a missile at one of its own satellites over the weekend, generating thousands of pieces of debris. Stat of the day: Seattle records its third-wettest November in more than a century Heavy rainfall and pounding storms are taking a toll on the US Pacific north-west, where flooding and mudslides in Washington state have forced evacuations and school closures. The National Weather Service warned that winds nearing hurricane strength were possible in the region, which has had nearly ceaseless rain for about a week. More than 158,000 customers were without power in western Washington at one point on Monday, the Seattle Times reported and less than halfway into the month it is already the third-wettest November that Seattle has recorded in more than a century. Communities in western Canada have also been forced to flee their homes. Don’t miss this: ENO teams up with TikTok stars for opera based on Tiger King It is being billed as the world’s first “TikTopera” – a collaboration between the English National Opera and Netflix – based on the hit documentary series Tiger King, created entirely on TikTok in the run-up to the second series this week. Each performer recaps a portion of the Tiger King story, including the battle between Joe Exotic and Carole Baskin. This is set to the music of George Bizet’s 1875 masterpiece Carmen, performed live in London by ENO’s 40-person professional chorus and full string orchestra. Stuart Murphy, the chief executive of ENO, said the project, which features TikTok stars cast in the lead roles, spoke to their “key value of trying to take opera out to everyone”. … or this: Goop’s sex therapist on her radical approach to pleasure Shandra Barrera, one of the participants on Sex, Love and Goop, the Gwyneth Paltrow-fronted Netflix series that aims to help couples “experience genuine arousal, desire and pleasure”, is using a mirror to look at her vagina. It’s a technique used by Darshana Avila, one of the show’s coaches, who is helping Barrera with the pain she experiences when she receives penetrative touch. This is all part of the buildup to the main event, when Avila will penetrate Barrera with her hand, hopefully without causing her pain. “I’ve learned that we have a major cultural bias against pleasure,” Avila says of her work, which is illegal in every US state except California. Climate check: Indigenous environment activists denounce Cop26 deal Indigenous communities facing a surge in land grabs, water shortages and human rights violations as a result of the Cop26 deal have accused world leaders of sacrificing them in order to postpone meaningful climate action and shield corporate profits. The Critics warn that the new global carbon-trading market will incentivize countries and corporations to offset – rather than cut – emissions responsible for global heating by investing in so-called green energy projects, which are linked to environmental destruction, forced displacement, arbitrary arrests and even murder. Want more environmental stories delivered to your inbox? Sign up to our new newsletter Down to Earth to get original and essential reporting on the climate crisis every week Last thing: New York billionaire seeks permission for ‘temple for a titan’ The billionaire hedge fund manager Bill Ackman will on Tuesday attempt to convince New York’s powerful Landmarks Preservation Commission to allow him to build a “flying saucer” penthouse on top of a historic apartment building in the Upper West Side overlooking Central Park. Ackman, an activist investor, has been engaged in a years-long public relations battle with his merely millionaire neighbors to garner support for his planned Norman Foster-designed two-story penthouse that has been described as a “temple to a titan”. Sign up First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comTwo prominent scientists are refusing to allow their work to be included in the Science Museum’s collection because of the institution’s links to Shell. Steve and Dee Allen, who have carried out some of the most important research into global plastic pollution, say the museum’s sponsorship deal with the fossil fuel company – and a subsequent “gagging clause” – meant it was no longer a credible scientific institution. “They have positioned themselves to fail in both of their primary tasks – to preserve and present the truth as best we know it,” said Steve Allen. The decision by eminent scientists to boycott the museum is the latest blow to the institution, which has had several resignations and faced growing protests over its relationship with Shell – and a newly announced deal with the “green” arm of the global fossil fuel corporation Adani. The Science Museum rejected the academics’ claims, saying that including an item in its national collection was “a significant process” and in this case “none of those formal steps towards an acquisition had been initiated”. A museum spokesperson also rejected the claim its sponsorship deal with Shell had any impact on its independence. “We entirely reject the false allegation that our curators are in any way inhibited in carrying out their vital role in an expert, independent and thorough manner,” a spokesperson added. The scientists – who are married – said they were approached by the Science Museum and asked if their work could be included in the institution’s archive. Before declining, they said they had several online discussions with the museum, agreeing which items would be suitable and how they would be delivered. “We stand by our claim that the Science Museum contacted us for items to be placed in the permanent record,” said Dee. “But in the end we declined because we were unhappy with the museum’s relationship with Shell and Adani and its treatment of climate protesters.” In particular, the scientists were concerned with a clause in its contract with Shell that prevents the museum from “damaging the goodwill or reputation” of the oil giant. “One is left to assume the Science Museum is now telling the ‘truth as best we are allowed’,” said Steve Allen. The scientists’ decision is the latest blow to the institution over its relationship with fossil fuel companies. In October, the leading climate scientist professor Chris Rapley, a former director of the Science Museum, resigned from its advisory board saying he disagreed with its “ongoing willingness to accept oil and gas company sponsorship”. Later that month, two trustees – Hannah Fry, a professor in the mathematics of cities at University College London, and Jo Foster, the director of the UK charity the Institute for Research in Schools – resigned from the museum’s board in protest at its deal with Adani. Fry said the Science Museum was “giving the false impression that scientists believe the current efforts of fossil fuel companies are sufficient to avoid disaster”. There have also been several protests at the museum, most recently when youth activists occupied it overnight. The Allens said they were initially honoured to be asked for their work – which has included pivotal studies into the extent and impact of plastic pollution – in the museum’s archive, but added that when they looked into its relationships with fossil fuel companies they felt they could not go ahead. “We felt that their impartiality has been compromised,” said Steve Allen. He dismissed the Science Museum’s claim that no formal offer to include their work had been made. “It really doesn’t matter what they say, it only matters how their actions are perceived by us in the scientific community, and the public. We have lost confidence in the Science Museum.”A leaked judicial report has found that Nigeria’s army and police shot and killed unarmed anti-police brutality protesters in October last year, before cleaning up the scene to remove evidence. The report, submitted to the Lagos state government on Monday, was based on a year-long inquiry into abuses by police forces and the killings at the Lekki toll gate in Lagos. It found that 11 unarmed people had been killed and that a further four were missing and presumed dead. The report identified 48 casualties in total. The leaked report described the incident as a “massacre”, said most of the army officers deployed to the toll gate were “not fit and proper to serve”, and recommended prosecuting certain policemen for their actions. “At the Lekki toll gate, officers of the Nigerian army shot, injured and killed unarmed helpless and defenceless protesters, without provocation or justification, while they were waving the Nigerian flag and singing the national anthem, and the manner of assault and killing could in context be described as a massacre,” the report said. The contents of the report have not been confirmed by the state government, but a figure involved in the inquiry confirmed to the Guardian that it was submitted to the Lagos government on Monday. It is the clearest admission yet at the official level that security forces killed unarmed protesters, following a year of denials and contradictory theories offered by Nigerian government ministers, the army and the police. Many thousands of mostly young Nigerians took to the streets in “EndSars” protests across several cities last year, demonstrating against the infamously brutal Special Anti-Robbery Squad (Sars) unit, and then more widely, against police brutality and bad governance. Protests across the country were met with extreme force by security agencies, including at the Lekki toll gate, where protesters livestreamed footage on Instagram showing live rounds being shot and demonstrators with bullet wounds. Amnesty International said at least 12 people were killed, including at another protest in Ikeja, Lagos. In the aftermath of the killings, Nigeria’s attorney general, Abubakar Malami, said the livestreams were likely to have been manipulated and said “hoodlums” wearing army fatigues could have been at the scene. The country’s information minister, Lai Mohammed, described the incident as “a massacre without bodies”. The 300-page report by the judicial inquiry found that the army came to the scene at the request of Lagos’ governor, Babajide Sanwo-Olu, who also set up the inquiry. The report said incomplete CCTV footage of that night, provided by the Lekki Concession Company, was manipulated before being presented at the inquiry. Officers involved in the atrocities should be prosecuted and state authorities should provide a public apology, the report said. As the demonstrations intensified last year, the government officially disbanded the Sars police unit, and many states initiated judicial inquiries into police abuses. Yet despite the reforms, Sars officers accused of violence have not been held to account but moved into other parts of the police infrastructure. Sanwo-Olu vowed a “proper response” to the panel’s recommendations, adding that a “white paper” would be published within the next two weeks. “This process will help us start the very difficult process of proper reconciliation, restitution, bringing together of anyone … affected,” Sanwo-Olu said.Opponents of the Victorian government’s controversial pandemic powers legislation have called for the bill to be delayed in the upper house, warning that protests outside parliament will grow. Debate in the Legislative Council ran into Tuesday night and was expected to continue late into the week, with opponents vowing to scrutinise the bill line by line. Eleventh-hour discussions with key crossbenchers mean the legislation – which gives the premier and health minister the power to declare a pandemic and make public health orders – is likely to pass the upper house after a number of amendments were agreed. The New South Wales premier, Dominic Perrottet, on Tuesday delayed debate until next year on extending his state’s emergency pandemic powers. The three key Victorian crossbench MPs – Samantha Ratnam of the Greens, Fiona Patten of the Reason party and Andy Meddick of the Animal Justice party – said the agreed amendments strengthened the bill with “further transparency and accountability”. The MPs faced death threats and abuse in the lead-up to the debate over the controversial legislation. The Victorian Labor MP Harriet Shing said protests against the bill had become “personal” and had caused parliamentarians and members of staff to “second guess their security”. “It has caused people ... enormous alarm, not just for themselves, but for their families,” she said. “It has to stop. It is a tiny, vocal, angry minority that diminishes the efforts of ... those who have contacted our offices to have a view on these matters.” But the Liberal MP Bernie Finn commended the protesters for “taking a stand for freedom”. Finn attended one of the rallies at the weekend, where he said thousands of people were present. “Those people in the streets aren’t going to wear what this premier is trying to pull. You’ve got people prepared to sleep on the streets of this parliament as a vigil, such is their commitment. “The people are marching in the street not because they’re some kind of leftwing or rightwing neo-Nazi or white supremacist, they’re people who have been ignored by Daniel Andrews for far too long ... they’ve been pushed to breaking point.” The Liberal MP David Davis said the rushing through of the bill was a “direct repudiation” of the bill of rights and the protections of MPs “going about their work in a proper way”. The bill was pushed through the lower house in 36 hours last month. “They know they’re trampling on human rights, they know what they’re doing is simply reprehensible and it cannot stand justification in its current form in any way,” Davis said. Patten said the pandemic legislation, if passed, would be reviewed within two years, and it was a “delicate balance” protecting human rights and health. The Liberal Democratic Party MP David Limbrick told the Legislative Council on Tuesday he would oppose the bill and warned if it did pass the protest movement would grow. “Do we think that if this passes today, and the legislation is applied, that those 50,000 people or so who marched on Saturday will just shrug their shoulders and say, ‘Oh, well, we tried’? I doubt it. The giant has awoken.” Limbrick said people would forget parts of the pandemic but they would not forget “being bullied”. The shadow attorney general, Matt Bach, condemned some “appalling incidents” at the protests but said it was incorrect to claim that “only crazies oppose this bill”, pointing to comments from various legal organisations in the state raising concerns about it. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Ratnam told parliament it was “completely irresponsible” for members of parliament to not condemn the protests where nooses and gallows were displayed. She said the campaign against the bill had “deliberately and maliciously” taken advantage of people’s genuine fears and anxieties during the pandemic and sought to whip them up to a “genuinely heightened state of terror, quite disconnected from the reality of what is actually happening in Victoria now”. “What I have also noticed is that almost every email or phone call or social media message [about the bill] has contained some form of misinformation [or] conspiracy theory, whether it is anti-vax conspiracy or something else, or some form of gross misrepresentation of the legislation we’re debating,” she said. The Liberal MP Gordon Rich-Phillips tried to adjourn debate on the bill and refer the legislation to the scrutiny of acts and regulations committee to conduct a full inquiry with public hearings, reporting back at the end of November. But the motion failed 19 votes to 18. The Law Institute of Victoria released a statement on Tuesday saying it was “pleased” to see the amendments but if its further key recommendations weren’t secured, a sunset clause should be introduced so any new legislation would expire between 18 and 24 months after its commencement. The Victorian Bar said the amendments didn’t go far enough in protecting the rule of law. “The proposed amendments largely address low-priority issues and not the most fundamental problems with the bill,” it said. “The major issues include the lack of effective parliamentary control over the minister’s pandemic orders and the lack of provision for an independent review of authorised officers’ exercise of power.” The Victorian Equal Opportunity and Human Rights Commission welcomed the amendments. The commissioner, Ro Allen, said the “clarity announced today strengthens the bill and its human rights commitments”.Reconstruction after Covid – a new dedicated long read series from the Guardian – will explore how coronavirus has influenced the way we live and provide original and thought-provoking ideas on the future of society, from voting rights and the climate crisis to the way we eat and how we think about death. The ambitious project, developed as part of the Guardian’s 200th anniversary, will feature essays by world-leading experts, journalists, academics and writers as they reflect on the impact of the pandemic and consider how society might rethink and adapt in the future. Launching today (Tues 16 Nov), David Runciman, professor of politics at Cambridge University, outlines how Covid-19 has exacerbated the already enormous age divide in our society – and why he believes one solution is to allow children to vote. In his essay, Runciman writes: “I believe there is a strong case for lowering the voting age to six, effectively extending the franchise to any child in full-time education.” Reconstruction after Covid is inspired by Reconstruction in Europe; a series of essays on the economic revival of postwar Europe that was commissioned by Guardian editor CP Scott in 1921 and edited by the economist John Maynard Keynes. Published by the Guardian in 1922, the series featured major contributions from leading economists, politicians and Nobel laureates, as well as Keynes himself. Upcoming essays in the Reconstruction after Covid series include: Guardian columnist Rebecca Solnit on how to confront the climate crisis without losing hope; Kwame Anthony Appiah, professor of philosophy at New York University on how to avoid a repeat of the ‘shadow pandemic’ that has blighted the developing world over the past two years; Jill Lepore, professor of American history at Harvard University, on the future of society after Covid; Jacqueline Rose, co-director of the Birkbeck Institute for the Humanities, exploring how the pandemic might prompt us to rethink death; and author and journalist Bee Wilson on why we need a national food policy. Other leading journalists, authors and academics set to write Guardian long reads as part of the Reconstruction after Covid series include Gary Younge, Suketu Mehta, Emily Bell and Shoshana Zuboff. Katharine Viner, editor-in-chief, Guardian News &amp; Media says: “Covid 19 has exposed just how broken our societies are – from inequality and loneliness, to the climate crisis and racial injustice. In the Guardian’s 200th year, Reconstruction after Covid takes inspiration from CP Scott and John Maynard Keynes’s groundbreaking essay series published a century ago, to tell a new story about what can be done to rebuild a better world in the wake of the pandemic.” David Wolf, editor of The Guardian Long Read, says: “As we slowly begin our recovery, Reconstruction after Covid will explore how the world has navigated coronavirus, and how we can ensure the crisis does not go to waste. The pieces we have coming up over the next few weeks are extremely varied, but they are all united by their clarity and boldness. One of our priorities in commissioning the series was to make sure the writing itself was a pleasure to read, and we’re thrilled with the roster of wonderful writers who are contributing to the series.” Reconstruction after Covid launches on the Guardian today, with new articles in the series due to be published over the coming weeks. Notes to editors About Guardian News &amp; Media Guardian News &amp; Media (GNM) publishes theguardian.com, one of the world’s leading English-language news websites. Traffic from outside of the UK now represents around two-thirds of the Guardian’s total digital audience. In the UK, GNM publishes the Guardian newspaper six days a week, first published in 1821, and the world’s oldest Sunday newspaper, The Observer.It was the last straw for many South Africans. So far this year they have battled their way past Covid-19 and the British &amp; Irish Lions, beaten New Zealand on the Gold Coast and, more recently, overturned Wales and Scotland. And how many of their beloved Springboks have been shortlisted for a men’s player or coaching World Rugby award? None, niemand or akukho nanye, depending on whether you prefer to receive your bad news in English, Afrikaans or Xhosa. On its own this would have been a relatively minor issue. France’s Antoine Dupont, England’s Maro Itoje and the Wallabies’ duo of Michael Hooper and Samu Kerevi are all fine players and no one has ever argued that award shortlists are a perfect science. But the context is all: plenty of people in South Africa are already outraged at what they regard as the continuing showtrial of Rassie Erasmus, the Springboks’ director of rugby, in the wake of his infamous Lions tour video rant and detect a recurring theme. There is obviously a danger here of putting two and two together and coming up with a number well in excess of four. The view from north of the equator can also be markedly different from how the world appears from down south, even if South African provincial sides now feature in the new United Rugby Championship. One thing, though, is very clear: many in South Africa feel disrespected, patronised and wronged and are increasingly making those views clear. Which is why the omission of, among others, Siya Kolisi, Damian de Allende, Lukhanyo Am and Eben Etzebeth from the player shortlist prompted such an outcry on social media. The former Springbok captain John Smit was on the World Rugby panel but little good it did Kolisi or his teammates. Incidentally there were no All Blacks shortlisted, either, which really is a moment for the scrapbook. There is certainly a strong argument that Kolisi and the consistently influential De Allende have been unlucky, with Erasmus’s colleague Jacques Nienaber also a conspicuous absentee from the coaching list. Then again, after Saturday’s result in Dublin, maybe Andy Farrell deserved greater recognition for helping to engineer Ireland’s third win over the All Blacks in five meetings. Not that any of the above names would end up victorious: the brilliant Dupont is a shoo-in for player of the year and, if a rising results graph is the main criteria, the England women’s head coach, Simon Middleton, would fully deserve an award for his coaching. But this is meant to be a piece about contrasting perceptions and whether, specifically, South African rugby is getting the thin end of the wedge. There is even a precise date – 15 November 2017 – when that jaundiced belief became properly entrenched. Despite South Africa’s bid to stage the 2023 Rugby World Cup having been recommended as the preferred option, a controversial secret ballot instead ended up awarding the tournament to France, prompting SA Rugby’s president, Mark Alexander, to issue an apology to South Africans for raising their hopes. It just happened to coincide with Erasmus’s return from Munster to pick up the Springbok reins and we all know how that turned out. South Africa were deserved winners of the Webb Ellis Cup, their pack proving themselves first among equals and their muscular gameplan demolishing England in the 2019 final. Was there any hint of disrespect from the northern hemisphere as Kolisi hoisted the trophy aloft? Not remotely, but the arrival of Covid meant the Boks never had the collective chance to undertake the year-long global lap of honour their achievement clearly merited. Maybe that is why this summer’s Lions tour had an increasingly sour edge to it: the more the visitors laid waste to below-strength provincial sides, the less it felt as if they were touring the strongest rugby nation on Earth. The economic and social hardships, the player drain to richer club leagues, the lack of crowds and face-to-face interaction to humanise the experience … if you are being generous you can begin to see why Erasmus started to act as if the whole rugby world was against him. My personal sense is that he had also studied how New Zealand sought to get at Warren Gatland on the 2017 Lions tour and, once South Africa had gone 1-0 down in a tight Lions series, decided he had little to lose. Had he showcased more of the tight decisions that went against the Lions as well as those that went in South Africa’s favour, his hour-long video might have had genuine validity. As it was, for anyone not wearing green and gold blinkers, the blatant attempt to influence the refereeing of the final two Tests – which duly worked a treat – clearly rode roughshod over any notion of protecting the sport’s integrity or respecting the officials. The verdict of the independent panel is due to be made public in the coming days and will inevitably generate further howls of protest regardless of the outcome. If it is legitimate to ask why it has taken four months to reach this point, part of the answer lies in the behind-the-scenes legal wrangling on the South African side. In Johannesburg and Bloemfontein it has long since become less about a video and more about the alleged desire of certain others to diminish Erasmus and tarnish the legacy of their World Cup-winning national hero. So watch this space for the dramatic final reel. Will Erasmus simply receive a fine and a slap on his laptop wrist or something more draconian? Will the Springboks have the last laugh out on the pitch and add England to their pile of scalps? And while we are at it – shortlists aside – let us all pray for one more thing: a transparently level playing field and less angry finger-pointing across rugby’s supposed north-south divide. • This is an extract from our rugby union email, the Breakdown. To subscribe, just visit this page and follow the instructions.When Cindy Warner joined Amazon Web Services in February 2020, she saw it as an opportunity to increase diversity and reshape the company’s strategy. She recalls how AWS “aggressively” recruited her, offering a quick path to higher-level roles and better pay. But just over a year after she joined, the promising job had become a nightmare. Warner, a tech executive with 30 years of experience, said she had faced pay discrimination and an underlying culture of sexism and homophobia. She sued the cloud computing company in May 2021 – alleging that male executives at AWS treated her with “open contempt, insults, and hostility” and upheld a “white boys’ club” – and claims she was fired shortly after. “I truly would not want my worst enemy to work at Amazon,” she told the Guardian, describing the workplace as “toxic” and alleging she was targeted for her work mentoring women and efforts to increase diversity and inclusion. Her lawsuit is one of several Amazon is currently facing over allegations of workplace discrimination, and it underscores the challenges women face from the bottom to the top of the tech industry. “This shows at Amazon, it does not matter if you have a lot of power on paper – the culture is going to impact you regardless of whether you are a high-powered executive or a lowly software engineer,” said Veena Dubal, a labor law professor at the University of California, Hastings. “At the end of the day, you are not really protected.” An Amazon spokesperson, Jaci Anderson, said the company disputed Warner’s account and that it had conducted a thorough investigation and “found her allegations to be unsubstantiated”. (Warner has criticized the integrity of the AWS investigation.) Anderson said Warner’s characterization of the circumstances under which she left AWS was “not accurate”, saying Warner had been encouraged to find another role within the company before her employment was terminated. “Amazon strives every day to be a top employer for women and historically underrepresented minorities,” Anderson said. “We continue to make progress in building a more diverse workforce, with a focus on increasing the representation of women in technical roles.” Sexism at AWS: ‘It was everywhere’ Warner started her role in February 2020 as a “global leader” in Amazon’s professional services group, ProServe, which promotes the company’s cloud-computing technology to corporate customers. Amazon, like many tech companies, categorizes workers into tiers of responsibility and pay. Warner was one of few female executives at her level in the department, she said, and according to the lawsuit she was hired at a lower tier than she felt she qualified for. Warner said she had quickly detected a “pervasive” culture of sexism. “It wasn’t just one person, it wasn’t just one group – it was truly everywhere,” she said. Warner alleges in the lawsuit that although the role was below her level of experience, she was repeatedly blocked from applying for promotions because of her gender, resulting in lost income of “millions of dollars”. Amazon disputes that Warner was promised a path to a higher-level role and said employees do not “apply” for promotions but are instead advanced through an internal review process. Warner claims that her male peers and colleagues frequently dismissed and harassed her. In one incident named in the suit, a colleague at AWS allegedly called Warner “disgusting names such as a ‘bitch’, an ‘idiot’, and a ‘nobody’”. Amazon claims its investigation found the account of “derogatory language” was untrue, and that the words cited in the suit were not used. Rather than being disciplined, the lawsuit alleges, the male AWS employee who berated Warner was ultimately promoted into the same role she had been discouraged from pursuing. Warner, meanwhile, remained at a lower position and compensation. “Amazon allows its managers, again seemingly in a misguided effort to protect the bottom line, to run amok and mistreat employees, particularly women and people of color, even when they arrive near the top of the Company’s corporate ladder,” said Lawrence Pearson, an attorney at Wigdor LLP, the firm behind the suit. Warner said her misgivings about the company culture had begun to solidify after a former employee, Laudon Williams, published a blogpost on LinkedIn in August 2020 entitled “Why I Left AWS”. In the post, he outlined a number of systemic discrimination issues at Amazon Web Services, claiming he had “personally heard an [executive-level employee] using homophobic language”. He also cited a “well-known incident in professional services” in which a leader told a diversity group that they needed to stop making excuses and “integrate better”. Williams claimed AWS “shows no interest in addressing the issues”. Anderson, the Amazon spokeswoman, said the company had investigated and was unable to substantiate issues raised in the post. The post had prompted “quite a blowup” internally, Warner said. But instead of reflecting on the allegations, Warner said, the company had gone on the defensive. One Black employee who brought up the blogpost to executives was “verbally assaulted” for rocking the boat. That woman was ultimately “so demoralized” she quit the role and relocated to another section of Amazon, Warner said. Warner described such responses as typical for the company. “I have never in my career seen a company so unwilling to be introspective – a company that has such outrage instead of self-reflection in the face of criticism,” she said. Amazon disputes the account of backlash to the LinkedIn post, saying nobody was “verbally assaulted” when it was brought up to leaders in a workplace meeting, but that the employee in question was discouraged from discussing it at that time. Warner is not alone Warner’s suit is the latest in a growing number of cases lifting the veil on sexism at all levels of Silicon Valley. It comes just six years after the tech investor Ellen Pao brought a gender discrimination lawsuit against her former employers at the venture capital firm Kleiner Perkins – one that “paved the way for whistleblowing in Silicon Valley”, according to Dubal. “As more people whistleblow, they are seeing how these issues are interconnected in many ways,” Dubal said. “And that could have a lasting impact on whether these companies actually change the culture.” Directly after Pao’s case, Tina Huang filed a suit against Twitter alleging its promotion system unfairly favored male employees, and the former Facebook employee Chia Hong filed a suit against Facebook alleging sexual and racial discrimination. In December 2020, Pinterest paid a record $20m settlement in a gender discrimination suit brought by a female executive who alleged “rampant discrimination, hostile work environment, and misogyny” at the San Francisco company. And Warner isn’t the only one alleging bad behavior at Amazon. The law firm handling her case is currently pursuing lawsuits from five other employees, including Charlotte Newman, an Amazon Web Services senior manager who has alleged both sexism and racist behavior. Newman, who is Black, claims in her lawsuit that Amazon fails to promote Black employees, and recounts being “groped” by a director at the company during a work dinner. Amazon said it had reviewed Newman’s career path at the company and determined “she was properly placed in her role”. Her harassment allegations were “immediately” investigated and the assailant she identified was fired, according to Anderson. But lawyers for Newman and Warner said these processes were not swift or thorough enough: “Women and employees of color at all levels of Amazon have had their complaints of harassment and discrimination brushed under the rug,” Pearson said. Amazon said this characterization of its processes was “not accurate” and that its code of conduct and ethics established a zero-tolerance policy regarding discrimination or harassment. The recent wave of complaints has prompted a backlash within Amazon. The LinkedIn post from Williams, as well as Warner’s suit, were cited in an internal petition at Amazon Web Services that was signed by more than 1,000 employees in July 2021, demanding an independent investigation to be completed by November. In response, the AWS chief executive, Adam Selipsky, emailed the petition’s authors to confirm the company would investigate the allegations through an outside firm, though he did not commit to a timeframe. Anderson, the Amazon spokesperson, said that investigation was continuing and that a date for completion had not been confirmed. The scrutiny of Amazon Web Services has put Andy Jassy – a former AWS executive who took over for Jeff Bezos as CEO of Amazon in July 2021 - under the microscope. Warner said she had written Jassy directly about her plight in an attempt to save her job, but the letter was “all but ignored”. Amazon has said HR leadership responded to her letter and asked her to conduct communication through attorneys “as is common practice during active litigation”. “The fact that Jassy was promoted from a particular sector at Amazon that was known to have a culture of misogyny and sexism does not speak well for the direction the company is going,” Dubal, the law professor, said. Asked about Jassy’s leadership, LaDavia Drane, the head of inclusion, diversity and equity at AWS, said that the Amazon division “has always operated with the belief that more diverse teams create better outcomes”. “Our organization is continuing to push every day to create a more inclusive culture, and that includes us pushing forward to actively invest in and retain women within our organization,” she said. Warner said she continued to receive inquiries from former employees at Amazon and other tech firms asking for advice on similar allegations. Nearly six months after filing the lawsuit, she is still job hunting, saying the experience left her wary of entering similar roles in the tech industry. “After what I would consider has been a very storied career, this has been a horror show, and I relive it every day,” Warner said. “When you go through something like this, it really changes you. It doesn’t go away.”Somewhere in southern California, Shandra Barrera and Camille Slusher sit with mirrors between their legs, staring at their yonis. They are participants on Sex, Love &amp; Goop, the Gwyneth Paltrow-fronted Netflix series, which aims to help couples “experience genuine arousal, desire and pleasure”. The mirrors are a tool used by Darshana Avila, one of the show’s sex and intimacy coaches who, in this episode, is helping Barrera with the pain she experiences when she receives penetrative touch. “What does she need to hear?” Avila asks Barrera about her vagina. “Relax!” Barrera responds, shouting at the mirror in between her legs. Avila suggests chiding herself might not be helping. This is all part of the buildup to the main event, when Avila will penetrate Barrera on screen with her hand, hopefully without causing her pain. That Avila’s job can involve touching clients’ genitals, makes her practice illegal in every US state apart from California. It’s not a service that all of her clients need, but when they do, she works with them to build a healthy relationship based on communication, consent and trust. “We first are laying down a foundation that helps them learn about tracking themselves, because if you don’t know what’s happening in your body or where your boundaries lie, it’s almost impossible to be in a fully consensual exchange,” Avila explains. If those conversations go well, they may lead to a session where Avila helps her clients discover pleasure in its many forms. “Sure, it could be ecstatic orgasmic pleasure. But as we saw on the show, it can be the pleasure of Shandra, for instance, receiving penetrative touch without pain. So why is this service not on offer everywhere? “If you look at this very simplistically, we have a legal and cultural bias that says, if you are not a medical practitioner, any context in which you were touching somebody’s genitals is wrong, bad and subject to legal action,” she says, pointing out fears of abuse or non-consensual touch. But in the case of sexological bodywork, she explains: “It’s assuming that there is an exchange that isn’t actually happening. [My job] is one directional. I am not receiving touch, I have clothing on. I have gloves on my hands,” she says. Avila sees a host of clients who come to her for issues ranging from the concise (I can’t orgasm; I have an injury after birth that’s still bothering me) to the ineffable (I don’t feel at home in my body; I love my partner but we don’t bond sexually). “We start creating this journey together, where I get a sense of where the missing puzzle pieces are and we go about filling them in and connecting them up,” Avila explains over the phone. “I’ve learned that we have a major cultural bias against pleasure,” she says. “We have this really narrow definition, that is: pleasure equals orgasm. But your eroticism isn’t necessarily focused on your genitals,” she says. For Barrera and Slusher – the ones staring into their vaginas through a mirror – their discomfort with their pleasure is clearly laid out on the show. Barrera’s comes from her strict religious upbringing in a home where sex wasn’t spoken about and lesbianism wasn’t condoned. Now, pleasure makes her feel shame – so much so that her body tenses up when she is about to be touched. For Slusher, her own anxieties about her body prevent her from being able to get out of her head and enjoy sex. A common misconception that people have about sex, Avila tells me, is that our partners don’t want to hear us say what feels good or bad sexually. We assume it will make them feel inadequate or that it is selfish. In fact, we tend to assume that sex is better when not spoken about very much at all. “I give people worksheets, that have lists of words about sensations and emotions, and ideas for ways you can touch. People get afraid they’re going to offend somebody. And they haven’t gotten to practice those skills. But they’re very learnable – it’s not rocket science,” she reassures. The worksheets include knowing exactly what types of touch are available to you – from stillness, compression and squeezing to stroking or tickling. It also includes being able to talk about where you like to experience these sensations and how they make your body feel. “I’m not saying you’re going to learn everything from a textbook. But there are fundamental things … that will make a difference,” she says. Avila believes that people talking to one another regularly, concisely and openly deepens intimacy, although she understands why people fear it will destroy it. Telling your partner things aren’t working for you is vulnerable, revealing. We struggle to advocate for ourselves even at the best of times – let alone when we’re naked. So requests need to be made in a way that invites intimacy, instead of taking it off the table. Much of this is intuitive: don’t start the conversation in the middle of sex, make sure it comes at a time when both partners are ready to receive it (so, not when you’re hungry or in the middle of an argument or tired or drunk); use ample praise– couch requests within the frame of what is going well. If the sex is really bad – and there are no good things for the requests to be couched in – Avila suggests focusing on the relationship. “Place an emphasis on: ‘I want to be in conversation with you,’” she says, “really emphasize the mutuality of that, even if you’re coming to say something like, ‘You have never touched me in a way that feels good’ or ‘I’ve been faking my orgasms for five years.’” Being in the presence of a licensed third party, if that’s available to you, can help. “Often when I’m working with couples, I feel like one of the hats I wear is translator and interpreter. Because I can hear what comes out of one person’s mouth, I can hear how it lands with the other person,” she says. Are there any questions that come up time and time again? “‘Am I normal?’” she says. “People want to know, desperately, that they are not the only ones. And the answer is, you are totally normal. You are not the only one and you’re also not broken,” she says. Avila believes this is the product of the unhealthy culture we live in, one that is dysfunctional, toxic, misogynistic. And that extends to the work that she’s doing not being available everywhere in the US. In another scene from Sex, Love &amp; Goop, Barrera is laying down, covered by a blanket and her partner, Slusher, is watching. “I’m going to stroke your labia,” says Avila. Then, she places her finger at the entrance of Barrera’s vagina, narrating her movements as she goes. She hears Barrera tense. “I’m starting to feel a little bit of pain,” Barrera says. Avila lightens her touch, and tells Barrera to breathe. “How’s that?” she asks. Soon there is relief, as Barrera realizes she is receiving penetrative touch. “I don’t feel any pain, which is crazy,” she says. “There is your love,” says Avila. “And here is your body feeling safe enough to receive.” I ask Avila how it makes her feel, to know that people like Barrera can’t receive this same sort of service openly in so many US states. “Honestly, it breaks my heart,” she says. “It makes me deeply sad on a certain level and angry on another that more people are not being given ready access to the qualities of care and support that really nurture them into their wholeness,” she says. But she’s also happy that this work has been spotlighted on a show on Netflix. “Now it is seen in a mainstream context,” she says. “I think all of us need therapy to work through what’s happening in our hearts, in our psyches and our mind. Why would we not want that for our bodies and for our sexuality and intimacy, which are such integral parts of what it is to be alive?”Download and keep on digital now King Richard © 2021 Warner Bros. Ent. All Rights ReservedEarly in the pandemic, Covid outbreaks were rampant in America’s meatpacking plants – the factories that kill, cut and package animals. But the chairman of one of biggest meat companies in the US, Tyson, argued that these factories should stay open to feed Americans. “It is as essential as healthcare,” John Tyson wrote in several newspaper ads. Days later Donald Trump issued an executive order to keep meat plants running. The following month, 49 meatpacking workers died of Covid. The message was clear: Americans needed meat, and workers needed to risk their lives to provide it. And Osha – the labor department agency that is supposed to protect workers – could seemingly do little to protect them. In a factory in Greeley, Colorado, owned by meat conglomerate JBS, at least six workers died early in the pandemic. Osha is supposed to investigate every workplace fatality reported to them, but it took months for them to send an investigator. When Osha finally showed up to investigate, it found JBS failed to make its workplace free of “hazards that were causing or likely to cause death or serious physical harm”. The penalty: a proposed fine of $13,494. That’s about how much revenue JBS earns in 60 seconds. Meatpacking workers tried to tell Osha about their concerns. In the first weeks of the pandemic, dozens of them officially complained to Osha. They said management was forcing people with Covid symptoms to continue coming to work; that social distancing guidelines weren’t enforced; and that they had inadequate protective equipment. Meanwhile, meatpacking executives privately believed that outbreaks were unavoidable, documents revealed by ProPublica have shown. “Social distancing is a nicety that makes sense only for people with laptops,” wrote Smithfield CEO Kenneth Sullivan. A Tyson official blamed outbreaks on the workers’ crowded living and commuting arrangements: “This is a culture issue.” In a way the companies were right: it was unavoidable – partly because, for decades, the meatpacking industry had worked to take bargaining power away from workers to create an industry that has been criticized for treating them as disposable parts of an assembly line. “What Covid did was just really shed light on what workers dealt with anyway,” said Kim Cordova, president of the United Food and Commercial Workers Local 7, which represents workers at the Greeley JBS plant. “Osha just failed. They did absolutely nothing to help workers during the worst pandemic we’ve seen in our lifetime.” Representative Jim Clyburn, who heads a congressional investigation into the coronavirus, wrote, “[Osha] failed to adequately carry out its responsibility for enforcing worker safety laws at meatpacking plants across the country, resulting in preventable infections and deaths.” In a statement, Osha said it was committed to worker safety and added that, as President Joe Biden had ordered, it was “continuing to review” its response to Covid in order to implement any changes that could better protect workers. It said Clyburn’s letter and requests referred to actions under the Trump administration. The failures weren’t limited to factories. The 500,000 people working in meatpacking inevitably came in contact with people in their community and spread the virus. Researchers found that by July 2020, areas nearby meatpacking plants had far more Covid cases and deaths than expected: about 5,000 additional Covid deaths and about a quarter million additional cases. Put another way, meatpacking plants were connected to 6% to 8% of all early-pandemic Covid cases and 3% to 4% of all early-pandemic Covid deaths. “This needs to go down in the history books as one of the biggest failures to the working man or woman that this country’s ever seen,” Cordova said. ••• A history of injuries and blazing line speeds The modern meatpacking industry runs on human workers repeating the same motion, over and over, regardless of how much their bodies tell them to stop. Each year, American meatpacking workers kill, cut and package about 9.3 billion chickens, 34 million cows and 130 million pigs. The numbers are too big to imagine. But in order to process that much meat, the USDA allows poultry companies to push 140 birds per minute through their lines – a number that was increased to 175 during the pandemic. That means some workers perform up to 24,000 knife cuts and lift 15 tons of meat each day, according to research estimates. When Osha collected data on repetitive stress injuries, meatpacking companies consistently reported the highest rates of any industry. But in 2001, the agency stopped collecting such detailed data, removing the column that classified injuries as musculoskeletal disorders. Osha said that repetitive stress injuries are still reported in Osha logs, but a 2016 GAO report found that that information is in a separate incident report that is generally not sent to Osha or the Bureau of Labor Statistics, making it difficult to gather and track. Osha also said the Bureau of Labor Statistics collects data on repetitive stress injuries; however that data is an estimate calculated from random surveys of employers. “I’ve had problems with my arm I used to cut because the line was too fast. I’ve had shoulder pain and I cut my finger badly because the production line comes too fast,” said one pork plant worker in Nebraska. “My wife, who works at the plant, almost cut her finger completely off with a saw because she doesn’t have enough time to cut the meat. I’ve seen a lot of people cut their arms, hands, and hurt their shoulders because they’re working too fast. About 1 in 10 workers are on light duty because of injuries.” In 1999, the Clinton administration issued an ergonomics rule that aimed to protect workers from these repetitive stress injuries. “It was 30 years in the making – 30 years of research to really build a really good standard to protect workers,” said Darcy Tromanhauser, the program director for the immigrant and communities program at the non-profit advocacy organization Nebraska Appleseed. But a year later, Republicans rescinded the rule. Meanwhile, managers keep workers on the lines. That can mean that many factories don’t allow workers to take bathroom breaks. A Southern Poverty Law Center survey found that nearly 80% of workers said they can’t use the bathroom when needed. Another survey in Minnesota found that 86% of workers said they get two or fewer bathroom breaks a week. “It’s very common to hear from workers that they soil themselves,” said Axel Fuentes, the executive director of Rural Community Workers Alliance in Missouri. “They usually make them go in their pants or defecate on the line because they couldn’t get bathroom breaks.” During the pandemic, keeping workers on the line meant forcing people with Covid to come to work, according to worker complaints to Osha. Serious and traumatic injuries are also common. In 2015, Osha began requiring employers to report serious injuries promptly after the incident. This involves any injury that requires in-patient hospitalization, amputation of a body part, or loss of an employee’s eye. (Only the states under federal jurisdiction have to report.) And year after year, meatpacking workers are among the most likely to suffer an injury where a body part is amputated. About half of the injuries involve workers losing fingers. In February, Hussain Ahmed Jalal, an immigrant from Myanmar, was working at the JBS plant in Greeley at 12.40am – after most other workers had gone home. “As I threw the meat on the conveyor, I accidentally got caught in the conveyor motor with my gloves and my left hand was stuck in the conveyor,” Ahmed Jalal said. “I called for somebody to help me and stop the motor and conveyor, but no one was around. Nobody saw the conveyor. I fell down and waited about an hour until the fire department finally came.” The accident amputated his entire left hand. Since the accident, he has gone through three different surgeries and is receiving workers’ compensation. He as worked at the factory since 2011, but he’s unsure when or if he will be able to return to work. Osha investigated the accident several months later and issued five safety penalties, according to Osha citations obtained by the Guardian. The proposed penalty: $174,566. JBS did not comment on Jalal’s injury or the related Osha proposed penalties. In a statement the firm said worker safety was its priority and, when asked about its pandemic response, said: “We strongly disagree with any claim that suggests we have not prioritized the safety of our workforce at all times throughout the pandemic.” All of the top meat producing firms have defended their safety records and handling of the Covid-19 pandemic. Tyson has also said safety is its “top priority” and since 1 October has required US employees to have Covid-19 vaccinations. Smithfield Foods has said it has invested hundreds of millions of dollars to protect employees. ••• The shift to an immigrant workforce The precarious work conditions in meatpacking – and lack of labor protections – were decades in the making, and often engineered to be this way. When Osha was created in 1971, lawmakers assumed labor unions would play a large part in keeping companies in check. In addition, competition in the job market would allow workers to move to another company with safer labor practices, especially since meatpacking plants were clustered in dense urban areas. But a handful of meatpacking companies had an idea of how to increase their power and maximize profits. They first started moving meatpacking plants away from large cities and into rural areas where they would typically be the primary economic driver in the region. This gave them immense political power that still lives on to this day. For example, in Greeley, JBS employs nearly 4,600 workers, which accounts for about 10% of working adults in the town. “These companies are so powerful that they run certain states like Iowa, Arkansas and North Carolina where the governors can’t do anything without their support,” said Debbie Berkowitz, former Osha chief of staff who’s been involved in worker safety at meat and poultry processing plants for more than 40 years. “This means that workers don’t get protected. The power of the industry is enormously frightening.” And those new powerhouses – Cargill, JBS, Tyson and National – started buying up smaller companies. These companies kept on pointing to their decreasing injury stats to show that their workplaces were getting safer. But Berkowitz said, “Nothing had changed except that the industry became enormously consolidated, lots of small companies were gobbled up by the big players – JBS, Smithfield, Tyson, Cargill.” Those four companies now control 85% of the beef market and 70% of the pork market. In addition to the geographic restructuring, these companies started to recruit a workforce that had less organizing power. Meatpacking used to be dominated by native-born white and Black workers. But starting in the 1980s, the industry started to rely more and more on immigrant labor. In 1990, only about 18% of meatpacking workers were Hispanic. Just 10 years later, about 42% were Hispanic. This coincided with the conservative attack on labor unions and the subsequent demise of an organized workforce. In 1952, about 90% of meatpacking workers were covered under union contracts. By 1983, union membership had plummeted to 33% and by 2020 it was just 18%. Meatpacking was once a middle-class job for citizens, with the average production worker in 1974 earning more than $25 an hour in 2021 dollars. But the active recruitment of workers with less organizing power allowed these wages to plummet. During the Great Recession in 2008, wages fell to about $16 an hour. Now it’s about $19 an hour. But that’s the average; many meatpacking workers are paid far less. About one in five meatpacking workers are food stamp recipients, double the amount from 20 years ago, according to US census microdata. As historian Wilson J Warren writes, the US meat industry transformed “from a relatively safe, well-paying industry employing primarily native-born white and Black people into an increasingly dangerous, low-paying industry employing a large number of immigrants”. And the ultimate goal for all of this was to improve the bottom line. While consumers have been paying more for meat and the farmers who raise these animals have been paid less, these meatpacking giants have profited. In 2017, the top four meatpacking companies had a combined annual revenue of $207bn. This year, the biggest of those companies, Cargill, brought in record profits, making $4.3bn in the first nine months of this fiscal year. ••• Underreported data masks severity of the problem For decades, there have been reports of meatpacking companies urging their workers to not report injuries. In the late-1980s, Osha found dozens of underreported injuries in large plants in Nebraska. Workers who were sick or hurt were pressured to keep working, or risk losing their jobs. The US Governmental Accountability Office (GAO) found similar practices in an investigation a few years ago, including one doctor who said injured meatpacking workers asked for medical permission to work “because their employer had threatened to fire them if they could not do their jobs”. “I never stopped working because they never cared about my injury,” said a worker at a pork processing plant in Milan, Missouri, who injured their finger in April while cleaning a platform on the processing line due to high-speed work. “All they did was to give me a Band-Aid and my supervisor said that was just to prevent water from getting into the wound. My fingernail is completely off and I’m still in pain.” In the past, the labor department used to collect data on repetitive trauma injuries. But in the early 2000s, Osha stopped requiring employers to collect this data separately, which made it look like overall workplace injuries were plummeting – something industry groups would boast about year after year. But even when Osha collected that data, it may have been a severe undercount. When the Southern Poverty Law Center surveyed hundreds of meatpacking workers in Alabama, they found that 66% of respondents said they suffered from symptoms of these repetitive motion injuries, like chronic pain, swelling and numbness. “The industry is much more dangerous now than in the 1990s, and the biggest factors are consolidation and cutting corners of worker safety,” said Berkowitz, the former Osha chief of staff. Notably, Osha collects comprehensive data only from the 29 states that are under its jurisdiction. All other states police themselves. Meanwhile the number of Osha inspectors is at the lowest number since the early 1970s, after the Trump administration slashed the agency’s resources. There are only 1,815 inspectors (752 federal and 1,063 state) to inspect the 9.8m workplaces under Osha’s jurisdiction. Under current federal Osha staffing, the agency is only able to inspect workplaces under its jurisdiction once every 165 years on average. Osha even struggled to count the number of meatpacking Covid deaths, according to a report by the House select subcommittee on the coronavirus crisis. Osha reported 92 deaths in 2020. But one Osha official told the subcommittee that they relied in part on data from the Food and Environment Reporting Network, a nonprofit news organization, which counted more than 260 deaths in 2020. ••• ‘These workers were sacrificial’ About one month after Hussain Ahmed Jalal lost his hand in an accident this year, another accident happened at the Greeley JBS plant. Jonathan Bryan Duerst, a 55-year-old worker, was knocked over by a piece of equipment and fell into a vat of chemicals used to process animal hides. Duerst died. Osha investigated and found eight serious violations that contributed to his death. The result: a proposed fine of $58,709. On one hand, Congress is investigating the industry for the hundreds of Covid deaths. In February, the House select subcommittee on the coronavirus crisis opened an investigation into JBS USA, Smithfield Foods and Tyson Foods for refusing to take basic precautions to protect their workers – “a callous disregard for worker’s health”, the committee said – Cargill and National Beef Packing company (National Beef) were added to its ongoing investigation. But the US has long turned a blind eye to an industry that allows a half million workers to work in dangerous conditions, all in an effort to fill the country’s huge demand for meat. And government regulators have been unable to protect them. If anything, Covid made it clear “that these workers were sacrificial and, by all means necessary, they have to keep production going,” said Cordova, the Greeley union president. Last year, the average American consumed about 225 pounds of meat. “When people buy any meat product they have to be thinking about how their food gets to the table,” said the pork plant worker in Nebraska. “We get it there. And we make many sacrifices to get it there.”I was one when Venus Williams made her professional debut in 1994 at the age of 14. And I was nine years old when Serena Williams won her first singles title at Wimbledon by beating her big sister in straight sets in 2002. When I was growing up you didn’t need to know anything about tennis to know about the Williams sisters. Venus and Serena were more than tennis players: they were an inspiration, a beacon of Black joy, and a solid reminder to hold your head up high no matter what space you walk into. Now, a film based on their early lives, King Richard, reveals the inspirational story of their formative years in Compton, California. Will Smith, playing their father, Richard, pushes through adversity, takes extraordinary risks and trains them not only to become champions, but to dominate the world of professional tennis for two decades. I remember sitting in front of the television watching the Williams sisters at Wimbledon every year. Whether they were playing singles, doubles or even each other, Venus and Serena were their own biggest rivals. And the camera would zoom in on their father in the audience, sometimes holding up a small whiteboard; “Welcome to the Williams show” it might occasionally read. It wasn’t until watching King Richard that I realised Richard Williams was a jukebox of catchphrases and motivational messages for his children, and to some degree for himself. “Just have fun,” he reminds them before every match. “Be humble, say thank you”, or “If you fail to plan, you plan to fail”. At times, my heart ached for the sisters as they navigate a childhood where their phenomenal talent separated them from other kids and propelled them into an adult world. Sometimes they trained in downpours, other times they were pulled out of competitions – Richard’s techniques weren’t always conventional but clearly, they worked. The young actors Saniyya Sidney and Demi Singleton do a superb job of portraying Venus and Serena through the complexities of rivalry, sisterhood and success. A thousand words were spoken through a swift look, a long hug, or a powerful hit of a ball. More than anything, King Richard is a reminder that parents make mistakes, they are humans with flaws too – something the film doesn’t shy away from. While the expectations placed on Venus and Serena felt immense, the faith and pride their parents had in them was unshakeable. I’m not a parent, but I can’t help but empathise with what it must take to bring up Black children in a world that can be so unkind to us. To want to protect them, guide them and stop them from going through the same traumas you did. While nobody can prevent us from experiencing the realities of this world, our parents still did their best to prepare us – even when as children, that felt frustrating, tiring or unfair. In one scene on a court in Compton, we see Richard having to deal with local troublemakers, and even when it leaves him bloodied and bruised, it doesn’t deter him from coaching his daughters. While I understood who the Williams sisters were, King Richard really gave me a fresh insight into what created them. Just as Venus was making a name for herself, her parents pulled her out of the juniors for years. It wasn’t because she didn’t have the skills, it was so she and Serena could be children without the pressures of constant competitions and the world watching. The adultification bias, which sees adults perceive young Black people as being older than they actually are, is stifling, so for Richard to prioritise his daughters’ childhoods feels like a revolutionary act. I didn’t expect to well up towards the end of the film. “You’re not gonna just be representing you,” Richard explains to a young Venus. “You’re gonna be representing every little Black girl on Earth.” And he was right. I’d almost forgotten what their impact meant to me and so many other Black children growing up. Witnessing two young, dark-skinned Black women doing what the world thought was impossible, was truly impactful for Black families around the world. Watching on-screen Black parents who dared their children to dream and encouraged them to be the best version of themselves, I couldn’t help but think of my own mum and the sacrifices she made for me. We didn’t have much at home but she always encouraged me to pursue what made me happy – like writing, which led me to this. The Williams sisters are evidence that if they could follow their ambitions, so can we. They shone in a world that didn’t see them. They forced the world to look and never forget. Download and keep on digital now King Richard © 2021 Warner Bros. Ent. All Rights ReservedAt two in the morning the other day, I found myself swaying slowly from side to side, cradling my preschooler and whisper-singing the Oompa Loompa song from Willy Wonka “like a lullaby”, per her barked instructions. Like most parents, I’m particularly fixated on sleep and how to optimize it. As I drew out the jig-like tune to make it as soporific as possible, the kindergartner whimpering from the top bunk and the preschooler occasionally flashing me a sadistic grin, I was pretty certain I wasn’t optimizing anything except for the likelihood that when we did eventually nod off, we’d all dream about tiny orange men. The preschooler, due to a combination of Covid and minimal square footage, happily slept the first two years of her life in a Pack ’n Play in our closet. But when the girls started clamoring to sleep in the bunk bed together, I entertained visions of pre-bed whispering that would render grownup involvement moot, and strengthen their sisterly bonds while leading to deeper sleep all around. Plus, I assumed sleeping together in piles was hardwired into us, from the days when we sought safety from roaming mastodons. So I put the bumper on the bottom bunk and figured, what’s the worst that can happen? “I’m cowering on the floor of their room,” my husband, Dave, texted the first night, a full hour after “bedtime”. “My arm fell asleep so I had to put her down. Now she won’t let me leave.” Pulsing ellipse, then, “I’m so hungry.” I tiptoed in to relieve him, as he scurried out to scarf down dinner. Two full minutes of silence. A cackle from the top bunk. “I’m having the funniest dream ever, Mama!” my kindergartner shrieked. I lay down on the floor. The preschooler popped up like a prairie dog. “NO LYING DOWN, MAMA,” she bellowed, a pint-sized Sigourney Weaver-as-Zuul in Ghostbusters. Over the course of the next few weeks, we tried everything. Crying it out. Not crying it out. Playing the silent game. A sticker chart. The promise of any breakfast they could dream up, including, straight up, a bowl of sprinkles. Nothing worked. They’d chatter and play until way past bedtime, then wake each other up multiple times each night. At the end of a particularly grueling stretch, the preschooler declared that she no longer cared about stickers or sprinkles, a scorched earth negotiating tactic straight out of Genghis Khan’s playbook. I nearly fell to the floor, weeping. Set aside whatever parental judgment you may harbor about the rights and wrongs of bargaining chips, not holding the line, and acquiescing to fruitless and idiotic demands, Oompa-related or other. The bigger question, in my mind, was whether my end goal – two happy kiddos calming each other’s anxiety and sleeping deeply because of it – was worthy, considering we were no longer sharing the tundra with predators, and we had the space to opt out if we wanted. The research and advice about bed sharing was all over the place, and the data about room sharing nearly non-existent. Some studies I read concluded that sharing a room or bed could maximize REM-stage sleep. Others concluded that doing so would do the opposite. I learned crazy facts, like that birds can shut half their brain off to sleep and keep the other half awake, and if they’re all hanging out in a line, the ones on the edges will have half their brains awake, while the ones in the middle will be fully asleep. Oh, to be a middle-of-the-pack pigeon on a telephone pole, I thought as I curled up in the fetal position on the floor by the bunk bed, acquiescing to whatever commands were coming from above. “If you asked me what was the best way to get the best night’s sleep, it would be everyone separate, in their preferred environment,” Dr Haviva Veler, director of the Weill Cornell Pediatric Sleep and Breathing Disorders Center, told me when I reached her by phone. So much for my mastodon theory. Various anthropologists surmise our circadian rhythms evolved to differ – you might be a night owl, your spouse a lark – because if more people are waking up at various intervals, it minimizes the chances that every single person will be snoozing the moment a predator lopes by. Of course, as anyone can tell you who enjoys a pre-bed snuggle or chat, that’s not the whole story. “We don’t live in a vacuum, and there’s the emotional part, the psychological effects of sharing a space at night-time,” Veler continued. Numerous sleep researchers told me that calming anxiety is the number one reason to throw siblings together, and others brought up that it might have less to do with sleep quality than it does with values. I expect you to share a room, I expect you to be a flexible person, you’re saying, in effect. And the psychological effects often pass down from generation to generation. My friend, who shared a room for years with her two younger sisters, is now forcing her two young children to sleep together, actual sleep be damned. This, despite the existence of a third bedroom and a very practical husband who calmly points out, as one or the other child starts shrieking in the middle of the night, that they could bypass all-house wake-ups should they so choose. “I don’t really know that it’s making them any better at sharing or any more tolerant of sounds/disturbances while sleeping,” she emailed me, “but I almost don’t really care at this point because it makes me so happy to wake up and find both of them in their cribs smiling up at me (or simultaneously cry-screaming as is sometimes the case).” Dr Veler has had parents come to her trying to figure out why their children fall asleep just fine together, but wake up in the middle of the night. It has to do with the concept of “sleep association”, or what you need in order to fall asleep, or get back to sleep quickly if you wake up. For me, that’s a pitch-dark room, an ice-cold climate, and Dave not moving or breathing audibly, something which has resulted in him dutifully affixing Breath Right strips to his nose to assuage middle-of-the-night snores. (“It’s like an oxygen wind tunnel in there,” he’ll say, morose, as he curls into the fetal position and settles in for a long night of trying to remain immobile, lest he provoke my nocturnal rage.) “We figured out that part of their sleep association was chatting with their sibling,” Veler said, “but when they didn’t have them in the middle of the night, they couldn’t get back to sleep.” Which is adorable. Albeit not at two in the morning. Veler’s recommendation? Separate the kids so they can start a new sleep association. Then reunite them if you so choose. So, though the girls begged to stay in their bunk bed, I laid down the law: our household sleep strategy moving forward would be to maximize REM-stage sleep at the expense of all emotional closeness. It worked fine until daylight savings time, that most dreaded celestial corrective, which was probably the cause of the preschooler waking up at random hours of the night. And so, I found myself once again cradling her and whisper-singing the Oompa Loompa song until her breathing calmed. Then I’d tip-toe back to my room, where the steady sound of Dave’s clear nasal passages would lull me to bed. I knew we’d wake each other up shortly, but fat chance I’d rethink my night-time environment in favor of something as clinical as optimizing sleep. Sophie Brickman is a contributor to the New Yorker, the New York Times and other publications, and the author of Baby, Unplugged: One Mother’s Search for Balance, Reason, and Sanity in the Digital AgeIn a red hot season of entertainment, with everything from aliens to superheroes to princesses, there’s one film that everyone is talking about: King Richard. Now available to download and keep, it’s the critically acclaimed biopic that follows Richard “King Richard” Williams on a mission to turn his daughters Venus and Serena into tennis superstars. In the cinema, it made audiences laugh, cry and burst into applause. Little wonder then that, with the awards season fast approaching, King Richard is being heavily tipped to scoop a clutch of gongs. To date, it has more than lived up to expectations, picking up a stellar six Oscar nominations, hot on the heels of four for the Baftas. The film itself gains an Academy Awards nomination for best picture, while Will Smith, who stars as Richard Williams, is in the running for actor in a leading role. Aunjanue Ellis, who plays Venus and Serena’s mother, is up for actress in a supporting role, and the film is in contention in three other categories: writing – original screenplay (Zach Baylin); film editing (Pamela Martin); and music – original song (DIXSON and Beyoncé Knowles-Carter). Earlier, when the Bafta shortlist was released, King Richard didn’t disappoint there either, picking up an impressive four nominations: leading actor (Will Smith); supporting actress (Aunjanue Ellis); original screenplay (Zach Baylin) and casting (Rich Delia, Avy Kaufman). With its quest for awards glory off to a roaring start, what is it about this film that makes it so special? 1 Looks like Will Smith is finally going to win that Oscar Having been nominated twice before but never having won, Will Smith’s performance is a favourite contender for Oscar glory (on top of any Bafta triumphs). Variety announced he is “now at the forefront of what is going to be a cut-throat best actor race”, and Awards Watch named him the most likely winner ahead of Denzel Washington and Benedict Cumberbatch. The buzz is well earned, as Smith disappears into the character of Richard Williams and delivers a performance that is complicated, nuanced and intensely moving. Having been nominated for Ali and The Pursuit of Happyness, it looks like three may be the magic number for Smith. Having already picked up awards at film festivals, and with ten nominations between the Oscars and Baftas, King Richard might, before long, have a trophy cabinet as crowded as Venus or Serena’s. 2 It’s Venus and Serena approved The legends themselves appeared online with Will Smith to release one of the trailers. Having spent so much of their lives seeing their actions misinterpreted and twisted, with people obsessing over every outfit, display of emotion or expression of disappointment, now Venus and Serena are reclaiming their narrative, telling their origin story and showing how two young girls from Compton became the icons they are today. “This movie means so much to our family and we can’t wait for you to see it,” Serena tweeted. 3 One word: Beyoncé That’s right, the one and only Beyoncé has written new music just for King Richard – and picked up an Oscar nomination for her efforts. Queen Bey was inspired by the story of the Williams family to write “Be Alive”, a powerful ballad with lyrics that speak to the film’s central message: “Look how we’ve been fighting to stay alive, so when we win we will have pride. Do you know how much we have cried? How hard we had to fight?” 4 It’s all about teamwork It’s not just Will Smith delivering a stellar performance. Praise has been heaped on the entire ensemble, with particular acclaim going to Aunjanue Ellis as the girls’ mum Oracene, Jon Bernthal as coach Rick Macci and, of course, Saniyya Sidney and Demi Singleton as young Venus and Serena. The newcomer actors are being picked out as ones to watch. It seems particularly apt that King Richard has launched two very exciting new talents into the spotlight. 5 It’s directed by the director’s director Best known for directing indie darling Monsters and Men and some of the best episodes of Top Boy, Reinaldo Marcus Green has taken a big step up with King Richard in terms of budget, scope and star power. The film is not only impressing audiences and critics, with its Rotten Tomatoes score topping 90%, but also has a vocal fan in Barry Jenkins, the Oscar-winning director of Moonlight and If Beale Street Could Talk, who could barely contain his enthusiasm. 6 You think you know this story, but you don’t While you may have expected the hard work Venus and Serena put in on the tennis court, you probably have no idea about the devastating hurdles they had to cross, the danger they faced, and the lengths to which Richard Williams was prepared to go to protect his family. 7 It shows how far we have come, and how far we haven’t Set in early 1990s Compton, the infamous suburb of Los Angeles, race is at the forefront of King Richard. Not only is the Williams family constantly underestimated, scrutinised by social services despite their high achieving children, and told they would be better off “playing basketball”, but racism is also a deadly threat, with the police brutality on the news terrifying the family. While a Black woman dominating the world of tennis is no longer a foreign concept, sadly much of King Richard speaks to the Black community’s present-day problems. 8 We all need a hero Venus and Serena Williams are more than two of the greatest tennis players the world has ever seen, they are icons who have inspired millions of people, in particular as heroes to Black girls everywhere. Richard is aware of their significance from early on, telling young Venus: “You’re not gonna just be representing you, you’re gonna be representing every little black girl on Earth.” But no matter your race or gender, a story of triumphing against the odds like the Williams family did, is universally inspirational. Download and keep on digital now King Richard © 2021 Warner Bros. Ent. All Rights ReservedFew people have dared to dream as big as Richard “King Richard” Williams, father of Venus and Serena, a man who wanted a better life for his children. Before the two girls were born he devised a 78-page plan to turn them into two of the greatest tennis players in the world which – spoiler alert! – he did. Many people think they know who Richard Williams is: the big character sitting courtside for his daughters’ greatest accomplishments – but few people know the story of the courage, determination and sacrifice that got him there. A film from director Reinaldo Marcus Green, starring Will Smith as King Richard, tells the unbelievable true story of the man behind the legends. Richard pushed his daughters to work hard to achieve their dreams, unashamedly driving them to the best of their abilities, and telling those who criticised him: “I don’t even mind you saying we’re hard on these kids. You know why? ‘Cause we are.” He knew that even if the world underestimated them, even if they had to practise on “raggedy” tennis courts with second-rate equipment, even if “this world ain’t never had no respect for Richard Williams” they were going to respect Venus and Serena. The film asks us to consider what we could achieve if we put our minds to it, and if someone believed and fought for us the way Richard Williams did for Venus and Serena. The three principles of commitment, confidence and courage are something we can all apply to our own lives, in order unlock our potential and become the greatest versions of ourselves. Life lesson one: commitment There’s no denying that Venus and Serena had a rare talent, but King Richard reminds us of the sheer amount of work it took to get them where they are today. Richard started giving his daughters tennis lessons when they were four years old, and had a clear vision of what they could achieve, convinced that “Venus and Serena are gonna shake up this world”. He was certain that if they never gave up, they could achieve all of their greatest dreams. We’ve all heard that, apparently, it takes 10,000 hours of practice to make yourself an expert, but the film asks us to actually consider what that involves. It’s waking up day after day to push yourself, to hit a shopping trolley’s worth of balls, committing to goals no one but you can see. Beyond Richard’s commitment to his daughters’ careers there was also his devotion to protecting their spirits, leading him to pull them out of junior tournaments he thinks will deprive them of the joy of childhood and the joy of the game. Because commitment to your dreams doesn’t mean agreeing to be exploited. Life lesson two: confidence When we first meet Richard, who is coaching Venus and Serena himself while working as a security guard by night, he possesses a confidence that many of the affluent white people he encounters seem perplexed by. By merely operating within the world of elite tennis he battles stigma on a daily basis. Despite the judgment and the rejection, Richard knows his, and his daughters’, value. When he meets with a potential tennis coach, Richard stays strong when the coach downplays Venus and Serena’s talent saying: “The chance of achieving the kind of success that you’re talking about is just very, very unlikely … Tennis takes expert instruction, it takes families with unlimited financial resources” – things he knows the Williams sisters do not have. But Richard is undeterred, certain that if he can get them the right opportunity, Venus and Serena will become two of the greatest athletes the world has ever seen. When they walk into a tournament and dozens of shocked white faces turn, Richard keeps his head high, assuring his Black family: “It’s OK, they’re just not used to seeing good-looking people like us.” When the whole world doubts you, this film reminds us that confidence is something no one can take away. Life lesson three: courage Richard didn’t just face microaggressions at white country clubs. When training his daughters on the courts in Compton, the Los Angeles suburb where they grew up, the family was often surrounded by danger. At times he had to physically put himself in harm’s way, and ended up beaten and bruised on the tennis courts where Venus and Serena played. More than anything, Richard had the courage to stand up for his family. When he sees his daughters being potentially exploited he stops it in its tracks. “We gonna do this a different way,” he says. In a racist world with the odds stacked against you, it would be easy to be paralysed by fear and feel hopeless in the face of injustice. We all hope to have the courage to stand up for those we love: King Richard shows us how it’s done. Download and keep on digital now King Richard © 2021 Warner Bros. Ent. All Rights ReservedHow do you calculate the price of a human life? What about 256,000 human lives? Around a quarter of a million Americans are living in parts of the United States where rates of cancer caused by air pollution exceed the US government’s own limit of “acceptable risk.” Environmental experts have a chilling name for these sites: Sacrifice zones. Residents of these communities die of cancer and other illnesses more often, and earlier, than people sometimes just a couple miles away. Many of them may not know this. The Environmental Protection Agency does know – and allows it to happen. In other words, a government agency that is supposed to protect Americans has effectively condemned thousands of them to death. We know about this moral scandal in part thanks to research and reporting by ProPublica. Last week, the investigative news outlet published a detailed map of US sacrifice zones. Many are in the Texas and Louisiana petrochemical corridor sometimes called Cancer Alley. But others are in communities as far-flung as Pennsylvania, New Mexico, Illinois, Kentucky and Tennessee. Millions of Americans no doubt go about their daily lives under the belief that, if nothing else, their government should protect them – and is protecting them – from cancer-causing industrial pollutants. Unfortunately, they’re in for a disturbing wake-up call. The publication identified around 1,000 hotspots, typically in communities near factories, refineries, or military facilities which release hazardous gases such as ethylene oxide, benzene, dioxin, and chloroprene. ProPublica’s research suggests that around 256,000 Americans live in areas where incidences of cancer caused by air pollution exceed 1 in 10,000, which is the EPA’s current upper limit of acceptable risk. While companies do report their emission levels to the government, their estimates are chronically lowballed, and the EPA often fails to use the information it collects to clearly inform members of the public about how the air in their communities may be affecting their health. Even when the EPA does release reports about the risk levels in sacrifice zones, little seems to change. Take, for example, the primarily black, working-class town of Reserve, Louisiana: a 2015 EPA report found that the risk of cancer from air toxicity in Reserve is 50 times the national average. After learning that the factories in their area were definitively linked to their community’s high cancer rates, the people of Reserve felt “Like nobody cared,” as resident Mary Hampton told the Guardian in 2019. The prevailing attitude from the government, factories, and media was “It is what it is so you all just live with it,” she said. Polluting factories are disproportionately concentrated in poor or minority neighborhoods. According to Steve Lerner’s 2019 book Sacrifice Zones: The Front Lines of Toxic Chemical Exposure in the United States, the average fine imposed on polluters of white neighborhoods is 506% higher than the average fine imposed on polluters of minority communities. Every day, people are going about their lives in conditions nobody should have to endure, especially without their knowledge or consent. Is it really too much to ask that we don’t live in government-sanctioned “sacrifice zones”? Sadly, those in charge seem to think so. Adrienne Matei is a freelance journalistConservative MPs have turned their ire on a colleague, Christopher Chope, for prolonging the sleaze scandal engulfing the party by blocking the ratification of a report that found another backbencher breached lobbying rules. The government tried to avoid drawing attention to the vote on Owen Paterson, so shunted it until 10pm on Monday and tabled a type of motion only one person needed to oppose in order for it to fall. But a lone cry of “object!” came from Chope, leaving several in the Commons – including the deputy speaker, Nigel Evans, chairing proceedings – visibly stunned. Chope is a veteran backbencher – and objecter. He has caused plenty of problems for the Conservatives before by being the sole person to shout “object!” and kill off private members’ bills on issues such as blocking upskirting and female genital mutilation. He also objected to a global women’s conference taking place in the Commons and a posthumous pardon to codebreaker Alan Turing following his homosexuality conviction. The first move prompted someone to hang female underwear over the door of his Commons office, and he was criticised by the then-prime minister Theresa May. Chope’s argument is that he does not necessarily disagree with the contents of bills he objects to, but disagrees with the principle of motions being passed without debate – which is what the government hoped would happen on Monday night to spare its blushes. He has previously insisted he has been “scapegoated” and called the characterisation of his actions a “travesty of the truth”. While his past interventions have sparked fury from some Tories, he faced a tidal wave of anger this week for blocking the Paterson report, meaning a debate will have to be held on it on Tuesday. Many other MPs believe they will now continue to have their own financial affairs, second jobs and expenses claims closely scrutinised. Ministerial aides have called Chope an “absolute twat” in private WhatsApp messages seen by the Guardian – and these are among the less explicit exchanges being shared as the fallout continues. Attention is now turning to his political future. Chope first joined the Commons representing Southampton Itchen in 1983 – the second general election won by Margaret Thatcher, whom he served as a junior minister under in the environment department. He narrowly lost his seat in 1992 but returned as the MP for Christchurch and East Dorset in 1997 – and has enjoyed a large majority ever since that currently stands at about 25,000. Given Chope occupies a safe constituency and has shown no intention of quitting despite proving a persistent irritant to the government, some hope he will be forced to stand down. One minister told the Guardian that “the executive are livid” and said “the man should retire”. They added: “The question is whether Chope’s implosion will be shorter or longer than Paterson’s.” A former frontbencher complained that “the fact we can’t deselect these people is baffling”, and expressed hope this time that Chope would be shunted out. The Tory whips’ are aware of Chope’s record but are understood not to have expected him to put them in such a bind by objecting on such a sensitive motion. However, a government source admitted: “Nobody is surprised, given his form in this area.” Chope has not held a government post in nearly 20 years – and instead been a continual thorn in ministers’ side as a staunch Brexiter on the Department for Exiting the European Union select committee. He is an honorary vice-president of the Thatcherite group Conservative Way Forward, and last month criticised the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, for his budget, saying it “flew in the face of so many real Conservative principles”.Last week, Arizona Representative Paul Gosar posted on Twitter and Instagram a photoshopped animated cartoon in which he assassinates Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez and attacks President Joe Biden. Gosar says it “symbolizes the battle for the soul of America” when Congress takes up the president’s economic package, which he said includes immigration provisions he opposes. Gosar represents Arizona’s 4th congressional district. Until 2012, a dear friend of mine, Gabrielle Giffords, represented Arizona’s 8th congressional district. I got to know Gabby shortly before she entered politics as a member of the Arizona state house of representatives in 2001. She then became the youngest woman ever elected to the Arizona senate and then, in 2006, the third woman in history to be elected to represent Arizona in the US House of Representatives. On 8 January 2011, during a public gathering outside a Safeway grocery store in Casa Adobes, Arizona, Gabby was shot in the head by a man firing a 9mm pistol with a 33-round magazine. He hit 19 people and killed six, among them federal judge John Roll and a nine-year-old girl, Christina-Taylor Green. The shooter, Jared Lee Loughner, was detained by bystanders until he was taken into police custody. Eventually, after facing more than 50 federal criminal charges, Loughner pleaded guilty to 19 of them to avoid a death sentence. Gabby was evacuated to the University Medical Center of Tucson in critical condition. By the time I was able to see her the following week, she could say a few words. But even now, a decade later – after the most intense and courageous personal effort at rehabilitation I have ever witnessed – she continues to struggle with language and has lost half her vision in both eyes. Gabby resigned from Congress in 2012. Why did Loughner try to assassinate her? No one will ever know for sure. Authorities found in his safe an envelope that bore the handwritten words “Giffords”, “My assassination” and “I planned ahead.” By all accounts, including his own, he was growing increasingly delusional. He had amplified on his social media accounts several extremist rightwing tropes. In March 2010, 10 months before the shooting, former vice-presidential candidate Sarah Palin had posted a map of 20 congressional districts she and John McCain won in 2008 but whose representatives in Congress had voted in favor of the Affordable Care Act. The map marked each district with a set of crosshairs. Palin promoted the map by tweeting “Don’t Retreat, Instead – RELOAD.” One of those crosshairs targeted Gabby. Although no direct connection was ever established between Palin’s map and Gabby’s shooting, surely Palin’s violent rhetoric contributed to a climate of political violence in America in which a delusional man would mark Gabby for assassination. Gabby herself had expressed concern about Palin’s map. Just as surely, Palin’s inflammatory post was a step toward increasingly violent political rhetoric on the way to Donald Trump and the insurrection of 6 January. Last Friday a group of House Democrats introduced a resolution to censure Gosar for posting his video. The motion was introduced by Representative Jackie Speier, co-chair of the Democratic women’s caucus, and nine other lawmakers. “For that Member to post such a video on his official Instagram account and use his official congressional resources in the House of Representatives to further violence against elected officials goes beyond the pale,” the group said. “As the events of January 6th have shown, such vicious and vulgar messaging can and does foment actual violence.” The House Republican leader, Kevin McCarthy, has so far been silent on Gosar’s video. The group of House Democrats who introduced the resolution condemned McCarthy’s silence, calling it “tacit approval and just as dangerous”. America is experiencing increasingly virulent politics and violent political threats. The New York Times reports that at a conservative rally in western Idaho last month, a young man stepped up to a microphone to ask when he could start killing Democrats. “When do we get to use the guns?” he said, as the audience applauded. “How many elections are they going to steal before we kill these people?” The local state representative, a Republican, later called it a “fair” question. According to the Times, violent threats against lawmakers are on track to double this year. Republicans who break party ranks and defy Trump have come to expect death threats – often incited by their own colleagues, who have denounced them as traitors. Unless those at the highest levels of government who foment or encourage violence – or who remain conspicuously silent as others do – are held accountable, no one in political life will be safe. Censure is not enough for Gosar. He should be expelled from the House. Robert Reich, a former US secretary of labor, is professor of public policy at the University of California at Berkeley and the author of Saving Capitalism: For the Many, Not the Few and The Common Good. His new book, The System: Who Rigged It, How We Fix It, is out now. He is a Guardian US columnist. His newsletter is at robertreich.substack.comOne of Britain’s biggest property firms, Land Securities, has swung to a half-year profit, helped by a recovery in central London office rents as many people have returned to their workplaces, at least some of the time. The Bluewater owner said the reopening of retail and a revival in office working had driven the first rise in the value of its property portfolio in five years. It rose by £81m, or 0.8%, to £11bn in the six months to 30 September. Landsec’s portfolio is 70% made up of central London property, mostly offices such as Deutsche Bank’s London headquarters and an office complex near St Paul’s Cathedral, but it also includes shops and Piccadilly Lights, the huge LED advertising screen in Piccadilly Circus and the property behind it. The firm also owns the Trinity Leeds shopping centre. Landsec made a pretax profit of £275m in the first half, compared with a £835m loss a year earlier. It said rents for prime London offices remained resilient and the central London office market enjoyed a recovery in leasing and investment this year, after being hit by the pandemic in 2020. Mark Allan, the chief executive, struck a more upbeat tone than in May when the developer reported a £1.4bn full-year loss. He said office use had recovered to 55% of pre-Covid levels, partly reversing the surge in working from home prompted by the pandemic. “Office utilisation has increased markedly over the past couple of months as confidence in the safety of workplaces and public transport has improved and government guidance has become clearer,” he said. The company has rejigged its portfolio, selling off hotels, leisure properties and retail parks. It plans to focus on offices in the heart of the capital and buy more prime shopping malls, capitalising on their declining values, as well as developing mixed-use urban neighbourhoods. Landsec estimates that 17% of all retail space in the UK is not needed, a figure that is expected to rise to 25% by 2025. However, despite the explosion in online shopping during the pandemic, it is betting on the popularity of good retail locations. Like-for-like sales at its outlet malls such as Braintree Village in Essex rose 7.9% from pre-pandemic levels in the 25 weeks after 12 April, and were up 1% over the six months. Shopping centre sales have also joined in the recovery and are close to 2019 levels. The company said rents in popular destinations had fallen by 65% to affordable levels for retailers. Landsec sold off £250m worth of assets and made £616m of acquisitions in the first half, including acquiring a 75% stake in Media City, the 15-hectare (37-acre) media, digital and tech hub in Salford, Greater Manchester. It is also taking over the urban regeneration specialist U+I for £190m. “Our focus on developing and investing in mixed-use urban neighbourhoods recognises that the lines between where we live, where we work and where we spend our leisure time are becoming increasingly blurred,” the company said.A suspected suicide bomber blew himself up with a homemade device outside a maternity hospital in Liverpool on Sunday. Here’s what we know so far: A taxi exploded in flames outside Liverpool Women’s hospital in the city centre shortly before 11am on Sunday. A male passenger inside the vehicle was killed in the blast and declared dead at the scene. Police have identified the passenger as 32-year-old Emad al-Swealmeen. The taxi driver – named as David Perry – managed to escape before the flames spread and was released from hospital on Monday after being treated for serious but non-life-threatening injuries. No one else was injured or killed. Police inquiries indicate that Swealmeen made an improvised explosive device (IED) and brought it into the taxi. Four men were arrested on Sunday afternoon and Monday but have all been released. The motive for the apparent attack is unknown but links to the Remembrance Day ceremony nearby are being explored. Swealmeen is understood to have been an asylum seeker who had previously lived in Iraq. He was refused asylum in 2014, according to reports. He lived with a couple called Malcolm and Elizabeth Hitchcott for eight months, who have described him as a “lovely guy”. Swealmeen converted from Islam to Christianity at a ceremony in Liverpool’s Anglican cathedral. The suspected attacker was previously sectioned under mental health laws after being arrested for possession of a large knife. He was reportedly interested in motor racing and had changed his name to Enzo Almeni, in a nod to the supercar creator Enzo Ferrari. The police have connected him to addresses in Sutcliffe Street, Liverpool – which is understood to be a privately run hostel for asylum seekers – and in Rutland Avenue.The number of workers on UK company payrolls rose sharply last month despite the end of the government’s furlough scheme, after a record increase in people moving from unemployment into work ahead of its closure. The Office for National Statistics (ONS) said Britain’s employers added 160,000 more workers to their payrolls in October, taking the total to 29.3million in the first month after the removal of the multibillion-pound wage subsidy scheme. The headline unemployment rate fell by more than expected, dropping to 4.3% in the three months to the end of September, from 4.5% in August. However, it still remains above the pre-pandemic level of 4%. It comes after the Bank of England held back from raising interest rates earlier this month while waiting to see what happened in the jobs market after the removal of furlough, confounding financial market expectations for the first rise in borrowing costs since the pandemic began. Some analysts said the jobs figures could provide Threadneedle Street with a green light for raising interest rates before Christmas – if a similar picture is maintained in the next set of official labour market figures on 14 December. Andrew Bailey, the Bank’s governor, said on Monday he was “very uneasy” about rising inflation across the British economy, and came “very close” to raising rates earlier this month. The Bank will next make a decision on interest rates on 16 December. “Today’s release has given the Bank an amber light and the next labour market release will probably give it the green light to raise interest rates from 0.1% to 0.25%,” said Paul Dales, the chief UK economist at the consultancy Capital Economics. According to the latest snapshot, a net increase of 304,000 people moved from unemployment into work in the three months to the end of September, the biggest jump on modern records dating back to 2001. Total job-to-job moves also rose to a record high, largely driven by people quitting their old jobs rather than dismissals; a development branded by some commentators as the “great resignation”, as people reassessed their priorities after lockdown and took advantage of the support furlough offered for job switching. “It’s fortunate that the furlough scheme ended at a very strong period of labour demand,” said Grant Fitzner, the chief economist at the ONS. “We’re seeing unprecedented levels of job switching at the moment.” It comes as employers across the country struggle with chronic staff shortages after the easing of pandemic restrictions, especially in care, warehousing and logistics, with job vacancies across the economy reaching a record high of almost 1.2m. The ONS said it was possible that those made redundant at the end of furlough would not yet be included in the data as they worked out their notice period. However, surveys of employers suggested the numbers made redundant was likely to be small. More than 1m jobs were still furloughed in the final weeks of the scheme, although about half of workers had returned to their jobs on a part-time basis while still receiving wage support from the state. Some employment experts warned the rise in employment was driven by part-time jobs and young people taking on zero-hours contracts, while many furloughed staff will have returned to their jobs on fewer hours. In a sign of continuing pressure after the end of furlough, more than 2 million people were claiming unemployment-related benefits in October. Although down from a peak of almost 2.7 million at the height of the pandemic in 2020, it remains significantly higher than the 1.2 million claiming benefits before the pandemic struck. It comes after the government removed a £20 uplift in universal credit from early October in the biggest overnight cut to benefits on record. The chancellor, Rishi Sunak, said the latest figures showed the “extraordinary success of the furlough scheme” and were evidence of the government’s plan for jobs working. “We know how vital keeping people in good jobs is, both for them and for our economy – which is why it’s fantastic to see the unemployment rate falling for nine months in a row and record numbers of people moving into employment,” he said. However, experts said average wage growth appears to have lost momentum. Official figures showed average annual growth in total pay packets, including bonuses, fell to 5.8% in September from 7.2% a month earlier. Although the drop reflected distortions caused by the pandemic gradually dropping out of the official figures, analysts said wage rises would fail to keep pace with higher levels of inflation. Nye Cominetti, the senior economist at the Resolution Foundation, said: “While unemployment is unlikely to be a problem this winter, pay may well be. The economy needs ‘goldilocks’ pay growth – fast enough to protect living standards, but not so fast as to generate excessive inflation.”With the recent announcement of research by the FSA that revealed that one in five women reported unwanted physical attention at football games, we’re keen to hear what it’s like for women who go to the football, and if there are moments that have shaped your experience in supporting your team. Share your experiences If you are 18 years or over, you can get in touch by filling in the form below and there will be a number at the bottom where you can leave a voicemail or send a voice note via WhatsApp. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. We will only use the data provided by you for the purpose of the feature. We will delete any personal data when we no longer require it for this purpose. For more information please see our privacy policy. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here. Once you have submitted the form, you can also send us a voice note via WhatsApp, or leave us a voice mail by clicking here or adding +44(0)7392318583. State your name at the beginning of the message and whether you wish to stay anonymous so your name and voice are not included in the podcast.The TV presenter Melanie Sykes has announced she has been diagnosed as autistic at the age of 51. In an email to readers of her magazine the Frank, Sykes opened up about the “life-changing” diagnosis and her relief that things in her life had finally started to “make sense”. “This week has been truly life-changing, or rather, life-affirming,” she wrote in the email, originally obtained by the Sun. “As many of you may or may not know, I was diagnosed with autism late Thursday afternoon. And then, finally, so many things made sense.” She said her diagnosis had come as a huge relief and was one she would be celebrating. “I now have a deeper understanding of myself, my life, and the things I have endured.” She described the previously unexplainable struggles she had faced throughout her career, including while working on live TV. “The sensitivities around working in television have come up,” she said. “I have always struggled with earpieces, what they call talkback, where you hear what the director says. I have often accidentally responded to the director in my ear, live on air, as I cannot juggle the person I am interviewing and the person in my ear at the same time.” She added: “My memory has always been problematic, and remembering pieces to camera could spin me out, resulting in sleepless nights beforehand. There have been many tears of fear and frustration.” In a video on Instagram, Sykes further explained how the conversation came up when she was making a documentary about the failures of the education system, especially for children who are autistic, so she decided to do the assessments. “There’s a sense of relief about it and a sense of mourning. Not because I don’t want to be who I am, it’s that I wish I’d known sooner so I could have understood exactly why things were rolling the way they were rolling. “I’ve been vulnerable to abusive people, I’ve been vulnerable to people that lie because I only see and take on board what people tell me. I’ve always been a bit funny with jokes, if somebody tells me something with a deadpan delivery I believe them.” Sykes has previously spoken about her youngest son being diagnosed with autism at the age of three, and said it gave her the push she needed to leave her marriage. “I couldn’t be in a marriage that I wasn’t happy in, in order to help him,” she told The Hot Mess Mums Club podcast. The model and activist Christine McGuinness recently revealed she had been diagnosed as autistic. Appearing on ITV’s Loose Women on Monday, McGuinness discussed how autism had affected her life and relationships, including having to “learn how to behave”. “I’ve always been afraid to say it out loud because I know it seems odd and it seems different,” said McGuinness, who is married to the TV presenter Paddy McGuinness. “If I go to a hotel room I will rearrange the furniture, I’ll take the pictures of the wall.”Netflix is to double the size of its base at Shepperton Studios, where it has made productions including the TV series Enola Holmes and films including The Old Guard, as the US streaming service looks to ramp up its British-made output. Netflix, which spent $1bn (£740m) making about 60 TV shows and films in the UK last year, including The Crown and Sex Education, first struck a deal to make the historic studio in Surrey its permanent production base in 2019 in a race to secure studio space amid a shortage fuelled by the streaming boom. “We are delighted to announce the expansion of our production presence in the UK,” said Anna Mallett, vice-president of physical production for the UK, Europe, Middle East and Africa region. “The new contract with Shepperton highlights our commitment to investing in the UK creative industry and will provide a wealth of opportunities and production jobs, from entry level to heads of department.” The new long-term deal comes as Shepperton Studios, home to films from Alien to A Clockwork Orange, prepares to more than double in size. Parent company Pinewood Studios, where films from the Bond franchise to Star Wars are shot, has received planning permission to expand Shepperton from 14 stages to 31 stages. Netflix will start using the expanded site on completion in 2023, but it will not take up all the new space. Netflix also revealed that viewers have spent more than 1.6bn hours watching mega-hit Squid Game, as the streaming giant announces it is to publish weekly “Top 10” lists to give viewers, investors and production companies more insight into its most popular content. Netflix, which in the past has been criticised for the lack of transparency in how it reveals viewing data, is to start releasing four weekly lists showing the most popular English and non-English films, and TV shows globally based on hours viewing. “This is an important step forward for Netflix, the creators we work with and our members,” Pablo Perez De Rosso, vice-president of content strategy, planning and analysis at Netflix, said in a blogpost explaining Netflix’s new policy. “People want to understand what success means in a streaming world, and these lists offer the clearest answer to that question in our industry.” The new weekly lists, published for the first time on Tuesday, show that Squid Game remained the second-most popular TV series globally with 42.8m hours of the dystopian drama viewed globally in the week to 14 November as it continues to prove addictive viewing two months after release. Season 3 of Narcos: Mexico proved to be the most popular TV series last week while Red Notice, the big budget blockbuster starring Ryan Reynolds, Gal Gadot and Dwayne Johnson, was Netflix’s biggest film globally with 148m hours viewed. The company said it would also make more frequent updates to its “all-time” biggest hits lists, which are based on hours viewed in the first 28 days after a title’s release and were published for the first time last month, which excluded any official data on Squid Game. In an update, Netflix revealed that Squid Game has amassed 1.6bn hours viewed in its first 28 days, almost triple the popularity of its second most popular global series, Bridgerton, on 625m hours. Perez De Rosso admitted that Netflix has in the past come in for criticism for the opaque measurement methodology it has used to illustrate popularity, while TV and production companies that make its content have complained they have little way to measure success. “Figuring out how best to measure success in streaming is hard, and there’s no one perfect metric,” said Perez De Rosso. “Traditional measures like box office or share of audience [for linear TV] aren’t relevant to most streamers, including Netflix. We believe engagement as measured by hours viewed is a strong indicator of a title’s popularity, as well as overall member satisfaction, which is important for retention in subscription services.”The testimony by Azeem Rafiq on the racism he experienced as a cricket player has sent shockwaves across the country, but for many others, it triggered a profound sense of deja vu. Rafiq told the digital, culture, media and sport committee on Tuesday that he lost his career to racism. If you have been affected we would like to hear from you. We are particularly interested in hearing from those in the South Asian community on your experiences of racism and islamophobia, and whether you also felt it pushed you out of sport. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Zhou Guanyu will become Formula One’s first Chinese driver after he was signed by Alfa Romeo for the 2022 season. The 22-year-old will replace the Italian Antonio Giovinazzi at the team and will partner Valtteri Bottas, who is to leave Mercedes as Lewis Hamilton’s teammate at the end of this season. Zhou is the final driver to be confirmed for next season, completing the 2022 grid. A statement from Alfa Romeo described Zhou as “a trailblazer who will write a pivotal page of his country’s motor sport history”. He will be the first Chinese driver to compete in F1, following on from his compatriot Ma Quinghua, the only Chinese man to have driven an F1 car when he took part in five practice sessions in 2012 and 2013 for HRT and Caterham. “I dreamt from a young age of climbing as high as I can in a sport that I am passionate about and now the dream has come true,” he said. “To be the first ever Chinese driver in Formula One is a breakthrough for Chinese motor sport history. I know a lot of hopes will be resting on me and, as ever, I will take this as motivation to become better and achieve more.” Zhou is second in the F2 championship, 36 points behind Oscar Piastri, with meetings in Saudi Arabia and Abu Dhabi to be completed. He was born in Shanghai in 1999, took up karting at the age of eight and has since moved through the ranks, including three seasons in European F3, and is now in his third season in F2. He was a member of the Ferrari academy between 2014 and 2018. In 2019 he was taken on as part of the Renault (now Alpine) academy and has been the Alpine test driver since 2020. He will bring considerable financial backing to Alfa Romeo with his commercial Chinese sponsors. “I dreamt from a young age of climbing as high as I can in a sport that I am passionate about and now the dream has come true,” he said. “To be the first ever Chinese driver in Formula 1 is a breakthrough for Chinese motorsport history. I know a lot of hopes will be resting on me and, as ever, I will take this as motivation to become better and achieve more.” Zhou will no longer have any ties with Alpine as of next year but has tested their older F1 cars and drove in FP1 at Austria this year. He will take part in the F1 rookie test at Abu Dhabi after the end of this season. This month the Chinese GP was announced as returning to the calendar in 2023 after a three-year absence because of the pandemic. F1 is ambitious to continue its growth in China, is a potentially huge market for the sport.F1. The sport’s chief executive, Stefano Domenicali, said: “This is fantastic news for F1 and the millions of passionate Chinese fans that now have a home hero to cheer all year long,” said F1’s chief executive, Stefano Domenicali. “It is another great example for the pyramid in F2 working and promoting talent to the top flight of motor sport.” Giovinazzi made his F1 debut in 2017 and was signed by Alfa in 2019. He has since scored 19 points, with his best finish a fifth place at Brazil that year. Meanwhile, Hamilton’s bid for a record-breaking eighth world championship took another fascinating twist on Tuesday after Mercedes called on F1’s stewards to reconsider their decision not to penalise Max Verstappen at the Brazilian Grand Prix. Hamilton won the Interlagos race but Verstappen escaped punishment for running his rival off the track. New footage has emerged and Mercedes have appealed the decision.Each week Molly Oldfield, host of the hit children’s podcast Everything Under the Sun, hosts a quiz for the Guardian in which she answers the questions kids have about the world around us. Such as, “What’s the difference between a turtle and a tortoise?” or, “Why does Pisa’s tower lean?” For a Christmas special, Molly will be answering questions about Christmas. Would your child like to know how fast Santa’s sleigh travels? Or why holly is spiky? If you have a child aged 3-13, and they have a Christmas question they would like to share with the world, please fill in the form below on their behalf and it could appear in the quiz. We will only use the data provided for the purpose of creating the quiz, we will delete any personal data when we no longer require it for this purpose. For more information please see our terms of service and privacy policy Share your child’s questions You can get in touch by filling in the form. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.For a good couple of years, writing The Windsors – Channel 4’s satirical soap opera about the royal family – was my full-time job and it was odd to think how bound up my livelihood was with theirs. Once, when our special on Harry and Meghan’s wedding was about to go out, I found myself jogging the Mall with Buckingham Palace in my sight. What if Harry were to emerge for a similar jog, I daydreamed, and somehow we got chatting and he asked me about my job? Would he want to give me a punch up the bracket? And if so, how would I talk him out of it? Similar thoughts must have occurred to the creators of Spencer, the film about Diana, Princess of Wales, which is in cinemas now and tipped for an Oscar, not to mention The Crown, which has been in the headlines because one of the show’s contributors, Jemima Khan, demanded her name be removed from the credits because of a lack of “respect” and “compassion” for her late friend – whom she wanted to portray “accurately”. On The Windsors we’re taking the mickey and often go into surreal flights of fancy, so inaccuracies don’t really count. In one episode, Kate was cured of Ebola by having Tony Blair in a mini-submarine shrunk down and injected into her. In another, Theresa May was poisoned by Camilla, the Duchess of Cornwall, but brought back to life by Wills with the kiss of a prince. I can’t imagine the critics of Spencer or The Crown getting in a flap about that. But comedy doesn’t excuse everything and we too have had our share of flak in the press for being cruel. Often we’re having a go at the institution of the monarchy rather than the individuals; an institution that embodies the idea of hereditary privilege, one in which you can attain a position of power and wealth purely by an accident of birth, is surely fair game. Plus, we pay millions for the royal family in the form of the sovereign grant. With that sort of outlay, isn’t it right to hold them up to scrutiny (and then make off-colour jokes about Prince Charles and Camilla bonking each other while a footman watches on)? Having said that, we do go after the individuals too: when you have Prince William presiding over wildlife charities while also hunting wild boar; Prince Edward, a man whose military service consisted of a three-month stint in the Marines, wearing a tunic covered in medals to a remembrance day service; and Prince Harry, a multimillionaire complaining about having to pay for his own security, then I’d say they’re fair game. And I haven’t even mentioned Prince Andrew. As for cruelty, I’d humbly suggest the critics are off the money. We were always keen to have warmth in our scripts – to be too sneering and vituperative would make for very boring television. We might portray Beatrice and Eugenie as silly and lazy, but we also show them genuinely caring for one another and their family. In the stage version of the show, The Windsors: Endgame, their mission is to try to clear their father’s name, something that’s doomed from the start, which only makes you root for them more. They’re deluded about their dad, but that only adds to the pathos. And our hero, Wills, is just that – a hero, a sort of cross between Hamlet and Henry V, tortured by doubt as he takes on his father. But he and Charles always make up at the end of our stories, because deep down they love one another. Which means, weirdly, that monarchists and republicans alike can get something out of the show. Diana, with the tragedy surrounding her death, is a trickier character to tackle – as the makers of The Crown and Spencer have discovered. We didn’t write her into the original Windsors TV show, not out of any particular sensitivity, but because we were dealing with the royal family in the present. But she does come up in the stage play. At one point Kate says to Wills: “She was the queen of people’s hearts.” And Wills replies: “As she said to Martin Bashir. The whole interview was completely discredited but for some reason that bit still counts.” It is a Diana joke, yes. But it’s a joke about the perception of her, not Diana herself. Likewise when our soap opera villain, Camilla, sings about her, it’s about jealousy, the fact that years after her death the British public still love Diana and will never love Camilla in the same way. We’re talking about a new series of the TV show at moment, and if it returns we may well deal with Diana more directly. One idea is for Beatrice and Eugenie to find a time machine and travel back to the 1980s to meet her and their mum, Fergie (as well as pop into the Blitz club for a snog with Steve Strange). I suppose we will have to tread a bit more carefully with Diana – given her status as a queen in public hearts (some members of the public, at least). Her favourite pop star was Chris de Burgh. Surely that’s worth a joke? Bert Tyler-Moore is a screenwriter. The Windsors, which he wrote with George Jeffrie, is available on All 4, and The Windsors: Endgame will be touring in spring 2023Chicago has long been a home for the experimental fringes of improvised music. Ever since free jazz pianist Muhal Richard Abrams co-founded the Association for the Advancement of Creative Musicians in 1965 – to counter the dwindling popularity of jazz at the time – the Windy City has produced a largely self-sustaining ecosystem of modern instrumentalists pushing the boundaries of their artform. While earlier examples include the likes of saxophonist Anthony Braxton and the Art Ensemble of Chicago, the last decade has seen a revival of Chicago’s jazz lineage on the international stage via the critically acclaimed releases of drummer and producer Makaya McCraven and composer Angel Bat Dawid. Musician Damon Locks moved to Chicago in the late 1980s and has been a pillar of the city’s artistic community ever since. His most recent work takes the form of his collective of singers, dancers and musicians, the Black Monument Ensemble. Performing as part of the 2021 EFG London jazz festival, Locks now brings this free-form celebration of Chicago’s Black musical legacy to the art deco space of Hackney’s EartH. Largely silent through the 90-minute performance, Locks instead conducts his eight-person group through whirling dances across the stage – his black cape flying in syncopation with the percussionist’s slaps on the congas; his leaps into the air signifying the thump of the kick drum. When he isn’t dancing, Locks is stationed behind a desk of hardware, shuffling papers and triggering vocal samples on the themes of affirmation and self-determination. The band follow his intuitive lead with three vocalists providing tessellated harmonies alongside trumpeter Ben LaMar Gay’s reverb-laden solos and Dawid’s frenetic runs on the clarinet. The result is an at times almost overwhelming tumult of sound, held at bay only by a consistent sense of groove. This tension between stability and chaos is where Locks operates best, laying down tracks such as the synth-looping Now (Forever Momentary Space) and explosive Power. It is a congregational cry that stills us listeners with its immediacy; a free jazz eruption that Locks channels from Chicago to bring to us here in the fleeting moment of its making.The former Conservative minister David Davis is calling for controversial plans to send asylum seekers to another country while their claims are processed to be scrapped. The government’s nationality and borders bill contains several provisions that have generated cross-party concern. These include “offshoring” asylum seekers, criminalising people for the way they enter the UK and giving a new “lower class” refugee status to some people depending on how they enter the UK. In an amendment tabled on Tuesday, Davis is calling on MPs to remove the clause in the bill that allows asylum seekers to be removed offshore during processing. Labour, Liberal Democrat and SNP politicians have all expressed concern about this clause, along with some leading Conservatives such as the former prime minister and former home secretary Theresa May, who has said she has “practical concerns” about the proposals. Critics have pointed to problems with Australia’s offshoring of asylum seekers to places such as Manus Island in Papua New Guinea. Opposition parties in Westminster previously tabled an amendment to the bill which would have removed victims of torture, sexual or gender-based violence, trafficking and modern slavery, LGBTQ+ persons, those with a serious physical disability or mental health condition, those under 18 or over 70 and pregnant women from the scope of the offshoring clause. However, the Home Office minister Tom Pursglove rejected this, saying: “However, we simply cannot support any amendment that seeks to limit our ability to remove individuals to safe third countries. “I assure the committee again that we would only ever remove an individual to a country that we are satisfied is safe for them. However, the amendment is overly restrictive and therefore could not be used flexibly to consider the circumstances in the country in question.” Human rights campaigners have expressed concern that as the bill stands it does not guarantee to exclude children from offshoring. Bella Sankey, the director of Detention Action, said: “As many MPs know, sending children, trafficked people and torture survivors to be detained in offshore facilities for years on end will lead to immense human suffering and a shameful legacy. “Australia’s offshore camps allowed rampant sexual and physical abuse, cost over £2m per person a year and did nothing to prevent dangerous boat journeys. If MPs want to avoid being complicit in this failed experiment we would urge them to sign on to David Davis’s principled amendment to the nationality and borders bill.” A Home Office spokesperson said: “The British public have had enough of seeing people die in the Channel while ruthless criminal gangs profit from their misery. Our new plan for immigration provides the only long-term solution to fix the broken system, and it’s right we keep all options on the table.” More than 100,000 people have signed a series of linked petitions organised by various organisations – Refugee Action, Refugee Council, Freedom From Torture and One Strong Voice – which protest about the bill. The petitions are to be presented at 10 Downing Street later on Tuesday. At the same time MPs have been invited to take part in a photo at Westminster symbolically binning mocked up copies the nationality and borders bill. Along with Davis’s amendment tabled on Tuesday other MPs have tabled amendments calling for removal of the clause allowing differential treatment of refugees depending on their mode of arrival in the UK. Other amendments include disallowing immunity from prosecution in certain circumstances for immigration and enforcement officers and protection from prosecution for those helping to save lives at risk at sea. In July 2021 the bill passed its second reading by 366 votes to 265.Railway bosses have launched a campaign to warn lorry drivers to stop hitting their bridges, owing to fears that an influx of new recruits to tackle the driver shortage could make the peak accident season even worse. Even in the comparative quiet of the pandemic, more than 1,600 rail bridges were struck in the last year by drivers who failed to gauge their clearance correctly, costing millions in repairs and payouts for cancelled or delayed trains. One bridge, Coddenham Road in Needham Market, near Ipswich, Suffolk, was hit 19 times during 2020-21, despite having been fitted with yellow collision beams. Network Rail, which paid out more than £5.5m for delays from bridge strikes over the year, said incidents were likely to rise with more goods deliveries over Black Friday and Christmas, with a particular risk from the number of newly qualified drivers expected on the roads. It has launched an education campaign with the slogan “wise up, size up” to remind drivers and haulage operators of the risks Sir Peter Hendy, the chair of Network Rail, said: “Bridge strikes cause unnecessary delays, costs, and safety issues for road and rail users. To compound matters, they drain public funds, which should be used on upgrading and improving our network.” He urged operators and drivers to “properly plan their routes, know the height of their vehicles and look out for road signs warning of oncoming bridges. “Those who don’t are at risk of losing their driver’s and operator’s licences, and Network Rail looks to recover the entire repair and delay costs from the driver’s employer,” he added. Posters will be displayed at points including motorway service stations across Britain. The problem has been such that Network Rail now has a team of bridge strike “champions” to raise awareness, who visit haulage companies to point out local risks. The 10 most battered bridges in Britain 2020-21 Coddenham Road, Needham Market, Suffolk (19 strikes) St John’s Street, Lichfield, Staffordshire (18) Harlaxton Road, Grantham, Lincolnshire (16) Stuntney Road, Ely, Cambridgeshire (15) Bromford Road Dudley, West Midlands (13) Watling Street, Hinckley, Leicestershire (11) Warminster Road, Wilton, Wiltshire (11) Ipswich Road, Manningtree, Essex (10) Thames Street, Staines-upon-Thames, Surrey, (10) Lower Downs Road, Wimbledon, London, (10) Source: Network RailJP Morgan’s billionaire chief executive Jamie Dimon was allowed to skip Hong Kong’s strict 21-day hotel quarantine rules because he runs “a very huge bank” with “key business in Hong Kong”, the territory’s chief executive, Carrie Lam, said on Tuesday. Dimon flew into Hong Kong on Monday on JP Morgan’s private jet, becoming the first Wall Street bank boss to visit the territory or mainland China since the pandemic began. Questioned about why Dimon was allowed to enter the territory without complying with coronavirus rules, Lam said: “The justification is related to economy, as this is a very huge bank with key business in Hong Kong. He needed to come and work for about a day in Hong Kong. But there are restrictions, including restrictions over his itinerary, so the risk is completely manageable.” Hong Kong is pursuing a Covid Zero strategy alongside China, and has imposed some of the world’s strictest travel rules to keep the virus out. Measures include mandatory hotel quarantines of three weeks for any resident returning from the UK or US, regardless of vaccination status, followed by seven days of self-monitoring. Tourists and most non-resident visitors are banned from boarding flights to the city. During his visit, Dimon told Bloomberg that the strict quarantine policy “does make it harder” to attract and retain talent in the territory. The local American Chamber of Commerce said in May that 40% of its members were considering leaving the territory because of the restrictions. JP Morgan said Dimon would spend only 32 hours in Hong Kong, and the visit was to thank staff for their hard work during the pandemic and hold meetings with regulators. In August, the government also granted an exemption to the Hollywood actor Nicole Kidman, who had flown into the territory to film a TV series, prompting a brief outcry from frustrated residents who have been forced to pay out for expensive hotel stays. They have complained on Facebook in the HK Quarantine Support Group that the city is allowing the rich and powerful better treatment than long-term residents. “The privileged can jetset into Hong Kong on a breeze without [any] consequences … the rest of us [are] forced into three weeks of solitary confinement with [poor] food and no fresh air,” one user said.With its vibrant cultural life, dynamic foodie scene, winding cobbled lanes and hilly coastal setting, Lisbon is a city that’s hard not to love. We want to hear about your favourite place in Portugal’s capital – from a lesser-known gallery to a traditional cafe, from a B&amp;B that’s a cut above the rest to a chic bar with the best ocean views. Tell us about the places you love and why for your chance to win. If you have a relevant photo, do send it in – but it’s your words that will be judged for the competition. Keep your tip to about 100 words The best tip of the week, chosen by Tom Hall of Lonely Planet, will win a £200 voucher to stay at a Sawday’s property – the company has more than 3,000 in the UK and Europe. The best tips will appear on the Guardian Travel website, and maybe in the paper, too. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here. We’re sorry, but for legal reasons you must be a UK resident to enter this competition. The competition closes on 23 November at 9am Have a look at our past winners and other tips Read the terms and conditions here If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy hereIndia’s capital, Delhi, and several surrounding states have shut schools, imposed work-from-home orders and a full weekend lockdown of the city is being contemplated in an attempt to tackle the deadly levels of pollution that have yet again enveloped the region. Over the past weeks, in what has become a dreaded seasonal occurrence, Delhi has suffered pollution levels 20 times higher than the levels deemed healthy by the World Health Organization and a thick brown smog settled over the city. The causes of the severe pollution that have made Delhi the most polluted capital in the world are a combination of factors including car exhaust fumes, stubble-burning by farmers in nearby states, industrial pollution, waste burning and construction work. The drop in temperature, change in air pressure and the lack of wind as winter arrives then causes the pollution to become trapped over the city like a toxic umbrella. Delhi was given a brief reprieve last November as Covid-19 reduced industrial activity and cars on the roads, but pollution has returned to the same deadly levels as before and on several days even hit a rating of 1,000 AQI in some areas – the highest the charts can measure. People going outside have complained of stinging eyes, nausea, breathing difficulties and lethargy caused by the toxic air and doctors reported a sharp rise in admissions related to respiratory and cardiac problems. The school closures in the capital, which came only weeks after they reopened following 18 months of being closed due to the Covid-19 pandemic, were joined by measures including a halt to construction work and drivers of Delhi’s 13m cars being asked to turn off their engines when stationary at traffic lights. Delhi’s state government has also said it is ready to impose an emergency weekend lockdown, similar to that implemented for the first time during Covid, to ease pollution levels, as India’s supreme court summoned it to demand answers on how the pollution was being dealt with, saying it required “drastic steps”. The court reprimanded the Delhi government for “passing the buck”and ordered it to hold an emergency meeting within 48 hours with the central government to find concrete ways to tackle the pollution. The Delhi government, however, told the judges a lockdown would have “limited” impact unless it was imposed on all the neighbouring states. Other north Indian states of Punjab, Haryana and Uttar Pradesh have also imposed work from home orders this week as air quality plummeted. The chief minister of Uttar Pradesh, Yogi Adityanath, ordered that people use public transport rather than cars and for the ban on stubble-burning to be fully enforced In October, the air in Delhi was at its cleanest in years due to belated monsoon rains but the situation began to rapidly deteriorate after Diwali, in the first week of November, as the temperature and wind in the city dropped, firecrackers were set off across the city despite a ban, and millions of cars – consistently the biggest source of pollution from within the capital – were on the roads. In recent days, stubble-burning from farms in neighbouring rural states has been responsible for up to 48% of the pollutants in capital’s air. A survey conducted this week by the digital community platform Local Circles found that 86% of families in Delhi surveyed had someone experiencing ailments, including sore throat, congestion, breathing difficulties and headaches, due to the toxic air. The pollution is also known to have long-term impacts. A study published in a science journal this year found that one-third of deaths in India – more than 2.5 million people – were as a result of air pollution. The Delhi government has taken steps to bring down the pollution in recent years, including closing all coal-fired power stations, expanding the public transport networks, which now only run on natural gas, banning diesel trucks from entering the city during the day, imposing a clean fuel policy and regulating construction. Smog towers, erected by the Delhi government to supposedly filter the city’s air, appeared to have little impact. Anumita Roy Chowdhury, the executive director of the Delhi-based Centre for Science and Environment, said: “We cannot do anything about the weather but we should be able to control the pollution. There are still certain sectors where we have to do a lot more, particularly the number of private vehicles in the city, which are exploding right now because public transport and walking infrastructure has not been built to the scale that is needed. Waste burning is also a huge problem, as is the booming construction sector.” However, she emphasised that the pollution was not Delhi’s alone. “If you take a satellite view of the entire north of India right now, you’ll see the smog problem has built up across the whole Indo-Gangetic plain, which means this is not a problem Delhi can fix within its own boundaries,” she said. “This requires a strong regional approach. And a lockdown is not a silver bullet that will make all the pollution just disappear.”Across four major cities – London, Amsterdam, Berlin and Tel Aviv – a new meat was born, containing precisely no animal. The London champion of the company, Redefine Meat, is the celebrity chef Marco Pierre White. At Mr White’s in Leicester Square, chefs, investors and barbecue and burger connoisseurs – as well as former winners of MasterChef – gathered to taste it. The tone of the event was set by the offering of a pipette of “blood” – “Doesn’t it taste like blood, though?” asked an excited waiter. Well, yes. But memo from the world of carnivore: blood is more something we put up with than something we actively want to drink. “I’ve had vegans complaining that this is too much like meat,” said Redefine Meat’s chief executive and founder, Eshchar Ben-Shitrit. “Personally, I don’t eat meat. I think it’s wrong to kill animals and eat them. But in order to get the flexitarian, it’s better to disregard the opinion of the vegan.” Plant-based meat alternatives are nothing new, and the recent boom in demand from part-time vegetarians, or flexitarians, has fed a surge in innovation, from seitan to pea protein products. Yet this is an unarguable technological breakthrough. While a mince texture has been achievable for some time, plant-based whole cuts – which is to say, a cut that has the mouthfeel and the appearance of a steak, or a lamb chop – have long been considered beyond man’s wit. Redefine Meat is cagey about which protein it uses (investors say it is soy; it also uses pea protein, along with ingredients your grandmother would recognise, beetroot, chickpeas, coconut fat), but is delighted by its method: the “meat” is 3D printed, and the mimicry is extraordinary. The molecules of difference that create the flavour of beef, as distinct from that of lamb, are few but extremely powerful. This is certainly the closest synthetic approximation yet. Ben Bartlett, a chef and barbecue expert, said: “I judge on taste, texture and appearance – I’ve had so many bland and dull plant products. Then suddenly this came along and I was marking them 9s and 10s.” The starter was “pork sausage” in a thick, umami-ish, Moroccan-tinged sauce of aubergine and yoghurt. It was not quite indistinguishable from the real thing, having a trace of sweetness that hinted at its true nature, but it was unmistakably the “gamechanger” that everyone describes. But not until the beef dish was the technical achievement really shown off. It resembled a stifado, a slow-cooked Greek stew heaped with baby onions, and the form was judiciously chosen; how much it would look like a steak if it had been flash fried, I don’t know. Yet the resemblance to meat, in the grain, the way it pulls apart, the mouthfeel, is absolutely uncanny. “Many of the traditional meat alternatives are fine,” said Jane Devonshire, the 2016 MasterChef winner, “but you wouldn’t get them past my husband.” This beef, Mr Devonshire would approve. White is not quite the unabashed carnivore his early image put across, and spent nine months as a vegan a decade ago. “I went from 20 stone to 15, I became fascinated by the weight loss. Then I started to look at cheeseboards and just hear a voice in my head saying: ‘Eat me.’” Nevertheless, he is associated with a certain mode of eating – fine cuts of noble provenance, a world away from processed or synthetic food. But he appears genuinely to have been won over by Redefine Meat. “I think it’s the cleverest thing I’ve seen in my 45 years in the industry,” he says. Tom Cenci, the head chef at Stoney Street restaurant in east London, is slightly sceptical about flexitarianism, particularly when it’s done for environmental reasons. “Sometimes you don’t need to reinvent the wheel. If you’re eating asparagus on Christmas Day, or you’re not treating the animal you’ve slaughtered with respect, and eating the whole of it, that’s just as bad for the environment as eating meat,” he says. Yet he notes the importance of this innovation; the vegetarian offering of 10 years ago – a risotto at the bottom of the menu as an afterthought – isn’t cutting it any more. The genius climaxes with a lamb dish, devised to be very like loin, dressed with peas. You would, no question, be able to tell what animal this was meant to be. It is as different to the “beef” as actual lamb is to actual beef, but still has that trademark, sweet back note. Would you choose it in lieu of lamb, when these 3D cuts are slated to cost about the same? It would take some flexitarian commitment to get you over the line.Racist taunts started early in career at Yorkshire Azeem Rafiq told the digital, culture, media and sport select committee that from early on at Yorkshire he was subject to personal racist abuse. He reported to the MPs on the committee that “there was a lot of ‘you lot sit over there near the toilets’, the word Paki was used constantly, no one ever stamped it out”. He said: “All I wanted to do was play cricket. Towards the end of my first spell but constantly throughout I knew there was something wrong. I started taking medication for my mental health. It was really tough.” ‘Toxic’ atmosphere under Ballance Rafiq said matters got much worse during his second spell with the county. In front of the committee he accused Ballance, now captain, of coming over and saying to others: “Why are you talking to him [Rafiq], he’s not a sheikh, he hasn’t got oil.” Rafiq said his captain’s behaviour was “disgusting” and the atmosphere under him became “toxic”. He stated that everyone saw what was going on but “no one did anything about it”. Asked by the committee chairman, Julian Knight, about the term “Kevin”, Rafiq said it was an offensive, racist one that reached the very top of the game. “‘Kevin’ was something Gary used to describe anyone of colour in a very derogatory manner. It was an open secret in the England dressing room,” he claimed. “Anyone who came across Gary would know that was a phrase he would use to describe people of colour.” In his witness statement to an employment tribunal, Rafiq said: “The constant racist banter from Gary became too much. He would constantly talk down to me and make racist jokes, designed to undermine me and make me feel small, like coming up and interrupting when I was talking to girls in a club, saying ‘don’t talk to him, he’s a Paki’. I did my best to try to fit in, but it happened so much that at one point in 2012, I remember crying outside a nightclub after his constant racist taunting.” In the statement Rafiq also alleged that Ballance had drugs and alcohol issues that were covered up by Yorkshire via missed tests. Ballance denies the drugs allegations. He did not comment on the select committee allegations. Finger pointed at Gale The former Yorkshire player said of the period after Jason Gillespie left: “Andrew Gale came in as coach, Gary Ballance as captain, and the temperature changed. I felt isolated.” In the statement to the tribunal, Rafiq accused Gale of “bullying” when he took over the leadership role. “Andrew joined in with Gary and others in the racist banter. Throughout my time at YCCC, Andrew called me ‘Raffa the Kaffir’, ‘Paki’ and so on. But it was the discriminatory treatment and bullying I felt from him that was harder for me than the name calling. There were numerous incidents where I felt that Andrew was aggressive and rude towards me in ways he wasn’t with white players.” Moxon called on to apologise for his treatment Rafiq alleged that Martyn Moxon, now Yorkshire’s director of cricket, “tore a strip” off him when he returned after the loss of his child. He told the committee he had never seen him talk to anyone like that before and called on him to apologise for his behaviour. Rafiq described his treatment by the club as “inhuman” after the stillbirth of his son. In his witness statement he claimed: “Throughout 2017 and 2018 I struggled as a result of the bullying, targeting and racism I faced – to the point that, again, I had suicidal thoughts. Despite my disclosure to Martyn about this in August 2017, nothing was done. Soon after, I faced accusations of ‘faking injuries’ and ‘ruling myself out’ of selection by teammates, which meant that senior management (i.e. Martyn and others) were openly discussing my confidential medical records and their assessments of them.” Alex Hales and the ‘Kevin’ comments Rafiq alleged the former England batter Alex Hales was involved in the “Kevin” abuse in the England camp. He said: “Gary and Alex got really close to each other when they played for England together. I wasn’t present in that dressing room but what I understand [is] that Alex went on to name his dog ‘Kevin’ because it was black. It’s disgusting how much of a joke it was.” Tim Bresnan complaint Bresnan was vice‑captain after Jason Gillespie left the club. Rafiq alluded to making a complaint against Bresnan to the select committee but had gone into further detail in his tribunal statement. He claimed that: “Tim would tag along and join in with Andrew’s racist comments and they bounced off each other in terms of the bullying. As with Andrew, Tim frequently made racist comments and was unduly harsh towards me compared to white British players, which became so unbearable that I made a formal complaint against him in 2017.” Through Warwickshire CCC, Bresnan responded to Rafiq’s comments to the select committee, saying: “I have been made aware of the bullying claims made against me and have listened to Azeem Rafiq’s account of his time at Yorkshire CCC today with great distress, as I’m sure everyone will have done. For any part I played in contributing to Azeem Rafiq’s experience of feeling bullied at Yorkshire, I apologise unreservedly.” Matthew Hoggard and YCCC’s culture issue To the committee Rafiq mentioned Hoggard in respect of him having been the one player who phoned him to apologise after his Sky Sports interview in which Rafiq outlined how he felt at Yorkshire. “The morning after my Sky interview, I took a call from Matthew Hoggard,” said the former England Under-19 captain. “He said, ‘I didn’t realise. I’m really sorry the way some of my comments made you feel. I just wanted to apologise for what I said.’ I said, ‘Wow, thank you.’ All I ever wanted was an apology.” In his witness statement, Rafiq had described how it was Hoggard who first called him “Raffa the Kaffir”. “I genuinely liked Hoggy, but I think he was a product of the discriminatory culture he was in and the culture that was allowed to thrive at YCCC. It was Hoggy who started calling me ‘Raffa the Kaffir’ … The comments from Hoggy towards myself and the other Asian players – Adil, Ajmal and Rana – were constant, on a daily basis, and all day, every day. I think he might have thought it was just dressing‑room banter but we would come in in the morning and he would say things like ‘you lot sit over there’ and make us all sit together. He would also call us things like ‘elephant washers’.” Jack Brooks and the ‘Steve’ label attached to Pujara To the committee, Rafiq highlighted how Cheteshwar Pujara was called “Steve” at the county as a joke rather than pronounce his first name properly. “Jack Brooks I think started it where he didn’t feel the need to call Pujara by his first name. Not only Jack, [but] the coaches, the media, the Yorkshire website – everyone called him that.” Wine poured down throat by other players Rafiq, who is Muslim, said he started drinking “to fit in” at Yorkshire, something he has “come to regret”. When asked by Knight if he was ever forced to drink under the age of 18, Rafiq said he was pinned down while a player for his local cricket club in his mid‑teens and had red wine poured down his throat. He said someone who played for Yorkshire and Hampshire was involved. In his witness statement to the employment tribunal, Rafiq added: “At YCCC, it was never forced, but there was an entrenched drinking culture which had the effect of isolating Muslim Asian players: if you didn’t drink, you didn’t fit in.” David Lloyd called out for briefing against player Rafiq claimed the former England coach and current Sky cricket pundit David Lloyd had briefed others about his drinking. Of Lloyd, Rafiq said: “He’d been an England coach and commentator and I found it disturbing, because Sky is supposedly doing this amazing work on bringing racism to the front and within a week of me speaking out, that’s what I got sent to me and I thought: ‘God, there are some closet racists and I need to do something about it.’” Lloyd issued a statement on Tuesday afternoon apologising to Rafiq. “In October 2020 I had a private message exchange with a third party involved in cricket, about a number of topics,” said Lloyd. “In these messages I referred to allegations about Azeem Rafiq which I had heard from within the game. I also made some comments about the Asian cricket community. I deeply regret my actions, and I apologise most sincerely to Azeem and to the Asian cricket community for doing this, and for any offence caused.” Root under fire for denials of witnessing racism at county Rafiq said he found it “hurtful” that the England captain Joe Root said he had never witnessed anything of a racist nature at Yorkshire. “Rooty is a good man. He never engaged in racist language,” Rafiq added. “I found it hurtful because Rooty was Gary [Ballance]’s housemate and had been involved in a lot of the socialising where I was called a ‘Paki’. It shows how normal it was that even a good man like him doesn’t see it for what it was. It’s not going to affect Joe but it’s something I remember every day.” Vaughan questioned over denials of racist language Asked about Michael Vaughan, who has denied telling Asian teammates at Yorkshire “there’s too many of you lot, we need to do something about it”, Rafiq said: “Michael might not remember it … three of us, Adil [Rashid], myself and Rana [Naved‑ul-Hasan] remember it. He used his platform at the Daily Telegraph to tell everyone he hadn’t said these things. To go on and put a snippet of my statement out and talk about other things, I thought was completely wrong. He probably doesn’t remember it because it doesn’t mean anything to him.” ECB and PCA ‘did nothing’ to help player Rafiq says he begged the England and Wales Cricket Board and the Professional Cricketers’ Association to step in, but that neither of the organisations wanted to. Rafiq says he had dark moments over the winter and at one point the PCA reported him missing. He said he doesn’t think that was done out of concern for his mental health but that it “wanted to tick a box just in case I killed myself”. Rafiq does not want son ‘anywhere near game’ Rafiq said that, as a result of his experiences: “I can’t imagine a parent, hearing me speak today, would want their child to go anywhere near cricket. I don’t want my son to go anywhere near the game. As a parent, I’d say keep an eye on your kids because this is reality. I would not let my kid go there and just leave them in the hands of these people.”Thousands of children are facing “serious” and even “devastating” consequences as a result of weight gain during the pandemic, experts warn, as “alarming” figures reveal one in four 10- and 11-year-olds in England are obese. Health leaders are calling for a “relentless drive” to boost child health as official NHS data lays bare for the first time how child obesity levels have soared during lockdowns. The National Childhood Measurement Programme, which measures obesity prevalence among school-age pupils in reception class and year 6, found obesity levels rocketed in both year groups by more than 4 percentage points between 2019-20 and 2020-21. Officials said the “significant” single-year increase in prevalence was the highest rise since the programme began 15 years ago. The figures show that almost one in seven children are already obese when they begin primary school in England. Among reception-aged children, those aged four and five, the rates of obesity rose from 9.9% in 2019-20 to 14.4% in 2020-21. By the time they are aged 10 or 11, more than a quarter are obese, according to NHS Digital. In just 12 months, the rate is up from 21% in 2019-20 to 25.5% in 2020-21. Dr Max Davie, officer for health improvement at the Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health, said lockdowns “may have been a key factor” in the rise in obesity rates. “This sharp increase in obesity levels across childhood is alarming,” he said. Caroline Cerny, from the Obesity Health Alliance, said the figures highlighted “the need for a relentless drive on improving children’s health”. “There are several aspects of the pandemic that are likely to have contributed to this increase in child obesity levels,” she said. “But it is very clear from data showing increases in sales of confectionery, biscuits and fast food that junk food companies used the opportunity to keep their unhealthy products centre stage in children’s minds. We need to break the junk food cycle to improve children’s health.” Boys had a higher prevalence of obesity than girls for both age groups, according to the figures. The proportion of children who were a healthy weight dropped between 2019-20 and 2020-21. Overall, the proportion either overweight or obese was 27.7% in reception and 40.9% in year 6. It means four in 10 children leaving primary school are at increased risk of serious health conditions. Nikki Joule, the policy manager at Diabetes UK, warned of potentially devastating consequences as a result of weight gain during the pandemic. “This new data, which shows that two-fifths of children aged 10-11 in England are living with overweight and obesity is hugely concerning, and it underlines why urgent action is needed to improve children’s health,” she said. “Living with obesity significantly increases your risk of type 2 diabetes, a condition which is known to have more severe and acute consequences in children and young people.” Children living in poorer areas are twice as likely to be obese than those living in wealthier neighbourhoods, the figures also revealed. In reception-aged children, 20.3% in the most deprived areas are obese compared with 7.8% in the least deprived. In year 6 pupils, the proportion who are obese ranged from 33.8% among those living in the most deprived areas to 14.3% in the least deprived. “We need an intense focus on closing the gap between the most and least deprived to ensure every single child has an equal chance to grow up healthy,” Cerny said. The NHS has launched a pilot scheme in which 15 new specialist clinics will care for severely obese children and their families. “Left unchecked, obesity can have other very serious consequences, ranging from diabetes to cancer,” said Amanda Pritchard, NHS England’s chief executive. The scheme “aims to prevent children and young people enduring a lifetime of ill-health”. Tam Fry, the chairman of the National Obesity Forum, said the figures would “likely end any hope” that the government would succeed in its mission to halve childhood obesity in England by 2030. “The figures are staggering and even worse than the forum feared,” he said. “For two years we have had reports of children increasingly being kept at home because of Covid restrictions, endlessly snacking on junk food on top of the amount they regularly eat at meal times, and prevented from being able to play with friends to burn off excess calories.” Fry said he feared the 15 child obesity clinics were “very sadly likely to be insufficient” in scale to “cope with the numbers who now will need help”.I do hope European readers are going to be able to access this article. Do you have computers where you live? What about electricity? Are there shops where you can buy newspapers? I vaguely recall seeing such things during my travels on the pale continent, but perhaps I was mistaken. A recent Bloomberg op-ed, titled Americans need to learn to live more like Europeans, suggests Europeans live deprived lives with limited access to modern conveniences – and argues that, owing to supply-chain issues, Americans may have to get used to doing the same. “Store shelves are emptying, and it can take months to find a car, refrigerator or sofa,” the article opined. “If this continues, we may need to learn to do without – and, horrors, live more like the Europeans.” The horrors, indeed! I’m not sure whether the Bloomberg headline was explicitly designed to trigger transatlantic anger and start an online culture war, but that’s exactly what it did. To be fair, it doesn’t take much to make the internet irate. You can write a light-hearted article about how you like cheese and, whoops, you’ve started a no-gouda, very bad culture war. Someone on Twitter will explain that your joke about brie was classist; someone else will say that your omission of cheddar was a violent act of erasure, and someone with a username like @DairyPatriot69 will tell you to go back to where you came from and eat whatever horrible cheese they make there. And if your article is somewhat more serious? If your article should suggest that Americans might learn a thing or two from other people? Well, the Maga crowd will track you down and denounce your opinions with all-caps inanities. Which, of course, is exactly the fate that befell the Bloomberg piece. Colorado congresswoman Lauren Boebert, for example, who is famous for loving guns and sympathising with QAnon, indignantly tweeted that if she wanted to live like a European she would move to Europe (which, famously, is a single, homogeneous country). “Let’s … keep our AMERICAN dream, thank you,” she exclaimed. Meanwhile, the former Ukip MP and Brexiter Douglas Carswell, who now heads a conservative thinktank in Mississippi, tweeted: “If Americans lived like Europeans, the world would still be using Nokias, printed encyclopaedias, diesel cars, waiting for a Covid vaccine and at the mercy of Russia for energy needs. The world is a better place because America is not like Europe.” (Supply chains might be messed up right now, but congratulations to the UK on managing the successful export of one toxic politician.) The American right – and Brits such as Carswell who join ranks with them – routinely jump on every opportunity they can find to portray Europe as a socialist nightmare. The US, they would have us believe, is the land of choice and prosperity. But, as Carswell may well have discovered in his move to America, free markets often work rather better in “socialist” Europe. I live in New York, where I pay way more for my mobile phone plan and internet than I would for comparable services in the UK or anywhere in Europe. There are effectively two companies I can choose between for my (pretty mediocre) home internet and they both cost around $80 (£60) a month. That’s because the sort of deregulation that figures such as Carswell champion produces very little competition within the US broadband market. If Americans lived like Europeans, they wouldn’t have to “learn to do without”, as Bloomberg suggests; they would learn that they didn’t have to pay some of the highest prices in the world to access basic necessities. If Americans lived like Europeans, their life expectancy might be higher: a recent study showed that Americans had shorter lives than similarly situated Europeans. If they lived like Europeans, they might not have the highest maternal mortality rate in the developed world. If they lived like Europeans, they would likely be a lot happier than they are now. Even if their refrigerators were smaller. Arwa Mahdawi is a Guardian columnistThat concludes our live coverage. Here’s our updated take on today’s events: And the key points of Rafiq’s evidence: I think it’s fair to say that Azeem Rafiq was by far the most impressive person to appear this morning. His testimony was at turns jawdropping and heartbreaking. Roger Hutton and the ECB’s quartet were, to say the least, somewhat less inspiring. Azeem Rafiq said racist terms were used “constantly” across his two spells with Yorkshire. “Everyone saw it,” he added. “No one did anything about it.” Rafiq said Gary Ballance used to call black and Asian players “Kevin”. “Kevin was a something Gary used to describe anyone of colour in a very derogatory manner. It was an open secret in the England dressing room,” he said. He said he believed Alex Hales, Ballance’s friend and teammate, went on to name his dog “Kevin”, because the dog was black. Rafiq said as a 15-year-old he was pinned down in club cricket and had red wine poured down his throat. Rafiq said he would not want his son to play cricket: “I don’t want my son to go anywhere near the game.” Former Yorkshire chairman Roger Hutton said there was a “clear resistance” at the club to see Rafiq as the victim. Both Hutton and Rafiq said that racism was a game-wide issue in cricket. At the regular Downing Street lobby briefing, Boris Johnson’s spokesman said the prime minister had been in meetings and so had not seen Rafiq’s testimony. He added: “Clearly, the evidence given this morning is concerning, and there is no place for racism in sport, and equally there’s no place for racism in society.” And that brings an end to an extraordinary morning of proceedings. Knight returns to the Colin Graves Trust. He says Hutton described it as a roadblock to reform. What will be done about that trust? Harrison says the ECB is to carry out a governance review and that he recognises it is a major problem. A final question from Clive Efford. He asks about taking away international matches from Yorkshire – does the ECB plan to use major events as leverage to ensure clubs adhere to the ECB’s antidiscrimination code? Harrison says yes, it is. Botros there are different ways that the ECB can bring sanctions on counties. Alex Davies-Jones is the final questioner. She asks how the ECB is make sure future changes are not tokenistic. Harrison gives a pretty impenetrable answer. But adds that the committee meeting this morning as given him hope. Davies-Jones asks if the ECB is resourced enough to deal with future complaints. Dickenson says it will get whatever it takes. He says the whole game wants to come together to take action. Brennan asks about the Essex investigation. Botros says the ECB will look into the allegations and how the club handle their own investigation. Brennan asks how the ECB could sanction a process that allowed Yorkshire to withhold their report. Dickenson said lesson have been learned. We expected to see the report, he says. Harrison says “the handling of the report indicates there are some certain issues around institutional racism at Yorkshire”. Brennan asks if he agrees with Hutton that Yorkshire is institutionally racist. Harrison again says “the handling of the report speaks to institutional racism”. Kevin Brennan now. He points out that Hutton said the ECB had not done enough to combat racism. Was he wrong? Harrison says “until you’ve eradicated racism you can’t say you’ve done enough”. Efford mentions the 2014 Fletcher report into racism at Yorkshire. Harrison says the ECB needs to look into dressing-room culture and the professional game. He’s says there is a “huge focus” on it from the ECB. Efford asks about the use of “Kevin”. Were the ECB aware of the use of it as a racist term? Harrison says he became aware of the slur when reading the report. Clive Efford MP now. He asks what the ECB are hoping to learn from their new Independent Commission for Equity in Cricket. Miller says people struggle to come forward and that they wanted to set up an independent body that would enable people to do that. Efford asks about the anti-discrimination code introduced at the start of the 2021 season and why the ECB felt it was needed. Miller says that it already existed but the ECB felt it needed to be hardened up. Alan Dickenson says the ECB have a had a long-standing desire to make the game a game for everyone. He says they will be entering partnerships with counties what will allow the ECB to check counties doing what they are should be. Julian Knight says it’s all very well talking about initiatives and that clearly the ECB are failing. Harrison says he accepts there is a lot more work to do. Elliott describes the ECB as “the wild west”. She asks whether it is fit for purpose. Harrison says yes it is, but “we’ve got a long way to go”. Elliott asks whether the ECB should’ve stepped in when Yorkshire appointed a law firm that their chairman used to work for. Harrison and Botros say they could not intervene in individual parts of the investigation. Julie Elliott asks whether the ECB’s system – being regulated by an independent committee that the ECB appoints – is appropriate. Harrison and Botros both struggle to answer. Damien Green MP asks whether the regulatory function of the ECB should be separate from the promotional function. Harrison says it brings some significant advantages. Botros says the ECB recognises the potential conflict and that processes are in place to separate the two arms. Green admits that parliament isn’t best placed to advise people on how to regulate themselves. Why is it different with Essex, asks Knight. Botros says Essex had not launched an investigation, while Yorkshire had already decided to launch an investigation through a law firm. Knight says asks why Yorkshire were allowed to behave in the fashion they did. Harrison says Yorkshire were allowed to run their own investigation as that, essentially, was how things were done at the time. He adds that lessons have been learned. Knight begins by asking Harrison why did they not step in to carry out the investigation. Tom Harrison begins by commending Rafiq’s bravery and asks if Dickenson can read a brief statement. He’s told he can’t and he should answer the question. Harrison says Yorkshire wanted to carry out the investigation themselves. Botros says Hutton wanted the law firm to carry out the investigation and invited the ECB to put someone on the panel. Knight asks if Hutton has therefore told the truth to the hearing. Harrison says the ECB were asked whether they would “partner” with Yorkshire in the investigation. Knight asks the ECB to provide the committee with correspondence over the decision. Harrison agrees. The ECB’s representatives have entered the room. The chief executive Tom Harrison, Kate Miller, the chief diversity and communications officer, Meena Botros, the director of legal and integrity, and Alan Dickinson, a non-executive director. And that concludes Hutton and Patel’s evidence. There’ll be another two-minute break before Tom Harrison of the ECB joins the panel. Giles Watling MP now. He asks whether this can be a defining moment, with Yorkshire leading the way. Lord Patel says that is what he is thinking. He says it’s a watershed moment. Steve Brine MP takes over the questioning. He asks Hutton to comment on the wider county game. Hutton says it’s clear from speaking to other chairs that they believe it is a game-wide issue. Brine asks whether he can name other chairman who feel it is coming down the track for them. Hutton says he doesn’t want to name names because he only has anecdotal evidence. Kevin Brennan asks Lord Patel what “White Rose values” means. “For me it’s about straightforwardness, bluntness, being honest, having pride in being a Yorkshireman and talking with people,” says Patel. Kevin Brennan asks if Hutton thinks Yorkshire CC is institutionally racist. Hutton equivocates. But says it falls into the definition. Brennan asks whether Hutton feels the ECB have done enough. Hutton says he always felt the ECB could and should have carried out the investigation into Rafiq’s allegations. He says they should have recognised this as an issue they should have got involved with. Kevin Brennan asks about the report’s terms of reference and whether they were changed. Hutton says the panel initially asked the investigation to look into two things – Rafiq’s allegations specifically and whether Yorkshire CC was institutionally racist. Hutton says unbeknown to him, the panel then asked those conducting the investigation not to report on whether Yorkshire was institutionally racist. Efford asks about Yorkshire’s response to the Black Lives Matter movement. Hutton says the players debated what stance to take and wore a logo on their shirts. He says he wouldn’t say Yorkshire was an outlier in their response to the movement. Efford asks if the inquiry was satisfactory. Hutton says he is glad the inquiry took place but that he doesn’t agree with all its findings and that it was in some ways flawed. Clive Efford asks Hutton about the way the report was written. Hutton says he wasn’t sure what to expect. Efford says it was written in a way so defamatory as to be unpublishable. Was that helpful to Yorkshire? Hutton says no, it was extremely unhelpful. Davies-Jones asks Lord Patel about Yorkshire’s future response to allegations. Patel says they have set up an independent hotline. He says he has reached out to people who have contacted him where appropriate. He says he wants any allegations to be investigated properly. Davies-Jones asks what Hutton’s reaction to the report into Rafiq’s allegations. He said he was shocked and surprised. Would he have done anything differently in terms of releasing the report? He says the issue was complex. He says they could not under legal advice publish the report in the way they might have liked. Alex Davies-Jones MP asks whether Hutton was aware of racism at Yorkshire before joining the club. He said he wasn’t aware of specific examples but was aware of wider, historical issues. He said on joining the club his focus was on improving the culture of the club more broadly rather than with regards to discrimination. Green asks Patel whether big-name players in the dressing room should be allowed to set the culture. Patel says they need to be part of the solution. Green asks Hutton about team selection and the lack of south Asian representation. Hutton says in his time at the club there were a number of initiatives put forward to improve the situation and that positive steps were being taken. Green asks Patel if he has the power and authority needed to make the changes required. Patel says he is days into his tenure and he says he has seen denial but also hard-working people who have given their lives to the club. He sees people who are scared and sadness within the club. “We’re all going to have to go on a journey to change that,” he says. He adds he is prepared to take whatever decision he needs to take to move things forward. Damien Green MP takes over questioning. He asks if there is anyone at Yorkshire capable of grasping this nettle? Hutton says he started his role during the pandemic and says therefore it is hard for him to evaluate. He praises Lord Patel and says there were other executives who were supportive during his time at the club. He says the culture of the club is stuck in the past, and that the CEO resigning won’t change that. Knight asks Hutton why no players were sacked. Hutton says he had no executive responsibility in his role. He says with regards to Gary Ballance, the club took advice from lawyers who said there was a need for education and training. Knight brings Lord Patel, the new Yorkshire chairman, to the front of the room and asks again about the role of the Colin Graves Trust. Patel says his understanding is that it can be held accountable. Knight asks about the Colin Graves Trust’s role in the scandal. Hutton says he could not remove directors without the support of the Trust but they supported those in position. He says he would’ve liked to remove Mark Arthur and Martyn Moxon, not because of the contents of the report but because of their failure to act on the findings of the report. He says the head of HR should also have been removed. Knight asks if Hutton regrets not resigning earlier. “I believed the club’s culture was stuck in the past and didn’t see, in August, my resigning would be the way to change it,” says Hutton. He says resigning at that point would’ve been capitulation rather than making a stand. Knight asks Hutton for his view on Rafiq’s evidence today. “Azeem was incredibly powerful, I thought he spoke brilliantly,” says Hutton. “I would repeat my profound apologies.” Knight asks about the failure of Moxon and Arthur to appear. Hutton says someone who was at the club during Rafiq’s time at Yorkshire should have attended. He says he met Rafiq for the first time this morning. He says the CEO (Mark Arthur) asked whether the investigation could be abandoned. He adds that Arthur said he did not want to apologise to Rafiq. Hutton says there was a “clear resistance” at Yorkshire to see Rafiq as the victim. And we’re back. Roger Hutton, the former Yorkshire chairman, has joined the hearing. Julian Knight says Arthur and Moxon were both invited but both chose not to attend. That concludes Rafiq’s evidence. There’ll be a two-minute adjournment before Roger Hutton joins the hearing. Nicholson asks about the effect of Rafiq’s family. Rafiq says his too young children “haven’t had a Dad really” because his focus has been on this case. He says he hopes today provides some closure. Nicholson asks whether he feels he lost his career to racism. Rafiq says he did. “Horrible,” he says. “I’m a believer that everything happens for a reason. Hopefully we’re going to a big change and we’ll see something that’s much bigger than any runs I got or any wickets I got. But it hurts.” The final questioner is SNP MP John Nicolson. He asks about the red wine incident. Rafiq says he was in a car and that no one stepped in to stop what happened. He says he’s angry at himself for looking the other way. Nicholson says there are plenty of “scoundrels” in his evidence so far. Are there any heroes? Rafiq mentions Tino Best and Rana Naved-ul-Hasan standing up now. He says no one stood up at the time. There were people who were openly racist and there were the bystanders. “A lot of people watched it happen and not many thought it was important,” he adds. Watling asks if the government should intervene in the game and what it should do. Rafiq says it’s important the government keeps an eye on the game. Watling asks if the club reaches out to Rafiq, would he be prepared to go back. Rafiq says the new chairman Lord Kamlesh Patel has proposed a few things. He says in the short term he would like to be on the outside. “I just want to speak about the facts.” Giles Watling MP asks about Yorkshire saying no individuals would face action. Rafiq says he was “staggered”. “At what point are these people going to realise what they are doing. I was angry.” Even two weeks ago they thought they could hide this, he says. Alex Davies-Jones MP takes over questioning. She asks what should Yorkshire/the ECB do? Rafiq says he doesn’t want to see tokenism from the ECB. Davies-Jones asks about homophobia and sexism in the game. Rafiq says the ECB needs to take responsibility for the game. “The action time is now,” he adds. Brine asks what he would say to a youngster in Barnsley today who wants to grow up and play for England? This is why where we’ve got to is difficult, says Rafiq. “I can’t imagine a parent, hearing me speak today, would want their child to go anywhere near cricket. I don’t want my son to go anywhere near the game. As a parent, I’d say keep an eye on your kids because this is reality. I would not let my kid go there and just leave them in the hands of these people.” Brine asks what has the game of cricket missed out on as a result of the racism in the game? “A lot of talent,” says Rafiq. “And not just Asian cricketers, black cricketers as well. The representation of black cricketers is worrying compared to where it was.” Steve Brine MP takes over the questioning and asks which other counties have problems with racism, and whether other players from other counties have been in touch? “I’ve had messages from people at Leicester, at Middlesex, at Nottinghamshire, so from quite a few,” says Rafiq. “Some people are still pretty scared to talk about it. The one reoccurrence was the word ‘Paki’ was used a lot.” Brine asks if Rafiq has become a mentor for others? “I want to become the voice for the voiceless, I want to help people who are suffering this,” says Rafiq. “Now I’ve been brave or stupid enough to stand up to an institution, I want to help others.” Elliott asks about the PCA’s response. Rafiq says he had a phonecall with a lawyer for three minutes who said he didn’t have a case. He subsequently says he discovered if they had backed him it would’ve used up too much of their budget. Elliott asks Rafiq to contrast his everyday life to his experiences at Yorkshire. My everyday life has just been cricket, says Rafiq. Racism in cricket and professional sport is worse than general society. “It’s a cop out to say it’s a societal problem,” says Rafiq. Julie Elliott MP now. Has anyone reached out privately and apologised? “Matthew Hoggard phoned me after my Sky interview,” says Rafiq. “He said he didn’t realise and was really sorry. I really appreciated it.” Efford asks if Rafiq thinks people at the top of Yorkshire CC could have been unaware of the problems with racism. They could have had that excuse before I spoke to them, says Rafiq, but not afterwards. “I made it perfectly clear,” he adds. “We need to get away from looking for excuses for these individuals.” Efford asks about the ECB. Rafiq says he spoke to Tom Harrison. “I felt like he was listening but they took the stance that they were going to trust Yorkshire to do the right thing.” He says he kept begged the ECB and PCA to step in but that neither of the two organisations wanted to. Rafiq says he had dark moments over the winter and at one point the PCA reported him missing. He says he doesn’t think that was done out of concern for his mental health but that they “wanted to tick a box just in case I killed myself”. Clive Efford MP takes over the questioning. He asks about Rafiq’s experience at Derbyshire. “I had the most enjoyable month on loan at Derby,” says Rafiq. “The captain and the coach made me feel welcomed and valued. I have nothing but good things to say about my time at Derby, though I was only there a short time. Efford asks whether the problems with south Asian representation is peculiar to Yorkshire. People got sick and tired of not getting opportunities, says Rafiq. It’s on the ECB, he adds, for too long they have not done enough. Brennan asks about Rafiq’s sister’s work at Leicestershire. Rafiq says his family didn’t know what he was going through until last year. He says he has spoken to his sister at length since and has no doubt that racism is a problem up and down the country. Throughout this process my own community and businesses in Bradford have tried to help Yorkshire cover this up, he says. People just don’t want to listen, he says. “Good people who are not racist just want to look the other way.” Kevin Brennan MP asks about Michael Vaughan. Rafiq says he “doesn’t want to make it all about Michael”. “Michael might not remember it because it doesn’t mean anything to him,” he adds. Here’s our first take of the news so far today: Green asks about Joe Root’s recent comments. “Rooty is a good man, he’s never engaged in racist language,” says Rafiq. “I found [his comments] hurtful. He was Gary’s flatmate. He was involved in social nights out during which I was called a Paki. He might not remember [the incidents of racism] but it shows how normal it was that even a good man like him doesn’t see it for what it is.” Green asks if racism is institutional in cricket. Yes, says Rafiq. It’s not just at Yorkshire, he says – the ECB has to take a bit of responsibility. “This is a problem up and down the country.” He says the ECB need to stop “palming off responsibilities”. Damien Green MP now. He asks why did Rafiq return to Yorkshire after leaving once? Rafiq says he knew something wasnt right in first spell but wasn’t sure what it was. He says he was in denial right up to 2017. He says Derbyshire couldn’t offer him a contract and he was struggling to put food on the table. Simon Jupp resumes. He asks about the response on social media. Rafiq says all he wanted was acceptance, an apology and to work to make sure his situation didn’t happen again. He says he was met by denials. “Social media was my voice. I was determined to become a voice for the voiceless. A professional player messaged me to say ‘You’ve done what we all wanted to do but didn’t have the balls to do it.’ My family has been abused, I’ve been abused. I can take it and I will take it because it’s something I’m passionate about. If Yorkshire had seen this as a chance to become leaders in this space it could have gone very differently.” Conservative Simon Jupp MP takes over the questioning. He asks about the delay in the allegations being made. Rafiq says he was encouraged to sign a confidentiality agreement before leaving Yorkshire. He says he wasn’t in the right frame of mind at the time and he left the country, went to Pakistan, and that he never wanted to come back. Jupp asks how he summoned the strength to do this. I’ve got a bit of Karachi and a bit of Barnsley in me, says Rafiq. “I don’t know how I’ve done it, I really don’t …” A tearful Rafiq can’t go on, so the meeting his adjourned for a few minutes. Knight asks about the lack of south Asian representation in the Yorkshire squad. Rafiq says the lack of players is “scary”. “As I’ve seen over the last 15 months, if you speak out your life is going to be made hell.” Knight asks about the allegations that have emerged at other clubs. Rafiq says the problem is widespread. British Asian representation in cricket since 2010 has dropped by 40%. He says many of the ECB’s initiatives to tackle racism are box-ticking and focussed on grassroots rather than in the professional game. Tell us about Kevin and Steve, says Knight. Rafiq says Yorkshire players, media, the club, commentators joined in calling Cheteshwar Pujara “Steve” while at the club. “Kevin” was something Ballance used to describe anyone of colour, says Rafiq. This was widely known, he adds. He says Alex Hales, Ballance’s friend and teammate, went on to name his dog “Kevin”, because the dog was black. Knight says the report mentions Rafiq’s drinking. Rafiq says he did things he isn’t proud of to fit in but says it has nothing to do with racism. Knight asks if he was ever forced to drink under the age of 18. Rafiq says he was pinned down as a 15-year-old in club cricket and had red wine poured down his throat. He says a player who played for Yorkshire and Hampshire was involved. Knight: what are your views of the report and how it was handled? (Knight describes the report as a “venn diagram of stupidity”) Rafiq says he only got it a week ago, and says it seems others got it before him (referring to Vaughan’s column in the Daily Telegraph). He says he wanted to see if his experience could help others. Institutional racism isn’t something anyone wants to be associated with. Says the lawyers who conducted the report were “brilliant” at the start but when they got his evidence things changed, making it about individuals rather than the club. “To be clear,” says Rafiq, “Paki is not banter, racism is not banter.” Knight: the attitude of Yorkshire changed when you made a complaint? Rafiq says board minutes show he was considered a leader, a future captain. He made a complaint about Tim Bresnan, and things changed. After the stillbirth of his son he says Martyn Moxon “tore a strip” off him. Rafiq says he had never seen him talk to anyone like that before. Knight asks about Gary Ballance. Rafiq says their relationship started to deteriorate due to his conduct. His says Ballance’s behaviour grew “disgusting”. He describes the atmosphere in the dressing room under Ballance as “toxic”. Rafiq continues on his second spell with the club: “Andrew Gale came in as coach, Gary Ballance as captain, and the temperature changed. I felt isolated. Ballance came over and said: “Why are you talking to him, he’s not a Sheikh, he hasn’t got oil.” Everyone saw it, says Rafiq. No one did anything about it. He says his treatment by the club was “inhuman” during the difficult pregnancy of his son, then has to pause. Q: What went wrong at Yorkshire for you? Rafiq: Pretty early on I joined a dressing room full of my heroes, Michael Vaughan. Matthew Hoggard, it was a surreal moment for me. From early on there was a lot of “You lot sit over there near the toilets”, the word Paki was used constantly, no one ever stamped it out. All I wanted to do was play cricket. Towards the end of my first spell but constantly throughout I knew there was something wrong. I started taking medication for my mental health. It was really tough. DCMS chair Julian Knight MP welcomes everyone to the committee and says he had “widespread refusals” from people asked to give evidence. Azeem Rafiq is in place and ready to go. As ever with these things, it looks like we’re not going to start absolutely on time. Hopefully the delay will only be a minute or two. Tanya Aldred’s profile in the Observer on Sunday outlines Rafiq’s remarkable career: His evidence today is certain to make deeply uncomfortable viewing for many in the sport. Parliamentary privilege means he is free to talk about all of his complaints without fear of legal reprisal. He has previously indicated he is ready to name names. Tuesday’s episode of Today In Focus also looks at the scandal: This timeline from PA Media helps illustrate Azeem Rafiq’s long road to this point: 2 September 2020 In an interview with ESPNcricinfo, former England Under-19 captain Rafiq reveals: “I know how close I was to committing suicide during my time at Yorkshire” over what he describes as “institutional racism” at the county. 3 September Yorkshire chairman Roger Hutton confirms a formal investigation into Rafiq’s claims will “start in a matter of days” and be conducted “thoroughly, impartially and with urgency”. 18 August 2021 ECB chair Ian Watmore calls on Yorkshire to provide a copy of the investigation’s findings after he confirms the independent enquiry had sent its conclusions to the county, with Rafiq revealing his exasperation with the continued delays to the process. 19 August Rafiq accuses Yorkshire of “fudging” his claims of institutional racism after the county apologise to the former spinner for being the “victim of inappropriate behaviour” but insist “many of the allegations were not upheld” in a lengthy statement. 10 September Yorkshire release a summarised version of their independent report, where they apologise and accept Rafiq had been the victim of “racial harassment and bullying” in his two spells at the club between 2008 and 2018, but after only seven of Rafiq’s 43 allegations were upheld the county insist there is insufficient evidence to prove or disprove institutionalised racism. 7 October A spokesperson for Rafiq accuses Yorkshire of “protecting the players and a coach who they now acknowledge used either racist language or were bullying” with the full report still not published. 28 October Yorkshire announce no individuals will face disciplinary action despite seven of Rafiq’s allegations being upheld. 2 November ESPNcricinfo reveals details of the report into Rafiq’s claims, which includes the admission of one senior player that he used the P-word reference to Rafiq, but Yorkshire conclude the incidents in question amounted to “friendly banter”. 3 November Emerald Group Publishing, Yorkshire Tea and Anchor Butter all end their association with Yorkshire over the handling of Rafiq’s allegations. Meanwhile, former England batter Gary Ballance reveals he used “a racial slur” against Rafiq but claimed both men “said things privately to each other which were not acceptable”. 4 November The ECB suspends Yorkshire from hosting international or major matches, while Ballance is “suspended indefinitely” from England selection. 5 November Ahead of an emergency board meeting Hutton resigns as Yorkshire chairman, calling on the executive board to follow suit and saying he was “saddened” after claiming the ECB declined to help in their enquiry. Former Yorkshire all-rounder Rana Naved-ul-Hasan claims he heard former England captain Michael Vaughan make inappropriate comments to Asian players at the club, something which Rafiq had also alleged and which Vaughan denies. 11 November Mark Arthur resigns as Yorkshire’s chief executive. 15 November Adil Rashid joins Rana in backing Rafiq’s claim related to Vaughan. The trio allege Vaughan said in front of a group of Yorkshire players of Asian ethnicity: “Too many of your lot, we need to do something about it.” Hello and welcome to live coverage of today’s digital, culture, media and sport committee hearing called to examine Yorkshire’s county cricket club’s response to the racism allegations made by Azeem Rafiq. The hearing begins at 9.30am GMT with Rafiq’s evidence; Roger Hutton, Yorkshire’s former chairman, is expected at around 10.15am, and the ECB chief executive Tom Harrison at 11.15am. Other ECB representatives are also scheduled to appear: Kate Miller, the chief diversity and communications officer; Meena Botros, the director of legal and integrity, and Alan Dickinson, a non-executive director. This, from Ali Martin’s explainer, outlines why we are here today: In 2020 Azeem Rafiq went public with allegations of the racism he says he experienced while a player at Yorkshire during two spells from 2008 to 2014 and 2016 to 2018. This prompted a 12-month investigation by the club, with a summary of the resulting report released in September upholding seven of Rafiq’s 43 claims and confirming he was the victim of “racial harassment” in his first spell and bullying during the second. Despite a conclusion that the club failed to properly escalate his initial complaints in 2018 as per its own policies, the club announced on 28 October that no action would be taken against any current employee. This, plus a leaked element of the still unpublished report that showed the panel considered the use of the P-word towards Rafiq to be “in the spirit of friendly banter”, prompted a raft of MPs to voice their displeasure earlier this month and saw Julian Knight, chair of the digital, culture, media and sport select committee, set up Tuesday’s hearing to get to the bottom of the issue.For the people of coastal Bangladesh, the monsoon can bring untold torment – and, occasionally, unexpected joy. Every year from June to October, in the Ganges delta region where the country’s three major rivers converge, the waterways swell and riverbanks burst, causing catastrophic flooding. The torrential rainfall is joined by heavy glacial runoff from the Himalayas, exacerbated in recent years by global heating. Homes and livelihoods are lost overnight. But the meltwater also brings cascades of sediment that, a few months later, leave unpredictable gifts – new strips of land, known as “chars”, rising from the riverbed. “You can’t really call it land,” says Marina Tabassum, who has been awarded the Soane medal, the first architect from the global south to win the prestigious gong. “It is wetness. It belongs to the river. But for the landless, the chars offer some years of relief. They provide a place to fish, cultivate and settle with their families.” Tabassum turned her attentions to the delta region last year when the pandemic struck and work in her Dhaka office, MTA, slowed down. It gave her time to pause and reflect, and reassess where the skills of an architect can make the most difference. The national lockdown had caused many to lose their jobs, increasing homelessness in the region, with countless delta-dwellers forced to live under makeshift tarpaulin shelters. “As architects we have a responsibility to these people,” she says. “The construction industry contributes half of all global emissions, but the people being affected by sea-level rise in the coastal areas have zero carbon footprint.” Coming hot on the heels of the compromised deal agreed at last week’s Cop26 climate summit, her lecture, to be given at Sir John Soane’s Museum on Tuesday evening and streamed online, couldn’t be more timely. Hers is a model of light-footed practice, in tune with what she calls “the wisdom of the land”. It is an approach that prioritises local skills and materials over technocratic solutions, working in harmony with natural cycles and using indigenous knowledge to intervene with minimal means, without “the roaring noise of architecture”. Last year, Tabassum and her team used the pandemic lull to develop a low-cost modular house kit for the landless char dwellers. They had previously researched the region’s popular flat-pack homes, which are designed to be dismantled and moved when needed, but the cost of £1,500, along with their requirement for carpenters, puts them out of reach of many. MTA designed a simple space-frame system using lengths of readily available bamboo, connected with steel joints, that could house a family of four for £300, and be built by residents themselves. The Khudi Bari (Tiny House) comprises a pitched-roof upper level sleeping platform above a ground floor of compacted earth, with the structure clad in panels of woven grass, or whatever local materials are to hand. Four families have been rehoused so far in Char Hijla, southern-central Bangladesh, to test how the design works, with 100 more homes on the way. Born in Dhaka in 1969, the third generation of a Bengali immigrant family, Tabassum grew up in a war-ravaged, fledgling nation, witnessing famine, death and destruction as a child. Her father was the only doctor in their neighbourhood, and he would spend each morning attending to a long queue of patients from the neighbouring slum before setting off to work – instilling a sense of social duty that she brings to her own practice. She graduated from architecture school in 1995 by which time, she says, “the affliction of consumer architecture had already infested Dhaka”. High-rise commercial blocks were springing up, and young architects were expected to join the fray, but she chose to resist. The same year, she co-founded her first practice, Urbana, with Kashef Chowdhury, both driven by a strong belief in craft and a desire to design buildings in tune with the history, climate and culture of the delta. Their decade-long partnership, in work and life, spawned several noteworthy projects, from the Bangladesh Independence Monument and Liberation Museum, to housing that responds to the tropical environment with large openings, terraces and verandahs. Founding Marina Tabassum Architects in 2005, she embarked on a project (as the architect, builder, fundraiser and client) that would shoot her to international prominence 11 years later, when it won an Aga Khan award. Standing on a frenetic corner of northern Dhaka, the Bait ur Rouf mosque is an oasis of calm, simply modelled from bricks and daylight. Its square prayer hall is surrounded by a cylindrical brick drum, in turn enclosed in a perforated brick cube, the gaps between the geometries allowing shafts of light to wash over the walls from above. It has a timeless air, with echoes of Louis Kahn, whose Dhaka parliament building was a strong influence on the young Tabassum, as well as the brick mosques of 13th-century Bengal. Like her subsequent work, it is entirely naturally ventilated. “I feel breathless,” she says, “if my building can’t breathe without the help of artificial means.” The spotlight of the Aga Khan award led to her being invited to teach a studio at Harvard, for which she brought the students over to Bangladesh to work on low-cost rural housing projects. She was then invited to exhibit at the Venice Biennale in 2018, and subsequent Sharjah Triennial, joining the international lecture and exhibition circuit. But the pandemic gave her time to refocus, and last year she established a new non-profit branch of her practice, the Foundation for Architecture Community Equity (Face), dedicated to projects for the country’s landless, ultra low-income groups and climate refugees. They are currently working in the Cox’s Bazar region of Bangladesh, home to the world’s largest group of refugee camps, where around 1.2 million Rohingya Muslims have fled from ethnic persecution in neighbouring Myanmar. Tabassum and her team have been designing food distribution outlets and women’s centres – for both the camp and its host community – aiming to create a more dignified experience than the usual tents for receiving handouts. “The main challenge is that government doesn’t want anything too beautiful,” she says, “because they fear the refugees will feel at home and not go back.” Digging foundations, for example, is forbidden, because it could encourage the erection of more permanent buildings. She is using the same modular bamboo space-frame system as for the Khudi Bari, allowing the structures to be temporary, but providing the opportunity for co-design and creation with the refugees themselves. Tabassum continues to design the more regular commercial projects at MTA – an apartment building, a private family museum and a 250-bed hospital on the outskirts of Dhaka are currently under construction – in order to subsidise the humanitarian work of Face, where her heart clearly lies. “Architecture has always been a service-rendering profession,” she says, “responding to a client, budget and site. In the current context, where there is such an enormous disparity between rich and poor, it is not sustainable if we make ourselves available only to the 1%. We need to go beyond that.” And her thoughts on winning the Soane medal? “At first I thought it was a prank,” she laughs. “Compared to the previous winners, Rafael Moneo, Denise Scott Brown and Kenneth Frampton, I am very much a work in progress. The search is still on.”A former minister in Muammar Gaddafi’s government was jointly liable for the shooting of PC Yvonne Fletcher outside the Libyan embassy in London in 1984, a high court judge has ruled. Reaching his decision on the lower civil standard – which requires proof on the balance of probabilities rather than beyond reasonable doubt – Mr Justice Martin Spencer said on Tuesday that although Saleh Ibrahim Mabrouk did not fire the shots himself, he was a “prime mover” in the killing of 25-year-old Fletcher. John Murray, a close friend who was on duty alongside Fletcher on the day of the shooting and cradled her as she lay dying, brought a civil claim against Mabrouk for assault and battery after frustration at the failure to bring criminal charges against the defendant. In Spencer’s judgment, which was greeted with tears from Murray and applause from fellow ex-officers at its conclusion, the judge said: “The defendant, who was notably described as having possessed ‘fanatical’ pro-Gaddafi political views, in my judgment clearly assisted in the commission of the shooting, pursuant to the common design … he was a prime mover in the plan to shoot the anti-Gaddafi demonstrators and, if necessary, any police officer who was in the way.” Mabrouk was one of four members of a revolutionary committee who had taken over the embassy in February, 1984. The judge said that although the defendant was in police custody at the time of the actual shooting on 17 April 1984, having being arrested earlier that day, he had allowed the shooter(s) into the building to position themselves to fire their guns, knowing they would do so. He also recruited volunteers to “deal with” the anti-Gaddafi protesters, directed counter-protesters to stand away from the line of fire and attempted to bring a solider into the embassy that day to instruct people in the firing and dismantling of weapons. The judgment is unlikely to result in any criminal action against Mabrouk, who is in Libya. Spencer said Mabrouk’s comment to a police officer putting out barriers before the protest was of “critical importance” in the case. The defendant had said: “We have guns here today, there is going to be fighting. We aren’t going to have responsibility for you or the barriers.” During his judgment, Spencer appeared to be overcome by emotion as he told Murray, who has spoken of his guilt that he could not save Fletcher, that he should feel proud of his conduct on the day of the shooting, including rushing to his friend’s assistance despite danger to himself. After the judgment, Murray, who was awarded the £1 in nominal damages he had sought, said: “This has been a battle lasting 37 years. It is a huge weight off my shoulders. My promise to Yvonne Fletcher to find those responsible for the shooting and to get justice has taken a huge step forward after all these years.” Mabrouk insisted in a letter to the court that he was innocent of any involvement, but did not participate in the proceedings. He was arrested over Fletcher’s murder in 2015, but in 2017, Scotland Yard detectives dropped the investigation, saying key evidence could not be used in court for reasons of national security.After the trial of Kyle Rittenhouse, who as a 17-year-old fatally shot two men and wounded a third, finally closed and the jury was sent out to deliberate its verdict, a crowd of supporters stood outside the Kenosha county courthouse volleying chants in the cold November dark. “Black Lives Matter!” one group shouted. “Self-defense is not a crime!” the other responded. The dueling chants crystallize what the trial has come to represent for the millions of people watching the case in Wisconsin and across America. To some, it’s a case of a gun-wielding teenager who responded to racial unrest by taking justice into his own hands and shooting three anti-racist protesters – two fatally. To others, Rittenhouse used his weapon in self-defense after he was attacked by members of a violent crowd. As the sun rose on Tuesday above nearby Lake Michigan, the case headed to the 12 jurors who will determine what it represents in the eyes of the law. It has not unfolded smoothly, as the prosecution seems to have botched some of its witnesses and arguments and the presiding judge’s behavior has been erratic and at times betrayed an apparent sympathy to the defense. Rittenhouse is charged with reckless homicide, intentional homicide and attempted intentional homicide. He has pleaded not guilty to all counts. Meanwhile, the city of Kenosha remains on standby hoping to avoid the violence that erupted in August 2020. Last week, Wisconsin’s governor, Tony Evers, mobilized 500 national guard members to assist local law enforcement should they be needed. “There’s a sense of unease out here as we wait for the verdict. We’ve been waiting on a verdict ever since [Rittenhouse] did the shootings,” said a man outside the courthouse who identified as Xavier S and traveled from nearby Racine to show solidarity with Jacob Blake. Blake was shot seven times in the back by a Kenosha police officer and left paralyzed from the waist down. Blake’s uncle, Justin, told the Guardian earlier this month that the past year had been a “living hell” for his family. Kristan T Harris, an independent citizen-journalist whose footage of last year’s deadly protest was used as evidence at Rittenhouse’s trial, said as he left the courthouse on Monday that regardless of the verdict he did not expect to see anything like the scenes he witnessed filming the protests that played out in August 2020. “How many people want to go out and protest in 30-degree weather?” he said. “There might be demonstrations, but I don’t think they will be as big. People are back to work. Last year, everyone was furloughed.” In an earlier interview, Harris described the chaos that unfolded a year ago, detailing crowds of roving protesters who uprooted street lights and a “handful of cops up against what looked like a huge rock concert’s worth of people decked out in riot gear”. Harris caught on film the moment a police officer collapsed after a thrown brick appeared to hit him on the head and knock him unconscious. Harris was also on scene nights later, when he said police pushed protesters toward a crowd of armed and agitated citizens who claimed they were standing guard to protect property. It was that police decision, he said, that set in motion the violence that followed. “That was the first choice which kind of dominoed and led to the tragedy of August 25,” Harris said. “Nobody had to die that night.” Harris has covered demonstrations in various cities, including the protests in Minneapolis that followed George Floyd’s murder, but said he never “thought Kenosha would be the city that would capture America”. But the outcome was less surprising to Dayvin Hallmon, who for 10 years served on the Kenosha county board of supervisors. For years, Hallmon said, he warned other board members that Kenosha, which is 80% white, was moving toward a racial reckoning after meeting with frustrated young people to hear their concerns. “I issued a number of warnings to them about where they were headed if they didn’t address the needs of people of color. They were asked to pass a resolution against hate and violence and said no. They were asked to rewrite the rules for police and sheriff engagement. They said no,” said Hallmon. “Nobody on the county board cared. Everything that happened with Rittenhouse and Jacob Blake was totally foreseeable and preventable,” he added. Omar Flores, a member of the Milwaukee Alliance Against Racist and Political Repression who met Hallmon when he started organizing, backs the former county board member’s statements. “He predicted Kenosha would be the hub of an uprising one day. We all made fun of him for it, but he was right,” Flores said. Flores, who identifies as Latino and who grew up in Kenosha, describes the city as a conservative place where police target people of color, who in turn think twice before vocalizing the need for change. He recalls people throwing trash at him – and one man brandishing a Confederate flag – the day in 2014 when he hosted a rally to express solidarity with Ferguson. “We sort of adopt this mentality that if you just sort of put your head down and try and act like the rest, you’re going to be left alone,” Flores said. Flores worries that mentality will keep young people of color from organizing in Kenosha and challenging the status quo. Still, he has noticed more people of color becoming bolder and more vocal over the past year – an encouraging sign, he said. “I do think that seeds are being planted. I think people’s perspectives are changing because of what’s happened with the trial,” he said.What can I do with several unopened bottles of dessert wine? I’m just not sophisticated enough to want to drink them. Jean, Solihull “First of all, I’d argue with the idea that anyone isn’t sophisticated enough to drink dessert wine,” says the Guardian’s Fiona Beckett. Which is not to say that Jean isn’t wise to consider other ways to make use of her mounting collection. Zero-waste chef Tom Hunt, who isn’t a big fan of the sweet stuff, either (“Why would I want an extra sweet thing on top of dessert?”), uses dessert wine to “add sweetness and flavour to sweet and savoury dishes alike”, such as braised meat or stews (just use in moderation). “You could also switch it in instead of red wine, unless you’re using that as a colouring.” If you’ve got any marsala knocking about, make a sauce for chicken – think 1970s classic chicken marsala, or follow Nigel Slater’s lead with a cream-and-herb sauce. After frying off two chicken breasts, he puts marsala, white wine and vermouth in the pan, bubbles to reduce, then stirs in creme fraiche, grainy and dijon mustards, cornichons and capers. “Stir in a small bunch of parsley, finely chopped. Add in a squeeze of lemon juice, then return the chicken breasts to the pan.” Marsala in the filling of, say, a mushroom-and-chestnut pie would also be a very good thing, or make like Nigella Lawson, who in Nigella’s Christmas Kitchen uses the fortified wine to finish a roast squash and sweet potato soup. Sauternes or muscat could find a home in jelly to eat with cheese and crackers (or to give as a present), or be used for poaching fruit, such as pears. Then there are chocolate truffles: “Mix the wine into a little leftover stale cake,” Hunt says, “shape into balls and dip into melted white chocolate – that would be pretty good.” Alternatively, pour the wine into the cake batter itself: “Find a recipe that has some liquid in it already, and that you could just swap out. That would give it a nice, sophisticated flavour.” Dessert wine deserves to be in trifles, panforte (heat with the honey and sugar before pouring over your fruit-and-nut mix) and syllabubs– and that includes zabaglione, which conveniently makes a great festive dessert. For her “perfect” version, Felicity Cloake whisks four egg yolks with three tablespoons of soft brown sugar in a heatproof bowl until thick. “Gradually beat in four tablespoons of dessert wine, a tablespoon of brandy (optional) and a pinch of salt.” Set the bowl over (but not touching) a pan of simmering water and keep whisking until, when lifted, it “drops a fairly solid ribbon trail on the surface”. Remove from the heat, whisk again, then serve – a crushed amaretti topping optional, but very much encouraged. Finally, where there’s dessert wine, there are cocktails. “Play around with it,” says Beckett, who suggests starting with a smoky joe (sake, cognac, single malt and dessert wine stirred with ice and strained) or auld alliance (equal parts whisky and sauternes mixed with ice and strained). “Failing that, give it as a gift.” And happily – *whispers* – ’tis almost the season for that. • Got a culinary dilemma? Email feast@theguardian.comA new space mission to hunt for potentially habitable planets around Earth’s closest neighbouring star system is under way. In a project with echoes of the 2009 film Avatar, an international collaboration of scientists in Australia and the US will search in the Alpha Centauri star system for earth-like planets that could sustain life. Alpha Centauri – Earth’s closest neighbouring star system – consists of two sun-like stars, known as Alpha Centauri A and B, and a more distant red dwarf star. The Toliman mission, named after the ancient Arabic-derived name for the star system, will search for potential planets orbiting Alpha Centauri A and B. The Toliman telescope, which is under construction, is set to be launched into low-earth orbit in 2023. It seeks to discover new planets in the “Goldilocks orbit” – at the right distance, so the planet is neither too hot nor too cold to sustain life. Project leader Prof Peter Tuthill, of the University of Sydney, said: “If we’re looking for life as we know it, usually the gold standard is a planet where liquid water could be present at the surface of the planet – so it’s not like a frozen snowball, and it doesn’t boil all the water up into the atmosphere.” “We know that life has evolved at least once, around a sun-like star on an earth-like planet,” Tuthill said. “We try to look for other examples that are as close to that configuration as possible.” Tuthill likened hunting for planets to solving a mystery: the signals planets give off are “very subtle” and “very faint” compared to the signals from stars, he said. Despite the seemingly frequent discovery of exoplanets – planets outside our solar system – “around our very nearest sun-like stars we don’t have any idea whether there could be … any earth-like planets,” Tuthill said. The Toliman mission will try to uncover planets by studying whether the stars Alpha Centauri A and B wobble from side to side, due to the presence of unseen planets tugging on them gravitationally. Collaborators on the mission previously detected a “planet candidate” potentially orbiting around Alpha Centauri A, but its existence hasn’t been definitively confirmed. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “If that is a real planet that would be something like a Neptune-like planet … a gas giant,” Tuthill said. “Maybe it has a moon around it that life could exist on.” That possibility has a sci-fi parallel: James Cameron’s 2009 film, Avatar, is set on Pandora, a fictional habitable moon that orbits a gas giant in the Alpha Centauri system. “If that detection is proved to be confirmed, then James Cameron got there first with his movie,” Tuthill said. At 4.37 light years away from the sun, Alpha Centauri would be an obvious destination for any future interstellar travel, Tuthill added. Even so, “a terribly forbidding leap in technology” would be required to get there. “At about the speed of the fastest modern space probes, this is something like a 100,000-year voyage.” “It’s not in my lifetime, but it’s still a visionary future where we might imagine developing technologies … able to span these interstellar voids.” In collaboration with the University of Sydney, the Toliman mission involves scientists at Saber Astronautics in Australia, and Breakthrough Initiatives and Nasa’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory in the US. “This might be the biggest privately funded space telescope ever built,” Tuthill said.Writer-director Janell Shirtcliff’s debut feature plays like a throwback to trashy queer-minded cult films of old, like the early work of John Waters (Pink Flamingos or Female Trouble) or Gregg Araki (The Doom Generation). There’s maybe even just a soupçon of Kenneth Anger in the use of what look very much like excerpts from Anger’s cutup gay bikers-meet-Jesus film Scorpio Rising. Except this shonky tale of crime and punishment in Los Angeles lacks the incisive wit or heretical instincts of those antecedents. It’s more like a Gen-Z fashion magazine homage to Gen-X heroin chic, with fractionally more of a plot. Main protagonist Mads (Bella Thorne) loves Jesus in her own special way, even though she is a heroin user and possibly a sex and love addict. (She attends an anon meeting for the latter issue but seems mainly there to steal cookies.) When not indulging in her favourite vices, she spends a lot of time lounging on sofas smoking, thinking about Jesus or dealing drugs along with with her flatmate best buddies Evie (Libby Mintz, who co-wrote the script with Shirtcliff) and Addy (Andreja Pejic). The trio get their supply from former actor Eric (Gavin Rossdale), but when one of their customers steals $20,000 from them after a night of partying a little too hard this sets off a chain reaction of violence and retribution. The women “disguise” themselves as nuns – which means wearing the full get-up including wimples but also supercool-looking vintage sneakers and turquoise knee-high boots – in order to raise the money from donations from random strangers in the streets, which is clearly a very stupid plan. Eventually, a ruthless Asian gangster named Queenie (Josie Ho, a hoot) and her henchman Tuff (Jamie Hince) come looking for their money, armed not just with guns and knives but also exotic snakes and venomous insects. The faux nun fugitives don’t know whether to call the police or animal control. The whole package has the feel of one of those sneaky marketing campaigns designed to punt a product such as lingerie in a very oblique way. Or possibly the back catalogue of music publishers Extreme Music, who hold the rights to most of the tracks played in the film, judging by the end credits. Or maybe the product being shilled is Paris Jackson herself, daughter of Michael, who is on hand here in a dream sequence playing Jesus and has an executive producer credit as well. • Habit is released on 22 November on digital platforms.Donald Trump’s secretary of state and treasury secretary discussed removing him from power after the deadly Capitol attack by invoking the 25th amendment, according to a new book. The amendment, added to the constitution after the assassination of John F Kennedy in 1963, provides for the removal of an incapacitated president, potentially on grounds of mental as well as physical fitness. It has never been used. According to Betrayal: The Final Act of the Trump Show, by the ABC Washington correspondent Jonathan Karl, the treasury secretary, Steven Mnuchin, talked to other cabinet members about using the amendment on the night of 6 January, the day of the attack, and the following day. Removing Trump via the amendment would have required a majority vote in the cabinet. Karl reports that Mnuchin spoke to Mike Pompeo, Trump’s secretary of state and an avowed loyalist. Mnuchin did not comment for Karl’s book, which is published on Tuesday. Karl writes that Pompeo responded only after Karl told Trump the former secretary of state had not done so. “Pompeo through a spokesman denied there have ever been conversations around invoking the 25th amendment,” Karl writes. “The spokesman declined to put his name to the statement.” Karl also reports that Pompeo asked for a legal analysis of the process for invoking the 25th amendment. “The analysis determined that it would take too much time,” Karl writes, “considering that Trump only had 14 days left in office and any attempt to forcefully remove him would be subject to legal challenge.” Karl says Betsy DeVos, the education secretary, and Elaine Chao, transportation, might have supported invoking the 25th amendment but both resigned after the Capitol attack. Chao is married to the Senate Republican leader, Mitch McConnell – who broke with Trump over the Capitol riot. Karl also says that “while the discussions did happen, the idea that Trump’s cabinet would vote to remove him was, in fact, ludicrous”. Pompeo is among Republicans jostling for position ahead of the 2024 presidential primary but that is a process which demands demonstrations of fealty to Trump, who continues to dominate the party in part by toying with another White House run. Trump is free to do so because he was acquitted at his second Senate impeachment trial, on a charge of inciting the Capitol insurrection. At a rally near the White House on 6 January, Trump told supporters to “fight like hell” to overturn his defeat by Joe Biden, by blocking certification of electoral college results. Trump’s vice-president, Mike Pence, eventually declined to weaponise his role overseeing the vote count, as Trump demanded he should. Karl reports that in the aftermath of the Capitol riot, around which five people died, “at least two cabinet secretaries” asked Pence, who had been holed up at the Capitol as rioters chanted for his hanging, to convene a cabinet meeting. Pence did not do so, Karl writes, adding that there is no evidence to suggest Pence was involved in 25th amendment discussions. On 7 January, Nancy Pelosi, the House speaker, and Chuck Schumer, the Democratic leader in the Senate, formally asked Pence to invoke the 25th amendment. Pence waited five days, then refused. Pence is also a potential candidate for the Republican nomination in 2024.Like its hulking, tourist-gulping attractions, Jurassic World Evolution 2 has both a silly name and DNA that has been stitched together from several different animals to create something improbably beautiful. A bridge between the spiritually bereft Jurassic World: Fallen Kingdom and the forthcoming Jurassic World: Dominion, this could so easily have been another cash-grab movie tie-in. Instead it’s a beautiful game predominantly about finding the wonder in the creatures you’re looking after (or chasing around in Jeeps). And where John Hammond failed, this is a park experience I can thoroughly endorse, even if people do get eaten with distressing regularity. Thanks to the events of the most recent film, in which a plot device dressed as an eight-year-old girl causes dinosaurs to be released into the wild, there has never been a better time to open one’s own Jurassic Park. All of the busy work from the first film (finding a mosquito trapped in amber, sucking out its prehistoric meal of dino blood, and hoping like a kid with a new pack of trading cards that it’s not one you’ve already got) can be dispensed with. Instead we have the faintly Metal Gear Solid V experience of sneaking up on confused dinosaurs, hitting them with a tranquilliser dart and then watching a cargo chopper swoop down and snatch them up and away to begin a happier life in the paddock you’ve just built for them. Later you’ll recruit scientists, who can be sent on longer-range kidnappings to return rarer species. With the help of series heroes Claire Dearing (Bryce Dallas Howard), Ian Malcolm (Jeff Goldblum) and Owen Grady (someone who certainly knows who Chris Pratt is), you must make sure the dinosaurs are happy, which you do by covering their paddocks in the right kind of shrubs, keeping their doctor’s appointments regular and not accidentally airdropping them into pens with things that want to eat them. The more (and more exotic) dinosaurs you collect, the more visitors will be drawn to marvel at the park’s exhibits, eat in the park’s restaurants, and then be eaten by the park’s exhibits. Honestly, though, zooming in on the odd moment of violence and chaos misses the point of JWE2. If this game were a scene from the films, it would not be the soldiers getting picked off and torn apart by raptors in the long grass, nor the final battle with the Indominus Rex from Jurassic World. Rather, it would be Sam Neill’s Dr Alan Grant leaning his whole body against the heaving side of the sickly triceratops, while Laura Dern’s Dr Ellie Sattler examines its tongue and talks to a park ranger about its diet of potentially poisonous herbs. Dr Grant grins like a child, pressed up so close against such a wondrously recreated creature. That’s the feeling you get playing JWE2. Selecting a dinosaur zooms the camera in from the top-down, god’s-eye-view to track it as it plods around its enclosure, grazing, drinking from a watering hole or occasionally battling a member of the pack for dominance. Each dinosaur comes with a multimillion year history including detailed accounts of what it ate and where it lived. Even though you’re sat in your living room, Frontier Developments’ magic is in transporting us – through lifelike animations, through snuffling grunts, through the soppy look in a stegosaurus’s eyes – to where we all wanted to be in 1993: standing in a real Jurassic Park, watching these impossibly majestic creatures. Jurassic World Evolution 2 is out now (9 November); £49.99The Church of England bishop who confirmed the man suspected of the Liverpool bombing into the Christian faith has said he was “shocked and saddened” by the attack and that Emad al-Swealmeen had been part of the community at Liverpool Cathedral. Cyril Ashton, an assistant bishop of Liverpool, said Swealmeen’s confirmation was “one of hundreds I have conducted as a bishop, so I have no specific recollection of the individual”. He added: “The church takes confirmation seriously and I know that he would have been thoroughly prepared with an understanding of the Christian faith. It seems that, sadly, despite this grounding, the bomber chose a different path for his life.” A cathedral spokesperson said Swealmeen was baptised in 2015 and confirmed in 2017, but lost contact with the cathedral in 2018. He was one of hundreds of migrants – mostly Iranians, but some from Syria, Afghanistan and elsewhere – who have attended classes and services at the cathedral, and have been baptised and confirmed in the Christian faith. In 2014, a special Persian congregation – Sepas, meaning “thanksgiving” in Farsi – was set up at the cathedral for Iranian, Afghan, Kurdish and Turkish converts to Christianity. By 2017, more than 330 people had been baptised and more than 200 confirmed in the faith. Many developed an interest in the faith during their long and difficult journeys across Europe, when they received help and charity from churches. For others, their interest was sparked by people they knew in migrant communities in the UK who were in the process of converting from Islam to Christianity. Some also believed conversion would help their asylum applications. Tribunal records show that a number of migrants cited fear of persecution in their home country after conversion to Christianity in support of asylum claims. One tribunal decision in 2017 suggested that the “improbably large” numbers of Iranians attending courses and services at Liverpool Cathedral meant it was unlikely they were all genuine converts. It was “possible for an individual to feign conversion”, it added. But in many other cases, asylum was granted after tribunals concluded the applicant’s new faith was indeed genuine. Liverpool Cathedral officials and ministers kept careful records of attendance and involvement. People were registered when they first came to church in case evidence of attendance was needed for an asylum application. That was often followed by five sessions of baptism preparation and 12 sessions of confirmation preparation. For a minority of converts, the church provided a “letter of attendance” for the immigration authorities and supported them through the appeals process. The Rev Richard White, who was a canon at Liverpool Cathedral until 2018 and is now a vicar in Hull, said there was a “clear process” for those joining the Sepas congregation, “as there is for anyone seeking baptism so they can make an informed decision”. In a very small number of cases, the church got involved in asylum applications, he said. “But I’m really confident that we did all we could to avoid being naive, and to never say we were vouching for someone simply because they had come on a course or been baptised.” After completing an Alpha course and being confirmed, Swealmeen was offered accommodation by Malcom and Elizabeth Hitchcott, both devoted members of the cathedral community. Swealmeen was “a quiet fellow” but deeply interested in the Christian faith, Malcolm Hitchcott told reporters this week. The convert impressed the former army man by the “depth of his prayers” and knowledge of the bible. He talked “endlessly and passionately about Jesus”. Hitchcott said he was “numbed” and “shocked” by Swealmeen’s suspected actions at the weekend. White said the weekend’s events “must not deflect us from working towards a better world. This is a ghastly thing, and we lament it, but it can’t become something that steers us away from the vast majority of times where people’s lives are being helped.” Paul Bayes, the bishop of Liverpool, told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: “We pray for everybody whom we confirm and welcome, and one of the things we pray for is that they will grow up in holiness and in wisdom. Sadly, in this man’s case that does not seem to have happened.”When Roger Ellis fell ill two years ago, his family rushed to the hospital, fearing he was having a heart attack. Doctors quickly ruled that out, but days later, he suffered from a seizure. In the following weeks, the retired industrial mechanic, 64, who lived in the east Canadian town of Bathurst, New Brunswick, grew increasingly anxious and disoriented, and often repeated himself. His condition rapidly deteriorated. In his first three months in hospital, he lost 60 pounds and had to eat through a tube and use a wheelchair. “We nearly lost him a couple of times,” said his son, Steve. Doctors were stumped. They ruled out epilepsy, a stroke, Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, autoimmune encephalitis and cancer. Roger spent more than a year in the hospital before he was transferred to a care home. “We just unfortunately accepted the fact that we weren’t going to know what he had until he died,” said Ellis. Roger remains in the care home, and his family now believes he is part of a cluster of people suffering from a mysterious progressive neurological illness. The cases, largely concentrated in a sparsely populated area of New Brunswick, have stumped experts. And the mystery has prompted a fierce row between officials who suggest the cases are unrelated, and scientists who have argued that they may all have been triggered by environmental factors or contaminants. Victims experience unexplained pains, spasms and behavioural changes, said Dr Alier Marrero, the neurologist who first identified the cluster. Many then showed signs of cognitive decline, muscle wasting, drooling and teeth chattering and frightening hallucinations. So far, 48 cases have been publicly acknowledged, but officials familiar with research into the cluster have told the Guardian that the number of affected people now exceeds 100. Public health officials have been tracking the cases for nearly a year and given little indication they were close to a solution. But in a surprise turn of events, New Brunswick’s health minister, Dorothy Shephard, announced in late October that an epidemiological report had found no significant evidence that any known food, behaviour or environmental exposure could be responsible. The press conference followed a controversial paper presented to the Canadian Association of Neuropathologists that claimed eight deaths attributed to the cluster were “misdiagnoses” of known diseases, such as Alzheimer’s and cancer. New Brunswick officials started to float the idea that the cluster itself might be a conflation of unrelated cases. But the sudden shift has prompted concern among victims’ families that the province is rushing to declare the case closed. “It was just a display of how incompetent and disorganized the province has been,” said Ellis, who says other families he has spoken with are “devastated” by the province’s response. “It’s a shame that my father and so many others have to be involved in this mess.” The episode has also exposed the fractured relationship between the province and federal health authorities, who were asked not to assist in the investigation – and say they were prevented from testing tissue samples of deceased patients. Staff at Canada’s public health agency said they were blindsided by the press conference and the controversial paper – and cast doubt on the province’s suggestion that there was no link between the cases. “It was unbelievable,” one scientist told the Guardian. “Even a layperson understands that you’re never going to find anything by just looking at the phenomenon itself. You need to have a control group … It was just rookie epidemiology.” *** Residents first learned of the mysterious cluster nearly a year ago, when a leaked memo from the province’s public health agency asked physicians to be on the lookout for symptoms similar to Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) – a rare, fatal brain disease caused by misformed proteins known as prions. But in late October, a paper presented by Dr Gerard Jansen the Canadian Association of Neuropathologists shocked families by suggesting that eight of the victims had died from unrelated brain diseases. “We’ve asked unequivocally for that study to be pulled and for an apology to be issued,” said Kat Lanteigne, head of the non-profit advocacy group BloodWatch. “Every single scientist that our organization has ever worked with or reached out to is absolutely mortified.” Jansen’s paper was also condemned by Canada’s public health agency, which accused him of improperly using private data. Jansen did not respond to a request for comment, but previously told CBC News that the federal agency doesn’t own the data. He also said that after presenting his findings, colleagues “unanimously concurred with my findings in all eight autopsies and my conclusions [regarding] this cluster”. The Public Health Agency of Canada said that it “reserves the right to take corrective action, to ensure that this kind of situation does not recur and, if necessary, to remedy any resulting misinterpretation of facts in the public health context.” And other scientists have also cast doubt on Jansen’s findings. “[Jansen] has deeply, deeply misinterpreted the significance of his findings,” said one federal scientist, who argued that even if the victims suffered known brain diseases, , that would not rule out the impact of environmental factors. Increasingly, experts believe β-Methylamino-L-alanine (BMAA) – a neurotoxin found in blue-green algae blooms across the province – could help explain the varied symptoms.In one study, high concentrations of BMAA were found in lobster. Harvesting lobster is one of New Brunswick’s biggest economic drivers – promoting speculation that the efforts to rule out the existence of a cluster could be motivated by political decision making. Federal scientists would like to test brain tissue from eight people within the cluster who have died for potential environmental toxins. But the province has refused permission for such studies. Families and scientists have also grown troubled by the New Brunswick government’s apparent efforts to distance itself from Marrero, the neurologist who identified the cluster. New Brunswick’s health minister, Dorothy Shephard, recently told reporters there had been “issues” in the reporting process that allowed the situation to escalate “often without oversight” and omitted that Marrero had worked with federal scientists, as well as neurologists in other provinces, when first identifying the cluster. The provincial health ministry did not respond to a request for comment from the Guardian. But for experts in brain disease, the age range of patients in the cluster, the volume of cases and the geographic location of those suffering suggests more thorough investigation is needed. “These kinds of things just don’t lend themselves easily to explanation that it’s just a random collection of sporadically occurring cases that have been artificially lumped together by an over-enthusiastic neurologist,” said the scientist. “It just doesn’t wash.” A second investigation, led by a committee of neurologists from across the province – but probably not including Marrero – is expected to release a second report early next year after reviewing the 48 patients, nearly all of whom were treated by Marrero. “They really seem to be discrediting him without using his name,” said Ellis. “This is unacceptable. Of all people, he has been the one that has been the most communicative during these last few months. His work ethic and his professionalism and empathy are just top notch.” Ellis says that if it weren’t for the leak of the CJD memo last year, the public would still be in the dark. “It makes me sick to think that they’re trying to set this up to be nothing,” he said. “And you know what? At the end of the day, if it is nothing, then we still have to figure out how to help people. Because they’re still suffering.”Returning the Parthenon marbles to Greece is a matter for the British Museum, Downing Street has said, apparently reversing longstanding UK government opposition to the idea, reiterated by Boris Johnson as recently as March. Johnson met the Greek prime minister, Kyriakos Mitsotakis, at No 10 on Tuesday evening, with Mitsotakis reiterating his offer to exchange a series of treasures that had never before left Greece as rotating exhibitions for the British Museum in exchange for the marbles. Appealing to Johnson’s background as a classicist, Mitsotakis told him he was “a true philhellene” – while insisting the Greek government did not consider the marbles question to be a “footnote” that could be forgotten or overlooked. A No 10 statement said that when Mitsotakis had raised the marbles, Johnson “said that he understood the strength of feeling of the Greek people on this issue, but reiterated the UK’s longstanding position that this matter is one for the trustees of the British Museum”. This has not, however, always been Johnson’s stated view about returning the 80 metres of monumental frieze sawn off from the Parthenon in 1802 on the order of Lord Elgin, Britain’s then ambassador to the Ottoman empire, which remain in London. In an interview with the Greek newspaper Ta Nea in March, Johnson stressed that this remained the position, despite “the strong feelings of the Greek people”. He said: “The UK government has a firm, longstanding position on the sculptures, which is that they were legally acquired by Lord Elgin under the appropriate laws of the time and have been legally owned by the British Museum’s trustees since their acquisition.” But when Johnson’s spokesperson was asked on Tuesday what the message to Mitsotakis would be at the meeting, he said: “I won’t pre-empt their meeting, obviously, but the possession of the marbles is a matter purely for the museum. It’s not one for the UK government.” Questioned about the apparent change to the previous UK position, he said: “The British Museum operates independently of the government. It is free, rightly, from political interference… Any question about the location for the Parthenon sculptures is a matter for them.” A Downing Street source said that despite Johnson’s views, it had long been the official UK position that any return was a matter for the British Museum – whose new chair of trustees is the former Conservative chancellor George Osborne. The seeming shift in approach is likely to reignite the wider debate about museums returning artefacts taken from other countries during colonial times, which UK ministers have so far resisted under the mantra of “retain and explain”. Some regional museums have said they could repatriate disputed Benin bronzes, most of which were looted by British forces in 1897. This year Germany said it would start returning a “substantial” number of the Benin bronzes held in its museums to Nigeria. Maintenance work at the British Museum and the pandemic have prevented the Parthenon marbles from being publicly viewed for almost a year. The Acropolis Museum, which was purpose-built to house the classical carvings at the foot of the monument in Athens, reopened in May. Mitsotakis is particularly keen to secure the sculptures’ repatriation, having described the UK’s refusal to engage in talks as a “losing battle”. The British Museum’s consistent view is that the sculptures were acquired legally, with Elgin receiving formal consent from the Ottoman empire to remove the section of sculptures. “His actions were thoroughly investigated by a parliamentary select committee in 1816 and found to be entirely legal, prior to the sculptures entering the collection of the British Museum by act of parliament,” the museum says on its website. Campaigners described the government’s new stance as a diversionary tactic. Paul Cartledge, an emeritus professor of Greek culture at Cambridge University and vice-chair of the British Committee for the Return of the Parthenon Marbles, told the Guardian it amounted to “a sleight of hand”. “It’s a nonsense,” he said. “Even if the trustees agreed to relinquish them, the final decision to rescind the act of 1816 which declared the Elgin Collection to be owned by the nation would legally have to go through the British parliament. There is no doubt that the pressure is building up for genuine, post-imperial reconciliation in the cultural sphere and Johnson is trying to evade it.” Greek media said Mitsotakis had told the UK leader the marbles were “a significant issue” for bilateral relations that Athens would not be dropping.The author of a self-published children’s book about a dragon that causes havoc with its fiery sneezes is suing John Lewis over its 2019 Christmas ad about a trouble-making dragon, Excitable Edgar. Fay Evans alleges in her copyright infringement claim that there is a “striking similarity” between her picture book, Fred the Fire-Sneezing Dragon, which she published herself in September 2017, and John Lewis’s two-year-old ad. John Lewis “strongly” denies the allegations, saying that the concept was first presented to it in early 2016, and it has documentation to prove this. Evans’s book is a rhyming story about a small green dragon whose fiery sneezes cause chaos and resentment, until he wins the affection of the humans in the story by cooking their food with his flames. In the John Lewis ad, Edgar the dragon annoys the people in the town where he lives by melting a snowman and burning down their Christmas tree, until he pleases them by lighting their Christmas pudding. “When I watched the John Lewis Christmas advert for the first time, I was gobsmacked – I couldn’t quite believe what I was seeing unfold before me. The visual resemblance to the main character in Fred the Fire-Sneezing Dragon and the narrative similarity throughout was striking,” Evans said. “I’ve since heard from many readers who genuinely thought that I had worked with the makers of the advert and that they were watching Fred’s story on the television. I am totally confident in the validity of my claim and have received an overwhelming amount of public support.” John Lewis said in a statement: “Having provided Ms Evans with the time-stamped documents that show the concept for our Christmas campaign was first presented to us in early 2016 – one year and seven months before her book was published – we are surprised to have received this claim. We strongly deny that we have copied or drawn any inspiration from the book, and will be robustly defending the claim.” Evans, who is represented by Brandsmiths, has served her claim on John Lewis plc and its advertising agency DDB UK. Brandsmiths head of intellectual property Andy Lee said he was “very happy to be representing Fay in this David versus Goliath battle”. John Lewis is also under fire over this year’s Christmas ad. Alt-folk husband and wife duo the Portraits have alleged that the retailer lifted their arrangement to Philip Oakey and Georgio Moroder’s 1985 electro-pop classic Together in Electric Dreams for its new advert Unexpected Guest. John Lewis has said there is “no substance to the claims”. Previously, the former children’s laureate Chris Riddell suggested that John Lewis had “help[ed] themselves to my picture book” Mr Underbed in their 2017 Christmas ad. A spokesperson said at the time that “the story of a big hairy monster under the bed which keeps a child from sleeping is a universal tale which has been told many times over many years”, and that “the main thrust of our story is utterly different to Chris Riddell’s”.The mutual insurance firm LV= has rejected fresh overtures from the rival insurer Royal London, saying it had proposed a dismantling of the business and called on members to back a planned takeover by the US private equity firm Bain Capital. The 178-year-old firm, originally known as Liverpool Victoria, wants to sell itself to Bain Capital for £530m, in a controversial deal that would end its member-owned status if they back the takeover in a December vote. Royal London, which had an earlier bid for the company rejected, last week proposed a deal to Bain Capital that would involve splitting parts of LV= with the US investment firm. The Mail on Sunday reported that it suggested in an email to the LV= chief executive, Mark Hartigan, that it could acquire some of its rival’s policies, leaving Bain to spin off the rest of the business into a separate entity. LV= said on Tuesday: “The board confirms that an email was received from Royal London last week, being almost a full year after our transaction with Bain Capital was announced. It proposed the dismantling of LV=. “The board of LV= continues to unanimously recommend the transaction with Bain Capital to its members ahead of the special general meeting on 10 December.” Royal London, the UK’s largest mutual life insurance and pensions company, was beaten to an agreed takeover by Bain Capital last December. Some LV= members complained they were not informed about the details of Royal London’s bid, which could have retained its mutual status. Alan Cook, the LV= chairman, said: “Despite having every opportunity, Royal London failed to submit a superior best and final offer, and therefore the board unanimously concluded that the better value, certainty, investment and structure of Bain Capital’s proposal would be in the best interests of our members. “The board of LV= is clear that at no point have any of Royal London’s proposals included an offer for membership rights or continuation of mutuality for LV= members, contrary to media speculation. Given this context, the board of LV= believes it is unfair and misleading to characterise any proposal from Royal London as preserving mutuality or offering a real mutual alternative.” He said the board was “surprised and disappointed” by the timing of Royal London’s intervention and accused it of trying to “destabilise” the company’s plans. Speaking on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, Barry O’Dwyer, the Royal London chief executive, said LV= would be better off striking a deal with his company, without commenting on the suggestion that its deal would break up its rival. “We’ve had discussions on and off with LV= over the last eight years and we’ve long believed that combining our two great mutuals was a good idea to deliver long-term benefits for both sets of members,” he said. “The near universal dismay which has greeted that proposal [from Bain] means that there is a significant risk now that members won’t support that proposal and so I sent a private email to the LV= chief executive offering to help construct an alternative.” He said mutuals were owned by their customers and run for their benefit, adding that Royal London paid a third of its charges back to its pension customers last year. “It’s really difficult for LV members and observers to believe that a US private equity company is going to safeguard member benefits and UK jobs more than a UK mutual does,” he said. “I just don’t believe that that’s credible.” He added: “My message to LV is: let’s talk. There must be a better way..” In parliamentary questions, the business secretary, Kwasi Kwarteng, backed a call from Labour MP Gareth Thomas, shadow minister for international trade, for full disclosure of how much the investment bank Fenchurch Advisory Partners, the law firm Clifford Chance, the PR firm FTI Consulting and other advisers have been paid by LV=. Thomas said the total could be £50m or more. Malik Karim, treasurer of the Conservative Party, would be one of the main beneficiaries, as founder and chief executive of Fenchurch. “I’m particularly interested in this deal,” said Kwarteng. “People who are shareholders, people who are customers, have every right for transparent data and I would very much support that.”Within nine months of his first match as England manager in 1963, Alf Ramsey had seen his side put eight past both Switzerland and Northern Ireland (Bobby Charlton scored three in the first of those games, Jimmy Greaves four in the second, if anyone is minded to complain about Harry Kane and stat-padding). Amid general excitement, Ramsey was unmoved: the capacity to hammer minnows (as Switzerland and Northern Ireland then were), he cautioned, had very little to do with the business of winning tournaments. For a country such as England, qualifying is a curious business. Get through easily and it is treated with a weary sigh, as though getting to the finals was always assured and the draw was kind. Struggle and the sense is, understandably, that if you can’t beat that lot, what hope do you have against the big sides? England made this group look straightforward, and the experience of Portugal and Italy suggests that achievement should not be underestimated. Poland, Hungary and an improving Albania were all potentially awkward opponents. The way the fixtures fell, there were three games in which there could have been pressure: at home to Poland, away to Hungary and at home to Albania. England won all three, the last two of those by an aggregate 9-0. Previous England sides have often struggled to dispatch lesser sides who sit deep against them; under Southgate they have revelled in that – which is another reason Kane’s remarkable goals return shouldn’t be dismissed. While the 1-1 draw at home to Hungary was frustrating, the two matches that raise greater concerns were those against Poland. England controlled the early part of the meeting at Wembley, went ahead and then fell back, leading to a Poland equaliser. England did burgle a late winner, although Southgate had not made any substitutions before it arrived and the shape of the game had barely changed. Then, in Poland, England again sat off having taken the lead and on that occasion ended up conceding in injury-time to drop two points. On the one hand, taking four points from the second team in the group is a useful return (and an important one: had those results been reversed, Poland would have been in a position to finish above England with a draw against Hungary on Monday), but on the other, both did highlight the one repeated failing of the Southgate reign, the tendency to drop too deep having taken the lead against decent opposition. It happened against Colombia and Croatia at the 2018 World Cup and it happened against Italy in the Euro 2020 final. The issue feels as much psychological as tactical and long predates Southgate but it is something that has to be resolved if England are ever to win anything. That’s not to say England should be gung-ho, or that there is anything wrong about the basic balance of the side. Southgate has been admirably strong in resisting the temptation to try to shoehorn in more of England’s vast array of attacking talent. More than the 39 goals scored, the most impressive statistic from qualifying is perhaps that they let in only three. As at the Euros, there are sure to be pleas before the World Cup for him to let the players off the leash, to give them their head, but the truth is that no side has won a major tournament playing a columnist’s romantic ideal of football since probably France in 1984. It’s the nature of international football that far too much is read into individual games, and no experiment should be entirely written off on the basis of one match, but it did feel significant that England’s worst performance in qualifying was against Hungary, when Southgate fielded both Phil Foden and Mason Mount in midfield with Jack Grealish and Raheem Sterling on the flanks. The idea that good players will work it out – which surely was disproved by the Gerrard-Lampard conundrum that blighted a generation – neglects the fact that England have four very good central midfielders anyway, in Jude Bellingham, Jordan Henderson, Kalvin Phillips and Declan Rice. The most encouraging aspect of the past two international windows for England has been the form of Foden, who felt peripheral at the Euros – even if there was a sense he was missed in the later stages against Italy. But if Foden plays, that probably means only one of Sterling and Mount, both of whom have been regulars when fit, can be accommodated if the shape is to be the 3-4-3 Southgate used against Albania and San Marino, as well as against Germany and Italy in the summer. That also means no starting berth for Grealish, Jadon Sancho, Emile Smith Rowe or Bukayo Saka (unless he plays at wing-back). But, as Argentina have found over the past decade and a half, having a fleet of gifted forwards is an advantage only if properly deployed; an international side must be thought of like a normal team, with its own dynamic, not as a reward for good domestic performances. The quest for structure and balance may mean that, at times, England struggle to break down opponents who sit deep – as Hungary did at Wembley. But so long as England get through the group, that doesn’t really matter. As Ramsey understood, tournaments are won not by thrashing lesser sides, but by beating good ones. England are contenders in Qatar and that means the next year has to be spent preparing for games against the elite. That may not be exciting, but it is necessary.Moldova, which was forced to declare a state of emergency after Gazprom increased gas prices in September, will be free of outside interference only when it has rid itself of endemic corruption and diversified its energy supplies, Natalia Gavrilița, the prime minister, has said. Speaking to the Guardian, she said capacity shortages and soaring inflation, including increases in gas prices, were going to put a strain on the popularity of her government, which was elected only last summer. Gavrilița said the new government, given a majority mandate, came to power not because of its pro-European views, but its commitment to end endemic corruption. She and the president, Maia Sandu, make up the only all-female leadership team in Europe, and have the unenviable task of steering the small former Soviet republic, the poorest in Europe, towards the west without alienating the east, on which it depends for its energy and survival. The dilemma came into sharp relief in September when Moldova was forced to declare a state of emergency after the Russian-owned energy firm Gazprom raised the price of the gas it supplied to $790 per 1,000 cubic metres, and cut deliveries by a third. A five-year contract had come to an end and Gazprom said the new prices reflected the market. The EU has accused Russia of using gas as a weapon, with some seeing Modova’s position as a foretaste of the vulnerability the west may face if Germany gives the Nordstream 2 gas pipeline from Russia the final go-ahead. In the talks with Moldova over a new five-year gas contract, Russia was accused of linking concessions on the gas price to discussions over the separatist region of Transnistria, future maintenance of Gazprom’s supply monopoly and even trade with the EU. An EU grant of €60m, agreed in October, “helped us to get to a deal with Gazprom, since it improved our negotiating position”, Gavrilița said. The talks ended with Moldova securing a new five-year gas contract at a lower price than initially demanded, but also a protocol on a future audit of more than $700m of disputed Moldovan debt owed to Gazprom. Opinion varies on whether Moldova panicked and conceded too much. With highly sensitive talks on the debt still to be resolved by next May, and Russia holding strong cards, Gavrilița is reluctant get into a slanging match with Moscow. The strategy seems to be to loosen Russia’s stranglehold – but to do so gently. Pressed on how much politics – as opposed to energy markets – had played a role in Moldova’s crisis talks, she said: “We have agreed to negotiate and sign an energy agreement with the Russian Federation. We are letting experts and international relations pundits draw their conclusions. What we are concentrating on is having a pragmatic professional relationship with the Russian Federation. “In the elections we were voted in on a largely domestic agenda. It was more about corruption, governance, creating jobs, rather than going pro-east or pro-west, because so many politicians in the past have hidden behind these geopolitical lines and used it to engage in corruption. Our approach is to deal with the issues that the people care about.” She said rising commodity prices were reducing the standard of living, and even with the resolution of the gas crisis, the gas tariff had increased two and a half times. “For a country as poor as Moldova it is a big hit for the people. We kept our electoral promise to raise pensions from €55 to €100 and that helps more than 400,000 people. We have put in money for targeted social assistance and provided subsidies for the first 150 cubic metres of gas consumed.” But, she said, for Moldova to survive, structural solutions were urgently needed, including energy efficiency and renewables, with which the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development is helping. Moldova’s best hope lay in diversifying its energy sources, improving its gas storage, investing in new pipeline connections with Romania, and looking at the fact that 100% of its domestic electricity comes from Transnistria, on the its eastern border with Ukraine. “None of this will be done overnight. It will take many years”. But Gavrilița said the precondition for change was ending what the president has referred to as “the rule of thieves”, a fair description for a country that has been used for massive Russian money laundering and which saw more than $1bn – about 12% of Moldova’s GDP – siphoned from state-owned banks in 2014. Gavrilița said: “Our government institutions have been corroded by years of vested interests and corruption. We came to power on this promise to improve the rule of law, so we are reviewing positions, introducing external vetting of judges and prosecutors. The prosecutor general, Alexandru Stoianoglo, has been arrested and there have been some high-profile resignations”. But, referring to previous fruitless anti-corruption campaigns in Moldova, she said: “It is not just about changing the processes but also the outcomes. We have to end an era based on public expenditure and private gain”.A Colorado man had a surprise encounter with the rarest mammal in North America, which he found hiding beneath a table saw in his garage. Reese Nettles had gone out to lift weights when he caught sight of a furry face with soft, curious eyes. “He looked like if you put your hand down he would run right over to you,” Nettles told the Pueblo Chieftain. His visitor was a black-footed ferret – one of the rarest mammals in North America, according to Colorado parks and wildlife (CPW). “What are the odds?” Nettles said. “It was a really neat experience. To think there are just 605 in the world and to have one in my garage – it was really interesting.” Only about 370 black-footed ferrets still live in the wild, the species having fallen victim to a bacterium that is nearly 100% deadly for them and the prairie dogs they hunt. An intensive vaccination campaign has been trying to pull the ferrets back from the brink of extinction. In the meantime, populations have been supplemented with a limited supply of captive-bred ferrets. The ferret found by Nettles was one of nine released two weeks earlier at Walker Ranch in Colorado, where more than 120 black-footed ferrets have been introduced in recent years. Nettles guessed he lived five or six miles from the ranch, an impressive distance for a ferret to travel without being noticed by hunters. At first, he thought the animal was a pet. A friend later identified it. “We don’t know exactly why this black-footed ferret left the colony,” said Ed Schmal, a CPW conservation biologist. “We put them into prairie dog burrows but they may not stay. “Sometimes they scramble around the colony to find the right home. This one might have gotten pushed out by other ferrets and it went looking for a new home. We really don’t know.” Nettles’s new friend is the exception, not the rule. CPW said it has only heard of one other black-footed ferret leaving the ranch, and it did not end up in a garage. “This is extremely rare,” Schmal said. “Black-footed ferrets are nocturnal and extremely shy. For some reason, this one left the colony and was seeking shelter. “We’re just glad it appeared healthy, not starving or sick, and we were able to capture it and return it to the colony.”Who regulates the regulators? Less than two weeks after No 10’s abortive attempt to sweep away the standards commissioner, another position relevant to their interests is still in their sights. Former Daily Mail editor Paul Dacre is yet again in the running to head up media regulator Ofcom, having earlier this year been firmly judged by the interview panel as “not appointable”. What a mania for sympathetic placemen this government does have. Surely there should be some kind of body charged with overseeing “new broom” appointments such as Dacre’s? Call it the Office of Coming Under New Tutelage (Ofcunt). But listen – I love the idea of a fresh face, and Paul, 73, seems the ideal candidate. This is the movie Sunset Boulevard could have been, if only Billy Wilder had had the balls: one in which Norma Desmond is called back into the studio and cast in Roman Holiday instead of Audrey Hepburn. So much more jolly than Paul mouldering away in his mansion and shooting a writer (probably me, after this article). I suppose if Ofcunt did have a remit, it would be to ask whether one could just rerun things until one got the answer one wanted? As a dedicated reader of Paul’s Daily Mail, I had always been given to understand that even the appearance of interfering with settled decisions should mark one out as a saboteur, or an enemy of the people. Instead, it appears to be what you do if you want a state-of-the-art 21st century media regulator to be run by some MMR scare-pusher who still has his emails printed for him. Then again, maybe this is a story of personal growth. No editor hated single mothers more than Dacre, and no politician has created more of them than Johnson. So it’s great to see the former so desperate for revival that he is prepared for the latter to pull strings for him to get it. And what strings. The Johnson administration has been trying to engineer this appointment since summer 2020, reportedly spoonfeeding Dacre guidance on what to say in the interview and how to meet the selection criteria. Yet somehow, he still managed to cock it up first time round. Look, no one sympathises more than me with this snowflake generation of septuagenarian establishment men whose coddling renders them simply unable to handle the rigours and thrust of competition. But can they not just give Paul a participation medal and be done with it? Instead, they are giving him another go, with former culture secretary Oliver Dowden now defending his decision to rewrite the rules in a way widely believed to better accommodate Dacre’s skillset. This is already the government that sought to install Charles Moore, Johnson’s hopelessly over-indulgent former Daily Telegraph editor, as BBC chairman. That plan failed to come off, leaving Moore with spare time to push the government into its fiascoid recent attempt to excuse corruption on the part of Owen Paterson. As one cabinet minister put it to the Sunday Times this weekend: “The first rule of politics is that if you listen to Charles Moore and do the complete opposite of what he says, you won’t go far wrong.” You might be beginning to feel something similar about Oliver Dowden, who has never had a proper job outside Westminster, unless you count five minutes at some PR firm. (And darling, I’m afraid I don’t.) Dowden’s other brilliant idea was to “level up Britain’s screens” – what? – with the current plan to sell off Channel 4. No matter that selling off an advertiser-funded public asset that built an entire independent production sector is a move that could cost that same sector well over £2bn a year. Just chalk up yet another commerce-killing piece of idiocy to The Party Of Business. Speaking of Channel 4, I do hope Dacre being shooed in to Ofcom would not deprive us of the channel’s long-commissioned series entitled “Paul Dacre’s Worldview”. I previously imagined this as 60 looped minutes of a Spitfire shooting up a Viagra factory, but accept it might just as easily involve things Paul saw out of the chauffeur-driven car window in the decades of being driven between his home in the Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea, and the Mail offices (also in the Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea). Or perhaps it will be three full hours of what were known within that newspaper’s offices as the Vagina Monologues, after Paul’s predilection for rants beginning with rhetorical inquiries such as “you call that a good cunting headline, you cunt?” If you don’t like this type of filth, be sure to make a complaint to Paul Dacre’s Ofcom. In the end, though, none of this is really is about Dacre, who is just another bitter and restless faded star with an excess of boiled piss. He is merely a symptom. The disease is a government yet again attempting to game the system to suit itself – or rather, the man who leads it. For never mind his enemies. Perhaps the most unique characteristic of Boris Johnson as a politician is that you couldn’t even find a single one of his friends who would claim he got into politics because he cared about public service. The question for Conservative MPs, as he grinds on regardless, is how many things this prime minister will be allowed to break, pervert or permanently distort in a spree motivated solely by his own self-interest. Many of them are worth saving; for some it might already be too late. • Marina Hyde is a Guardian columnistWomen who work mostly from home risk hurting their careers as more men return to office working post-pandemic, a Bank of England policymaker has warned. Catherine Mann, a member of the Bank’s monetary policy committee, said this may lead to women getting caught in a “she-cession”. Women aren’t returning to work in the same numbers as men, partly due to issues with childcare and disruption at schools. We would like to hear from workers about their views on how remote working could affect their careers. Share your experiences Are you a worker with caring responsibilities, and do you plan to take advantage of offers by your employer to work from home more often? Do you have any concerns that it may have an impact on your career prospects or chance of promotion? While there has been increased working from home during the pandemic, how have you divided up childcare and household chores with your partner? And how will this change if you return to working more in the office in the coming months? You can get in touch by filling in the form below. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.The much-awaited meeting between Joe Biden and Xi Jinping achieved its admittedly low expectations when the two finally met and showed a willingness to move the bilateral relationship in a positive direction. Progress began to show soon after the meeting, for example on journalist visas. But the two sides also provided a list of existing grievances following the three-and-a-half-hour talks. The US said it raised its concerns over China’s human rights record, its “unfair trade and economic practices”, and its behaviour in the South China Sea. On the issue of Taiwan, China warned Biden not to “play with fire”. Beijing also expressed its disapproval of dividing the world into blocs and engaging in ideological demarcation, saying they would “inevitably bring disaster to the world”. The separate statements illustrated the depth of the division between the world’s two superpowers. “[Both] sides are very clear-eyed about where they diverge and are not likely to reach agreement,” said Todd Hall, the director of Oxford University’s China Centre. “But both also recognise their shared interest in mitigating the major potential dangers in the relationship and working where possible towards common ends.” Zhao Tong, of Carnegie Endowment for International Peace in Beijing, said China saw US policies aimed at protecting its own basic values as “threats to China’s core interests”. “In this sense, it’s a good sign that both leaders recognised the need to resume practical cooperation, but how far can it go eventually is still a question.” Days before the meeting, the US and China surprised delegates at Cop26 in Glasgow by pledging to work together on cutting greenhouse gas emissions. Analysts say it shows despite the fractious relationship, there is still room for the two diverging superpowers to cooperate. But both sides also understand that climate is not the ultimate dealbreaker. As Li Shuo of Greenpeace East Asia pointed out, the Cop26 decision related to nationally determined contributions “is actually stronger than the US-China deal”. The bilateral deal, Li said, was “weak due to their contentious relationship and constrained by their limited domestic climate progress”. For Beijing, Taiwan is its ultimate red line. It has long suspected Taipei of trying to achieve independence through implicit support from Washington, and the US of using Taiwan to contain China. “It is like playing with fire, and those who play with fire will get burned,” a Chinese readout quoted Xi as saying. Xi told Biden during the meeting – according to Chinese media – that “we have the patience, and we are willing to strive for the prospect of peaceful reunification with the utmost sincerity”. But he also warned that his country “will have to take resolute measures if the ‘Taiwan independence’ separatist forces provoke, compel or even cross the red line”. For Washington, Beijing’s assertive policies both domestically and internationally in the past decade have brought a sense of existential crisis. Biden frames the US’s competition with China as a matter of democracy verses autocracy. It is so pressing an issue for him that next month he will convene a “summit for democracy”. But the White House will soon run into an old question: to what extent it should involve democratic Taiwan in this club? Until and unless both sides give issues such as Taiwan a new framing, there will be little genuine progress in the overall relationship, analysts say. What we will be seeing, according to Hall, is “rather an attempt to enable cooperation where feasible while preventing the disagreements and competition both sides now view as part of the relationship from spiralling out of control”. It is what Biden calls “common-sense guardrails” at a time of great power competition. It is also what China’s Global Times describes as “injecting certainty” for the bilateral relationship. It is, perhaps, the best we could hope for in the foreseeable future.When it comes to persuading vaccine-hesitant NHS staff to roll up their sleeves and get jabbed, it is important to remember the context within which vaccine hesitancy exists. The population of England has a rich diversity of cultures, ethnicities and religions, but there are stark socioeconomic inequalities between these groups that translate into health inequalities. In Birmingham and Solihull, a very diverse area for which I am chair of the mental health trust, there is a nine-year gap in life expectancy between people born in those born in the richest and poorest areas. When it comes to healthy life expectancy – the number of years a person spends in good health – there is a 17-year gap between people in these areas. We also know from research into the impact of Covid on BAME groups that these inequalities have contributed to fear, stigma and distrust of the vaccine in some communities. Staff in the NHS come from these communities. And so the approach we have taken with our staff mirrors what we have done in the wider population, which is building trust in the vaccine programme that is culturally appropriate. In Birmingham and Solihull, we found that areas with low staff vaccination rates correlated to low response rates in the NHS staff survey. This, for me, emphasised the correlation between how engaged a member of staff was with the NHS and their confidence in the vaccine. From our side, giving our staff a safe space to talk about their concerns has been vital in improving vaccine uptake among workers. We have been working across the NHS, local authority and voluntary and community organisations. That includes helping faith leaders and organisations such as the Birmingham Central Mosque and the Council of Black Led Churches to distribute materials that are accessible for their audiences. Having this information come from community leaders that people know and trust locally helps ease the fears of those who are vaccine hesitant. The dialogue has to be two-way: the feedback we get from communities helps us shape the messages so they address the questions that people from different cultures might have. In Coventry and Warwickshire, for example, we put on weekly sessions with different faith groups featuring bilingual clinicians and public health representatives, adopting an “ask us anything” approach. This helped people feel that their concerns were being taken seriously, especially when they had time to ask questions through the multiple sessions we put on. We took the time to help allay their fears. We have tried to showcase a diverse range of staff on our internal communications. For example, an interview with one local nurse, who says of the vaccine: “I really didn’t want it. I had heard so many negative stories especially about the effect it would have on me and my fellow black peers. Well, it’s not true. I have had it and I am feeling fine. It’s my passport to freedom.” Such communications aim to deal with the facts about the illness, work through the myths and appeal to people’s bigger picture, “to protect yourself, your family and those you care for”. As we pass 50 million people vaccinated in the UK, we are seeing many of those who were initially nervous about the effects of the vaccine come forward, but there is still a long way to go. The NHS People Plan, published in 2020, sharpened the focus on looking after the health and wellbeing of our staff, tackling workplace discrimination and encouraging a culture of belonging and trust. We want to keep staff with a hugely diverse range of experience working for the NHS, and use their skills to help us tackle health inequalities in the wider population. However, the proportion of people who are fully vaccinated within particular population groups and also among NHS staff is still lower than we would like. As the vaccine becomes mandatory for NHS staff in the coming months, we will keep working to get it done, with a tailored approach that is inclusive of all of our colleagues. We will keep talking, we will keep trying to save lives. Danielle Oum is the co-chair of the NHS Confederation’s BME Leadership Network and chair of Birmingham and Solihull Mental Health NHS Foundation TrustAlmost 200 children under the age of five died of starvation in 14 hospitals across Ethiopia’s northern Tigray region between late June and October, according to data collected by local doctors and researchers. The research, shared with Agence France-Presse by Dr Hagos Godefay, the former head of the health bureau in the pre-conflict Tigrayan government, offers a snapshot of the suffering in Tigray, where a communications blackout by federal authorities has prevented a full examination of the toll of the war. The region is also being subjected to what the UN has described as a de facto aid blockade, meaning most essential medical supplies are no longer available. Hagos told the news agency that 186 children under five had died from severe acute malnutrition in the 14 hospitals still functioning in Tigray, and condemned the blockade and its impact on medical services as “collective punishment”. Hospitals were experiencing three to four deaths a week from ordinarily treatable illnesses such as pneumonia and diarrhoea, Hagos said, and tens of thousands of people are in urgent need of “chronic follow-up” treatments and care for conditions such as HIV, cancer and diabetes. “If we are not able to manage them, if we are not able to provide them drugs … it’s catastrophic,” he said. Hagos said according to data collected by doctors in hospitals as well as through household surveys by doctors and university researchers in the region, 29% of children in Tigray are acutely malnourished, up from 9% before the war. For severe acute malnutrition, the figure is 7.1%, up from 1.3%, he said. Ethopia’s prime minister, Abiy Ahmed, sent troops into Tigray in November 2020 in an attempt to remove the Tigray People’s Liberation Front, in response, he said, to TPLF attacks on army camps. Since then thousands of people have been killed, thousands detained and millions displaced in Tigray, and more recently the Amhara region. The conflict itself and the prominence of ethnic militia groups and Eritrean forces have blown open historic regional and ethnic fault-lines in Africa’s second most populous country. Abiy’s government has rejected claims it is blocking aid to Tigray, saying access has been restricted because of TPLF advances into the neighbouring Amhara and Afar regions. Earlier this month, eight other rebel groups, including the Oromo Liberation Army (OLA) – a historical foe of the TPLF – announced it was joining the Tigrayan forces in the conflict. In late October, TPLF forces said they had seized control of the strategic cities of Dessie and Kombolcha, positioning them to move down a major road towards Addis Ababa, and raising fears of an attack on the capital. In recent weeks, Ethiopian authorities have accelerated the arrests of thousands of Tigrayans in the capital and across the country, as part of sweeping state of emergency provisions announced on 2 November. As many as 1,000 people are reported to have been arrested in the past week, according to Liz Throssell, a spokesperson for the the UN’s high commissioner for human rights. The government has defended the arrests, saying it was detaining those suspected of supporting TPLF forces approaching Addis Ababa. The UN, rights groups, relatives and a government-created Ethiopian human rights commission have said the detentions, including of children and elderly people, appear to be on the basis of ethnicity. “We are concerned that arrests have been continuing over the last week in the Ethiopian capital, Addis Ababa, as well as in Gondar, Bahir Dar and other locations, as police invoke the excessively wide provisions of the state of emergency,” Throssell said at a press briefing on Tuesday. “These developments are all the more disturbing given that most of those detained are reported to be people of Tigrayan origin, arrested often on suspicion of being affiliated to or supporting the TPLF.” Agence France-Presse contributed to this reportGermany has suspended its approval process for the controversial Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline which would double its reliance on Russian gas following growing geopolitical pressure to scrap the project. Energy markets across Europe surged after the German energy regulator suspended its certification process, in a big setback to Kremlin-backed Gazprom’s plans to extend Russian gas dominance via a new pipeline across the Baltic Sea. UK gas prices for next month surged 9.3% on Tuesday to 223p a therm, an almost three-week high, while the Netherlands – which is one of the biggest gas markets in Europe – suffered an increase of 7.9% to 88.05 euros a megawatt hour. The German energy regulator said it would not continue its approval process until the Nord Stream 2 company, which is registered in Switzerland, transfers its main assets and staffing budget to its German subsidiary. “A certification for the operation of Nord Stream 2 will only be considered once the operator is organised in a legal shape compliant with German law,” the regulator said. Germany’s decision to delay Nord Stream 2, which bypasses current pipelines that run through Russia’s nearest neighbours in Ukraine and Belarus, follows calls from western leaders to scrap the plan or risk destabilising the region. Boris Johnson warned Germany that it would have to choose between “mainlining ever more Russian hydrocarbons in giant new pipelines” and “sticking up for Ukraine” and “championing the cause for peace and stability” in eastern Europe. Critics of the project fear Russia will use the pipeline as a geopolitical weapon in Europe amid the global gas crisis, while weakening Ukraine which relies heavily on revenues from shipping Russian gas to Europe via its gas transit network. Moscow denies this. “When we say that we support the sovereignty and integrity of Ukraine, that is not because we want to be adversarial to Russia, or that we want in some way strategically to encircle or undermine that great country,” Johnson said in a speech to City of London dignitaries at Mansion House on Monday. The US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, warned earlier this year that Nord Stream 2 represented “a Russian geopolitical project intended to divide Europe and weaken European energy security”. Europe faces a looming winter gas crisis, which has fuelled fears of a widespread industrial slowdown due to factory shutdowns and potential power outages. It is also expected to drive a cost of living crisis for homes and small businesses. Gas prices have reached record highs in recent months, ignited by a global surge in demand after the Covid-19 economic slowdown last year, and fuelled by Russia’s reluctance to export extra supplies to Europe to help meet demand despite rocketing market prices. Some countries have accused Russia, which is Europe’s largest gas supplier, of withholding extra gas supplies to Europe in order to pressure Germany to approve the gas project. The Kremlin has denied this. The boss of commodities trading giant Trafigura, Jeremy Weir, warned that Europe could face “rolling blackouts” this winter due to tight gas supplies and low gas storage levels. “We haven’t got enough gas at the moment quite frankly; we’re not storing for the winter period. So hence there’s a real concern that there’s a potential if we have a cold winter that we could have rolling blackouts in Europe,” Weir told an industry conference. Weir warned that there was “an issue looming on oil prices on a long-term basis” because of a slowdown in new oil production, and that it was “very possible” that global oil prices, which have climbed by 60% since the start of the year to more than $80 a barrel, could reach $100 a barrel for the first time since 2014.The Fox News host Laura Ingraham sparked mockery on social media after becoming confused when she believed a guest discussing the Netflix television show You was actually referring to her. Ingraham opened her show on Monday night by slamming what she called a “Team of Incompetents” in the Biden White House, and questioning the capabilities of the president himself. “America is truly in danger,” she said, “under a president who is physically and mentally deteriorating before our eyes … real chaos is unfolding.” Unfortunately for Ingraham, real chaos – and confusion – then unfolded on her show. You, which the Guardian called an “awful, sociopathic show we’re absolutely addicted to”, is about a serial killer stalker. Raymond Arroyo, a conservative commentator and regular guest, mentioned the Netflix production as part of a discussion on TV shows and a rightwing perception that they are sympathetic to leftwing points of view, including around vaccines and Covid-19. “I was watching an episode of You when measles came up,” said Arroyo . Looking puzzled, Ingraham interrupted. “Wait, wait, wait,” she said. “When did I mention measles?” “I don’t know,” said Arroyo. “It was on You.” “What was on me?” Ingraham asked. “What are you talking about?” “The measles and the vaccine episode was on You,” said Arroyo. Ingraham became visibly annoyed. “We never did a measles and vaccine episode. Is this a joke?” “I know!” Arroyo yelled, waving his arms furiously. “It was on You! It was on You!” Ingraham continued to fail to understand there is a show on Netflix called You, and that Arroyo was not referring to her own show. The pair continued a dialogue that seemed to belong more to a sitcom or sketch show than primetime on a major US network. “Raymond!” Ingraham said. “I’ve never had measles. What are you talking about? This is stupid!” Arroyo tried to explain: “It was an episode of a show, Laura.” “What’s it called”?” “You! You! It’s called You.” Ingraham still didn’t get it. “What’s he talking about? I’ve just never done a show on measles. I completely give up.” The segment ended shortly after. After the clip went viral, Arroyo later tweeted that the dialogue had been scripted – a claim that was not entirely convincing to some online commentators. “My favorite part was that only regular viewers realized it was totally scripted,” Arroyo said in a post. Ingraham on her own Twitter feed has not yet mentioned the incident.The most striking thing about Tong Yang-tze, sitting inside her modest Taipei studio residence, is her confidence, and the sense that she’s had it all along. Now in her late 70s and considered one of Taiwan’s foremost calligraphers and artists, Tong grins and jokes over cups of green tea and local sweets, belying her fame and cultural significance. “Of course I’m good!” she laughs at one point, recalling an offer early in her career from her former university to teach. “I said no, I don’t want a teaching job. At that time, everybody needed a job but I wanted to be an artist. No regrets.” Last week Tong’s calligraphy with a modern art twist greeted visitors to the hotly anticipated M+ museum in Hong Kong, an ambitious decade-long project to create what has been dubbed Asia’s Tate Modern. The 33-gallery space, in a harbourside building designed by “starchitects” Herzog &amp; de Meuron in collaboration with TFP Farrells and Arup, opened last week. Tong’s work – broad and rough inky brushstrokes sweeping chaotically across and around the space – is ubiquitous in Taiwan. It is signage at train stations and airports; it is the branding of theatres, bookshops and a Chanel anniversary campaign; it features in collaborations with jazz musicians (“the only music that goes with calligraphy”) and fashion designers. It is the stamp in your passport when you arrive in Taipei. Tong moved to Taiwan in 1952 with her family, leaving a comfortable life in Shanghai. They settled in Taipei, where she says they were poor and had no friends. Her father set her and her four siblings the task of learning calligraphy – practising 100 large characters and 200 small characters every day, all through their school years. “I fell in love with it,” she says. After a fine arts degree at National Taiwan Normal University, a postgrad at the University of Massachusetts and a “very easy” stint as a graphic designer in New York, Tong built a career fusing the ancient traditional practice of calligraphy with modern art, illustrating deeply meaningful ancient texts. She is notoriously media shy, and can’t recall having ever done an interview in English before. She doesn’t like strangers in her home - journalists for example, she specifies apologetically – or posing for photographs. Credit for this temporary exception is apparently owed to her close friend and peer, the internationally lauded founding director of Cloud Gate Dance Theatre, Lin Hwai-min. Sitting around her glass and crochet-topped table, Lin prompts, praises and teases his old friend from 1970s New York. When Tong talks of her private studio at university, and time spent with rich relatives on Madison Avenue, Lin laughingly calls her a princess. When she offhandedly notes she got into Taiwan’s most prestigious business school but chose art instead, he chides “stupid girl”. But he doesn’t mean it: later, when asked about their parallel rise through Taiwan’s artistic elite, he waxes lyrical. “She really invaded all our lives in the past few decades,” he says. “Or we should say she cultivated it. Calligraphy used to be everything in the old days, and now you look out and you see the new design. But she brings calligraphy through to society. It’s truly amazing.” He looks over at her and laughs. Tong almost rejected the M+ commission when she saw the plans for the space: no walls, all those galleries. Boring. How can you appreciate the art? But, she says, leaning forward and grinning mischievously: “I like a challenge.” Her first thought was to use a contemporary poem for the contemporary city, but instead she did the opposite, choosing passages from the I Ching, a seminal 3,000-ish-year-old Chinese text. One pillar hosts four separate pieces, each an interpretable message for an individual, another a four-sided wraparound image, forcing viewers to circle the pillar to take it in – ensuring that wherever someone stands in that open, wall-less space, they will have a different experience of her work. When creating for herself, Tong says she prefers working at more manageable sizes, but her grandest pieces have filled exhibition halls. Often working to commission, her work “fits the space”, she says matter of factly. But there is a caveat. “Every art exhibition will be different,” she says. “Art cannot be repeated.” Lin shows me a video on his phone. It’s Tong creating one work hanging nearby in the National Concert Hall – she holds a brush nearly her size, gliding it around the paper sheets taped to the floor. “It’s physical work, using my whole body,” she says. But, asked what her main feeling is while she works, Tong says: “Enjoyment.” Tong is not outwardly political, saying she “never touches it”, and sidesteps questions of the Hong Kong upheaval that has sent so many artists fleeing to Taiwan. Tong’s work will feature at the M+ gallery in a time of extraordinary political suppression in Hong Kong, with crushing censorship, cultural blacklists and an exodus of artists. In September, national security police raided the Tiananmen museum, confiscating its historical exhibits and paraphernalia. In October 2020, the History Museum was closed for renovation but the uncertain climate prompted independent efforts to digitise the entire exhibition, fearing it would be politically sanitised once reopened. M+ has already felt the heat. Earlier this year, pro-Beijing legislators rounded on the museum over its plan to include art by Ai Weiwei in its exhibition, saying the display of some works by the Chinese dissident artist could spread “hatred against China” and violate the national security law. When it opened last week, the much anticipated exhibition included some nods to the political upheaval of the past two years, including art featuring police riot shields. Tong’s approach does allow for experimentation, and for a respectful rebellion against the traditional that she says is driven in part by her hope to see young people drawn away from the digital world towards calligraphy. Her work, she says, can be read as a meaningful text, or simply enjoyed for its appearance. Both are equally important: while she consults with professors to interpret and choose her phrases, if they don’t look good on paper she won’t use them. Lin says this makes her work accessible to people who can’t read Chinese, or who have not studied the ancient texts from which she draws her characters. Tong’s work has mostly shown in Taiwan, but has been sought after by collectors around the world. “The meaning for us all is beyond the characters she’s presented,” says Lin. “Most of us enjoy the special design, the musicality, the grading of the different shades of ink. You can take it as abstraction.” Her friends and colleagues note, with gentle exasperation, Tong’s penchant to be dissatisfied with her own work and discard it. That habit will feed part of her next work, teasingly sitting in the nearby corner. “I’m an artist,” she says. “I enjoy my time and I just want freedom. I have lived by that. I was – I am – fortunate. The one thing is I need a challenge.” • This article was amended on 18 November 2021 to correct a misspelling of Lin Hwai-min’s name in a picture caption.Clarissa Eden, the Countess of Avon, who has died aged 101, is remembered for her comment, as the prime minister Anthony Eden’s wife during the 1956 Suez crisis, that she “felt sometimes that the Suez canal was flowing through my drawing room”. It reflected only partly the spirit of a stylish, intellectual woman, who found herself almost unwittingly at the centre of Britain’s political life in the mid-1950s. Though she was descended from the Churchill dynasty, politics hardly impinged on her early life. The third child and only daughter of Winston Churchill’s younger brother, John Spencer-Churchill, a stockbroker, and Lady Gwendoline Bertie, daughter of the 7th Earl of Abingdon, Clarissa Churchill, born in London, was more attracted to the liberal and intellectual milieu of her cultured mother, a renowned beauty, than to politics. Of her uncle Winston, she recalled attending lunches in the 1930s at his country home, Chartwell, where, at the nadir of his career, he was “endlessly telling us there was going to be a war and we would all get gassed”. A patchy education, not uncommon among girls of her class, ended when, at 16, she was sent to Paris with two friends and a chaperone to be “finished off”. She intended to paint, but was taken up by the glitterati of Paris society and would arrive at parties in a green Rolls-Royce owned by Hugo Baring, of the banking family. It was only when she went to Oxford in 1940 to study philosophy that she discovered a direction to her life. Though not an undergraduate, she studied seriously and found Oxford’s intellectual life “a revelation, terribly exciting”. Clever, beautiful and original, she was taken up by the elite, became a “dons’ delight”, and mixed with the pillars of the academic community – Maurice Bowra, David Cecil and Isaiah Berlin – and of the artistic world, including the composer, novelist and painter Gerald Berners, the photographer Cecil Beaton, the painter Lucian Freud, and the writers Cyril Connolly, Evelyn Waugh and Elizabeth Bowen. She spent the rest of the second world war decoding telegrams in the Foreign Office basement, while living at the top of the Dorchester hotel in cut-price rooms (most people avoided the upper floors because of the bombing); and she worked for a British information newspaper directed at the Russian allies. With no intention of pursuing a career, but without a private income, at the war’s end she landed a job reviewing theatre, music and the arts in Vogue’s Spotlight column, during which time she befriended the theatre director Peter Brook, and then as a publicist with the film producer Alexander Korda. On the set of The Third Man, which Korda co-produced, she met Orson Welles, who became a dinner companion and was one of the few actors she liked, though the reclusive and complex Greta Garbo became her close friend. She moved on to become an editor at George Weidenfeld’s newly established publishing firm. She had first met Anthony Eden, then respected as one of the most skilful diplomats of the age, when she was a schoolgirl, but it was not until 1946, when Eden was in opposition and in the dying stages of his first marriage, to Beatrice Beckett (they divorced in 1950), that they met again, at a dinner party. They were just friends for years; Clarissa harboured no thoughts of a closer attachment “because he was a politician, for a start”. It came as a complete surprise to all her friends when, in August 1952, they announced their plans to marry, with only two days’ notice. The combination of the foreign secretary Eden’s glamour and Clarissa’s elegance, youth and family connections ensured that the marriage and reception at No 10 Downing Street, hosted by Winston and Clemmie Churchill, made the international headlines. With no experience as a politician’s wife, Clarissa was thrust into the world of diplomacy and entertaining world leaders, which she handled with style. But only nine months into the marriage, Eden was struck down by illness, requiring three operations to save his life. For the rest of their marriage, during his successive illnesses, Clarissa devoted herself to his care. Her experience as a foreign secretary’s wife was good training for Eden’s long-awaited elevation on Churchill’s retirement to the premiership in April 1955 – a move welcomed by the Conservative party. Eden, the heir apparent for a decade and deputy since 1951, was increasingly vexed at Churchill’s refusal to go. Clarissa adjusted to living at No 10 Downing Street, though she was shocked at the pace of life at the top. “I’d never seen anyone working like that in my life before – working from dawn to two in the morning – and I just felt this is so awful, this life, that I must tailor my life to his,” she said. Though this meant sacrificing time with her friends, she derived enjoyment and interest from being at the hub of the nation’s political life. Among global figures, she counted as friends the US secretary of state Dean Acheson, who was “always making terribly funny jokes” and Jawaharlal Nehru, prime minister of India – “a beautiful man” of “great spirituality”. Clarissa had little taste, however, for political intrigue. During the Suez crisis, which broke in July 1956 after Egypt’s president, Gamal Abdel Nasser, nationalised the Suez Canal company, her role was “to bolster” Eden in the fevered atmosphere of No 10 as he moved towards a resolution to use force against Nasser – a policy that divided parliament, families and friends. Though Clarissa never wavered, she was curious enough to wander (unnoticed) up Whitehall from No 10 to observe for herself the massive antiwar demonstration in Trafalgar Square. The crisis would tarnish Eden’s reputation and end his political career. Illness forced him into retirement a few months later, in January 1957. In 1961 he was raised to the peerage as the Earl of Avon. For Clarissa, it was an opportunity for them to build a life together, delighting in their mutual appreciation of art and culture and the company of old friends. Although they were abroad for much of the year, in the peaceful village of Alvediston, Wiltshire, Clarissa read, and cultivated a magnificent garden. When Eden died in 1977, Clarissa was 56. She rediscovered her intellectual friends from “before Anthony”, as she put it, became an intrepid traveller to undiscovered places, took up scuba diving, and re-entered London’s social life. As keeper of the flame, she fiercely defended Eden’s reputation, believing history should judge him in the longer perspective of his career as a skilled statesman over four crucial decades of the 20th century, rather than solely through the prism of Suez. I came to know Clarissa in her later years when, with so many friends dying, her typically forthright philosophy was “to make new ones”. She asked me to edit her 2007 memoir From Churchill to Eden. She still radiated extraordinary beauty and elegance. Her gift for friendship was inspiring; she was witty, always curious, impatient with convention and humbug, and she had an intellectual honesty, a finely tuned sensibility to culture, a completely original take on people, and a style of conversation now almost vanished. She illuminated any company she graced. • Anne Clarissa Eden, Countess of Avon, born 28 June 1920; died 15 November 2021 • Cate Haste died in April 2021Circus 1903 An adorable elephant puppet named Peanuts was the big hit of this circus spectacular when it rolled into the Southbank Centre in 2019. Now it’s back, with ringmaster David Williamson introducing some old favourites alongside new international acts including contortionists, acrobats and knife-throwers. Southbank Centre, London, 16 December-2 January The Jungle Book A swinging new version of Rudyard Kipling’s adventure, adapted, directed and choreographed by Tom Jackson Greaves with poetry and lyrics by Sanah Ahsan. The Watermill’s musical caper adds an extra bit of fun by offering 5pm pyjama performances to ease the post-show bedtime routine. Watermill, Newbury, 18 November-31 December Pinocchio: The Greatest Wonder of the Age This new musical version of Carlo Collodi’s classic tale gives the wooden boy more than a talking cricket for company. Paul Boyd’s story is set in a circus and features the conjuror Mr Fox, acrobat Lady Cat and opera sensation the Red Lobster. Like several theatres this Christmas, there are special socially distanced performances available if you prefer. Lyric, Belfast, 26 November-31 December Squirrel Bright-eyed and bushy-tailed, the Egg’s nut-loving mischief-maker is back. Marc Parrett’s scurrying squirrel puppet is the star of Tim Bell and Kate Cross’s five-star show, which creates a wintertime wonderland with a chic Bauhaus-inspired design, jazzy accompaniment and a giddy sense of fun. The Egg, Bath, 27 November-24 December A Christmas Carol Charles Dickens’ fable can seem like an old chestnut and this winter it’s being staged far and wide as usual. But this new musical version with audience interaction should ring the changes. From Noisemaker, the company behind Oor Wullie and The Snow Queen, it’s directed by Andrew Panton and features 11 actor-musicians. Dundee Rep, 27 November-31 December A Chorus Line With more hopes and dreams than Santa could ever fulfil, this high-kicking sensation of a backstage drama gets a welcome new production by musicals maestro Nikolai Foster. The always electrifying Adam Cooper stars as the demanding director Zach. Curve, Leicester, 3-31 December Hex The National Theatre’s Christmas spectacular offers the “true story of the bad fairy”, reimagining Sleeping Beauty from the perspective of the sprite who makes her slumber. Rosalie Craig takes the lead role and there’s a first-rate creative team including choreographer Jade Hackett, composer Jim Fortune, writer Tanya Ronder and director Rufus Norris. Olivier theatre, London, 4 December-22 January Robin Hood Christmas is a fine time for this swashbuckling saga of goodwill and merriment, which gets remixed as a “legend of the forgotten forest” by Bristol’s Wardrobe Ensemble in a show for over-sevens. A modern-day hero, JJ, gets caught up in the Sherwood shenanigans. Bristol Old Vic, 25 November-8 January The Book of Dust – La Belle Sauvage Delayed by almost 18 months because of the pandemic, Philip Pullman’s prequel to the His Dark Materials trilogy finally hits the stage, adapted by Bryony Lavery, directed by Nicholas Hytner and designed by Bob Crowley. Book a spare seat for your dæmon and treat yourself to a madeleine in the interval. It is Christmas after all. Bridge theatre, London, 30 November-26 February Llygoden yr Eira Eek! It’s the welcome return of Snow Mouse, this time staged in the Welsh language for a 10-venue tour by Theatr Genedlaethol Cymru and Theatr Iolo. A cosy bit of wintry fun for the under-fives. Tour runs 18 November-18 December There May Be a Castle There’s been a party mood at the Little Angel all year, as Islington’s puppet theatre is celebrating its 60th birthday. Its festive shindig is based on the book by Piers Torday about a pink knight, a family of mice and a shapeshifting dinosaur. Visit before 27 November to explore a birthday puppetry exhibition in the workshop. Little Angel, London, until 23 January Jack and the Beanstalk “Fee-fi-fo-fum … I smell the socks of a Scarborian!” Or so it goes at Scarborough’s Stephen Joseph theatre, where a giant is rumoured to have gobbled up the Easter Bunny and now plans to lock up Father Christmas. An off-kilter escapade from the gang behind last year’s The Snow Queen, which was a witty whirlwind of a show. Stephen Joseph theatre, Scarborough, 3-31 December Mrs Delgado A new Christmas tradition is afoot in Oxford: world premieres of Mike Bartlett plays at the Old Fire Station. After the success of Snowflake in 2018 comes Mrs Delgado, a story of neighbours and “raised blinds and lowered boundaries” during the Covid-19 lockdown. Live-streamed on 11 and 14 December. Old Fire Station, Oxford, 6-21 December Ghost Walk Not ready to return to theatre? Or just fancy a winter stroll with some added drama? Poltergeist Theatre’s site-specific, digital audio show is playable on smartphones and invites you to turn ghost-detector on a trip around the City of London. Featuring Juliet Stevenson, Nina Wadia and Paterson Joseph, it is then available for download until spring. Broadgate, City of London, 10-11 December Donald and Benoit It’s the season to tell stories – and listen to them, too. Sound Stage’s new audio drama, adapted by Jeanine Byrne from John Byrne’s original story, is the tale of a naughty kitten who livens up the life of a bored boy by the seaside. Available online, 17-19 December Beauty and the Beast Panto aficionados will know that for one subgenre, screaming guitars and drum kits are as essential as frocks, sweets and slapstick. That’s rock’n’roll panto – and Christian Patterson’s take on Beauty and the Beast returns this year with a 10-strong cast, puppets and plenty of bangers. Theatr Clwyd, Mold, 19 November-15 January The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe Narnia visits you this Christmas thanks to the UK and Ireland tour of this CS Lewis adaptation with its spellbinding design by Tom Paris. EastEnders’ Samantha Womack now plays the White Witch in the show which was first staged at Leeds Playhouse in 2017 and transferred to the Bridge theatre in London in 2019. Touring until 7 May The Not So Ugly Sisters Did the Ugly Sisters get a bum deal? Maybe Cinderella isn’t so squeaky clean after all? In a co-production with Leeds Playhouse and Red Ladder, children’s theatre company Wrongsemble imagine Cinders and Prince Smarming’s wedding day, with the stepsisters – who have become hairdressers – rudely snipped off the guest list. Written and directed by Elvi Piper, with music by Bay Bryan and Claire-Marie Seddon. Waterside Arts Centre, Sale, 24 November-1 January She Loves Me Love is in the air in the parfumerie at the heart of this romantic comedy, where two bickering employees find themselves falling for their pen pal. The twist is no great secret – this is the show that inspired You’ve Got Mail – but the songs by Jerry Bock and Sheldon Harnick are a treat. Crucible, Sheffield, 11 December-15 January Christmas Dinner This promises to be a fun festive show with all the trimmings. The sparky Catherine Wheels Theatre Company has teamed up with the Lyceum for a play by Robert Alan Evans in which a fed-up stage hand resigns herself to a lonely turkey sandwich on the big day but the sprites of her theatre rally together to lift her spirits. Royal Lyceum theatre, Edinburgh, 6 December-2 January Dick Turpin Rides Again “The legend returns!” screams the poster – and you’d be forgiven for thinking that’s not Mr Turpin but legendary panto dame Berwick Kaler, who bowed out in 2019 after starring in his 40th pantomime for York Theatre Royal. Now he’s back, at the city’s Grand Opera House, alongside familiar accomplices including Martin Barrass and David Leonard. Watch out for Kaler’s traditional low-flying Wagon Wheels. Grand Opera House, York, 11 December-9 January The Wiz Ease on down the road with the “super soul musical” based on The Wizard of Oz and best known for the 1978 film version starring Diana Ross as Dorothy, Lena Horne as Glinda and Richard Pryor as the Wiz. Choreographed by rising star Leah Hill, Matthew Xia’s production should raise the roof of this pint-sized theatre. Hope Mill, Manchester, 24 November-16 January Matthew Bourne’s Nutcracker! Matthew Bourne’s New Adventures company present the festive favourite that’s as cheekily delicious as opening your chocolate advent calendar early. Funny, fantastical and with a scrumptious design by Anthony Ward, it’s a sugar-rush of a show. Touring until 23 April Five Little Christmas Monkeys Counting is central to Christmas, whether it’s how many more sleeps till the big day, how many presents you get or how many sprouts you have to endure. The perfect time then for a festive spin on this riotously fun numbers show created by Andrea Sadler and David Duffy, the duo behind a puppet version of Dogs Don’t Do Ballet. For children aged six and under. Park theatre, London, 14-22 December Santa Must Die! Expect a distinct shortage of pa-rum-pum-pum-pum in this tale of zero-hours Christmas contracts that puts the gig into gig economy. A punky night out with upfront politics about workers’ rights and corporate greed, it’s written by Rosie MacPherson and foregrounds the bitter stories of those working through winter with Scrooge-like superiors. Alphabetti theatre, Newcastle, 16-31 DecemberSouth Africans rarely need an excuse to feel aggrieved. This is especially true for the country’s most successful sports team. The Springboks’ World Cup wins in 1995, 2007 and 2019, as well as the series triumph over the British &amp; Irish Lions this year, may have been built on a foundation of powerful forwards and a strong kicking game but they were fuelled by a desire to prove people wrong – to make real a blurred image of unity, to assuage a pervasive sense of national insecurity. World Rugby provided grist to the mill this week. The game’s governing body released the shortlist for its annual awards and, despite South Africa sitting at the summit of its rankings, failed to put forward Jacques Nienaber or any Springbok for the men’s coach or player of the year. “We obviously respect the process,” was Nienaber’s diplomatic response to the snub. “We’re very happy for the guys who got nominated. We wish all the nominees the best of luck.” What is being said inside the dressing room is confidential. But there is little doubt that both the coach and his director of rugby, Rassie Erasmus, will prod wounded egos to secure a first win in England since 2014 and with it a clean sweep of their European tour. To do this they have stuck with the same matchday 23 as the one that beat Scotland 30-15 in Edinburgh last Saturday. A new half-back pairing will start, as the Montpellier duo of Handré Pollard and Cobus Reinach replace Elton Jantjies and Herschel Jantjies. Nienaber labelled these changes as “rotational” rather than the result of a shift in approach, but did say that Jantjies the fly-half offers more “versatility from the bench”. One further change sees Franco Mostert make way for Lood de Jager in the second row. De Jager, who has overcome two serious shoulder surgeries and has played only two games for Sale Sharks this season, is the more conventional of the two locks. Mostert can play both tight and loose and gives Nienaber flexibility with his substitutions in the second half. This is the key to South Africa’s strength. The much vaunted “Bomb Squad”, the nickname for their eight replacements, has been elevated to a mythological status back home. The Springboks have been down at half-time in six consecutive Tests since September, winning three of them. In 25 matches since November 2018 they have outscored or equalled their opponents in the second half on 23 occasions. Nienaber changed his entire front row before half-time against Scotland and both sets of heavies will fancy their chances against a comparatively inexperienced England line without Ellis Genge and Jamie George. Not that Nienaber is leaving room for English excuses should his team win. “Across the board, at all international teams, the injury tally is going up,” he said, batting away Owen Farrell’s absence by mentioning the injuries to Cheslin Kolbe, Pieter-Steph du Toit and Faf de Klerk. Not that Nienaber will use this to fire up his charges. He’s got all the ammunition he’ll need. South Africa Le Roux; Kriel, Am, De Allende, Mapimpi; Pollard, Reinach; Nché, Mbonambi, Nyakane, Etzebeth, De Jager, Kolisi (capt), Smith, Vermeulen. Replacements Marx, Kitshoff, Koch, Mostert, Wiese, H Jantjies, E Jantjies, SteynFor Xi Jinping, the stakes were high at the recent plenary meeting of the Chinese Communist party, with all the stops being pulled out to make sure that things would go smoothly. The outcome seems never to have been in doubt and must have disappointed any foes who did not want Xi to be anointed leader into the distant future. Ostensibly the meeting was held to review the achievements of the past 100 years. In reality, it was about the future. One outcome of the meeting was the publication of a resolution on past achievements, which was designed to show that Xi Jinping’s leadership today and in the future is the inevitable outcome of history. The resolution will consolidate his pre-eminence within the party, empowering him to set the course for its second 100 years. Huge resources are dedicated to crafting an official history to be accepted by all. Woe betide anyone who challenges the official narrative. It was the party’s third historical summation, placing Xi alongside Mao Zedong and Deng Xiaoping, who oversaw the first two. The first two resolutions criticised the past to legitimise setting out on a brave new path forward. For Mao in 1945, it was the last nail in the coffin of his rivals for party leadership by exposing their “leftist” mistakes, which had almost brought the party to ruin. For Deng, the challenge was to break with the immediate disasters of the Great Leap Forward famine and the political turmoil of the Cultural Revolution, without discrediting Mao entirely. It enabled China to move into the reform era. Xi’s purpose is distinct. He is not defining the way forward by criticising the recent past but rather by highlighting how the past plays into his hands. The spotlight was on Xi, his achievements, the wrongs he has righted, and the future direction for China. The resolution described Xi as the “principal founder” of the party’s ruling ideology and the “core” of its leadership; it is intended to be the key document for all party members to unite around, eradicating challenges to his policy preferences. What can we discern from the meeting? First, barring an accident of nature, Xi will be reappointed for a third term as party general secretary at the 20th party congress (to take place in November 2022). This will allow for policy continuity, rather than policy change as occurred after the previous two historical resolutions. For instance, the harsher atmosphere that has enveloped the intellectual and cultural sphere in recent years will continue. What does Xi dream about? In seeking the “rejuvenation of the Chinese nation”, he envisages a China that will be more assertive and respected in the global sphere. China is to become a strong, global power by 2049, a rule-maker rather than a rule-taker, capable of playing a more forceful role in determining global norms and practices. For Xi, the west is in decline while the east is rising, and this provides China with the opportunity to more effectively promote its national interests. Trade and investment policies will be used to promote this agenda. Despite the milder language at the meeting, China will continue to tighten control over Hong Kong and push its territorial claims in the East and South China Seas and over Taiwan. But, to bring about happiness for the Chinese people, Xi’s leadership will have to keep the economy moving forward while dealing with rising social problems. His leadership has identified three that are products of the party’s policies and development model: combating corruption, reducing income inequality, and confronting environmental degradation. On taking power, Xi launched a major campaign against corruption, netting political foes, officials high and low, at home and overseas. One unexpected outcome was that the impact on lavish banqueting caused a number of producers of the fiery drink Maotai to go out of business, and the sales of Remy Cointreau to drop significantly. The question remains whether corruption can be addressed fully without institutional reforms and greater transparency. How long can campaigning maintain momentum? China’s last few decades of economic liberalisation have transformed it from one of the most equal nations in Asia to one of the most unequal, a problematic outcome for a party that still insists on calling itself socialist. Xi refers to creating “common prosperity” in China, but little concrete has been put forward to make this happen. The party could abolish once and for all the household registration system that means migrants in the major cities are treated as second-class citizens in terms of access to education, health, and benefits. However, such moves are resisted by local governments, which feel they will be left to foot the bill. Experiments to date with property taxes have met resistance from real estate companies, homeowners, and local officials who would rather that their multiple property portfolios not be revealed. A redistributive financial system would help but, to date, richer folk and richer areas have benefited from the current set-up. Thus, the leadership has turned to calling on the rich who, showing their patriotic credentials, have been donating billions in philanthropy. However, without a political coalition and will to shift the inegalitarian fiscal structure, progress will be difficult. As the United States has found, turning back inequality once it is entrenched is a tough political road to follow. Then there’s the rising pollution, which affects everybody, rich or poor, rural or urban, and has become a “quality of life” issue for the new middle class. Despite recent commitments, the question is whether the party can balance sustained economic growth with environmental protections. China’s addiction to coal remains a problem. Its delegation, together with India’s, at Cop26 pushed the final documents to call for phasing “down” coal instead of phasing coal out. Since July, China has expanded operations at 153 coalmines and production in October was the highest since March 2015. While there are murmurs of opposition, the historic plenary session would suggest that the future is in Xi’s hands. However, when politics is so deeply personalised and centralised, there is only one person to blame if things go wrong. Unless, of course, we get a new resolution on history that tells us who led the party astray, despite Xi’s earnest attempts to keep policy on the straight and narrow. Tony Saich is Daewoo professor of international affairs at Harvard Kennedy SchoolPolish riot police on the country’s border with Belarus have fired water cannon and teargas at people forcibly attempting to cross into the European Union. The clashes come a day after EU governments approved sanctions against the Belarusian leader, Alexander Lukashenko, for allegedly engineering the crisis by allowing thousands of asylum-seekers from the Middle East to travel through Belarus to the border with Poland. Televised footage from the border on Tuesday morning showed dozens of men throwing rocks and approaching a fence near the border crossing at the Polish town of Kuźnica. Polish border guards responded by firing water cannon and teargas at them. Video showed stun grenades detonating near migrants on the Belarusian side of the border. Poland has claimed the stun grenades were provided by Belarus. Poland’s defence ministry said on Tuesday it had “repelled an attack” at the border. “Attack by migrants at the border crossing in Kuźnica,” the defence ministry wrote. “The migrants are very aggressive, they throw stones at Polish officers and soldiers.” Poland and Lithuania have declared states of emergency that give police sweeping new powers to summarily expel migrants and ignore requests for asylum. NGOs have complained that Polish authorities have refused to allow aid for migrants into the border area and journalists have been prevented from reporting close to the border. By contrast, Tuesday’s clashes at the border were covered live by state television in Belarus, where Lukashenko has sought to put blame for the border crisis on European governments. Belarusian troops have been accused of cutting through border fencing and pushing migrants into making dangerous attempts to cross the border. On Monday, the local Muslim community of Bohoniki, a village in north-east Poland, held a funeral for Ahmad al-Hasan, 19, from Syria, who was found dead in the Bug river in eastern Poland on 19 October. According to witnesses, Ahmad, who could not swim, was pushed by a Belarusian soldier to enter the water. The funeral was streamed via Skype to the family of the young man. Anna Alboth of Grupa Granica, a network of Polish NGOs monitoring the situation on the border, said: “It was important for all of us to remember him and underline that this was the umpteenth, unnecessary death and if the Polish government had taken a different approach to solving this crisis, Ahmad would still be with us.” At least 12 migrants have died during the crisis, most due to exposure, Grupa Granica said. Doctors say they are receiving more requests from migrants in the Polish “secure zone” to treat dehydration, hypothermia and trauma from armed attacks. NGOs have described racing to reach migrants before the police, as Polish authorities can expel people regardless of their medical condition. NGOs have called for a humanitarian corridor into Poland. ‘’We believe that this is the only way of de-escalating the ensured violence,” wrote Grupa Granica. “We have been receiving more and more disturbing information stating of attempts at forcing migrants to take part in Belarusian provocation and to use violence against the Polish officers … Considering their current situation and status as hostages of the regime, we can expect that a certain point they may be forced to do so.” On Monday, the Council of Europe’s commissioner for human rights, Dunja Mijatovic, arrived in Poland on a four-day visit. On Tuesday,Piotr Muller, a Polish government spokesman, said: “We are preparing for a pessimistic outcome – that this conflict could stretch out for months.” The Polish government was considering launching formal consultations with Nato on how to solve the crisis, he said. Hundreds of people, mainly from Iraq and Syria, had moved from an improvised campsite in the woods to the Kuźnica border crossing on Monday accompanied by Belarusian border guards. They were allowed through Belarusian border checkpoints but were denied entry into Poland. There are many children among the asylum-seekers, who largely come from Iraq and Syria. Reuters reported that one nine-year-old Kurdish boy, a double-amputee hoping to reach Germany for medical treatment, had been trapped in freezing conditions outdoors for eight days. “It’s very cold here ... We came here from Iraq for my son Taman. I want to take my family to a country where our rights will be protected,” the boy’s father told Reuters. “As a family we are in a very difficult position ... We are calling on everybody who can help us ... I want my son Taman to live in a beautiful place.” Video footage on Monday evening had showed Polish and Belarusian soldiers in a tense standoff after an attempted breach of the border fencing. One woman who appeared to have become trapped in razor wire screamed as a voice off-camera warned her not to move or she may injure herself further. The German chancellor, Angela Merkel, spoke to Lukashenko by telephone on Monday evening about “the need for humanitarian aid for refugees and migrants”. Russia has sought to establish direct contacts between Lukashenko and European governments, many of which have condemned him for his brutal crackdown on opposition. On Tuesday, Germany announced it had temporarily suspended the certification process for the new Russian Nordstream 2 pipeline. While the process was officially suspended over a technical issue, it comes as tensions between Russia and the west have skyrocketed over the migrant crisis and a Russian troop buildup near the Ukraine border.MPs have finally approved a report that found a Conservative former cabinet minister broke lobbying rules, ending a humiliating U-turn Boris Johnson was forced to embark on after he tried to overhaul the parliamentary standards system. Two weeks on from initially voting to spare Owen Paterson from suspension, the government and Tory backbenchers eventually endorsed a report that found him guilty and scrapped the body that was to be set up to give their former colleague a right of appeal. In an attempt to quell the growing fury within Johnson’s own party, the Commons leader, Jacob Rees-Mogg, said he had made a “mistake” by conflating his support for reforming the standards system with the result of the two-year investigation into Paterson. He faced condemnation from senior Conservatives, including the former prime minister Theresa May, who said that despite ministers’ bid to rectify the situation, “it will not undo the damage that has been done”. Speaking in the Commons, she said the report into Paterson had been “clear and fair” and Johnson’s bid to save him was “misplaced, ill-judged and just plain wrong”. May added: “It would be a mistake to think that because someone broke the rules, the rules are wrong. The rule on paid advocacy is a longstanding one. The problem came because there was an attempt to effectively let a then-member off the hook. That flew in the face of the rules on paid advocacy and in the face of the processes established by this house.” Labour’s shadow Commons leader, Thangam Debbonaire, said ministers had tried to interfere “right in the middle of a live case” and insisted: “The government cannot sweep this under the carpet.” She added: “No MP must be for hire, not one.” Rees-Mogg said the fact that Paterson’s late wife, Rose, took her own life last summer “coloured and clouded our judgment and my judgment incorrectly – it is as simple and as sad as that”. But he conceded: “That was a mistake.” Ire was also turned by Tory MPs on their colleague Christopher Chope, who blocked the endorsement of the Paterson report on Monday night because the type of motion the government proposed contained no opportunity for debate, so he was able to force one the following day by shouting “object”. Chope said if the motion had been approved the night before it would have been a “major constitutional issue” for MPs to overturn a previous motion with no debate. “I’ve got no regrets, whatsoever,” he said. Mark Harper, a former chief whip, challenged supporters of Paterson to identify one fact that was disputed about the former North Shropshire MP’s conduct, while a backbencher, Alicia Kearns, suggested to Chope parliament had already debated the issue enough, and was visibly frustrated when he told her “she hasn’t applied her mind”. Although the deputy chief whip told Tory MPs it was a free vote but that the chief whip would be voting for the Paterson report – a sign of encouragement for others to do the same – there was no formal division, as no one in the chamber signalled opposition, meaning it was approved “on the nod”. Chris Bryant, the chair of the standards committee, said he was pleased the decision had been taken that would “draw a line under the unfortunate events of recent weeks” and empowered the group to maintain a robust and effective standards system. Although the Paterson report has finally been put to bed, some Tory MPs fear significant damage has been done. One elected in a marginal constituency in 2019 told the Guardian: “This has already cost me not five, 10, 15 or 20 votes – but hundreds. It could have cost some of us our career here.” There has also been a significant breakdown in trust between younger, newer Conservative MPs and the party’s veteran parliamentarians. Johnson hosted the more than 100 people elected in 2019 in Downing Street later on Tuesday in an attempt to mend relations. Invited several times to apologise for his handling of the Paterson scandal, the prime minister declined. Pressed repeatedly at a press conference, he said: “I think it’s very important that all MPs work primarily and above all for their constituency. Anybody who lobbies on behalf of commercial interests is clearly in breach of the rules.”ITALY (NIL) It was a good evening for the home nations. England fired up the old vidiprinter to tap out some brackets in San Marino, scoring 12 (TWELVE) good goals and being allowed to keep 10 (TEN) of them. Scotland, in an even more impressive display, scored twice against a proper team. But perhaps most entertaining of all was Norn Iron’s goalless draw with the champions of Europe, the initially supercool Roberto Mancini morphing into a fascinating stop-motion study of the Kübler-Ross model of grief, as the realisation that Italy were making an awful balls of Human Rights World Cup qualification yet again spread slowly across his face. The Azzurri’s failure to see off the Irish allowed Switzerland to snatch the automatic Group C qualifying spot from under their noses, meaning they now have to go through the play-offs again, and look what happened last time. History was repeating itself in more ways than one, too, for it wasn’t the first occasion that Italy have slipped up in Belfast. Back in 1957, they came away with a 2-2 draw that would have been enough to see them to the finals … had they not raised a stink about the late replacement of the ref with a local whistler, insisting the game would be downgraded to friendly status. When the match was replayed in the new year, Norn Iron won 2-1 and Italy were out. Oh Alfredo Foni! No trip to Sweden for your boys! Mancini is now perilously close to joining Foni, 2017’s Gian Piero Ventura, and whichever big baby at the Italian FA decided not to travel to Uruguay in 1930 in a fit of pique because Fifa had turned down their offer to host, on a very short list of Italians who have failed to take their men to the finals. At least Italy are seeded for the semi-finals of the play-off round, which means they’ll initially avoid the might of Portugal and – yes, we are writing this – Scotland. But should Wales and Turkey win big on Tuesday night, Italy could be drawn against Sweden again. Should that happen, they’d have four months to spend alone with their demons, and The Fiver wouldn’t be putting too much money on their chances when the rematch eventually comes round. Ah well, they’ll always have Wembley. LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE! Join Scott from 7.45pm GMT for hot clockwatch coverage of the latest HRWC qualifers. QUOTE OF THE DAY “Apparent complacency by the authorities is leaving thousands of workers at continued risk of exploitation by unscrupulous employers, with many unable to change jobs and facing wage theft. They have little hope of remedy, compensation or justice. After the World Cup, the fate of the workers who remain in Qatar will be even more uncertain” – Mark Dummett, Amnesty’s global issues programme director, on its damning new report. FIVER LETTERS “I worked in Norwich for a couple of years, travelling there from south London on a Monday morning and returning late on a Friday evening. Contrary to yesterday’s Fiver, I don’t think Dean Smith has to do much at all to make Carrow Road a difficult place for visiting teams to go to. It’s in the middle of nowhere” – Johnny Mac. “I just wanted to clarify the story about the 11-year-old being fined €3,000 for hugging Cristiano Ronaldo (yesterday’s News, Bits and Bobs). The FAI has waived that fine” – Aonghus McGovern. “Regarding the risque names of exotic players and especially Rafael Scheidt (Fiver letters passim), one of my erstwhile dreams as a long-suffering Sunderland fan was that we’d sign him, plus the great George Weah and a Moroccan international who scored in the 1998 World Cup, Abdeljalil Hadda. Then the commentator could say: ‘Hadda, Weah and Scheidt.’ It’s a north-east thing!” – Michael Goulding. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Michael Goulding. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS Manchester City defender Benjamin Mendy has been charged with two additional counts of rape by the Crown Prosecution Service. Derby County are now 18 points adrift of Championship safety after being hurled back into negative figures by an extra nine-point deduction. Australia forward Sam Kerr has signed a flamin’ new two-year contract extension with Chelsea, keeping her at the club until summer 2024. Arsenal manager Jonas Eidevall is less than impressed with his team’s schedule after Leah Williamson was ruled out until 2022 with hamstring-twang. “Obviously, we had a really tough week and no other team in the league has been asked to play with such a tight schedule,” he sighed. “It was almost inhuman.” And Potters Bar Town have been awarded their FA Trophy first-round tie after Saturday’s game at Bedford Town was abandoned due to an injury-time stramash with the visitors 1-0 up. “I don’t want to say we didn’t play our part in the game being abandoned because it takes two to tango, but the scenes at the end were pretty distasteful,” sighed Potters Bar boss Lee O’Leary. RECOMMENDED LOOKING It’s David Squires on $tevie Mbe’s Premier League return. RECOMMENDED LISTENING Here’s the latest Football Weekly pod. RECOMMENDED VOTING The FSA Awards are coming soon and various members of Big Website are up for gongs. Vote now and vote regularly. STILL WANT MORE? Jonathan Liew on one-sided international qualifiers. Speaking of which, Barney Ronay offers his thoughts about that 10-0. Floating brain in a jar Jonathan Wilson on where England go from here (well, other than Qatar). When Gianfranco Zola lit up Chelsea and the Premier League 25 years ago. By Chris Evans. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! CASTOLO, ESPIMAS AND MINANDAWhat’s in a name? That evergreen question is complicated even further in Arthur Jones’s fascinating documentary, executive produced by James Cameron and informed by the research of marine historian Steven Schwankert. Following the Titanic sinking in 1912, the identities of the 700-odd survivors have been mostly claimed, except for those of six Chinese men – out of eight who boarded – who remained bizarrely neglected. This film chronicles Schwankert’s quest to unravel the mystery, as his arduous journey across the US, the UK, Canada, and China takes the shape of a detective story, where each revelation exposes the blatant racism of early 20th-century western politics. Armed with a dock slip listing the names of the Titanic’s eight Chinese passengers, Schwankert and peers’ attempt to trace their origins runs into immediate difficulties, as most of their subjects changed their identities in order to sidestep cruel and discriminatory immigration regulations. These Titanic survivors arrived in the US looking to work as labourers, and under the provisions of the Chinese Exclusion Act they were shipped to other countries immediately after the sinking. Some disappeared without a trace. The only survivor whom the researchers were able to build a coherent narrative around was Fang Lang, who founded a business in the US by changing his name and working as a merchant, shielding himself from the Exclusion Act, which targeted manual labourers. While this documentary takes a pretty conventional approach, the emotional impact of the exhaustive research is gripping. At one point, a list of Fang Lang’s personal items on the Titanic is uncovered, which includes dozens of neck ties: he was due to attend the wedding of his friend, who perished on this fateful trip. Above all, this film is a window into the open racism against immigrants, the ramifications of which are still deeply felt today. • The Six is released on 16 November in cinemas.Covid is now a pandemic of poor nations, a leading global expert has told a cross-party group of MPs, adding that governments that are attempting to vaccinate their way out of the pandemic are taking a huge risk. Dr David Nabarro, the World Health Organization’s special envoy on Covid, told the all-party group on coronavirus that the world was still deep in the pandemic, with 5,413 reported deaths in the past 24 hours alone. “This is a disease now fundamentally of poor people and poor nations,” he added. Without mentioning the UK by name, Nabarro said wealthy countries that were attempting to “vaccinate a population out of an active pandemic” were taking a huge gamble, saying one concern was the rise of new variants that may evade current vaccines, while another was that the population may be reluctant to comply should measures such as mask-wearing and social distancing be re-introduced. “If there is a hoovering up of vaccines for the boosters, that is just going to have a global consequences that are really quite extreme, and everybody needs to know that,” he said. According to official data, more than 22% of people in the UK aged 12 or over have had a booster dose, while an estimated 68.6% of the entire population have had at least two jabs. In stark contrast, in Africa just 6% of people had been fully vaccinated by the end of October, the WHO said. According to figures from Our World in Data, some African countries have even lower levels – in Nigeria the figure is only 2.8%. Speaking at a meeting of the all-party parliamentary group on coronavirus (APPG) on Tuesday, Anna Marriott, health policy adviser for Oxfam and policy adviser to the People’s Vaccine Alliance said the situation was dire. “If we look at low-income countries as a whole, shockingly, less than 1% of the total vaccine supply has been delivered to those poorest countries, many of which are in Africa,” she said. “Pharmaceutical corporations have de-prioritised developing countries, including the continent of Africa,” she said, adding that included de-prioritisation of vaccine-sharing schemes such as Covax and efforts on the part of the African Union to purchase vaccine. “Rich countries have pushed themselves to the front of the vaccine queue by willingly paying higher than necessary prices,” she said. Dr Ayoade Alakija, co-chair of the African Union Africa vaccine delivery alliance for Covid-19 said it was crucial to waive Covid vaccine patents to allow countries to manufacture doses themselves. “The transfer of technology should be mandated. These vaccines are a public global good; it should be mandated of those companies and there should be absolutely no talk of them losing profits in a pandemic, it is inhumane, it is immoral. And quite frankly, it is also quite stupid,” she said. One problem raised by experts, including Eva Kadilli, director of Unicef’s supply division, was that some vaccines donated by rich nations had a short expiry date. That put huge strain on healthcare systems, which had to scramble to use them in time, while the different storage requirement of the jabs meant there could be logistical problems if vaccines arrived at short notice. Dr Nicaise Ndembi, chief science adviser to the Africa CDC (the Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention), said close to 700,000 vaccines had expired, saying this could add to vaccine hesitancy. “If people are aware that we’re destroying vaccines, they are sure that something is wrong,” he said.Researchers have found new evidence that suggests spyware made by an Israeli company that was recently blacklisted in the US has been used to target critics of Saudi Arabia and other autocratic regimes, including some readers of a London-based news website. A report by Montreal-based researchers from Slovakian company Eset, an internet security firm, found links between attacks against high-profile websites in the Middle East and UK, and the Israeli company Candiru, which has been called Israel’s “most mysterious cyberwarfare company”. Candiru and NSO Group, a much more prominent Israeli surveillance company, were both added to a US blacklist this month after the Biden administration took the rare step of accusing the firms of acting against US national security interests. The Eset report revealed new information about so-called “watering hole attacks”. In such attacks, spyware users launch malware against ordinary websites that are known to attract readers or users who are considered “targets of interest” by the user of the malware. The sophisticated attacks allow the malware user to identify characteristics about the individuals who have visited the website, including what kind of browser and operating system they are using. In some cases the malware user can then launch an exploit that allows them to take over an individual target’s computer. Unlike NSO Group’s signature spyware, which is called Pegasus and infects mobile phones, Candiru’s malware is believed by researchers to infect computers. The company appears to be named after a parasitic freshwater catfish that can be found in the Amazon. The researchers found that the websites that were “known targets” of this kind of attack included Middle East Eye, a London-based news website, and multiple websites associated with government ministries in Iran and Yemen. Candiru did not respond to the Guardian’s request for comment. Middle East Eye condemned the attacks. In a statement, its editor-in-chief, David Hearst, said the outlet was no stranger to attempts to take the website down by state and non-state actors. “Substantial sums of money have been spent trying to take us out. This has not stopped us reporting what is going on in all corners of the region and I am confident that they will not stop us in future,” he said. Once websites are compromised, researchers at Eset say, they are considered “jumping off sites” that help malware users target individuals. In other words, not every individual who visited one of the compromised websites would have been in danger of being hacked, but users of the malware are believed to have used the websites as a starting point to help identify a much smaller group of individuals who were then targeted. Matthieu Faou, who uncovered the campaigns, said Eset developed a custom in-house system in 2018 to uncover “watering holes” on high-profile websites. In July 2020, the system notified them that an Iranian embassy website in Abu Dhabi had been tainted with malicious code. “Our curiosity was aroused by the high-profile nature of the targeted website, and in the following weeks we noticed that other websites with connections to the Middle East were also targeted,” Faou said. The “threat group” then “went quiet” until it resurfaced in January 2021 and was active until late summer in 2021, when all the websites that were observed to have been victims of attacks were then “cleaned”, Eset said. Eset said it believed hacking activities ended in late July 2021 after a report by researchers at Citizen Lab, released in conjunction with Microsoft, detailed Candiru’s alleged surveillance activities. That report accused Candiru of selling spyware to governments linked to fake Black Lives Matter and Amnesty International websites that were used to hack targets. In the July 2021 report, Citizen Lab, a research group affiliated with the University of Toronto, said the Tel Aviv-based Candiru made “untraceable” spyware that could infect computers and phones. At the time, Candiru declined to comment. Microsoft said in July that it appeared that Candiru sold the spyware that enabled the hacks, and that the governments generally chose who to target and ran the operations themselves. The company also announced at the time that it had disabled the “cyberweapons” of Candiru and built protections against the malware, including issuing a Windows software update. There is little public information available about Candiru, which was founded in 2014 and has undergone several name changes. In 2017 the company was selling its malware to clients in the Gulf, western Europe and Asia, according to a lawsuit reported in an Israeli newspaper. Candiru may have deals with Uzbekistan, Saudi Arabia and the UAE, Forbes has reported. Microsoft reported that it had found victims of the spyware in Israel and Iran. Citizen Lab said it was able to identify a computer that had been hacked by Candiru’s malware, and then used that hard drive to extract a copy of the firm’s Windows spyware. The owner of the computer was a “politically active” individual in western Europe, it said. This month Candiru made headlines after the Biden administration announced it had added the company to the commerce department’s entity list, a blacklist usually reserved for America’s worst enemies, including Chinese and Russian hackers. In its press release, the commerce department said it had evidence that Candiru developed and supplied spyware to foreign governments that used it to maliciously target government officials, journalists, businesspeople, activists, academics and embassy workers. The tools also helped to enable foreign governments to conduct “transnational repression”, the department said. Candiru has not commented on its placement on the entity list.With Lady Gaga, Pharell Williams, and Selena Gomez all in on the act, the marker of success in 2021 is not a star on Hollywood Boulevard, it’s the launch of a beauty line. Trust Harry Styles to blow the rest out of the water. Yesterday, the boyband star turned cultural and style juggernaut announced the launch of Pleasing – described as a “life brand”. Styles’s first business venture includes a range of nail polishes, an illuminating primer serum, and a dual-purpose eye and lip oil. With the tagline “Find your pleasing”, the mission of this venture is to “bring joyful experiences and products that excite the senses and blur the boundaries”. Styles announced that he hoped to “dispel the myth of a binary existence”. Pleasing is at odds with outmoded beauty industry ideas about masking and concealment. Instead, “illuminating” and “highlighting” are the buzz words for Styles. There is a sense that this brand is about celebrating what is already there and encouraging customers to be themselves. Undoubtedly, the idea of this beauty line is to serve as an extension of Styles’s unique and much-revered aesthetic. His signature look spans everything from floral suits to feather boas and is the result of a long-running collaboration with British stylist Harry Lambert. The new venture, which came as a pleasant surprise to fans, sent social media into overdrive when it was announced, along with an interview and cover shoot with Dazed. A shot of Styles by photographer Rafael Pavarotti, styled by editor-in-chief Ib Kamara, features on the front of the December issue. The image, which shows the singer straddling a vintage motorcycle while wearing lilac flares and singlet vest (slashed to reveal his torso) attracted more than 5m likes on Instagram in 24 hours. Stylers (as Styles’s fans are affectionately known) will have to wait until 29 November to get their hands on the collection but can pre-order now. Prices start at £16 for Pearly Tops, a clear nail polish to give a “barely there” effect or painted over other colours, and £50 for the Perfect Polish Set, which comes with alphabet stickers. While skincare also features in the collection – the Pearlescent Illuminating Serum and the Pleasing Pen will also be available – nails are an evident focus for Styles, whose playful use of polish has become something of a style calling card. “It’s starting with nail polish because that was kind of the birth of what it was for,” Styles tells Dazed. “Me seeing a colour on a flower or a wallpaper or something and thinking, ‘Oh, I wanna put that on my nails.’” Pleasing is Styles’s version of sourdough. He credits the pandemic for its inception. “It was a fun little project, but during the pandemic, it felt like it was so much more than nail polish,” he says. “I really think that the essence of Pleasing is finding those little moments of joy and showing them to people.” If Styles plans to leap from musician to mogul, Pleasing is an excellent place to start. However, he is adamant that his venture is more than a celebrity endorsement. “I don’t think that putting someone’s face on something sells a bad product,” Styles says in the interview. Undoubtedly, there is serious value in beauty now. In July, the global beauty industry was valued at $511bn, with celebrity brands taking an increasingly significant share of the market. Fenty Beauty, the product line Rihanna launched in 2017, is now worth $2.8bn. Lady Gaga’s Haus Labs is reported to be the third most successful celebrity beauty line in the world.A Libyan warlord who led a 14-month assault on the capital and once said the country was not ready for democracy has announced his candidacy in its first presidential elections at the end of next month Khalifa Haftar, the head of the self-styled Libyan National Army, which fought against its internationally recognised government in the 2014-20 civil war, declared he wanted to bring the Libyan people “glory, progress and prosperity” as he joined a contest that also includes the son of Libya’s former dictator, Muammar Gaddafi, among its hopefuls. Haftar’s support base lies in the east of the country and, if elected, it is unlikely he would be accepted by militias in its west who fought for more than a year to prevent him from seizing Tripoli. Members of the LNA allegedly under his command have been indicted for war crimes by the international criminal court and he is also facing a hearing in a court in Virginia brought by relatives of his alleged victims who claim he is guilty of war crimes, including starvation of families. Haftar, an American citizen, is insisting he is not liable. He has been credited at various times with the support of Egypt and the United Arab Emirates and has been opposed by Turkey, who backed militias defending Tripoli with fighters and arms. Haftar announced his candidacy via a televised address from the eastern city of Benghazi, dressed in a suit and tie rather than military fatigues and projecting himself as an anti-corruption champion. “We’ll change Libya’s future if we place its treasures and riches in the hands of those with integrity,” he said. “I declare my candidacy for the presidential election, not because I am chasing power but because I want to lead our people towards glory, progress and prosperity.” The 77-year-old, who said elections were the only way out of Libya’s chaos, said in an interview with Jeune Afrique published in February 2018 that Libya was not yet ripe for democracy, raising doubts about how long Libya would remain a democracy if he won. His chances of winning, assuming the elections occur, have been hit by the decision of Saif Al-Islam Gaddafi to announce on Sunday that he was standing, since both men will be hoping in the east to draw from the same pool of voters. Another figure based in the east, the speaker of the parliament, Aguila Saleh, is also standing. Haftar’s candidature, with 40 days to nominal polling day, underlines the chaos that surrounds the elections, with disputes raging over the qualifications of those seeking to stand, the constitutional powers of the president and whether free elections are feasible in a country in which as many as 20,000 foreign forces including mercenaries are on the loose. There are already reports of campaign teams being set up by mercenaries in the east. But the international community recommitted themselves to elections last Friday, and it will probably be down to the US to decide whether the elections will heal Libya’s rifts or exacerbate them. As many as 600 people have applied to stand in the parliamentary elections, and their credentials are now being checked. Such is the chaos over the rules that the national electoral commission on its website appeared to announce that Gaddafi’s application to stand had been rejected, only for the post to be deleted moments later. The commission blamed hacking. The performance of the UN Special Mission in Libya has been widely criticised in recent months for failing to show leadership, placing huge pressure on the administration of Libya’s electoral commission, a largely administrative body, to take charge of a politically fraught contest.The average Australian is working 1.5 hours more unpaid overtime each week since the start of the Covid pandemic, according to a new survey. The poll, which used a nationally representative sample, found the average employed Australian is working 6.13 hours unpaid each week in 2021, up from 5.25 hours in 2020 and 4.62 hours in 2019. The findings are based on a poll of 1,600 people by the Australia Institute’s Centre for Future Work released on Tuesday to coincide with go home on time day – a campaign that urges workers to push back against unpaid overtime. By working an extra 319 hours a year unpaid in 2021, workers are doing the equivalent of an extra eight 38-hour weeks of work. Employers are benefiting from a total of $125bn of free labour, estimated to cost $461.60 a worker every fortnight. According to the Productivity Commission’s Working from Home report, the pandemic has boosted the proportion of businesses with staff working at home from 20% to 44%. But while some have welcomed the greater flexibility of working from home, it has also sparked concerns of greater unpaid overtime. One study cited in the PC report found the length of the average workday increased by about 8%, or almost 49 minutes, relative to pre-pandemic levels. Unpaid overtime takes many forms, from employees who receive annualised salaries receiving no extra compensation for arriving at work early, staying late, working through breaks, working nights and weekends, and taking calls or emails out of hours, to workers paid by the hour who nevertheless feel pressure to do the same. The Centre for Future Work report, by the economist Dan Nahum, found that Covid-19 appeared to have accelerated the “time theft crisis”, with 26% of workers reporting their employers’ expectations of their availability increased during the pandemic. Young workers aged 18 to 29 performed the most unpaid overtime, at 8.17 hours a week. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The survey also suggests the pandemic may have changed work habits, with 65% indicating they will continue to do at least some work from home post-pandemic. “This year Australian workers are taking home a smaller share of GDP than we have ever seen before,” Nahum said. “Yet, time-theft is rife and bosses are stealing record amounts of unpaid time from workers.” Nahum said Covid-19 had “made the situation worse, indicating work-from-home does not necessarily improve work life in favour of employees”, instead making it easier for employers to “undercut Australian minimum standards around hours, overtime, and penalty rates”. Some 39% of employees said their employers remotely monitored their activity and a further 17% were unsure whether they were being electronically monitored or not. Nahum said industrial laws were “not keeping pace with technology”. He argued the unpaid overtime phenomenon was worse because half the part-time and casual workers surveyed were keen for more paid hours, “yet the average part-timer is giving away over 4.5 hours a week and the average casual just over five hours”. “These are worker efforts that should end up as wages in someone’s pocket, not a boost to a profit column.”Adelaide United Coach: Carl Veart Major ins: Nick Ansell, George Blackwood, Isaias Major outs: Tomi Juric, Jordan Elsey, Ryan Strain Player to watch: Striker Kusini Yengi is the type of player the Reds want to develop, but is battling league-wide trends against deploying young attackers Predicted finish: 5th Fun fact: Adelaide United’s first competitive win was in round five of the 2003-04 NSL season – a 1-0 win over Brisbane Strikers Based on stockpiling young South Australian talent – as well as choice cuts under-valued elsewhere such as James Delianov and Josh Cavallo – that can contribute to the first team and eventually turn into potential transfer bait, Adelaide’s strong culture saw them over-achieve in 2020-21 as they reached the semi-finals. Ostensibly, simple linear progression would tell us the Reds should get better almost by default this campaign as their young cohort improves with experience. However, the mid-season return of Craig Goodwin in 2020-21 and the signing of Isaias this off-season suggest Veart may be hesitant to go all in on his youngsters. Finding the right balance between the exuberance of youth and wisdom of experience – something A-League Men clubs have traditionally overshot in favour of the latter – could be key to their finals hopes. Brisbane Roar Coach: Warren Moon Major ins: Nikola Mileusnić, Matti Steinmann, Luke Ivanovic Major outs: Dylan Wenzel-Halls, Riku Danzaki, Jamie Young Player to watch: A born-and-bred Queenslander, Alex Parsons received significant hype during a breakout 2020-21, but the encore is always harder Predicted finish: 4th Fun fact: Arriving in Australia as a five-year-old refugee, Roar utility Rahmat Akbari is eligible to represent Afghanistan at senior international level It hasn’t received as much attention as Adelaide’s efforts, but Roar coach Warren Moon is instigating his own, Sunshine State-flavoured reformation in Brisbane. Formerly the coach of Peninsula Power and Lions FC in the NPL Queensland, Moon has made a concerted effort to bring in players with local connections during his tenure and supplemented this with the shrewd recruitment of figures such as Matti Steinmann and Luke Ivanovic. Combined with his flexibility in approach and tactical aptitude, it is clear the Roar are building something sustainable and potentially special at Moreton Daily Stadium. Unfortunately, a lack of top-end talent may limit what they can achieve in 2021-22; Macklin Freke facing a big task in replacing long-time custodian Jamie Young and the creativity and verve of Riku Danzaki leaving a massive void to fill up front. Keep an eye on a potential breakout season from Rahmat Akbari. Central Coast Mariners Coach: Nick Montgomery Major ins: Nicolai Muller, Cy Goddard, Storm Roux Major outs: Daniel De Silva, Alou Kuol, Gianni Stensness Player to watch: Josh Nisbet is already a cult figure due to his tenacious play and diminutive stature but, with departures elsewhere in the Mariners midfield, his role will increase this season Predicted finish: 12th Fun fact: The Mariners use Tom Petty’s ‘I Won’t Back Down’ as a club anthem. She dwells with Beauty – Beauty that must die; And Joy, whose hand is ever at his lips Bidding adieu; and aching Pleasure nigh, Turning to poison while the bee-mouth sips The Mariners experienced a season for the ages under Alen Stajcic in 2020-21, shrugging off more than half a decade of abject misery to shock Australian football by storming – at least until Melbourne City woke up – to the top of the A-League Men table, eventually finishing third and playing finals football for the first time since 2013-14. Alas for the Gosford faithful, all rhyme and reason suggests it was a (magical) one-off. His counter-attacking style had already began to lose its lustre by season’s end, when Stajcic departed. Also out the door went creative fulcrum Daniel De Silva, midfield rock Gianni Stensness, and the swag and game-breaking ability of Alou Kuol. Still up for sale by owner Mike Charlesworth, their battle appears less one for finals and more one to avoid the spoon. Also, apologies to John Keats. Macarthur FC Coach: Ante Miličić Major ins: Ulises Davila, Daniel De Silva, Craig Noone, Al Hassan Toure Major outs: Denis Genreau, Mark Milligan, Matt Derbyshire Player to watch: Young striker Al Hassan Toure moved to the Bulls from Adelaide this off-season in search of more game time and, with Tomi Juric rarely sighted in pre-season, may just get it Predicted finish: 6th Fun fact: The three stars on the Bulls’ logo don’t represent titles but “links with the grassroots football community, the National Premier League and the A-League” The Bulls are a tough side to predict. On the one hand, their off-season recruiting splurge has loaded up their squad with a bevy of tried-and-true attacking threats, including reigning Johnny Warren medallist Ulises Davila. How Miličić fits all these players into his high possession-based style, however, remains a significant question mark, as does whether they have enough stockpiled on the defensive front to keep sides at bay up the other end – the now-retired Adam Federici helped the club ship 10 goals less than their expected goals conceded last season. Persistent rumours of the club being in a state of crisis throughout the offseason won’t go away either, highlighted by the shock departure of Mark Milligan just months after he retired as a player and took up an assistant coaching role. The Bulls have the potential to collapse, but just have so much talent that it’s difficult to completely write them off. Melbourne City Coach: Patrick Kisnorbo Major ins: Mathew Leckie, Manuel Pucciarelli Major outs: Craig Noone, Adrian Luna Player to watch: The attacking triumvirate of Jamie Maclaren, Mathew Leckie, and Andrew Nabbout get the headlines, but central defender Curtis Good is primed to challenge for a World Cup pace and, perhaps, secure a European move Predicted finish: 1st – champions Fun fact: Maclaren, Leckie and Nabbout are all born-and-bred Melburnians; Maclaren a Green Gully junior, Leckie a Bulleen Lions youth and Nabbout a former Brunswick City Spartan When examining a competition on the eve of its commencement, it’s always tempting to try to convince yourself this is the year of the underdog; the year when the plucky upstart shocks the world and defies the odds. And that would be great, because nobody wants to read the story of how the Empire crushed the Rebellion. But alas for the romantics, that is what might very well happen. Darth Kisnorbo and his defending champions have retained almost every key contributor to last year’s premiership and championship double-winning side and have even added Socceroos captain Leckie to their frontline. Combine this with a fearsome aerobic capacity born of one of the most hellacious pre-seasons this league has seen and they can run you off the park as well. In short, anything less than another double for City’s fully armed and operational battle station would be a disappointment. Melbourne Victory Coach: Tony Popovic Major ins: Chris Ikonomidis, Jason Davidson, Josh Brillante Major outs: Rudy Gestede, Callum McManaman, Elvis Kamsoba Player to watch: Joining from Serie B side A.C. ChievoVerona, Francesco Margiotta will be relied upon to provide the lethal edge the club has lacked since Ola Toivonen Predicted finish: 3rd Fun Fact: WWE NXT wrestler Indi Hartwell grew up a Victory fan and even served as a ball kid for a game The only way is up for Victory, literally. After finishing second-bottom in 2019-20, the fallen A-League giants went one better (worse) in 2020-21, crashing to a first wooden spoon in club history and suffering two abject humiliations against City. The second cost club legend Grant Brebner – who had arguably been handed a Sisyphean task – his job. In a way it is lucky there were Covid-enforced crowd limits; the simmering unrest within the club’s large fanbase could have exploded to a greater extent than the banner and pyro show that doubled as a training-ground protest. Now, Popovic and his history of success is in, as well as Joe Palatsides in the club’s academy to turn on the talent pipeline and supplement the strong off-season recruitment. Finals should be expected, but don’t be surprised if strong early season form leads to a blowout in aspirations. Newcastle Jets Coach: Arthur Papas Major ins: Matthew Jurman, Daniel dos Santos Penha, Beka Mikeltadze Major outs: Nigel Boogaard, Roy O’Donovan, Matt Millar Player to watch: Christened the ‘Port Macquarie Pele’ by Jets fans, midfielder Angus Thurgate has more than 70 senior games under his belt at just 21 and looms as a key contributor Predicted finish: 10th Fun fact: The Jets took their moniker from the Royal Australian Air Force base located at Williamtown, 25km from their home ground McDonald Jones Stadium It has been a time of significant change in the Hunter, with the club overhauling its roster as it seeks to turn around a depressing trudge of mediocrity, ownership chaos and player departures. And given the significant off-season upheaval, it wouldn’t be a shock to see the club once again head towards the bottom of the table. Yet simultaneously, based on some – admittedly nascent – pre-season signs, it would also be unsurprising for them to come good and challenge or even qualifying for finals. It is apparent that Papas and his staff are undertaking a project in the Hunter that will require a few seasons to properly kick into gear, one which will only be boosted when the club, which is currently administered by a consortium of fellow A-Leagues clubs, finds stable ownership – perhaps even with a component for fans to share a stake. Perth Glory Coach: Richard Garcia Major ins: Daniel Sturridge, Brandon O’Neill, Brad Jones Major outs: Diego Castro, Neil Kilkenny, Chris Ikonomidis Player to watch: Sturridge is going to monopolise coverage but striker Bruno Fornaroli is no slouch and could thrive with the Englishman drawing defenders off him Predicted finish: 7th Fun fact: Glory faces the Phoenix every year in the ‘distance derby’ celebrating the 5,255km between the two clubs The fate of Glory’s campaign likely rests on two factors – both of which are impossible to truly predict until the season commences. The first is how the club will cope with the extended time on the road thanks to Western Australia’s stringent border controls: eight games in the east sandwiched by their season-opening game against Adelaide and round 10 fixture against Wellington Phoenix. Having faced similar challenges last season, Garcia and his staff should have some idea of how to look after the physical and mental wellbeing of players but, as seen in Western United’s unceremonious collapse at the back end of 2020-21, living out of a suitcase always has the potential to tear down a season quickly. The second factor is the health and form of Sturridge. The Englishman’s profile will deliver the A-Leagues a sugar hit, but his injury history and lack of recent football loom over his potential impact on the field. Sydney FC Coach: Steve Corica Major ins: Max Burgess, James Donachie, Elvis Kamsoba Major outs: Ryan McGowan, Alexander Baumjohann Player to watch: Adam Le Fondre scored four goals in just seven games after a mid-season return from India in 2020-21, and will have Jamie Maclaren’s golden boot firmly in sight Predicted finish: 2nd Fun fact: Sydney are the only five-time champions in A-League Men history, eclipsing the four won by Hakoah Sydney City, South Melbourne, Marconi Stallions, and Melbourne Victory. Last season’s grand final defeat to City had all the hallmarks of a changing of the guard as the Citizens supplanted the Sky Blues as the kings of the castle, and Corica’s side could yet be replaced by a new dynasty. That is not to paint the Harboursiders as the sick men of the A-League. However, as their trademark continuity in culture, personnel and approach ensures they will once again be right in the thick of it come the pointy end of the season. And if Max Burgess can rediscover the form he showed at the end of 2019-20 and the unfairly maligned Elvis Kamsoba can fire off the bench, they potentially have made two of the best off-season signings. Indeed, the rest of the league may appear to have closed the gap on Sydney but underestimate them at your peril, lest the keepers of the Arnieball make you live to regret it. Wellington Phoenix Coach: Ufuk Talay Major ins: Gary Hooper, Callan Elliot, Luka Pršo Major outs: Tomer Hemed, Ulises Davila, Cameron Devlin Player to watch: Reno Piscopo Predicted finish: 11th Fun fact: Ross Aloisi was the Phoenix’s inaugural captain in 2007–08, just a few years after serving as Adelaide United’s skipper in their first A-League Men season First with Mark Rudan and then under Talay, the Phoenix have made a habit of making the naysayers look like fools in recent years, overcoming numerous obstacles to consistently ask questions of rivals and challenge for finals. Nevertheless, the sheer weight of the challenges has to show up in results eventually. Though the New Zealand-based side will return home at some point in the new year, they will be forced once again to play early home games out of Wollongong’s WIN Stadium. There is also a significant drain in talent, including the shock retirement of Steve Taylor just days after he was named captain. Though Kiwi fans will be quick to produce screenshots should this prediction turn out wrong, this may be the year that the ‘Nix experience the unwanted nostalgia of a season mired near the foot of the table. At least the A-Leagues independence means they won’t have to suffer through another round of calls for their expulsion from the competition. Western Sydney Wanderers Coach: Carl Robinson Major ins: Dimi Petratos, Terry Antonis, Rhys Williams Major outs: Bruce Kamau, Dylan McGowan, Nicolai Muller Player to watch: New captain Rhys Williams will be relied upon to provide leadership, a pillar of strength in the centre of defence and shore up a porous set-piece defence Predicted finish: 8th Fun fact: During the expansion process, Wanderers was one of five possible names put to a public vote, alongside Athletic, Strikers, Wolves and Rangers It is fair to say Carl Robinson’s first season in charge at Wanderland did not quite go the way he – or club management – envisioned. Lured down from Newcastle only months before the season started, the Welshman was given significant backing and licence to recruit upon his arrival in Sydney’s west but, despite the influx of talent, could not prevent the late-season swoon and omission from finals for a fourth straight year. Robinson has again recruited strongly, bringing in proven performers with a link to Sydney’s west such as Terry Antonis and Dimi Petratos. Perhaps on paper, he has assembled the second-strongest list in the league, and potentially its best midfield in Antonis and Steven Ugarkovic. How those individuals are deployed and function as a collective will make or break their championship credentials. Western United Coach: John Aloisi Major ins: Leo Lacroix, Aleksandar Prijovic, Neil Kilkenny Major outs: Andrew Durante, Besart Berisha, Tomislav Uskok Player to watch: He doesn’t get much credit but Tomoki Imai has quietly become one of the league’s best and most versatile defenders Predicted finish: 9th Fun fact: Very early on, club officials floated the prospect of pursuing Arsenal legend Arsène Wenger as their foundation coach No side generates the same hostility that Western United does but, unfortunately for their attempts to build an identity and fanbase, it is not down to envy of the club’s on-field exploits. The rancour, instead, is almost entirely linked to the ongoing saga surrounding the lack of action on the construction of a stadium those behind the club’s bid promised during the expansion process. This, in turn, has necessitated its use of multiple home grounds, a shrinking number of which are actually within their supposed turf in Melbourne’s west. This resulted in an unedifying situation in September, when they announced Lakeside Stadium as a home ground for 2021-22 – only to promptly be blocked by existing tenants and vanquished expansion rival South Melbourne. Under new coach John Aloisi, the club has loaded up on veteran talent in an attempt to return to finals and also boasts some good youngsters, but it might all be for moot if there is no tangible progress on proposed construction site in Tarneit.Vaccines, artificial intelligence and drones are among technologies that are set to face the most scrutiny from the Australian government over national security risks. More than three years after the Turnbull government blocked Chinese telco Huawei from Australia’s 5G network on security grounds, the Morrison government will release a list of nine types of technologies that it believes may require extra “risk management”. Wednesday’s shortlist of critical technologies – including advanced communications such as 5G and 6G – outlines areas that are “most likely to impact on the national interest”. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, will say in a speech on Wednesday the government wants to “balance the economic opportunities of critical technologies with their national security risks”. Morrison will also call for Australia to become “a quantum technology leader in the Indo-Pacific”, pledging funding of $70m over 10 years help “take our research to the world”. He will say the new shortlist “signals to governments, industry and academia the technologies slated as critical for Australia today or those expected to become so within the next decade”. “Through this signal, we intend to drive consistency in decision making and focused investment – a mission focus,” Morrison is expected to say in a speech to the Australian Strategic Policy Institute’s Sydney Dialogue. The list – which is expected to be regularly updated – names the “critical technologies that may require increased focus to promote or protect our national interest”, according to the strategy document. But it does not replace existing regulations – such as the defence and strategic goods list, which controls the export of technologies that could have a military use. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The nine main groupings include genetic engineering; novel antibiotics and vaccines; autonomous vehicles and advanced robotics; low-emission alternative fuels; artificial intelligence; and quantum technologies. The move comes amid growing focus on the security risks posed by some international research collaborations. The head of intelligence agency Asio, Mike Burgess, has previously said universities needed more clarity about which research or technologies the government considered particularly sensitive. Burgess conceded in March that there was currently “some ambiguity there at this stage, which is unhelpful to researchers, students and research organisations”. While the strategy document to be released on Wednesday does not specifically name China, it appears to allude to several concerns about Australia’s top trading partner, noting critical technologies are “increasingly the focus of international geopolitical competition”. “Critical technologies confer a strategic edge, and at a time of intensifying geostrategic competition, this can be used to threaten our values, interests and way of life,” the Blueprint for Critical Technologies says. The document cites a range of risks, including highly geographically concentrated supply chains. “Australia and like-minded partners support and promote diversified supply chains and markets to mitigate potential economic coercion and trade disruption risks,” the document says. It also cites the risk of the “malicious use of critical technologies to spread dis- or misinformation and undermine trust in Australia’s values and trusted institutions”. The foreign minister, Marise Payne, has previously accused China and Russia of spreading disinformation – allegations that Beijing described as “completely rubbish”. Wednesday’s document warns that Australia’s strength in areas of technology research or intellectual property “could be used contrary to our interests and undermine our competitive advantage if subject to espionage or foreign interference”. The government has set four goals, including ensuring Australia has access to “secure, reliable, and cost-effective” technologies rather than relying on “limited suppliers” that may pose “unacceptable risks to our national security”. Another goal is to maintain the integrity of Australia’s research, science, ideas, information and capabilities, which should be “protected against intellectual property theft and exploitation, as well as malign technology transfer”. The other two aims are to promote Australia as a trusted and secure partner for investment in critical technologies, and to “shape an international environment that enables open, diverse and competitive markets”. Morrison will say on Wednesday that Australia is working with its Quad partners – India, Japan and the United States – to “enhance the resilience of Indo-Pacific supply chains”. The prime minister says this is important because “as a country of around 25 million people in a world of some 7.8 billion people, most of our technology is – and will continue to be – imported”. Morrison says quantum technologies – applying quantum physics to explore ways to acquire, transmit and process vast quantities of information – have the potential to “revolutionise a whole range of industries”. In his speech, Morrison will also describe the Aukus deal with the UK and the US as being “about much more than nuclear submarines” because it will also see the countries work together on advanced technologies and capabilities. Aukus has triggered a backlash from France over the cancellation of the $90bn French deal for 12 conventional submarines, and concerns among some south-east Asian nations over the new plan to acquire at least eight nuclear-propelled submarines. According to his speech notes, Morrison will defend Aukus as “a broad and adaptable partnership that will drive our technology and capability cooperation to meet the challenges of the 21st century in our region”. Officials from Australia, the US and the UK are due to report back to leaders in December with a proposed Aukus “work plan”.Spectators who witness racist abuse at professional sporting events may soon be able to alert officials via text message as part of new guidelines set out by the Australian Human Rights Commission and endorsed by some major sporting bodies and stadia. Cricket Australia, the AFL, the NRL and Tennis Australia are among 20 signatories to the zero-tolerance guidelines the AHRC hopes will become the foundation of a consistent, industry-wide approach help prevent further incidents like those which occurred during Australia’s third Test against India at the Sydney Cricket Ground in January. When they do occur, players will be encouraged to report crowd abuse to authorities and even halt play to do so. Another suggested referral pathway for fans, officials and players is the appointment of match-day integrity officers. After days two and three of that Test match were overshadowed by allegations of racist slurs directed by fans towards Mohammed Siraj and Jasprit Bumrah, the commission convened a roundtable and invited professional codes, clubs, players, venue operators and anti-racism experts to participate in months-long consultations. The result, released on Wednesday, is a six-page document outlining advice designed to support the already-existing policies and procedures employed by sporting codes and venue operators, with a focus “on the experiences of those targeted by racism, and others (including witnesses) who may be affected by it”. Titled Racism. Nobody Wins, it features clear procedures for the “safe and swift” reporting of racist incidents by spectators, including through “SMS hotlines [and] web-based tools on sporting code websites”. It also recommends players, staff and officials are regularly trained to identify who to tell and when, and in de-escalate techniques. Targets of racism and bystanders who witness it should be provided with counselling and other support mechanisms. Perpetrators, the guidelines say, should have memberships paused, be banned entirely or re-entry made contingent on participation in anti-racism training, but in a manner appropriate to the age and understanding of perpetrators – especially in the case of children. The guidelines, developed as part of the Racism. It Stops With Me campaign, also suggest the industry publicises clear definitions of racial discrimination and racial vilification, and includes a zero-tolerance approach in ticketing terms and conditions. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The other signatories are: Sport Australia, the Australian Institute of Sport, Golf Australia, the Australian Basketball Players’ Association, the SCG, Sydney Football Stadium, ANZ Stadium, Commbank Stadium, Adelaide Oval, McDonald Jones Stadium, Newcastle Entertainment Centre, Stadiums Queensland, Venues NSW, WIN Entertainment Centre, WIN Stadium and the Challenging Racism Project. The guidelines are intended as the first phase in an ongoing partnership with signatory codes, clubs and venues to strengthen their anti-racism work and policies. At this stage they cover only professional sport, not grassroots. They are also limited to on-the-ground racism at sporting venues – research was not conducted into online racist abuse. “Sport holds a unique place in Australian society – it encapsulates our values of equality and fairness and helps us connect to each other,” said the AHRC’s race discrimination commissioner, Chin Tan. “But unfortunately, racism in sport remains an ongoing issue.” Australia has not been immune to the global spike in taunts against black and Indigenous players of all sports. The AFL great Adam Goodes retired due to persistent racial abuse, Héritier Lumumba endured 10 years of racist taunts while playing for Collingwood, and A-League Men forward Bernie Ibini is among numerous footballers to have experienced abuse. After January’s cricket Test, the India veteran Ravichandran Ashwin claimed he has been the victim of abuse from Sydney crowds for almost a decade. “When racist incidents happen, they can have a long-lasting impact on those affected, and damaging social consequences. There is no place for racism anywhere, and that includes sport,” Tan said. “We need consistent and strong responses to spectator racism across the sporting codes to send a united message that racism will not be tolerated and that there will be serious consequences when it occurs.”Labor is hoping to make Australia’s internet frustrations an election issue, promising a revamped national broadband network that will stay in public hands and allow more choice. With Australia still ranked 59th in the world for broadband speeds, and 32nd out of the 37 nations in the OECD, Labor is promising a $2.4bn boost to the nationwide broadband rollout, promising to update the already ageing network. The opposition says the funding commitment is off-budget, and will be financed through the NBN corporation itself, which Labor has committed to keeping as a public entity. The Labor promise builds on the government’s $4.5bn retrofit announcement from last year, which aimed to upgrade fibre-to-the-node, fibre-to-the-curb and cable connections for homes in designated areas. That followed years of complaints of poor speeds and connectivity. The Coalition has maintained its decision to upgrade the copper network it had previously insisted on using, was part of a “strategic review” and not because of on-going complaints. Anthony Albanese and communications shadow minister Michelle Rowland are promising to fast track access for up to 1.5m homes who want a fibre-to-the-premise connection to boost speed. Labor says it could lead to almost seven out of eight homes in the designated fibre-to-node footprint, receiving an upgrade if they choose to access it. It estimates more than 10m premises would have the option of access to faster internet speeds under its plan, by 2025. Regional Australia would be one of the areas to benefit, with Labor estimating an additional 660,000 premises outside urban footprints would receive access to the optical fibre network, if they choose. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning For those who decide to take up faster (and more expensive internet plans), the cost of shifting the connection from the node to the premise will be borne by the NBN, Labor says. “Reliable, quality, high speed internet is not a luxury or a nice-to-have, it is essential 21st century infrastructure,” the joint Albanese-Rowland statement says. Labor had planned for the national broadband network to include fibre-to-the-premise connections as part of its original rollout. The Coalition government changed that to fibre-to-the-node, which it said would roll out the program faster and cheaper. But the change slowed down available speeds, because of differences in the copper quality, or the distance from the node to a home. The pandemic put those challenges under the spotlight, and led to the government conceding the network needed an upgrade, giving more people access to a direct connection. Guardian Australia also revealed the cut down version of the NBN delivered by the Coalition cost up to three times more than its original forecast, and came in at closer to the initial cost Labor set for the national rollout. Under the Coalition government, NBN Co has now taken on a mix of government and private debt worth more than $57bn, as costs for constructing and maintaining the older technology went up.Australia will have to spend $30bn over the next half century to bolster coastal defences against the threat of rising sea levels and other global heating impacts to cope with more exposed properties becoming uninhabitable, the Insurance Council of Australia has said. The ICA, an industry group representing insurers and reinsurers, described the funding as “modest” compared with the bill of not taking action to limit a widening “protection gap” in insurance. Most so-called “actions of the sea” are not covered by insurance, exposing the assets of millions of people and their communities living near the coast. These perils include tidal inundation, coastal and estuarine inundation, coastal erosion, and shoreline movement, all of which are set to worsen with sea levels rising at a pace of more than 3mm a year globally, and even faster for some parts of Australia. “This is leaving Australian communities, properties, and critical infrastructure increasingly vulnerable,” the report prepared for the ICA by Baird Australia found. “As these events increase in frequency and intensity, a growing number of exposed properties in Australia will become uninhabitable.” It noted a June 2016 storm that eroded beach and private land on Sydney’s northern beaches cost governments and homeowners, along a short stretch of the beach, about $25m to build a seawall to limit future erosion. The estimated $30bn figure spending needed for large-scale coastal protection and other projects was “modest” at just 1.2% of the average yearly infrastructure spending by governments. It would deliver “significant returns” in avoided disruption to communities and the economy. In some cases, though, mitigation efforts would not work and a “planned retreat from coastal hazard zones may be the best long-term community option”, the report said. Insurance “protection gaps” are likely to grow in areas where perils increase, such as northern Australian regions exposed to more intense if not more frequent cyclones. Damage from such tempests can be greater from sea surges or heavy rainfall than from winds. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning A joint state-federal coastal hazard information database was needed to measure and monitor “actions of the sea”. The insurance industry was also ready to assist with setting “robust land planning and building codes” to reduce risk to property holders and keep insurance premiums within reach of property holders, the report said. A spokesperson for NSW’s Department of Planning, Industry and Environment, said that the state government was “helping councils prepare coastal management programs which will identify ways to address current and emerging coastal hazard risks”. “We are also updating the NSW Coastal Design Guidelines, which will preserve the special qualities of the coast and inform better urban design in these communities,” the official said. “Those guidelines are expected to be shared with the community in coming weeks for feedback.”Fifteen seconds is all you need. Point your phone camera to a shelf and hold up your favourite book, or three. Add a trending soundtrack, a caption, a couple of hashtags – #BookTok #FYP. Throw a pandemic into the mix and you have the formula: you can make a book review go viral. Stuck inside during Sydney’s Covid lockdown, I fell down the endless TikTok abyss, where I found BookTok: the app’s reading corner that has amassed more than 26bn views. There, I spent more time watching people talk about books than actually reading books myself. One of those people is Cait Jacobs, a book blogger based in New York. Jacobs joined BookTok under the handle @caitsbooks in December 2019. Three months later, she started posting content to a small follower count of 100. That number has since skyrocketed to more than 240,000. Her videos range between 10,000 to more than 1m views. One about LGBTQ+ representation in books has been viewed more than 8m times. “I really thought when I started that no one would see my videos,” she tells me. “I’m an introvert – I have social anxiety going to a grocery store. So connecting to so many other readers is a shock.” On a platform like YouTube or Instagram, you have to actively seek out book-related content. On TikTok, it can be stumbled across. “Videos filter to the For You Page seamlessly,” Jacobs explains, of the assemblage of new TikToks users scroll through as soon as they open the app. “And the audience it reaches is not just readers”. Hence the staggering numbers. Behind the ambiguity of the TikTok algorithm is a sense of organic growth, stronger than that of any other platform. My For You Page is filled with a mysteriously curated mix. It is individualised – perfectly aligned to my interests, and slightly terrifying if you think about it too deeply. The audience that scrolls beyond the FYP – through BookTok accounts and tags – will pick up on patterns. Many videos follow “formats” likely to go viral. Recommendation lists are a staple example, where the emotion of a popular song on the app is thoughtfully paired with the books being recommended. A stack of novels featuring “angsty enemies-to-lovers romance” would be perfect to the punch of Good 4 U by Olivia Rodrigo, for instance. Or, a selection of “books guaranteed to make you cry” listed off to her heartbreak ballad Drivers License. One of my favourite video formats is less popular, and involves a creator sharing the plot of a book as though it were a real story of their own. Elizabeth Cayoutte – aka @bettysbooklist – pioneered this. Looking down the barrel of her phone camera, she says: “Someone has died at the school costume party. My friends and I take parenting very seriously, and while we have our secrets, I assure you that it was an accident. So why won’t anyone believe me?” After a tantalising moment of shock and intrigue, the video cuts to the cover of Big Little Lies: the Australian domestic mystery novel published in 2015. Other TikTokers such as Jacobs jump across various formats, from sharing guilty pleasure tropes and relatable bookish experiences, to assuming what her audience’s “favourite book says about them”. Often featured in her videos is Leigh Bardugo’s young adult fantasy duology, Six of Crows. It is a series I also call a favourite, so we share in a little squeal about it over the phone. “Six of Crows always gets people talking,” Jacobs says. “I think it’s the mix of a rich fantasy world and a diverse ensemble of characters.” Though YA novels such as Six of Crows, E Lockhart’s We Were Liars, Kiera Cass’s The Selection and anything written by Sarah J Mass thrive on BookTok, broader genres are not forgotten. “YA fantasy is a big one, but so are mysteries and classics.” Jacobs says there is also a huge appetite for “spicy” and “smutty” books; books that are sensual, erotic, or both. “BookTok is a place where everyone is comfortable,” she says. “Because everyone is eager to share their reading, and delve into what they want from their plots, characters and worlds. And all it takes is a short video.” These short videos have been noticed beyond the world of BookTok - 26bn views of the BookTok hashtag means a viral five-second clip can impact sales worldwide. The Guardian has coined it the BookTok effect; where books are hyped on TikTok, and top bestselling charts soon after. Jacobs says it is so prevalent, she can “point directly to the videos” that catapulted certain books to popularity. “Selene from @moongirlreads created a spike in sales of The Song of Achilles by Madeline Miller. And Ayman, from @aymansbooks, made it impossible for readers to get their hands on The Invisible Life of Addie LaRue by VE Schwab after her video recommending it.” Booksellers have caught on, with Barnes &amp; Noble in the US featuring a “discover popular BookTok books” category on their website, and displaying a BookTok table in stores. “It is surreal,” Jacobs says. “It is special, because BookTok has such a wide reach and audience around the world, but it is just a community who love to read and talk about it. “It’s something I never would have imagined could happen.”Three out of every four video ads the United Australia party has posted on YouTube since late September have been pulled by Google for allegedly violating the tech giant’s advertising policies, according to Google’s transparency report. Since former the Liberal MP Craig Kelly joined the UAP in late August, the party has spent $2.684m on 25 ads run on YouTube, boosting the number of views on the party’s videos into the millions. The spend far outweighs the amount being spent by any other political party. The next nearest is Labor with $60,750. It is not clear from the report what the removed videos contained or which of Google’s policies they are alleged to have violated. Labor has previously raised concerns that the UAP was using its platform to undermine confidence in Australia’s response to the Covid-19 pandemic, citing videos in which Kelly questioned the safety of Covid vaccines or promoted the drug ivermectin. In October Labor’s shadow assistant minister for communications, Tim Watts, wrote to Google asking why the UAP was allowed to remain on YouTube given that some videos had already been removed for allegedly violating its policy. In parliament in October, Watts noted Kelly himself had said he had received one strike, and questioned why the UAP was still allowed on the platform. “The question is: why is the member for Hughes and the UAP’s YouTube page still operating after repeatedly violating YouTube’s policies, let alone spending millions of dollars promoting medical misinformation during a pandemic? Given the member for Hughes’s record of spreading misinformation and his intent to match the 2019 election spend of the UAP, the potential for harm is obvious and Google must act in a transparent and proactive way.” Google appears to now be closely scrutinising advertising from the United Australia party. According to Google’s transparency report, 12 of the last 16 ads UAP has paid for – or nearly half of the 25 ads since Kelly became leader – have been pulled by YouTube for violating the company’s ad policy. Guardian Australia has sought comment from the United Australia party. Kelly previously told Guardian Australia that “it is a disgrace and a new low that a political party would ask a foreign oligarch to censor freedom of speech in Australian politics”. “The idea that an alternate opinion of an expert is misinformation is a claim I categorically reject,” Kelly said. He said Labor’s appeal to Google amounted to “silencing of genuine debate, and that will leave the public misinformed”. The ads had been pulled after UAP had spent either up to $50,000 or more than $100,000 on each of the ads. Google’s transparency report tracks expenditure on political advertising by $50,000 increments. All but two of the removed ads had between 1m and 10m impressions before removal, the remaining two had between 100,000 and 1m. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The move came after Google removed a number of videos in response to Labor providing a list of videos they argued violated Google policy on misinformation. In a letter sent to Watts on 3 November, Google’s head of public policy and government affairs, Samantha Yorke, identified six videos Google had removed in response, including a video on Kelly’s private members’ bill banning vaccination passports, a video entitled “Rowan Dean was right on ivermectin” and a 10 May interview with then-Sky News host Alan Jones, in which Kelly questioned the efficacy of Covid vaccines. Yorke said Google had also taken action with regard to its strikes policy, but did not specify whether the UAP had any strikes left before it would be banned from YouTube. Watts questioned how many more times the UAP and Kelly would need to violate Google’s policies before being “kicked off for good”. “Online misinformation has consequences,” he told Guardian Australia. “We’re currently seeing it play out in the extremism and violent rhetoric some are using in the recent protests at Victorian Parliament.”For his new book, My Favourite Movies, David Stratton selected a somewhat unusual number of films to feature: 111. “I started off with 101, which seems to be the fixed number for this sort of book, and then I just couldn’t narrow it down,” he explains. “It’s really impossible to cut out a lot of films. I just had to put in another 10. I could have put in another 50, probably. But I had to draw the line somewhere, so it became 111. And even so, there’s things that should be there but aren’t.” My Favourites Movies is a trip through the film critic’s best loved flicks, a list that includes the likes of Casablanca, Picnic at Hanging Rock and Animal Kingdom. To narrow it down to the 111 movies featured – a task he found “very, very difficult” – Stratton rewatched all his contenders during lockdown. That part of the process, at least, was easy. “Every time you watch a favourite film you notice something new, or I do anyway,” he says. “They just get better.” Nostalgia helped Stratton decide which movies made the cut. He focused on including films he has a sentimental attachment to, the ones that remind him of a certain time in his life. For that reason, Stratton rates his memory as his most useful asset. Here, he tells us why good recall is essential in his line of work, as well as the story of some important personal belongings. What I’d save from my house in a fire I would save paintings. We have a neighbour who lives in the same part of the Blue Mountains that I do, Peter Boggs, who is an absolutely wonderful artist. And for quite a few years I’ve been buying some of his paintings. He paints streets and houses, never people. They’re very ethereal sort of paintings; sort of misty, slightly out of focus. I have probably about eight or 10 of his paintings and I just love them. They’re very beautiful works of art. My most useful object My most useful object is my memory. Especially in the context of writing this book, I’m happy that I still have very vivid memories of the first time that I saw a lot of the films that I wrote about. The reason that I draw the distinction about it being a book about my favourite movies as opposed to what I think are the best movies is very often because of the circumstances in which I saw them. And the memories of those circumstances. I do keep records of all the films that I see but, when you write about a film, you don’t necessarily write down the circumstances in which you saw it. And sometimes they prove to add to the experience, in my opinion. The circumstance in which I saw a particular film might add to the enjoyment of it or the fact that it becomes a favourite. So my memory is pretty good for a fellow of my age, for which I’m very fortunate. The item I most regret losing A hat. Not just any old hat. When I became an Australian citizen, which was probably 1988, my wife gave me a beautiful Akubra to celebrate. And to my eternal shame, I left it in the upper rack on an aeroplane, on a long-haul flight somewhere. I deeply regret losing the hat. It was a very sentimental hat. Irreplaceable, really.How do I talk to my children about death? When Rechelle Leahy’s husband Allistair was diagnosed with stage-four colon cancer in 2013, they faced a difficult decision: when, and how, they would tell their two children – aged just six and four – about his impending death. It’s a situation no one wants to find themselves in but, given the inevitability of death (and with one in 20 Australian children losing a parent before the age of 18), it’s a topic we ought to be prepared to tackle. So how to do it? According to the paediatric psychologist Deirdre Brandner, parents of young children can start this discussion with a focus on small creatures or plants, giving children the basic understanding that “living things die”. “The death of pets, whether they are ours or others’, can be a helpful way to introduce this topic,” she says. “Talking about how we felt when a pet or someone we loved died will allow children to better understand the grief process.” She says while children under five will struggle to understand that death is irreversible and universal, it’s still important that they’re told when someone they know has died, though parents might consider the amount of information shared. “Keep explanations brief but honest,” she advises. “Young children tend to ask more direct questions and often ask the same questions over and over again because they are trying to process this event. Sometimes we want to avoid discussing death with children because we are worried or fearful about how they will cope, [but] talking to children about death will allow them to feel more secure and supported.” Matthew Kwoka of Southern Cross Funerals, who runs a video series called Death Defined that aims to break the stigma around the “death conversation”, says children often gain an understanding of death when bearing witness to someone’s declining health during a terminal illness, but sudden or tragic deaths can be more traumatic. “[The] immediate departure of a parent … is a totally different kind of grief,” he explains. “The shock factor is more traumatic for all involved and is a far more difficult situation to explain to a child.” In such cases, Brandner suggests planning your talk first (running it by a friend can be helpful), speaking openly in language children will understand, using words like died or dead over “went to sleep” or “passed away”, which create confusion and do not help the grieving process. “Tell children the truth and do so as soon as you can,” she advises. “Be calm and set the emotional tone. Carefully watch for your child’s reaction and follow their lead. Reassure them that they are safe and cared for. Don’t overwhelm them with too much information at the beginning but be there to answer questions in the coming days.” While their responses will depend on their age and developmental stage, Brandner says it’s important to give children time to process the information, to validate their feelings, and to remember that there’s also “much variability in how any of us grieve”. She suggests rituals, experiences and routines as a way to help the process. This could include creating memory books or slideshows to remember the person, along with planting their favourite flower or making their favourite meal, or lighting a candle. She also suggests sticking to children’s regular routine where possible, to bring a sense of normalcy to their days. “Young children in particular need reassurance that their life will go on no matter what happens,” she says. “Some children will not display any adverse reactions, but others may exhibit increases in irritability, anxiety, clinginess or anger outbursts. “There can be changes in appetite, losing themselves in screens or retreating to their rooms. We do need to provide comfort and flexibility in supporting children during this time. However, children respond and are best supported by routine and consistency. It makes them feel secure that their world is still the same.” Leahy says her boys were understandably sad after their father’s death. They’d ask questions about whether Allistair could see them, if he was missing them and what he would do now that he wasn’t there in person any more. As a family they’ve been open about their feelings since Allistair’s death: celebrating his birthday with cake and his favourite movies, and releasing balloons on the anniversary of his death with notes attached, telling him what they have been up to. “The conversation [about his death] was the hardest we had as a family,” Leahy says. “It was devastating to know that the loss of the boys’ dad would leave such a big gap in their lives, but it was also a way to show the boys that it was OK to have complicated emotions, to show them that adults get sad too.” After losing her mother, grandmother and husband in 10 years, Leahy launched iDecide, a platform with “bank-level” security that allows users to plan and store crucial information for loved ones in case of their death. She says being open and honest helped alleviate her children’s anxiety at an incredibly tough time. “We need to include our families in this conversation,” she says. “It empowered Allistair to manage the narrative around his own death and [helped] the boys understand that when he died it was not him abandoning them, but that death is part of the lifecycle and he would still be with them every day because he is part of them.” • Sarah Ayoub is a journalist, academic and author of books for young adults and childrenThe prime minister’s department breached freedom of information law by dragging out a request for internal documents about the alleged rape of Brittany Higgins, prompting the regulator to warn it to urgently fix its “compliance with the FOI act”. In April this year, two months after Higgins spoke out publicly about her alleged attack in March 2019, the department of prime minister and cabinet received a targeted FOI request for documents relating to its handling of the case. The request, made by an anonymous member of the public, asked for emails sent or received by a specific assistant secretary within a two-month window, which contained the keyword “Brittany”. The FOI captured just 20 relevant documents. The department, however, complained that the request was “complex and voluminous” and twice asked for an extension to the 30-day statutory timeframe to respond. It also ran its decision past the prime minister’s office, something departments are not legally obliged to do. The department was granted the extensions, allowing it until 4 June 2021, but still failed to meet the legally-imposed deadline. That prompted a complaint to the Office of the Australian Information Commissioner (OAIC). The OAIC’s yet-to-be-released investigation report, seen by Guardian Australia, found the department had breached FOI law. In explaining its actions, the department told the regulator it had been delayed by the complex and sensitive nature of the request, but also by an apparent requirement that “all PM&amp;C FOI decisions are to be noted by relevant senior executives and the prime minister’s office”. “The department did not explain to what extent the engagement with relevant senior executives and the prime minister’s office contributed to the processing delay,” the OAIC report said. A decision was eventually made in July 2021. Despite claiming the request was “complex” and “voluminous”, the department released just two of 20 relevant documents. They included a benign all-staff email from secretary Phil Gaetjens urging his employees to seek support if they needed it, and a copy of a public statement made by Higgins about her alleged rape, which was forwarded to the assistant secretary Peter Rush without any additional comment. The rest of the documents were blocked on a range of grounds, including because they contained information that could harm personal privacy, disclose a deliberative matter, or compromise the efficient and proper conduct of some operations of the department. It is the second time the department has been ruled to have broken the FOI law in this way in as many years. Last year, the OAIC criticised the department for inexplicably delaying a freedom of information request about allegations the former public service commissioner improperly aided the rightwing Institute of Public Affairs. That prompted a raft of recommendations, including that it audit itself and report back to the regulator on its “compliance with statutory timeframes”. Now, the OAIC has recommended the department appoint an information champion, potentially supported by an information governance board, to “provide leadership, oversight and accountability necessary to promote and operationalise the department’s compliance with the FOI act”. That was supposed to occur by 5 November 2021. The department was also told to provide training to FOI section staff and relevant senior executives “about the obligations under the FOI act to comply with statutory processing periods”. The department was given until 5 January next year to finish the training. Guardian Australia asked the department whether the recommendations had been implemented. It refused to address the question. “These matters are the subject of a complaint made to the Office of the Australian Information Commissioner, to which the department has responded,” a spokesperson said. “Until the acting freedom of information commissioner publishes information about the complaint, it is not appropriate for the department to comment further.”Centrelink’s decision to cancel the age pension of an 80-year-old man who lives in a nursing home with advanced dementia was “absurd and wrong”, a tribunal has found. In a judgment published this week, the Administrative Appeals Tribunal criticised Centrelink for cancelling the man’s age pension when he did not “personally have the capacity to comprehend … a decision to suspend his pension”. The tribunal heard David Fry was living in an aged care home and his son, John, was appointed his legal guardian, after David was discovered driving on the wrong side of the road and judged to be “mentally incapacitated”. John Fry became responsible for managing his father’s dealings with Centrelink, which had been paying David the age pension since 2006. In May 2018, the agency suspended David Fry’s age pension because John failed to provide updated financial details for one of his father’s superannuation accounts. John, who the tribunal heard was having difficulty obtaining the information and was unfamiliar with Centrelink processes and his father’s finances, called the agency and the payment was reinstated. However, his father’s pension was suspended again in September for the same reason, before the agency cancelled it altogether in December 2018. The last letter Centrelink sent before the payment was cancelled, on 20 October, was sent to David Fry, rather than his son. The tribunal said that letter had no legal effect because the agency knew Fry “did not have the mental capacity to be aware of, let alone respond to, the requests”. In December 2018, Centrelink wrote to both men advising that David’s pension had been cancelled because “we did not receive a reply to the income stream review letter we sent you”. In ruling against Centrelink, the tribunal member Roger Maguire said it was “difficult to contemplate a person who might be more vulnerable than a hospitalised septuagenarian suffering from dementia”. While acknowledging Fry’s son hadn’t complied with the notices in a timely fashion, Maguire said that was in part because he had “no knowledge of his father’s financial affairs and had become guardian of his father’s affairs against his father’s will”. “His father was not forthcoming with information, and this placed him in a situation of particular difficulty,” he said. Under social security law, Centrelink may suspend or cancel a payment when a person fails to comply with a certain notice. However, the tribunal noted the agency also has powers to obtain information from a person’s financial institution. It did not do so, instead opting to cancel Fry’s age pension. Centrelink argued the decision to cancel Fry’s payment was “rational and proportionate”, but Maguire found it was “absurd and wrong”. The financial information sought by Centrelink eventually confirmed that Fry remained eligible for the pension, the tribunal said. Centrelink also argued Fry should not get backpay for the period he was without the pension – between December 2018 and approximately January 2020 – because the cancellation was not appealed within 13 weeks. The tribunal ruled against Centrelink, finding there was evidence John had called the agency three times in October. While staff had not recorded the reason for the call, Maguire said it was “fairly obviously he wasn’t phoning up to try and organise a golf game”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The case is the latest example of problems with Centrelink’s age pension income stream reviews process, which the independent MP, Andrew Wilkie, recently likened to the robodebt scandal. In that, Centrelink was similarly criticised for accusing people of underreporting work income based on incomplete information, rather than obtaining evidence directly from a person’s employer. In one recent case handled by Wilkie’s his office, Centrelink warned an 84-year-old woman she might lose her pension if she did not provide 18 years of financial information. In another case, a man who was reportedly in hospital the week before Christmas when he received a Centrelink letter telling him his pension may be stopped if he did not provide information from a super fund by 6 January. Wilkie said Centrelink was “out of control”. “That Centrelink thinks it’s OK to just go and take the pension of an elderly man in the advanced stages of dementia is either cruel and mindless or symptomatic of an agency that is still beholden to useless automated systems despite the robodebt debacle,” he said. “Maybe taxpayers should suddenly and arbitrarily stop paying the minister responsible for Centrelink from time to time because that looks like the only way to jolt some sense into the government.” Labor’s government services spokesperson, Bill Shorten, said it was “more breathtaking cruelty and heartlessness from the government that gave us robodebt”. Services Australia’s spokesman, Hank Jongen, said the agency conducted income stream reviews each financial year in August to “ensure we assess a customer’s income support payments and concession cards correctly”. “This decision relates to a payment cancellation in 2018,” he said. “From 1 January 2019, we introduced a new process for our Income Stream Reviews to make it easier for customers. This made it mandatory for all providers of income streams to supply information to us, rather than asking customers to supply it, to complete reviews. Our staff then review if a discrepancy is identified.” He said when a person was nominated as a Centrelink nominee it was “expected that they will act in the best interests of the customer in all their dealings with us”. “We encourage anyone who is struggling to fulfil their commitments as a nominee to contact us so we can provide guidance on the best options,” he said. Do you have a story? luke.henriques-gomes@theguardian.comIn episode one of Sort Of, non-binary Pakistani-Canadian millennial Sabi Mehboob is sitting on a chair facing their employers – a youngish couple whose two children Sabi nannies. Paul, the father, awkwardly fumbles through a speech designed to gently fire Sabi, closing with the painfully uncomfortable statement: “You’re so real. I’m glad our kids have been exposed to you.” Sabi replies in the characteristic deadpan they deliver for the entirety of the seven-episode series: “I’m glad I exposed myself to them.” Sabi, played by Canadian actor Bilal Baig, is “so real” – they’re fashion-forward, switched on, smart and compassionate in the way they approach their nanny duties, which are tested when the kids’ mother has an accident and falls into a coma. But while Sabi is out and proud within the broader community as non-binary and queer, they’re hiding their identity from their mother, Raffo, who is Pakistani, Muslim and concerned for the future of her children. Seeing Sabi in full makeup and femme clothing pales in comparison, though, to discovering they’re a nanny. “Are you this man’s servant?” Raffo asks in disbelief when she finds out, glaring at Paul. It’s this kind of nuance that makes Sort Of, created by Baig and Fab Fillipo, so much more than “just” a story about gender diversity, or sexual diversity, or cultural difference, or indeed any of the niches it will be crammed into by the mainstream TV paradigm. Instead of constructing a run-of-the-mill drama about the conflict between Sabi’s Muslim, Pakistani heritage and their authentic self, Sort Of creates a full cast of complex characters, none of whom are restricted to a simplified caricature of what they represent. Raffo is living apart from her husband, slowly unravelling in the wake of her middle-age existence that is no longer centred around her children. She is torn between wanting to encourage Sabi to live their life authentically and wanting to shelter them from the wrath of their father. Sabi’s employer, Paul, is riddled with grief in the wake of his wife’s accident and confused about what role Sabi can play in the lives of his children. He’s also empathetic, immature and conflicted about how to parent. Sabi’s best friend, 7ven, is zany and fun and off to Berlin for an internship opportunity at a gallery. But instead of riding out this millennial dream of coming of age in the “queerest city in the world”, 7ven is back within weeks, unable to fit in overseas and unwilling to push through the discomfort of loneliness. Sort Of is the type of television so many other shows are trying to be but never quite achieve. It’s meaningfully diverse and intersectional, with three-dimensional characters, hilarious dialogue and a big heart. And yet, despite its quality and impact, the show has had little media coverage since its Australian release. I’m puzzled by this, given the voracious appetite for other shows that explore intersectional themes around sex and gender, such as Netflix’s Sex Education. The cynic in me wonders if it’s because unlike Sex Education, Sort Of doesn’t consign its queer, non-binary and non-white characters to supporting roles, and instead centres their experiences entirely. They are the leads, and they should be. Sort Of is a show that is more than just pushing boundaries for the gender and sexually diverse. It’s a show about love and life and death, and how the three can be more intertwined than we realise. It’s about the mistakes we make when we’re young and how part of growing up is the inevitability of being disappointed by the ones we love. It’s about figuring out who we are, and expecting empathy, inclusion and acceptance from our society. When I’ve written previously about shows I love that feature culturally diverse leads, I’ve had white friends admit to me they didn’t consider watching them. They saw a brown lead and thought the show wasn’t “for them”. Imagine if I did that every time I was looking for something to watch? When TV shows champion diversity, they risk being defined by it, to the detriment of their recognition on merit alone. Sort Of should not go unnoticed – because it is important these stories are told and heard, and even more important we reach a critical mass of diverse television shows until they no longer stand out as an anomaly.A house many would consider a knockdown, rebuild has been given a new life as a snug, energy-efficient home by an ACT firm that say their science-based architecture model can be applied to existing housing stock across Australia. Prior to the renovation, owners Kathryn and Rachel – who have requested their surnames be kept private – say the house was “always cold in winter and hot in summer”. They decided to upgrade it when they moved from Melbourne to Canberra with their teenage son in 2019. Kathryn had owned the house for years and while well situated – north-facing and opposite a park – it did not suit the family’s needs. At first, the pair weren’t wedded to the idea of keeping the home. However, when their research led them to Light House Architecture and Science, Kathryn and Rachel, both archivists, were told it was the perfect candidate for an energy-efficient makeover. At the time, the home was 123m2 – with two bedrooms, one bath and a small study. With a 3.8-star energy rating, architect Duncan Hall says in addition to being “leaky”, it suffered from a progression of awkward, disjointed spaces, typical of many 1980s project homes. “The kitchen was old-school, disconnected from the dining area, and dark. The bedrooms were fine, the wet areas depressing. At the end of the house, the study/bedroom was small and poky. “[But] it was solid structurally, in pretty good nick,” says Hall. “And it had clear potential. It sat comfortably in the streetscape and related well to the other homes in the street.” The design team from Light House Architecture and Science focused on the home’s thermal performance and rearranged the floor plan, adding a 13m2 multipurpose room and creating better connections to the garden. Completed in 2020, the high-functioning, tightly sealed 136m2 home achieved a 7.7-star energy rating – on a budget of $400,000. Light House owner and director, Jenny Edwards, is a building scientist, whose research and simulations inform the practice’s design approach. The Light House team takes on 35 projects a year – half are new builds – using scientific modelling to streamline processes to drive sustainability and affordability. In the case of Little Loft House, one look at the plans told Edwards the house should be retained and upgraded. “Orientation is number one. Unless the house is structurally really bad, we would always encourage clients to renovate and extend. “The savings and comfort improvements are very real.” Built on an east-west access, the living room and bedrooms already enjoyed northern sun, but it was clear more could be achieved within a “smaller, smarter, sustainable” framework. Hall sketched out the possibilities on the existing plan, noting the moments that arose from the sun’s progression through the house. “It was one of the things we really enjoyed about the planning process,” says Rachel. “Duncan said you can have your morning tea here, lunch here and pre-dinner drinks here.” “A good home can’t just be about energy efficiency. It has to feel and look like a joyful home,” insists Edwards. Her team’s process is holistic, beginning with a focus on passive solar features and draught-proofing, ditching gas for all-electric appliances, improving function and liveability by rearranging and improving the floor plan, then addressing water storage and landscaping. In “leaky” Australian homes, draught sealing and insulating delivers “the best bang for your buck”, says Edwards. Between 46%-61% of a home’s heating energy can be lost and between 79%-86% of its heat gained through windows. All of the aluminium-framed single-glazed windows in Little Loft House were replaced by uPVC double-glazed windows with high solar transmission/low emissivity glass. Insulation was bumped up too. “Pre-90s homes don’t have insulated walls,” says Edwards, but retrofitting is not expensive. “We took all the internal lining out and replaced it with new batts in the walls plus topped up the ceiling insulation – for less than $10,000.” The internal envelope was also thoroughly sealed, and ceiling vents, ducts and downlights removed. Taking the home all-electric was the next step – heating, hot water and cooking were all converted from gas to electric. There are now two reverse-cycle air split system air conditioning units, ceiling fans and a hot water pump. There’s electric under-floor heating in the new bathroom, all lighting is now LED, and the cooktop is induction. Combined with the draught sealing, the switch to electric has reduced energy consumption by 69%. The family delights in the comfort and sense of intimacy that comes with temperature stability in the home. “It feels safe and calm and stable,” says Rachel. They also loved the process. Light House presented good/better/best options to guide the selection of fixtures and fittings. “They’ve done all the research,” says Rachel. “Australian-made where possible, the best star ratings, a standard bathroom design for example. The model was very transparent.” Hall’s plan has addressed flow and function. Sitting at one end of the east-west access, the once-poky study has been transformed with a pop-out addition that draws northern light and sunshine in. The loft space that inspired the project’s name sits suspended over a daybed. The room has a library wall and a desk. Now, a bench outside the window is a favoured spot for enjoying the garden. A study nook, extra wardrobe space and extra toilet were other gains. “I think the term I would use is ‘human scale’,” says Rachel. “It doesn’t feel overbearing and it’s not ostentatious. Duncan has come up with a design that encourages us to live in a comfortable but less cluttered way.” The owners aren’t the only ones impressed with the project, which picked up two gongs in the 2021 ACT Institute of Architects Awards: the Derek Wrigley award for sustainable architecture and the Gene Willsford award for residential architecture – houses (alterations and additions). Jenny Edwards says the Little Loft House project is a rejection of the “disposable” attitude to substandard housing. Instead, it uses standard construction materials to keep costs low while achieving thermal excellence – avoiding demolition and landfill. “This gorgeous little house is 47% smaller than the average new Canberra home and uses 80% less energy,” says Edwards. The project cost – in “a very expensive construction market” – includes significant landscaping, rainwater tanks, all fixtures and fittings and appliances. Her modelling shows the same approach would achieve better outcomes in every state of Australia. “It’s not rocket science … it’s just good design and science, and fairly simple science at that.”A bill that would ban child marriage in England and Wales will be presented to parliament for its second reading this week and has been welcomed by campaigners as a “huge stride” forward. Currently, marriage and civil partnerships are legal at 16 and 17 with parental consent. This is not just out of step with international legislation but also a loophole that is “more often used as a mechanism for abuse”, according to Pauline Latham, MP, who will present her bill on Friday. If adopted, it will have a “dramatic impact on so many young children, mostly girls but also some boys”, Latham said. “It could transform their life chances and their futures.” “We are keeping everything crossed that it goes through on Friday and no one votes against it.” Latham, a member of the international development committee, said ending child marriage was also critical for the UK’s international commitments. “We can’t tell someone else to end child marriage if we are allowing it,” she said. Sajid Javid had originally proposed the private member’s bill, but Latham picked it up after his promotion to the cabinet. The health secretary has said child marriages are associated with appalling abuses, including a heightened risk of domestic, sexual and “honour”-based violence, and described child marriage as “child abuse”. Last year, about a quarter of the 753 cases dealt with by the UK’s forced marriage unit were of children under 18. Between 2007 and 2017, 3,096 marriages involving children aged 16 and 17 were legally registered in England and Wales, according to the Office of National Statistics. Campaigners say non-legalised religious marriages of children are even more common, which is why they want all child marriages, not just registered ones, criminalised. Over the past year, domestic abuse charity Karma Nirvana dealt with 78 cases of child marriage in England and Wales. Only four of them were registered marriages, the group said. Natasha Rattu, director of Karma Nirvana, said: “This is a huge stride towards ending child marriage. We haven’t managed to get a bill to this stage so far. We have had conversations with the government that are very positive. Come Friday, we will know whether we have got it over the line.” If passed, the marriage and civil partnership (minimum age) bill would make it an offence to carry out “any conduct for the purpose of causing a child to enter into a marriage”, with a maximum sentence of seven years imprisonment. The minimum age for civil partnerships and marriage would be raised from 16 to 18 in England and Wales. Diana Nammi, executive director at the Iranian and Kurdish Women’s Rights Organisation (IKWRO), said they had seen first-hand the lifelong harm caused by child marriage. “Some of these child marriages get registered, though the vast majority do not, and, in all cases, the moment she is married, often to a much older man, the full weight of the expectations upon her as a wife fall on the child’s young shoulders.” “Too often girls are failed by the adults and statutory professionals that should safeguard them. It’s wrong that the onus has been on the child to speak out in order to get protection. That’s why IKWRO has tirelessly campaigned for this landmark change in the law that will make it clear that no child should ever face child marriage and that it is the responsibility of safeguarding professionals to ensure this does not happen.” Payzee Mahmod, a survivor of child marriage, who is now an IKWRO campaigner, said: “At the age of 16, I was robbed of my childhood, when I found myself standing in a wedding dress in a garden in London, facing a child marriage to a man twice my age, who I didn’t know.” • In the UK, the NSPCC offers support to children on 0800 1111, and adults concerned about a child on 0808 800 5000. The National Association for People Abused in Childhood (Napac) offers support for adult survivors on 0808 801 0331. In the US, call or text the Childhelp abuse hotline on 800-422-4453. Other sources of help can be found at Child Helplines InternationalAn acrimonious divorce in which the warring parties were ordered to sell an art collection including works by Andy Warhol, Jackson Pollock and Mark Rothko after being unable to agree its worth, has resulted in the most valuable auction ever held by one of the world’s leading art houses. More than $676m(£503m) was paid for the Macklowe Collection, amassed over more than half a century by the real estate magnate Harry Macklowe and Linda Macklowe, an honorary trustee of New York’s Metropolitan Museum of Art. The total sum made the sale the most valuable single-owner auction ever staged, and the most valuable auction held at Sotheby’s, the auction house said. The 35 works included Rothko’s 8ft tall Number 7, which was sold for $82.5m, the largest single sum of the sale. Created in 1951, the painting was described by Grégoire Billault, Sotheby’s chairman for contemporary art, as “a perfect symphony of colour, light and scale” and among the artist’s greatest works. Warhol’s silkscreen Nine Marilyns sold for $47.4m and his Sixteen Jackies reached $33.9m. Alberto Giacometti’s bronze sculpture, Le Nez, sold for $78.4m and another by Picasso reached $26.3m. Pollock’s Number 17, 1951 more than doubled the lower end of its pre-sale estimate to go for $61.2m, and Cy Twombly’s untitled painting of dripping red peonies made £58.9m. The collection also included works by Sigmar Polke, Gerhard Richter and Agnes Martin. The Macklowes, both in their 80s, built up their art collection over almost six decades of marriage, although Linda was thought to be the driving force behind most acquisitions. The couple were renowned for making barbed exchanges at public events, and their marital strife eventually resulted in a divorce. As well as their art collection, at stake were two Manhattan apartments – one valued at $72m – plus a $19m estate in the Hamptons and a 150ft yacht. But neither they nor their lawyers could agree on the value of their art collection. A judge concluded the only way to establish its worth was to test the market, and ordered the works to be sold. Following a 14-week divorce case, Harry Macklowe celebrated his new marriage to Patricia Landau by posting 42ft high images of the newlyweds on one of his buildings in New York’s Park Avenue – within sight of his ex-wife’s apartment. The sale at Sotheby’s in New York on Monday evening was regarded as the biggest test of the fine art market since the start of the Covid pandemic in early 2020. With demand generally exceeding supply, there was strong competition for the works, particularly from bidders representing Asian buyers. Almost a third of Sotheby’s sales last year were secured for Asian collectors. Both Harry and Linda Macklowe attended the Sotheby’s sale. A second sale, of a further 40 works in the couple’s collection, is scheduled for May 2022.Stephen Colbert Stephen Colbert observed a historic occasion on Monday evening, hours after lawmakers answered “one of the thorniest questions facing our country: should we have roads?” The answer was yes, as Joe Biden signed into law the $1.2tn infrastructure bill to fund projects from public transportation, roads and bridges to ports, railways, power grids and broadband internet. “That means thanks to Joe Biden, more Americans will have access to high-speed internet,” the Late Show host explained, “which means quicker load times for all their QAnon conspiracy theories.” The intense negotiations over the measure were remarkable, he added, because “funding roads and bridges didn’t use to be such a big deal”. The original 1956 measure which created the interstate highway system, for example, enjoyed strong bipartisan support. “But now, not so much,” he continued. “Our politics are so partisan, so broken, that the GOP House members who voted in favor of infrastructure were targeted by their own party of their House committee assignments and even got death threats. “Are we just death threat-ing everything these days?” he added. “Pretty soon we’re going to need a new greeting card section: Death to a Special Nephew on His Birthday.” Seth Meyers On Late Night, Seth Meyers celebrated the arraignment of Trump ally Steve Bannon, who turned himself in to authorities on Monday after a grand jury indicted him on two counts of contempt of Congress. Bannon, who refused to assist the House investigation into the 6 January attack on the Capitol, arrived at the courthouse on Monday and “of course couldn’t help but shout out some incomprehensible anti-government babble into a camera”, Meyers detailed. In a nonsensical tirade, the former Republican strategist referred to himself as “Captain Bannon” and called for allies to “take down the Biden regime”. “I’m sorry, you call yourself ‘Captain Bannon’ now?” Meyers mocked. “It’s like an ironic nickname they give the guy who rinses out the chum buckets down at the marina. “Also it really undercuts your attempt at defiance and bravado when there’s a guy behind you holding up a sign that says ‘Coup Plotter’,” Meyers observed of a protester at Bannon’s arrest. “Gotta be a bummer for a guy like Bannon who thinks he’s an evil mastermind to get upstaged by a sign that clearly took five minutes to make.” Jimmy Kimmel In Los Angeles, Jimmy Kimmel recapped the highlights from “the 900th book” about Donald Trump’s presidency. In Betrayal, the former president told ABC News’s Jonathan Karl that he “wouldn’t dispute” a report that he told Mike Pence to “you can either go down in history as a patriot or you can go down in history as a pussy” on the morning of the Capitol riot. “I wonder if he tried to grab Mike Pence by the patriot,” Kimmel joked. “Mike Pence now claims he has no problems at all with his former boss, so I guess Trump was right.” The book also revealed a movement within Republican leadership to ban Trump from Biden’s inauguration; according to Karl, Trump got wind of the plan and tweeted his planned absence before it could be announced he was disinvited. In a statement released on Monday, Trump disputed the story and said “the decision was mine and mine alone” and called Mitch McConnell “the old broken-down Crow”. “He’s still got it,” said Kimmel. Trevor Noah And on the Daily Show, Trevor Noah reacted to Trump’s non-denial of calling Mike Pence a pussy. “‘I wouldn’t dispute it?’” he marveled. “Wow, Trump is gangster – ‘Why would I dispute it, the guy’s a total pussy, why would I dispute it.’ “You know what I love about Trump? Even if he didn’t say that, he’s the type of guy who would pretend he said it just because it sounded cool,” he added. “By the way, can we also acknowledge that ‘don’t be a pussy’ is the thing that people only go to in life when they don’t have any other arguments? It’s the last option when you have nothing real to convince someone with,” he continued. “But sometimes it’s good to be a pussy. Often times history is made by pussies,” he concluded. “I mean, Gandhi? Total pussy. Britain was like ‘Are you gonna fight us? Or are you a pussy?’ And Gandhi said, ‘I am a pussy – you must be the pussy you want to see in the world.’”Ian Wallace, who has died aged 87, belonged to the generation of ornithologists who did so much to popularise birdwatching after the second world war. He also made major contributions to two of the most widely read ornithological works of his day: A Field Guide to the Birds of Britain and Europe, which he revised in conjunction with James Ferguson-Lees, and the nine-volume Handbook of the Birds of Europe, the Middle East and North Africa, to which he contributed key sections on field characters and behaviour. His other books included Discover Birds (1979), Birdwatching in the Seventies (1981), Watching Birds (1982), Birds of Prey of Britain and Europe (1983) and a history-cum-memoir, Beguiled By Birds (2004), of which one reviewer wrote: “It makes you want to bring him home, open a bottle, and sit back as he regales you with stories all night.” Among Ian’s many admirers was Dominic Couzens, a fellow birdwatching author, who praised the way he could express the sheer thrill, with “binoculars up, heart thumping” of finding a rare bird. Rare birds were Ian’s lifeblood: from 1963 to 1968 he was chairman of the British Birds Rarities Committee, and by the late 1960s he had seen a wider variety of species in Britain than anyone else. He was also a long-time council member of the RSPB and the British Ornithologists’ Union, and a founder member of the Society of Wildlife Artists, with whom he exhibited his own quirkily distinctive artwork. An only child, Ian was born in Great Yarmouth, Norfolk, to Scottish parents, William (known as Jackson), who worked in the fishing industry, and his wife, Elizabeth (nee McKenzie). His father was himself a keen birdwatcher and Ian’s earliest memory was of being shown a puffin on Shetland, at the age of four. He attended Loretto school near Edinburgh, where he was a member of its thriving ornithological society, and on leaving did two years of national service with the King’s African Rifles in Kenya, taking every opportunity to study the exotic local birdlife, along with familiar migrants from home. Returning to the UK in the mid-50s, he studied economics and law at Clare College, Cambridge, where he was president of the Cambridge Bird Club, and during the following decade he worked in marketing for a number of companies in a range of industries, claiming to have created the character Captain Birdseye for the company of that name. In 1963 he joined Guy Mountfort, Julian Huxley and other ornithological luminaries on a birdwatching expedition to Jordan that was described in Mountfort’s 1965 book Portrait of a Desert. In 1968 he returned to Africa, spending three years working in the marketing department of Nigerian Breweries in Lagos. While there he undertook a birdwatching expedition to Lake Chad, driving more than 3,300 miles in 12 days and carrying plenty of beer to ensure an easy passage from local officials. In the field his willingness to push the boundaries did sometimes get the better of him, and he had several of his sightings rejected by the British Birds Rarities Committee as “not proven”. Frustrated, he temporarily withdrew from the birding establishment – “retired hurt”, as one observer noted rather cuttingly. But Ian’s irrepressible character would not allow him to stay on the sidelines for long, and in 1986 he began writing a regular column for a new magazine, Bird Watching. His witty anecdotes and trenchant opinions soon endeared him to a younger generation of birders, many of whom were, until then, unaware of his achievements. They subsequently benefited personally from Ian’s approachability, encouragement and advice, for he was generous of spirit and perpetually enthusiastic about his hobby. He retired in the late 90s and in later years focused on birdwatching in his local patch, an unremarkable corner of rural Staffordshire, where he continued to find unusual specimens while making careful observations of more common ones. Every August he would also attend Birdfair – the annual gathering known as the “Glastonbury of birdwatching” – where he was instantly recognisable in his trademark kilt and tam o’shanter. A dazzlingly inventive public speaker, he would reduce audiences to tears of laughter as he wove increasingly absurd flights of fancy into his dispositions, while still making his point. In 1958 he married Karin Bryde-Williams, and they had two daughters, Petra and Kirstie. They divorced in 1984, and in 1996 he married Wendy Stephens, with whom he had another daughter, Helen. Wendy died in 2020, and he is survived by his daughters and a grandson, Thomas. • Donald Ian Mackenzie Wallace, birdwatcher, born 14 December 1933; died 4 November 2021Nobel laureate Orhan Pamuk is being investigated by the Turkish state for “insulting” the founder of modern Turkey and ridiculing the Turkish flag in his new novel Nights of Plague. Pamuk, who denies the accusations, published the book in Turkey in March. The first complaint against the book – set on a fictional Ottoman island during an outbreak of the bubonic plague in the early 1900s – came in April, when a lawyer accused Pamuk of inciting “hatred and animosity” by insulting Mustafa Kemal Atatürk and ridiculing the flag of Turkey in the work. An Istanbul court decided not to take the claim forward due to lack of evidence, but the lawyer who brought the case, Tarcan Ülük, appealed against the decision and the investigation has now been reopened. Pamuk was previously prosecuted for “insulting Turkishness” after raising the 1915 killings of Armenians and Kurds in an interview. Those charges were dropped in 2006 – the same year Pamuk won the Nobel prize for literature, praised as an author who “in the quest for the melancholic soul of his native city has discovered new symbols for the clash and interlacing of cultures”. Law 5816, under which Pamuk is now being investigated, is intended to protect “the memory of Atatürk” from insult by any Turkish citizen. If found guilty, Pamuk faces up to three years in prison. In a statement to Bianet, Pamuk denied the latest charges. “In Nights of Plague, which I worked on for five years, there is no disrespect for the heroic founders of the nation states founded from the ashes of empires or for Atatürk. On the contrary, the novel was written with respect and admiration for these libertarian and heroic leaders,” he said. He was backed by free speech organisations around the world, who urged authorities not to prosecute him. “Orhan Pamuk is Turkey’s national treasure, a literary asset whose words reverberate across the globe and should be celebrated as such, yet he finds himself once again targeted for his writings,” said PEN International president Burhan Sönmez. “The Turkish authorities have repeatedly used criminal defamation laws to silence those who dare to speak out, and this case is no exception.” “These baseless accusations have already been dismissed in court,” added Karin Deutsch Karlekar, director of free expression at risk programs at PEN America. “The reopening of the investigation, despite the lack of evidence and [the] initial court decision not to prosecute the case, points to the overall climate of repression against writers in Turkey and demonstrates how the legal system enables appalling authoritarian restrictions on free expression and creativity.” According to PEN America, at least 25 writers were jailed last year by the Turkish government, the third-highest number globally. The Turkish Publishers Association also called on prosecutors to drop the investigation. “Court cases such as this pose a huge burden on the time and resources of publishers and writers, creating an atmosphere of threat and tension,” it said in a statement translated by Bianet. “Such interferences, which turn into de facto bans on books, harm the principle of democratic society and we call on the authorities to take concrete steps to immediately end the investigation.” Daniel Gorman, Director of English PEN, said: “The fact that an investigation has been launched highlights the significant restrictions on freedom of expression faced by writers in Turkey today. We urge Turkish authorities to drop the case against him, and we continue to campaign against ongoing attempts by the Turkish government to silence writers.”The credibility of New Caledonia’s third and final independence referendum has been questioned after indigenous leaders warned that participation could be adversely affected by the Covid pandemic. The French government has announced that the referendum will proceed as planned in December after the coronavirus crisis eased. But the pro-independence FLNKS party has been calling for a postponement and has called on supporters not vote on 12 December because the indigenous Kanak people – who are more likely to vote for independence – are in mourning for victims of the pandemic. Kanaks have been far more seriously impacted by the pandemic than Europeans in the Pacific territory. The referendum is the third and final poll asking whether the Pacific territory wishes to become an independent nation. Support for independence increased from 43.3% in the first vote in 2018, to 46.7% in 2020. It had expected to be close to, if not over the required 50% in the final vote. However, Covid has greatly impacted the push for independence. Eighty percent of New Caledonia’s 267 deaths and 10,500 Covid cases have been among the Kanak and other Pasifika people, who were more likely to support independence in previous votes. The virulent Delta surge saw the territory go from zero cases at the start of September to more than 10,000 cases within six weeks, with lockdown measures affecting traditional Kanak mourning rites. The lockdown measures include curfews, a ban on gatherings of more than five, anda limit of nine mourners at a funeral. As lockdowns lift, FLNKS leaders have said that the first priority of Kanak communities will be to complete customary mourning ceremonies, which often take several months, rather than campaigning for the upcoming independence vote. A FLNKS member, Charles Wea, said the virus had devastated the Kanak people. He described 30 deaths in his family, spread across Ouvea and Lifou Islands, as well as the north of the main island. He called France’s minister for overseas territories, Sebastien Lecornu, “a cowboy, because he doesn’t want to pay attention to what we are asking, he doesn’t respect our customs”. Wea said mourning requirements would prevent Kanaks from campaigning throughout the territory as they would be focusing on visiting bereaved communities for traditional ceremonies. Wea said normally large crowds would come to mourn with the bereaved, with ceremonies including long speeches by uncles, chiefs and of what they had accomplished in life. “We are not in the mood for campaigning,” said Annie Wakaine, whose cousin – the widow of a prominent independence leader – died from Covid recently. “It’s so very difficult for us. We never thought it could be like this. All the country is in mourning, above all Kanaks and Oceanians. We use Messenger, Facebook video, but no family has come, no gatherings. We stay home. It’s so very difficult for us.” The FLNKS has informed the United Nations decolonisation committee, with which it is been listed since 1986, that conditions are not conducive to holding a referendum. Kanak non-participation and the call for postponement of the poll has been supported at the UN by the Melanesian Spearhead Group of Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands and Vanuatu. Speaking on local television last week, Victor Tutugoro, leader of one of the parties in the FLNKS coalition, warned that if the poll went ahead on 12 December, the FLNKS and its supporters would not be present on the 13th to plan the country’s future. “Why would we take part when we have not been listened to?”, he asked.Liverpool’s politicians and faith leaders have urged solidarity in the face of division after reports of Islamophobic attacks following a suspected suicide bombing in the city. Multi-faith representatives delivered a joint statement of solidarity outside Liverpool women’s hospital on Tuesday, where a car was blown up on Sunday. The Rev Canon Dr Crispin Pailing, the rector of Liverpool, said the attack had “shocked people of every faith – and those of no faith – across the city”. He added: “Terrorism is an indiscriminate act against people of all faiths and backgrounds. It seeks to destroy our lives of peaceful coexistence and disrupt the functioning of society.” Leyla Mashjari, an associate director of Al-Ghazali Multicultural Centre, representing Liverpool’s Muslim community, said: “At this difficult time let us remember that there is more that unites than divides us.” She said she had heard indirect reports of Islamophobia since the weekend. “We haven’t heard directly from people but it’s going around the city that a few ladies have had scarves pulled off, issues like that. So what we are trying to do is get the word out that we are working with organisations including the city council, and that people should report these crimes rather than just ignore them,” she said. Asylum seekers in Liverpool felt particularly vulnerable, she added. Emad al-Swealmeen, the 32-year-old who died when a bomb he is thought to have made detonated, is thought to have been seeking asylum in the UK. Kim Johnson, the Labour MP for Liverpool Riverside, which includes the Rutland Avenue address where police investigating the bombing have seized a significant amount of material, told MPs in the Commons that her team had also heard about incidents where women wearing hijabs had faced abuse. “We must remain alert but not alarmed. We must stay calm, look after each other and pull together as the great diverse city we are and not allow anyone to exploit this situation to divide us,” Johnson said. Two days after armed police stormed 2 Sutcliffe Street in the Kensington area of the city, the Merseyside police chief constable, Serena Kennedy, spoke to affected residents alongside the Liverpool mayor, Joanne Anderson, and the police and crime commissioner, Emily Spurrell. “People have been talking about how traumatic the experience was for them on Sunday and how they want to get back to some semblance of normal life,” said Anderson, a former Kensington resident. People wanted answers to questions none of the officials could answer: how long had Swealmeen been plotting the attack? Who was he trying to kill? Was he working alone or with others? “There’s still a lot of questions about his motivation or if he was working with anyone else,” said Spurrell. Her staff, along with local firefighters, were giving out leaflets from Stop Hate UK that said “faith is welcome – hate is not”. “This is a diverse street. We know there will be some community tensions in some parts of the city so we are encouraging people to come together and support each other,” Spurrell said. The terraced streets of Kensington are home to many asylum seekers and refugees. Accommodation is cheap: a terrace house on Sutcliffe Street sold for £70,000 this year. Many are rented houses of multiple occupancy, though others, including Swealmeen’s former home, have been divided up into bedsits with their own doorbells. Hassan, 16, from Iraq, arrived in the UK via a small boat just weeks ago and is living in supported accommodation for teenage asylum seekers around the corner from Sutcliffe Street. His housemates are Eritrean, Syrian and Sudanese. “I was shocked to hear about the hospital attack,” he said. The MP for the area, Labour’s Paula Barker, said she knew Kensington residents would be “deeply troubled”. “It is essential that this community is supported and listened to now and in the future,” she told MPs. “I know ordinary scousers in all their diversity will play their part, however small, in remaining vigilant, avoiding spreading misinformation and sowing division online or within our communities.”Once considered off-duty attire or a commuter-friendly shoe to be quickly removed and replaced with heels or brogues, the humble trainer has become a workplace staple. Two in three Britons now say they wear trainers to the office, according to the latest shoe report from Shoeaholics, part of the Kurt Geiger footwear group. And we’re not stopping with one pair. The average person in the UK owns a “trainer wardrobe” worth £474, and most workers own at least seven pairs of trainers and wear them for everything from working to running to going to parties. One in four are aspiring sneakerheads, professing to have up to 10 pairs in their collections. “The pandemic has accelerated the trend, with fewer people required to be in a formal office setting every day,” said the Shoeaholics boss, Mark Hoyal-Mitchell. “But even those who are returning to formal workplaces are increasingly confident to wear styles of shoe that would have been deemed unacceptable just a few years ago.” It’s a finding that will shock few in the fashion industry, which has been banking on its customers’ collective preference for a more comfortable shoe option for years. Once a symbol of athleticism, trainers have become objects of desire that fit neatly into our demand for clothes that offer aesthetic value and comfort simultaneously. Without question, trainers are now respected attire for formal events and red carpet outings, with everyone from the Duchess of Cambridge to Selena Gomez spotted stepping out in trainers for events. This year the Nomadland film-maker Chloé Zhao attended the Oscars in a pair of all-white sneakers by Hermes, while the US vice-president, Kamala Harris, is regularly photographed in her signature black All Stars. While sports labels once ruled the market (valued at $70bn in 2020), fashion houses such as Balenciaga and Dior are worthy competitors. The last decade has also seen the launch of a number of new-to-market sneaker brands, including Allbirds, the New Zealand/American company that is a favourite with Barack Obama. For brands associated with contemporary workwear – among them the London-based Me &amp; Em and Arket, which is part of the H&amp;M group – trainers are a building block on which an entire aesthetic has been built. These brands regularly position their suiting and formal tailoring pieces with trainers – stark white styles are preferred. A resurgence of classic running shoes, popularised in the 80s, is also essential for those looking to be in step with the style zeitgeist this season.The small fires they are building will do little to warm the refugee and migrant families attempting to cross the border between Belarus and Poland in a desperate effort to reach European soil. Freezing temperatures and the lack of humanitarian support have already resulted in at least nine deaths, while dozens of people have reported injuries, theft and abuse at the hands of the authorities. Another humanitarian catastrophe is unfolding on the European Union’s doorstep. Poland has responded by deploying 20,000 border police, firing water cannon and teargas at asylum seekers, reinforcing its border fencing and blocking access for journalists and aid organisations. This need to react is understandable: Belarus president Alexander Lukashenko’s use of refugees and migrants as pawns for political gain, luring them from the Middle East to deliberately create a border crisis, is heinous. Still, Poland’s militarised response is disproportionate, and is – according to the UN – a breach of humanitarian law and the right to asylum. But while Lukashenko’s actions are appalling, what is really to blame for this crisis is a string of shortsighted and transactional agreements with the European Union’s neighbouring countries in recent years. The root of this latest military escalation – which involves not only Poland, but a nominal number of troops from Britain, as well as EU sanctions and strong condemnation from Nato and members of the UN security council – is a fear of migration that has loomed over EU politics since 2015. Since the Brexit vote, the dogma of “deterrence at any cost” has dominated migration policies, including the deployment of illegal “pushback” practices at external borders, such as towing migrants back on boats they arrived on, rounding up refugees on land and forcing them back out to sea, and informal detentions. The Polish government has long been implementing a strict immigration agenda, by closing its borders – even breaching EU law by doing so and defying calls for the humane treatment of asylum seekers. Poland is no exception. As internal divisions within the European Union deepen and the prospect of a responsible plan for hosting refugees is far from view, pushing the management of migration to agreements with non-EU countries has become the bloc’s go-to solution. To secure the EU-Turkey deal in 2016, member states turned a blind eye to Turkey’s human rights violations in return for it stemming refugee arrivals to the Greek islands. By effectively paying the Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, to “keep migrants out”, it was the EU that first introduced refugees into foreign policy as bargaining chips. From then on, the precedent was set. Similar arrangements can be found along Europe’s border regions. In Libya, the EU provided support to the Libyan coastguard to intercept asylum seekers at sea and return them to detention centres where they faced physical and sexual abuse. A standoff this spring in between Spain and Morocco – which is also one of the EU’s key partners in controlling migration from African countries – in the Spanish north African coastal city of Ceuta revealed the same pattern of migrants being used for political gain. Spain accused Morocco of flooding its borders with migrants – 2,000 of which were unaccompanied children – after Madrid allowed the leader of the Western Sahara independence movement to be treated for Covid in Spain. Footage of a months-old baby being rescued by the Guardia Civil and children using plastic bottles as floats to swim to shore is a stark reminder of the real victims of Europe’s fear of migration. It is not just Europe’s transactional migration policies, but the language used, that sets the stage for these recurring standoffs. Across European states and political parties, refugees and migrants are often presented as a threat to national security. Greek, Polish and Turkish media have used rhetoric of “wars” at borders; Brussels, too, has adopted militarised language. Responding to incidents at Belarus’s borders over the summer, the European Commission president, Ursula von der Leyen, vowed to fight back to what she called “a hybrid attack to destabilise Europe”. Describing – and treating – refugees as weapons diverts attention from the real issue at stake: protecting the safety and rights of people trapped at borders. The EU’s externalisation of migration control does not justify the Belarusian regime’s deliberate tactics to engineer a state-sponsored humanitarian crisis. But it should alert EU leaders to the dangers of treating humans in transactional terms. Questionable migration deals and anti-immigration messaging not only undermine the right to asylum, but threaten the very foundations of the European project – which it might need reminding of: to promote peace, human rights and dignity, and to offer freedom, security and justice without internal borders. So long as EU countries do not respect asylum laws and continue to treat refugees with hostility and violence, countries such as Belarus, Morocco, and Turkey will continue to exploit the fear of migration. The EU has created its own achilles heel – and human beings continue to pay the price. Anna Iasmi Vallianatou is academy fellow at the Europe Programme of Chatham HouseIreland has confronted one of the most painful chapters in its history and agreed an €800m compensation package to thousands of unmarried mothers shunned by society and hidden away in church-run mother and baby homes. The redress scheme was agreed by the government cabinet on Tuesday and will offer up to €65,000 each to survivors of a practice, widely condemned as a shameful and cruel, that spanned almost 80 years of the country’s 100-year history. Announcing the scheme, the children and equality minister, Roderic O'Gorman, said: “There is no payment or measure that can ever fully compensate or atone for the harm done through the mother and baby institutions. “What we have set out today is the next chapter in the state’s response to the legacy of those institutions, and its commitment to rebuilding the trust it so grievously shattered.” The state will also offer compensation to the children who ended up spending their early years in the religious institutions, some of them forced to work in laundries. Mothers who spent less than three months in a home will be eligible for €5,000, with double that for those who spent between three and six months behind closed doors. Those who spent more than 10 years in a home can apply for compensation of up to €65,000. Those born in the homes, who have not previously received compensation from the residential institutions redress scheme, will be eligible for compensation through a separate scheme offering between €1,500 and €60,000 for those who were forced into work. The government said about 34,000 survivors in Ireland and abroad would be eligible in “the largest scheme of its type in the history of the state”. The redress scheme comes after an inquiry by the Mother and Baby Homes Commission of Investigation detailed the horrific experiences of about 56,000 women and about 57,000 children who were placed or born in homes, mostly run by nuns, between 1922 and 1998. In its report published in January it discovered an alarming number of deaths of babies in the homes and documented the cruelty and neglect suffered. Many were forced to take part in work and separated from their babies, who were fostered or adopted. The commission was established after human remains were found in a mass unmarked grave near a home in Tuam, county Galway. Catherine Corless, a local historian, had begun studying the records of the home and discovered that 796 children had died there between 1925 and 1961 but there were no burial records. After excavation, 20 underground chambers were discovered with human remains in at least 17 of them, and age-at-death put at between 35 foetal weeks and two or three years old. Legislation to allow for the exhumation, identification and reburial of the bodies is going through the Dáil. “We are progressing legislation to enable access to birth certificates and early life information, and to allow for interventions at the site in Tuam,” said O'Gorman.Germany is paving the way for the introduction of tighter restrictions on people who have so far chosen not to be vaccinated against Covid-19, in an effort to control its highest infection levels since the pandemic began. On Tuesday the country’s disease control agency, the Robert Koch Institute, recorded a seven-day incidence rate of 312 cases per 100,000 people, with several areas at more than 1,000. A year ago, before the vaccine was introduced, the rate stood at 139. There were 265 deaths reported on Tuesday, much fewer than the pre-vaccine peak. With the country in political limbo, the old government of Angela Merkel operating in a caretaker capacity until a new three-way coalition takes the reins next month, management of the pandemic appears to have lost direction. Less than 70% of the population is fully vaccinated, leaving Germany considerably behind other European countries such as Italy, Spain and Portugal. The spread of the more infectious Delta variant, an increase in communal activity, a return to the workplace and a sluggish rollout of booster vaccines, which are recommended six months after the second jab, have been blamed for the increase in infections. A rise in health conditions usually related to the colder months has contributed to some hospitals being on the verge of being overwhelmed. Some hospitals have stopped all but essential surgery to cope with the increase in patients. The state of Saxony, where 85% of ICU beds are occupied by Covid patients, became the latest to introduce so-called 2G rules in all non-essential shops and facilities, meaning only people who can prove they have been vaccinated or have recovered from Covid will be allowed entry. Saxony’s social minister, Petra Köpping, said that in addition tests would be required if the incidence continued to rise to the extent that hospitals were unable to cope. 2G is a reference to the German words for vaccinated and recovered (geimpft and genesen). North Rhine Westphalia is due to follow suit, with unvaccinated people to be excluded from entry to all non-essential facilities and events including football matches and Christmas markets. People wanting to attend carnival events as the season kicks off will be required to take a test in addition to being vaccinated or having recovered. Berlin is also on track to introduced similar “2G-plus” rules, its mayor, Michael Müller, said on Tuesday. The city hopes to reopen vaccine centres, which were closed across the country at the end of the summer when they were deemed no longer necessary, but authorities have said this would happen in January or February at the earliest. The 2G regulations are similar to, though not as stringent as, rules introduced in Austria on Monday, under which unvaccinated people above the age of 12 have been confined to their homes for 10 days, except for necessary tasks such as going to school or work, to the doctors, to shop for food, or for exercise. Police are carrying out random spot checks on individuals and have the power to issue €400 fines. Austria has an incidence rate of about 850 cases per 100,000 people. As the Social Democrats, the Greens and the pro-business FDP entered what they said were the final rounds of negotiations in Berlin about forming a government next month, they announced they had agreed on new, tougher coronavirus measures to be applied across Germany. These include only allowing people on to buses and trains if they have been vaccinated, have recovered or have tested negative. It was unclear on Tuesday how this would be implemented. Another measure being pushed by the Greens in particular is a vaccine mandate for people in certain fields of work such as care homes or hospitals. The FDP has called for a vaccine mandate in the armed forces. The Social Democrats’ Olaf Scholz, the likely future chancellor, said he was in favour of a vaccine mandate if there was widespread consensus for it. An opinion poll on Tuesday by the pollster Forsa showed that 53% of Germans were in favour. The three parties have said they will resist a blanket lockdown and instead are in favour of legislation to allow each of the 16 states to impose their own restrictions. Measures introduced as emergency legislation in the Bundestag that gave the federal government the power to introduce disease control restrictions are due to expire on 25 November. There has been criticism of the new government that by allowing nothing comparable to take its place, a signal is potentially being sent out that the measures are no longer needed as the pandemic is under control, which is clearly not the case. The Forsa poll showed that 60% of Germans are against dropping the measures. Christian Drosten, a leading virologist and coronavirus expert, has repeatedly warned in recent weeks that the vaccine and booster jabs alone will not be enough to control the spread of the virus, and that physical distancing rules will have to be reintroduced. Merkel and Scholz are due to hold a video conference with state leaders on Thursday to discuss the next measures. Austria’s chancellor, Alexander Schallenberg, said the lockdown of the unvaccinated there had already started to have an effect, with more than half a million people opting to get a vaccination in the days before the lockdown, and vaccine centres reporting a heavy stream of people seeking a jab since Monday. “That is exactly what we wanted to achieve,” Schallenberg said. His aim was “to persuade the unvaccinated to vaccinate and not to lock up the vaccinated”. About 65% of Austrians are vaccinated. In Upper Austria, one of the main hotspots, clinics reported 59 deaths in four days, a record number, and there were 93 Covid patients in intensive care beds, 80 of whom were unvaccinated. On the normal wards, three out of four of the 513 people being treated for coronavirus were unvaccinated. Hospitals in Salzburg said they had been overwhelmed with patients and had introduced a triage system to decide which patients should get an intensive care bed. • This article was amended on 17 November 2021 because an intended update was omitted: restrictions initially focused on Upper Austria and Salzburg were expanded to all of Austria.The BBC has scrapped plans for a new version of the Christmas favourite The Snowman after its composer called it a “vile desecration” of his work. The new arrangement of Howard Blake’s famous score, narrated by Stephen Fry, was scheduled to premiere on BBC Radio 3 on Christmas Eve. The music was to be sung by a choir instead of played by instruments – a move derided by the artist. Blake, who composed the music for the original 1982 animated film, told the BBC Radio 4 Today programme he cared “a great deal about The Snowman”. He added: “It’s worldwide. It is absolutely loved by people. What scares me is that we have an arrangement that mocks it and makes it sound silly, it will take a great deal of pleasure away from the world, and I don’t approve of this arrangement.” He said that while he received thousands of requests and gave permission to “pretty well every arrangement”, he did not think this particular one was a good idea. Speaking to the Daily Telegraph, Blake went further, calling the new arrangement a “desecration” and “absolutely vile”. He said he originally refused permission for a vocal arrangement, but was told Prince Charles and the Queen had already been told about it. “How could I refuse?” The BBC said it was “a great shame” to remove The Snowman from its festive schedules. A spokesperson said: “We are saddened and surprised to hear of Mr Blake’s concerns as we sought permission from him and his publishers and he has been consulted and has contributed throughout. “A distinguished team has been skilfully developing plans to bring this production to millions of listeners this Christmas, so it’s a great shame we have to remove this from our festive schedule, in line with Mr Blake’s wishes.” Blake had said it was not possible to perform parts of The Snowman such as the motorbike ride by vocalising the score. Though classical music often uses vocalisation – a form of singing often using vowel sounds but not full words – “they are all from melodic lines and they move in intervals that can be taken by sopranos, altos, tenors and basses, and this is not possible to do like that”. The Bafta-winning animation, based on the Raymond Briggs book of the same name, has been aired on TV at Christmas every year since 1982. • This article was amended on 17 November 2021. The Snowman has been broadcast on TV every Christmas since 1982, though not necessarily on Christmas Day as an earlier version said.Dr Leonard Sash, who has died aged 89 after a long period of illness, was an NHS GP and consultant physician to the Arsenal football team. Born in Delmas in the East Transvaal (now Mpumalanga), South Africa, Len was the son of Bessie (nee Liverman) and Max Sash, a GP working in the district of the then Orange Free State. His elder brother, Sydney, also became a doctor, and his sister, Cecily, was an acclaimed artist. After attending Edward VII secondary school in Johannesburg, Len went to the University of Witwatersrand, also in the city, graduating in 1957. He then went to Britain in order to distance himself from the apartheid system, initially working for a GP in the then multicultural and economically diverse area of North Kensington, London, before acquiring his own practice in nearby Cambridge Gardens. I had the pleasure of working for him there for almost three decades, and we became firm friends. Soon after arriving in Britain, Len also spent some time working at the Camden Rehabilitation Centre helping ex-servicemen, and it was there that he met Bertie Mee and Fred Street, then both physiotherapists. Bertie later moved to work with the Arsenal football team and, on becoming manager, asked both Len and Fred to join him at the club. Len went on to hold the position of consultant physician at Arsenal for more than 30 years. In addition to his heavy GP workload, Len also managed to fit in working at the rheumatology clinics at St Charles’ and St Mary’s hospitals. He was influential in pioneering sports injury clinic sessions for amateur sportspeople, and ran a regular sports injury clinic for students and staff at Imperial College health centre for 15 years from around 1991. During the latter part of his career he became a partner at the London Clinic for Injuries, a centre of excellence for orthopaedic surgery and physiotherapy. Eventually his health deteriorated and, in 2006, with much regret, he relinquished all of his medical responsibilities. Len and his partner, Paul Hamblin, met socially in 1994, and immediately struck up a close and enduring friendship based on a shared love of the arts. They entered into a civil partnership in 2006. Len loved to draw and paint. Indeed, he was an accomplished artist and his work was often exhibited. His unique style expressed movement and energy incredibly strongly. Len and Paul loved the countryside of Oxfordshire and, latterly, Gloucestershire, which is where they imaginatively restored a beautiful old property. Their many friends were lucky enough to enjoy the combination of fabulous surroundings, delicious meals and stimulating conversation. Owen, their spaniel, was ever-present. All those who knew Len will miss his directness, enthusiasm, skill, wisdom, humour and warmth. He is survived by Paul and by his nephew, David.Name: Subtitles. Age: During the silent movie era “intertitles” or “title cards”, boxes of text between film sequences, were used in lieu of speech, so that viewers had some idea of what was going on. So about 115 years, let’s say. Fascinating. They’re a bit different now, right? Right. Now we’re talking text displayed at the bottom (hence sub) of the screen. And it can either be a translation of the dialogue from one language to another or a written transcription of the same language. Of course, for people who are deaf or hard of hearing. Exactly. Though by no means exclusively. Who else? Well you might have trouble understanding an accent or dialect perhaps – an American watching Trainspotting, for example. Or you might just be a young person. A young person? Yes. Research by captioning charity Stagetext found that young people are almost four times as likely to watch TV with subtitles as older viewers. What kind of numbers are we talking about? So four out of five people aged 18 to 25 said they have subtitles on all or part of the time. For those between 56 and 75, it’s less than a quarter. Though presumably they’re more likely to be deaf or hard of hearing. Nearly twice as likely. So what is it about then? “I think there’s far more acceptance of subtitles by young people because it’s the norm,” said Stagetext’s chief executive, Melanie Sharpe. “They can take in far more information quickly because they’re used to it.” That’s why young people are always looking at their phones while I talk to them. That’s probably just because you’re boring. Also, they are better with text than spoken conversation. Have you tried calling a young person? They panic and don’t answer … Because they see it’s you calling them. Anyway, when I finally get round to this Squid Game everyone is talking about I’ll be switching on the subtitles as my Korean is a bit rusty. You might be better off brushing up on your Korean. Some native speakers have said the subtitles on the hit Netflix show deviate widely from the original script. Oh really? Indeed. TikTokker Youngmi Mayer, of Korean-American descent, said: “If you don’t understand Korean you didn’t really watch the same show.” Maybe it’s a period romantic comedy in Korean. Maybe. Still, not as fun as real-time captioning? Which is? You know, news bulletins, live sports etc when the subtitles are generated by speech-to-text programs, which are prone to mishearing fails, as the BBC has often found out … Do say: “Cromer, famous for its crab”; “Chinese year of the horse”; Benedict Cumberbatch. Don’t say (as the BBC did): “Cromer, famous for its crap”; “Chinese year of the whores”; Benedict Couple Beer Batch.The government has ordered an in-depth investigation into the takeover of the Cambridge-based chip designer Arm by its US rival Nvidia, in a move that could result in the $54bn deal being blocked. Nadine Dorries, the digital and culture secretary, has ordered the UK competition watchdog to launch a “phase 2” investigation on public interest grounds, citing competition and national security concerns. The move follows the Competition and Markets Authority’s initial findings in July that the deal raised serious competition concerns, and the regulator’s assessment that no “behavioural remedy” offered by Nvidia would be enough to address them. Arm has been described as the “Switzerland” of the semiconductor industry, with its designs used in chips that act as the “brain” in all electronic devices from self-driving cars to smartphones, including being used heavily by rivals to Nvidia. “Arm has a unique place in the global technology supply chain and we must make sure the implications of this transaction are fully considered,” said Dorries. “The CMA will now report to me on competition and national security grounds and provide advice on the next steps.” There have been concerns about the threat to Britain’s economy and national security from a string of recent takeovers of UK companies by foreign rivals and private equity firms. The government has beefed up its powers to block the takeover of key national assets under the new National Security and Investment Act. “The government’s commitment to our thriving tech sector is unwavering and we welcome foreign investment,” said Dorries. “But it is right that we fully consider the implications of the transaction.” Nvidia moved to buy Arm from Japan’s SoftBank last year in a $40bn (£30bn) cash and shares deal. Nvidia’s share price has rocketed since then, now valuing the deal at $54bn. The California-based firm’s offer for Arm came just as the semiconductor industry made headlines when a global shortage began to disrupt the manufacturing of a swathe of consumer goods from mobile phones to cars, making control of companies in the sector a geopolitical issue. Arm Holdings, which employs 6,500 staff, including 3,000 in the UK, has about 500 users of its designs worldwide including Apple, Samsung, Qualcomm and Nvidia. “We plan on addressing the CMA’s initial views on the impact of the transaction on competition,” said Nvidia. “And we will continue to work with the UK government to resolve its concerns.” Nvidia, which has pledged not to downsize Arm’s UK operations and to keep its open licensing model, said the deal would “help accelerate Arm and boost competition and innovation, including in the UK”. The CMA now has 24 weeks to conduct its investigation, although this can be extended by up to eight weeks. The European Commission announced an in-depth inquiry at the end of October. Margrethe Vestager, the EU’s executive vice-president in charge of competition and digital policy, said analysis had shown that the deal could “lead to restricted or degraded access to Arm’s [intellectual property], with distortive effects on many markets where semiconductors were used”. Despite the mounting obstacles to the deal, Masayoshi Son, the chief executive of SoftBank, said this month that he expected the takeover to eventually be cleared. Neil Campling, the head of TMT research at Mirabaud, said: “It has been one-way traffic for the UK silicon industry in recent years. Once a bastion of leading players, many UK semiconductor companies have been sold off to foreign owners. So it is about time the UK realised just how important a key technology enabler based in the country is to the global electronics ecosystem.” Earlier this year Boris Johnson stepped in to review the purchase of the UK’s largest producer of semiconductors by a Chinese-owned manufacturer, after being criticised for waving the deal through when the Welsh secretary said he was “satisfied” that security risks had been taken into account.Mike Ripley’s obituary of the crime novelist Robert Richardson took me back six decades to when I too was an indentured trainee at the County Express in Stockport. Bob, as we knew him, and I were colleagues for about three years. I was pleased to read about what he went on to do in the local press in Hertfordshire, on national titles and with his books. When I left Stockport at the end of my apprenticeship my co-workers presented me with a volume of the Complete Works of Shakespeare – Bob’s idea, I suspect. Among all the staff signatures, he added “Hamlet Act I, Scene III” – confirming his school nickname of Bob the Bard. It’s a shame that I didn’t take the advice – “do not sleep, But let me hear from you” – to not be a stranger.The leader of the Proud Boys far-right group has asked a judge to free him from jail in Washington DC, complaining about poor conditions. Henry “Enrique” Tarrio is serving a five-month sentence for stealing and burning a Black Lives Matter banner from a historic Black church in the capital, after Donald Trump’s election defeat. On Monday, Tarrio asked a judge to release him, arguing that he has been exposed to inhumane conditions. Asking that his sentence be reduced or that he be allowed to complete it under house arrest, he claimed to have been harassed by correctional officers and said his cell regularly floods with dirty water from a toilet in a neighboring cell. “I’ve been to jail before and what I’ve seen here, I’ve never seen anywhere else,” Tarrio said in a video testimony. “This place needs to be shut down immediately,” he added. Tarrio described abusive guards, smoke-filled hallways and medical neglect, saying he witnessed a prisoner have a seizure who lay for a half hour before help arrived. “I’m deathly afraid that something is going to happen to me,” Tarrio said. According to his attorney, Tarrio has endured “serious abuses of his rights on a daily basis”, including jail employees repeatedly ignoring his requests for medical treatment, throwing cold, often inedible meals into his cell and denying access to running water. “Mr Tarrio has been intimidated and antagonized by correctional staff to dissuade him from making complaints about the horrendous conditions,” Tarrio’s attorney, Luca Dansie, wrote. Approximately three dozen Proud Boys members and associates have been charged in connection with the Capitol riot, in which Trump supporters sought to overturn his election defeat. Some have been charged with conspiring to carry out a coordinated attack to stop Congress certifying Joe Biden’s victory. Tarrio was not present at the Capitol on 6 January and has not been charged in connection to the riot. But he was arrested on 4 January, on his way to DC. Police pulled him over on a warrant for vandalizing the Black Lives Matter sign, which was stolen from the Asbury United Methodist church the previous month. Officers also found Tarrio to be carrying two unloaded magazines emblazoned with the Proud Boys logo, which he said he sells. Tarrio pleaded guilty in August to destruction of property and attempted possession of a large-capacity ammunition feeding device. His complaints about jail conditions mirror those of several prisoners charged in the Capitol attack. In October, a federal judge held the DC corrections director and jail warden in contempt of court and asked the Department of Justice to investigate whether inmates’ civil rights were being abused. Last week, the District and the US marshals service struck a deal to improve conditions at the city’s main jail. DC superior court judge Jonathan Pittman said on Monday he would rule by the end of the week on whether he will reduce Tarrio’s sentence to 90 days. Pittman also took the jail’s damaged reputation as proof that Tarrio was not being singled out. “It’s obviously distressing to hear of these conditions,” Pittman said. “I come back to the same question: how is Mr Tarrio’s condition any different than any other inmate at the jail?” Associated Press contributed to this reportFiling suit in response to whistleblower allegations which have rocked Facebook, the attorney general of Ohio, Dave Yost, accused the social media company of “creating misery and divisiveness for profit”. Yost sued Meta – as Facebook was recently renamed – after revelations from the whistleblower Frances Haugen shocked consumers and sent stock prices tumbling. Filed in the northern district of California, the Ohio suit claims that chief executive Mark Zuckerberg and associates violated federal securities law by knowingly deceiving the public. “Facebook said it was looking out for our children and weeding out online trolls, but in reality was creating misery and divisiveness for profit,” Yost said. “We are not people to Mark Zuckerberg, we are the product and we are being used against each other out of greed.” The litigation comes amid a larger backlash against Zuckerberg and his online empire, after Haugen shared what the suit calls “a trove of internal company documents” showing Facebook’s complicity in the harm its platforms cause. Through Wall Street Journal articles and other reportage, Haugen’s leaks uncovered how little Facebook’s leadership was doing to protect users or even abide by its own rules. The revelations have further eroded trust in the social media behemoth and caused financial repercussions. Between 13 September and 21 October – as the Wall Street Journal published its exposés – “Facebook’s stock price declined by $54.08 a share, or over 14%”, the Ohio lawsuit states. Yost filed the complaint on behalf of Facebook investors and the Ohio Public Employees Retirement System, a public pension fund affected by falls in Facebook shares. The suit relies on Haugen’s evidence to assert that Facebook knew its platforms “facilitate dissension, illegal activity and violent extremism, and cause significant harm to users, especially children” but refused to meaningfully course-correct. “This matter arises from an egregious breach of public trust by Facebook, which knowingly exploited its most vulnerable users – including children throughout the world – in order to drive corporate profits,” the complaint says. A Facebook spokesperson said the lawsuit was “without merit” and said the company would fight it. The Associated Press contributed reportingMyanmar’s military junta has charged Aung San Suu Kyi with “election fraud and lawless actions”, according to state media, adding to a series of legal cases facing the ousted leader. Military-controlled media reported on Tuesday that the Union Election Commission had prosecuted 16 people, including Aung San Suu Kyi and President U Win Myint, in relation to alleged fraud during the 2020 general election. Aung San Suu Kyi’s party, National League for Democracy (NLD), won the vote by a landslide – a result the military has refused to accept. The military, which seized power on 1 February, has tried to justify the coup by claiming, without evidence, major election rigging. This allegation has been dismissed by the Asian Network for Free Elections, an independent watchdog, which said results were “by and large representative of the will of the people of Myanmar”. The public has also strongly opposed the military takeover. The military-controlled Global New Light of Myanmar said Aung San Suu Kyi and others had been “involved in electoral processes, election fraud and lawless actions in 2020 multiparty democracy general election”. It cited various allegations including “violating the existing laws in assigning the election sub-commissions”, threatening election officials, and wrongly adding names to voter lists. The former chair of the election commission, U Hla Thein, is also among those facing charges. The military junta annulled the election results earlier this year and appointed a new election commission. It initially promised to hold a new vote within a year but has since delayed this pledge, saying “multiparty elections” would take place and the state of emergency lifted by August 2023. The new allegations add to a series of legal cases facing Aung San Suu Kyi, who has been in detention since February. She is accused of breaching the official secrets act, of corruption, and of breaching a natural disaster law by breaking coronavirus restrictions in the run-up to last year’s election. She is also accused of breaching a communications law and an import law by illegally possessing walkie-talkies. No media or observers are given access to the ongoing court cases, and Aung San Suu Kyi’s legal team has been gagged by the junta.My friend Eric Pye, who has died aged 67, was an adult educator who was passionate about creating fairness in the world. He was also an inventive recycler who found ways to re-use everything, from clothes to towel rails. Eric described himself as “peasant class”. He was born in Rainford, near St Helens, now in Merseyside, to Edith (nee Harrison) and Horace Pye, and grew up on their tenanted farm without electricity, inside toilet or bathroom. At Ormskirk grammar school, where he was bullied about his humble upbringing, he became a rebel and was expelled, though one of his teachers was able to ensure he sat his O-levels. He then attended sixth form at Wade Deacon grammar in Widnes. He always said that he arrived at East London Poly (now the University of East London) with all his life’s possessions in a single plastic bag. He graduated in biophysical science in 1976. In 1979 he started work at the Blackfriars Adult Literacy Project and soon became one of its coordinators. It was this experience that inspired him to move into a career in adult education. His accommodation at the time was squats in Brixton and Islington, where he became adept at avoiding waste, making sure everything was used or re-used as something else. After travelling to South America and Russia in the early 1980s, Eric and his partner, Jean Ireland, moved to Sheffield, where in 1984 he became education manager for Nacro, the charity working with offenders to reduce crime. After six years there he became manager of the school governor support service at Sheffield city council. In addition, he took up a role in the council’s advice and reconciliation service, working with schools to help resolve conflicts, and touching the lives of thousands of children and parents. He retired in 2013. With Jean he had two sons, Daniel and Ben, to whom he was a playful and loving dad, inventing games and making all sorts of toys – shadow puppets, Thunderbirds outfits and models – from recycled junk. After Eric and Jean separated, he became a life partner to Jan Novitzky, an adult educator. In retirement they took up modern jive dancing and travelled extensively. Eric also joined a choir and captained a team for his local bowls club, Whiteley Woods, where he brought new ideas to a restrained and quiet game, creating the Wobbly Woods intra-club tournament. He often sported a bandana for matches. He was also a keen and creative allotmenteer. His self-built shed was replete with a living roof on which various old plastic animals roamed. The plot was peopled with prizewinning scarecrows – ballroom dancers, Jimi Hendrix, a biker and a suffragette. Eric bought nothing, supporting his vegetables with curtain poles, towel rails and even an old trampoline frame. Eric is survived by Jan, Daniel and Ben, his brother, Keith, and nephews, Dean and Michael.Sarina Wiegman, the England head coach, has said she is concerned about the workload of players after Arsenal announced that the centre‑back Leah Williamson will be out until the new year with a “significant” hamstring injury. On Tuesday the Arsenal manager, Jonas Eidevall, described his side’s schedule as “almost inhuman” as Williamson was ruled out after picking up the injury in the 1-1 draw against Tottenham on Saturday – Arsenal’s third match in six days. Eidevall pointed to the rest he was able to negotiate for Vivianne Miedema – enabling the striker to sit out the later half of the last international window – as one of the ways he and his staff have tried to manage the physical burden placed on players who competed at the Olympic Games in the summer, something they had not yet been able to arrange for Williamson. In announcing her squad for the World Cup qualifiers this month against Austria at the Stadium of Light and Latvia at the Keepmoat Stadium, Wiegman said the absence of Williamson, who has captained the side on a temporary basis, was “very disappointing”. “Of course she’s very disappointed and I’m very disappointed,” the head coach said. “When you’re an international player you have tournament on tournament on tournament, every summer, then you have Champions League, then you have your domestic competitions. The players have so many games and we have to consider when they are going to have some rest, physical and mental, because they are just human beings.” With Williamson out, Wiegman would not be drawn on who will wear the armband for the latest round of games with Steph Houghton and Lucy Bronze still missing through injury. “This is so fresh that [Williamson] won’t be here. So we will think, talk to the players, then we will tell you,” she said. Williamson’s Arsenal teammate Jordan Nobbs has returned to the England squad for the first time under Wiegman, having not played for the national team since April as she was eased back after an ankle injury. “We have been following Jordan of course the whole season and she has done well, she’s had a lot more playing minutes and I’m looking forward to working with her next week,” Wiegman said. “She brings energy, she’s always dynamic, technically good. I’ve seen her at Arsenal, I’ve seen her before in my other job and now she’s continuously playing minutes.” Should the striker Ellen White feature against Austria or Latvia, then she will collect her 100th cap. The Manchester City forward is also two goals shy of Kelly Smith’s England scoring record of 46. White is one of seven Manchester City players included in the last Lionesses squad of 2021 and Wiegman said she is unconcerned by the results of the club this term. “Players come to us, they have rhythm, they all play, get minutes. Of course they have some injuries. So far with the first international periods we have had we had it was really good. That’s what I expect now. We’ll see how they come in but I’m very positive about how they will come into our camp.”Campuses will be hit by strikes at the start of next month and there is a threat of more next year after the University and College Union announced that its members will stop work over pension cuts, pay and working conditions. The union said three consecutive days of strikes would take place from 1 December at the 58 institutions that backed ballots for industrial action this month. The 58 universities and colleges will be joined by a further six in undertaking other forms of industrial action, including strict working to contract and refusing additional duties, from the start of December and continuing indefinitely. Jo Grady, the UCU’s general secretary, said: “While we set out pragmatic solutions that could halt widespread disruption to UK campuses, university bosses refuse to revoke unnecessary, swingeing pension cuts or even to negotiate on issues like casualisation and the unbearably high workloads that blight higher education. “A resolution to this dispute is simple. But if employers remain intent on slashing pensions and exploiting staff who have kept this sector afloat during a pandemic then campuses will face strike action before Christmas, which will escalate into spring with reballots and further industrial action.” The announcement sets up what could be a bitter dispute between the union and university leaders, with Universities UK – representing employers in the pensions dispute – rejecting Grady’s claim that there is a simple resolution. “We have repeatedly stated our willingness to consult employers on any viable, affordable and implementable alternative proposal from the UCU and we remain fully committed to continuing talks to develop a joint approach,” a UUK spokesperson said. UCU said the initial three-day strike “will just be the start of sustained disruption…. If employers do not make improved offers, further industrial action is likely to continue into the spring.” The action is the latest chapter in a long-running dispute between staff – including lecturers, researchers, librarians and administrators – and university employers. The strikes follow more than 18 months of severe disruption and turmoil caused by the Covid pandemic that led to campuses being closed to most students. Central to the dispute is the operation of the Universities Superannuation Scheme (USS) and its management. UCU contends that the USS’s trustees have burdened the scheme with pessimistic forecasts, and have called for the fund to be revalued. Others are going on strike after backing a separate ballot on issues including insecure contracts, low pay and inequality. The Universities and Colleges Employers’ Association said: “UCU members need to understand that any industrial action aimed at harming students is an unrealistic attempt to try to force all 146 employers to reopen the concluded 2021-22 national pay round and improve on an outcome that is for most of these institutions already at the very limit of what is affordable.” Although the strike will disrupt teaching at the affected institutions, the National Union of Students said its poll of 1,600 students this month found overwhelming support, with 73% of students backing the strike action and just 9% opposed. UUK said: “Universities will put in place measures to minimise the impact on students, other staff and the wider university community and will ensure that students can continue to learn and receive support.”Another two energy suppliers have gone bust, bringing the total number of companies crashing out of the UK’s energy market to 21 in the last 10 weeks. Neon Reef and Social Energy have both collapsed under the pressure of rocketing energy market prices, which have reached record highs in recent months amid a global gas supply crunch. Neon supplied electricity to about 30,000 households, and Social Energy supplied energy to about another 5,500 customers, bringing the total number of customers in need of a new supplier to more than 2 million. The suppliers ceased trading within days of the regulator warning that they would lose their licences if they failed to hand over cash collected from energy bills, which is used to support renewable energy projects. Social Energy was one of five energy suppliers to miss its deadline for payment of £28,735 towards supporting small-scale renewable energy projects, such as rooftop solar panels, at the end of last month. Neon Reef missed a £349,149 payment for large-scale renewables, which was due at the end of August. The energy regulator advised households left without a supplier to wait while a new energy company was appointed as their new supplier through Ofgem’s “safety net” process. The market is expected to face scores more failures as energy market prices remain high moving into the winter months. Energy company leaders and industry experts fear that all but the strongest six suppliers in the market may go bust in the months ahead, leaving suppliers that do not have the backing of major international energy groups, or deep-pocketed investors, to buckle under the weight of record energy costs.The Blair government’s 2005 liberalisation of gambling laws was intended to be a two-sided deal. Regulation of gambling firms would be overhauled and liberalised, and in return they would operate as businesses within the UK, pay tax and be subject to domestic regulation. The gambling firms had other ideas, and moved offshore anyway – where they set up in tax havens like Gibraltar and the Isle of Man. The Gambling Act might have been intended to turn Britain into the gambling hub of Europe, but it succeeded only in making us a leader in the amount of money we lose. We continue to export billions to gambling operators offshore, and with it jobs and corporation tax revenue. We then effectively import the cost of gambling harm, which Public Health England estimates to be £1.27bn a year. This exploitative mess has no upside for the country. After Geoffrey Cox landed in hot water following revelations he worked for a tax haven and against the interests of the British government, details emerged of 19 Conservative MPs and nine Labour MPs who received gifts and hospitality totalling £225,000 in the past year. Much of this came from tax-avoiding online gambling corporations. This has led to questions about whose interests these MPs are serving. That the gambling industry is keen to maintain relationships with MPs is no surprise. The government knows the industry is in dire need of reform. It is in the middle of a comprehensive gambling review, which has pledged to put consumer protection at its forefront. Our understanding of gambling-related harm, its causes and the practices of the online gambling sector should leave policymakers far better placed to legislate than in 2005, when the industry was in its relative infancy and smartphones weren’t yet widespread. The gambling industry needs all the friends it can get, given that the sector it represents has spent more than a decade alienating people. The House of Lords gambling industry select committee found that 60% of the industry’s profits came from the 5% of customers who were either problem gamblers or at risk. But this business model, built on a section of customers losing way more than they can afford and finding new gamblers once they’ve lost everything, is obfuscated by MPs friendly to the gambling lobby, who often resort to “paint by numbers” libertarian rhetoric around not telling people how to spend their leisure time. It sadly remains the view of government that gambling is more of a leisure activity than a public health issue, although the two are not mutually exclusive. However, when the Social Market Foundation suggested affordability checks if someone wanted to deposit more than £100 a month, or the Gambling Commission consulted on checks taking place at losses of £125 a month, the gambling lobby and its supporting MPs were outraged. But even if gambling is considered a leisure activity, this is surely compatible with appropriate controls on spending that are in line with other leisure sectors. If we legalised illicit drugs, we would do so knowing the products were addictive and therefore regulate their supply and consumption, with adequate controls applied. Drug-taking might be considered a leisure activity in such a context, but promoting it through advertising would be extremely controversial. Our knowledge of gambling disorder and its neurological parallels to cocaine addiction have evolved considerably since 2005, and a higher proportion of people who engage with online slots or casino products get addicted to them than those who smoke cannabis and get addicted. But as our knowledge has evolved, the arguments MPs connected to the gambling lobby are making remain the same. They warn of a “black market” emerging if we increase consumer protections, despite the Gambling Commission dismissing this as nonsense. Yet the very same MPs are happy to accept gifts and hospitality from gambling firms operating in unregulated markets. If they are so worried about illegal gambling, perhaps they could ask the representatives of these online gambling firms that they go to the races or football matches with if they’ll withdraw from jurisdictions they are not licensed to operate in. Or if they will come back onshore and pay UK corporation tax. Such pushback might stop the flow of gifts. That’s because the interests of online gambling firms are not aligned to those of the country. MPs who take their side are clearly not serving the best interests of their constituents. • Matt Zarb-Cousin is the director of Clean Up Gambling. He writes in a personal capacityAn Insulate Britain activist has told the high court he will “block the highway at the earliest opportunity” if he is not jailed for breaching an order banning the group from protesting on the M25. Ben Taylor, 27, was one of nine members of the climate activist group to appear at the royal courts of justice in London on Tuesday accused of breaching the injunction granted to National Highways by blocking a roundabout on London’s orbital motorway. Dr Ben Buse, 36, Ana Heyatawin, 58, Louis McKechnie, 20, Roman Paluch-Machnik, 28, Oliver Roc, 41, Emma Smart, 44, Tim Speers, 36, James Thomas, 47, and Taylor all face a potential two years in prison and unlimited fine. All but Buse defended themselves in court and were invited to respond to points made by lawyers for the claimant. In a statement echoed by all defendants, Roc, from London, told Dame Victoria Sharp, president of the Queen’s Bench Division, and Mr Justice Chamberlain: “I’m proud of our actions and I stand by what we have done.” He went on: “We obviously didn’t do this for personal gain. We did take responsibility for our actions, and I did them in an attempt to mitigate the suffering of people in this country who cannot insulate or adequately heat their homes.” Taylor told the court that if the judges did not send him to prison he would “go out and block the highway at the earliest opportunity”, adding: “And I will continue to do so until the government makes a meaningful statement and fucking acts on it,” he said, spurring a rebuke from Sharp for his language. “If you send me away to prison, 10 people will step forward in my place,” Taylor said. “If you send each of us away, 100 people will step forward and take our places. If you send 100 of us away, 1,000 people will step forward to take our place. “If you somehow manage to stop all non-violent protests, then things will only turn violent.” Since beginning their campaign of disruptive road protests on 13 September, Insulate Britain’s activists have taken action on 19 different occasions on roads in and around London, at the port of Dover and, latterly, in Manchester and Birmingham. They are calling on the government to agree to a programme of insulating all Britain’s homes by 2030, starting with social housing, as a first practical step towards tackling the climate crisis. So far 174 people have been arrested 857 times as part of the campaign, according to the group’s own estimates. Myriam Stacey QC, representing National Highways, told the court the nine defendants were among 15 to 20 activists who blocked a roundabout leading to the M25 near Waltham Cross on 8 October. The protest was in breach of an injunction granted on 22 September banning the group from protesting on the M25. A National Highways official had described Insulate Britain’s protests as “unprecedented and sustained”, Stacey said. She read out lines from press releases and social media postings by the group that made clear they knew they were in breach of court orders, and that they knew they were causing major disruption. Stacey said the court should take into account in deciding on a sentence that the defendants were engaged their right to protest. But, she added: “Everyone is bound by the law. The right to protest is not absolute.” The case continues. Sharp said she would give her verdict on Wednesday at 10am.How sad that you present such a monochrome image of the chess world of which I have been a keen member for many years (Editorial, 12 November). I have never brought curling sandwiches in a plastic bag to a chess event. My preferred energy source is a ripe banana. When I reached in my pocket for one before a tough match, a team member once asked hopefully whether I had any heroin with me. Rob Hull London • Your country diary (13 November) says: “Screams of swifts that scoured air in summer are now amplified within the walls of Pyrenean or Anti Atlas gorges.” Our common swifts are much further south than that. During November they are likely to be snapping up insects over the Congo forest. Sarah Gibson Author, Swifts and Us • Here in subtropical south London, we have lemon trees flowering and setting in mid-November, as well as being harvested (Letters, 14 November). Not entirely good news, I admit. Peter Afford London • Alexis Petridis describes Damon Albarn’s new album, The Nearer the Fountain, More Pure the Stream Flows, as “genuinely beautiful” (11 November), but fails to mention that the title is a line from Love and Memory by the poet John Clare. Toby Wood Peterborough, Cambridgeshire • Surely the question for LV= members (Report, 15 November) should be: “What have US private equity groups ever done for mutual businesses?” Les Bright Exeter, Devon • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.“Britons eat an average of 336 Weetabix a year each,” you claim (Weetabix workers to hold four-day strikes over pay and conditions, 8 November). Let’s do some maths. The population of the UK is 68,366,392. If everybody ate 336 Weetabix, this would give an annual total consumption of 22,971,107,712 Weetabix. But not everybody eats Weetabix and some don’t eat cereal at all. You say that Weetabix accounts for 7% of UK cereal sales. So let’s make a generous estimate that 5% of the population (3,418,320) eat Weetabix. To come up with an average of 336, this 5% would have to eat 18.4 Weetabix a day. I don’t think so. Alan Woodley Northampton • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.The benefits of switching to electric vehicles to clean up our toxic air has been given much airtime, both at Cop26 and by the UK government in recent weeks (‘What if we just gave up cars?’: Cop26 leaders urged to dream big, 10 November). However, evidence shows that electric cars still emit PM2.5 particles, the most worrying form of air pollution for humans. The threat posed by air pollution cannot be overstated – the air we breathe can have a catastrophic effect on our health, right from the moment we are born. More than a third of maternity units in England are in air pollution hotspots that fail to meet the World Health Organization’s 2005 air quality guidelines. This means that every two minutes, a baby is born into areas surrounded by toxic levels of air pollution. Children are then likely to grow up, learn and play in these areas of lethal pollution. If we’re going to stop babies being born into toxic air, more electric cars won’t cut it. We need fewer vehicles on our roads altogether, not just cleaner ones. Sarah Woolnough CEO, Asthma UK and the British Lung Foundation • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Sainsbury’s has teamed up with Amazon to test a “just walk out” store, where it is possible to buy groceries without having to scan items or visit a till. The store, which is currently only open to Sainsbury’s staff, is in Holborn in central London, just yards from equivalent outlets operated separately by Tesco and Amazon. It is expected to open on 29 November. The Smartshop Pick &amp; Go store uses the same technology as the six UK Amazon Fresh stores, in which cameras and special weight-sensitive shelves detect when an item has been removed so that shoppers can put their items in a bag or basket and walk out without having to pay at a till. Customers can gain entry to the store in future by generating a QR code via Sainsbury’s SmartShop app, which is currently used to scan items with a mobile phone in its supermarkets. It is the first time Amazon has allowed a retailer in the UK to use its technology, according to Bloomberg. However, Amazon has signed deals to supply its technology to retailers in the US, reportedly including WH Smith, which plans to open its first checkout-free store at a US airport this year. Sainsbury’s said: “We regularly trial new and convenient ways for customers to shop with us and we’re currently testing an upgraded version of SmartShop with colleagues at one of our Holborn stores.” The latest trial comes after Sainsbury’s opened a till-free store on the same site in 2019. The outlet closed a few months later after shoppers found scanning items with their phones too clunky. Amazon has begun a flurry of tests of checkout free stores after opening its first hi-tech grocery outlet in the UK in March. It now has six UK Amazon Fresh outlets in London and is rumoured to be planning hundreds more in the UK. Tesco opened its GetGo store last month, after a small trial of a similar store at Tesco head office in Welwyn Garden City, which has been selling goods to staff since 2019. The AI technology in Tesco’s store has been developed with the specialist tech firm Trigo, led by two scientists who previously worked in the Israel Defence Forces. The discounter Aldi is also testing a “just walk out” store in Greenwich, south London.Boris Johnson has sought to regain the initiative in the public debate about sleaze, standards and corruption, after a fortnight of dire headlines for the Tories, with the surprise announcement that he is backing plans to ban MPs from working as paid consultants, and to limit all second jobs for MPs to what can be done “within reasonable limits”. (See 3.56pm.) This amounts to a considerable shift from a PM who only last week was arguing that allowing MPs to have second jobs “has actually strengthened our democracy”. Johnson announced his move as Keir Starmer was holding a press conference about how Labour will put a similar proposal to a vote tomorrow and, although Starmer immediately announced that this was an important victory for his party (see 4.48pm), Johnson has at least managed to avert the threat of a Commons defeat tomorrow. The Johnson proposal actually goes slightly further than the motion proposed by Labour (see 3.56pm), but Labour has much more ambitious long-term plans, including for an eventual ban on all second jobs for MPs, with limited exceptions. (See 4.18pm.) Some 50 Tory MPs have consultancy jobs and the Johnson move is bound to make him unpopular with some of his backbenchers, some of whom may decide to quit parliament rather than face a significant loss of income. But David Cameron suffered a similar party management problem when he enforced a tough line on his MPs during the expenses scandal, and he got credit for this with voters. He also found that the clear-out of old guard MPs helped him to reshape the parliamentary party more to his liking. MPs have finally approved a report that found a Conservative former cabinet minister broke lobbying rules, ending a humiliating U-turn Boris Johnson was forced to embark on after he tried to overhaul the parliamentary standards system. The prime minister’s father, Stanley Johnson, has been accused of inappropriately touching a former cabinet minister as well as a senior political journalist. Caroline Nokes, who chairs the women and equalities committee, said Johnson had smacked her on the bottom in 2003, while he was in the running to be MP for Teignbridge in Devon. Ailbhe Rea, political correspondent for the New Statesman, said she was grateful to Nokes for speaking out and said Johnson had “groped me at a party at Conservative conference in 2019”. Asked about the Nokes allegation, Starmer said it was “serious” and should be investigated, possibly by the police. (See 4.48pm.) Returning the Parthenon marbles to Greece is a matter for the British Museum, Downing Street has said, apparently reversing longstanding UK government opposition to the idea, reiterated by Boris Johnson as recently as March. The coronavirus pandemic may have “exacerbated” the number of people self-radicalising online, the UK security minister, Damian Hinds, said in the wake of the Liverpool bombing. Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe’s MP has called on the government to pay a £400m debt it owes to the Iranian government to secure her release, PA Media. PA says: Tulip Siddiq told MPs she was becoming “increasingly frustrated” with the government as they “ignored the elephant in the room” that the debt had become linked to Ms Zaghari-Ratcliffe’s detention in Iran, and needed to be paid to secure her release. During a packed Westminster Hall debate which saw MPs of all parties vying for space in the room, Siddiq also read out a letter from Zaghari-Ratcliffe’s husband Richard, in which he revealed the prime minister passed him “one day” during his 21-day hunger strike outside the Foreign Office. Siddiq said: “In six years of dealing with our government I am getting increasingly frustrated with the fact that when I deal with ministers from government they ignore the elephant in the room which is the fact that this case is now linked to the £400m that we as a country owe Iran.” She added: “We have seen that it is not a coincidence that any time there is movement on the IMS (International Military Services) court hearing, we see some movement on Nazanin’s case. When the IMS court hearing was delayed earlier this year, Nazanin received a call to say ‘Come to court because we need to speak to you’.” Sir Iain Duncan Smith, the former Conservative leader, said other countries had managed to secure the release of their citizens from Iran, asking: “How is it the United States, Australia, France and Germany have all successfully now negotiated their citizens arbitrarily detained in Iran and yet we have made no progress?” Liberal Democrat foreign affairs spokesperson Layla Moran said the UK should “call the bluff” of the Iranians, adding: “If the Iranian government said the debt removes the barrier and then if they still do not release these hostages we show the Iranian government for the wicked regime it is. I do not see the downside.” Foreign Office minister James Cleverly told MPs that the government shared the frustration they felt about the detention of Zaghari-Ratcliffe and other British nationals in Iran. He added: “A number of members have raised the issue of the International Military Services debt. As I have said to the House of a number of occasions the UK government recognises we have a duty legally to repay this debt and we continue to explore all legal options to resolve this 40-year-old case. “But we have always been clear that we do not accept British dual nationals being used as diplomatic leverage.” Keir Starmer has said Yorkshire County Cricket Club has to set out how it will change the culture at the club following Azeem Rafiq’s evidence to MPs. In a TV interview Starmer said: Obviously what has happened in relation to Yorkshire Cricket shows that we have got to do more work to root out racism in sport, particularly in cricket. I think the response of the club was very poor, without any proper sanctions, and treating racial slurs as banter. At the afternoon lobby briefing the prime minister’s spokesperson admitted the government’s approach to MPs’ second jobs had changed in recent days. The spokesperson said: Clearly in recent days we have seen the strength of feeling in the house on this and that’s why the prime minister has written this letter today. [See 3.56pm.] We have changed our approach in recognition of the strength of feeling and the need to ensure the public continues to have faith in the rules that guide parliamentarians. The NHS is already preparing for the prospect of an annual Covid-19 booster vaccine programme, should one be required, Amanda Pritchard, the NHS England chief executive, has said. In a speech to the NHS Providers annual conference, she said: We had the latest advice yesterday from the JCVI on extending [boosters] to the over-40s, as well as giving second doses to 16- and 17-year-olds, and I think we can expect further expansions in the future. We are already thinking about how we can do annual booster vaccines, if they are needed. And of course we continue to make that evergreen offer to people who are yet to come forward for any or all of the doses they are eligible for. In an interview with broadcasters Keir Starmer has restated his claim that Boris Johnson’s decision to back a ban on MPs working as consultants represents a victory for Labour. Starmer said: We’ve had two weeks of Tory sleaze and corruption. And be under no illusion, the prime minister’s only done this U-turn because his back was against the wall, because we, the Labour party, have put down a binding vote for tomorrow. So this is a significant victory for the Labour party. This is a prime minister has shown no leadership on this whatsoever. It’s a step forward for standards in public life. And I rather hope that all my press conferences are this successful, that whilst I’m making a demand of the prime minister, he concedes, caves in. And that’s a very significant victory for the Labour party. Labour has accepted that its motion for tomorrow is covered by what Boris Johnson is proposing, my colleague Jessica Elgot reports. During the press conference Keir Starmer, who was only told about the PM’s announcement after it started and who had not at that point read the PM’s letter, said that, although he thought this was a victory for Labour, he wanted to check the small print. And here are more lines from Keir Starmer’s press conference. Starmer said that, if the government accepts the motion that Labour has tabled for tomorrow (see 3pm), that would be a “very important victory” for his party. He said: If the motion that we are putting down is now accepted across the house, then that is a very significant step forward, not least because the motion is binding, and therefore this is a meaningful vote, and a very important victory for the Labour party. But Starmer also said he wanted to look at the small print of Boris Johnson’s announcement. (See 3.56pm.) He appeared to be taken by surprise by the letter. He said that peers would not be covered by his proposed ban on most second jobs for MPs. He would not commit to banning Labour MPs from having second jobs without such a ban applying to other MPs too. As an opposition party, he said he wanted to get cross-party support for this proposal. (That seems unlikely to happen.) But he also said that if Labour won the election, the party would implement this change. He accepted the legal work that he did himself before he became party leader would not be allowed under his proposal for most second jobs to be banned. He said his proposed ban on MPs having second jobs would not cover media appearances or writing books. He praised Caroline Nokes for revealing that she was touched inappropriately by Stanley Johnson 18 years ago, saying it took “great bravery” to speak out in this way. He said: The allegations are serious and they need to be fully investigated, I don’t think at this stage it’s for me to say what should happen as a result. But it takes guts and bravery to come forward to make allegations like this. They now need to be fully investigated either by the Conservative party or by the criminal authorities. This is from Tom Newton Dunn from Times Radio on the PM’s announcement. As LabourList reported last week, 50 Tory MPs have between them earned more than £1.7m in consultancy fees since the beginning of 2021 alone. Another analysis for the Times (paywall) found that almost one in four Tory MPs spend at least 100 hours a year on second jobs (many of which would not be covered by the Labour ban). There are Labour MPs too with paid consultancies, but this is predominantly an issue for the Conservative party. In his opening remarks at his press conference Keir Starmer outlined a five-point programme to clean up politics. First, he said he wanted to ban “all second jobs for MPs”, with very limited exceptions. That should start tomorrow with the Commons passing the motion to ban MPs from working as paid parliamentary strategists, advisers or consultants, he said. (See 3pm.) Second, he said there should also be a five-year ban on former ministers taking jobs in the sectors they used to regulate. Third, there should be tighter rules to stop foreign money coming into British politics, he said. Fourth, there should be a new Office of Value for Money, to stop the waste of taxpayers’ money, and reform for the procurement system. And, fifth, a new independent Integrity and Ethics Commission should be set up to improve standards in government. At the Labour press conference, when told about the prime minister’s letter, Keir Starmer’s initial reaction was to say: “So we’ve won the vote tomorrow already.” Here are the key points from the Boris Johnson letter to the Commons Speaker proposing a ban on MPs working as paid consultants or lobbyists. (See 3.36pm.) Johnson says the code of conduct for MPs should be updated so that it “continues to command the confidence of the public”. He says the government is specifically backing two proposals in the report published by the Commitee on Standards in Public Life three years ago (pdf). They are recommendation 1, which says: The code of conduct for MPs should be updated to state that: ‘Any outside activity undertaken by a MP, whether remunerated or unremunerated, should be within reasonable limits and should not prevent them from fully carrying out their range of duties’. This rule would almost certainly force Sir Geoffrey Cox to cut back on his legal work. According to the Daily Mail, in some years Cox has devoted almost 30 hours a week to his legal work. (Cox said last week that he regularly works 70 hours per week, and that casework for his constituents is always given primary importance.) And the government backs recommendation 10, which says: The code of conduct for MPs and guide to the rules should be updated to state: ‘MPs should not accept any paid work to provide services as a parliamentary strategist, adviser or consultant, for example, advising on parliamentary affairs or on how to influence parliament and its members. MPs should never accept any payment or offers of employment to act as political or parliamentary consultants or advisers’. Johnson says it is parliament to decide its code of conduct, not the government. But he says: “The government believes that these two recommendations form the basis of viable approach which could command the confidence of parliamentarians and the public.” Johnson says it is “a matter of regret that the house has not yet taken forward these specific recommendations”. Given that Johnson has been in office for more than two years, and that the government decides what matters are put to the Commons for debate, this is disingenuous, because it implies that someone else is to blame. In Johnsonland, it is probably as close as you get to an apology. Johnson says these two recommendations should be implemented “as a matter of urgency”. This actually goes further than the proposal set out in the Labour motion, as reported by Kitty Donaldson at 3pm, because that only directly calls for recommendation 10 in the 2018 report to be implemented. The Conservatives have hit back. Boris Johnson has just posted this on Twitter. He says the government is backing a ban on MPs working as paid consultants or lobbyists. MPs are already banned from working as paid lobbyists, subject to a narrow exception. But a ban on MPs working as political consultants would be news. Angela Rayner, the deputy Labour leader, is opening the press conference. She says we have all been “disgusted” by the corruption scandal surrounding the Conservative party. Keir Starmer is about to hold a press conference about the Labour vote tomorrow on stopping MPs working as paid consultants. There will be a live feed here. George Eustice, the environment secretary, has been giving evidence to the Commons environment committee about labour shortages in the food and farming sector this afternoon. The hearing opened with some highly critical questions from Neil Parish, a Conservative, who complained that the visa systems offered by the government were not doing enough to address the serious problems facing farmers. He went on: All we are doing at the moment is staggering on, as far as I can see. The pig sector is not profitable. Pig prices are on the floor ... A lot of pig farmers will stop keeping pigs, bluntly. Poultry is being reduced. All of these visas are very time limited, and half the time people don’t want to come for a short period. What gets me so cross is we put in place a system that’s not working. And when the industry doesn’t take it up, you’ll say the industry didn’t take it up, so it’s all the industry’s fault. No, it’s not the industry’s fault. We’ve got a very good industry which, as far as I can see, we are not actually destroying, but we are actually making it very difficult. Eustice said he thought the visa scheme should be working for the pig and poultry sector. He also said that pig production had increased by about 7% or 8% this year, and that was part of the reason for the problem of over-supply. Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minister, has told MSPs that the Covid certification scheme in Scotland may be extended to cinemas, theatres and some licensed premises. Bloomberg’s Kitty Donaldson has posted on Twitter the text of the motion tabled by Labour for debate tomorrow saying MPs should be banned from working as paid consultants. Yesterday Labour said it also wanted to stop MPs having paid directorships, but that aspect is not covered by this wording. Keir Starmer is giving a press conference at 3.30pm. We will find out more then. The proportion of school children absent due to Covid has halved according to the latest figures from the Department for Education, after it issued its first full attendance figures for schools in England since the October halfterm holiday. The rate of absences defined by the DfE as Covid-related halved from 3.2% on 21 October to 1.6% on 11 November, the lowest since state schools reopened in September. The number of pupils with suspected cases of Covid also fell, from 87,000 in mid-October to 50,000 last week, while confirmed cases recorded by the DfE fell from 127,000 to 67,000. However, the DfE has advised schools to record absences with continuing cases of Covid as ill, meaning its Covid-related figure leaves out such cases. Simon Coveney, Ireland’s foreign minister, has said he is unsure whether a change in tone from London on the negotiation over Northern Ireland is merely a “tactical drawback” by Boris Johnson’s government or cause for optimism. Speaking following a meeting in Brussels with the EU Brexit commissioner, Maroš Šefčovič, Coveney said: The EU team this week is up for making progress ... They want to be focused on solutions, and working in partnership with the British negotiating team so that by the time Lord Frost meets [European Commission] vice-president Šefčovič on Friday in Brussels there can be the basis of real and measurable progress that hopefully both sides could could take as a starting point to generate momentum to try to solve a whole series of other issues that need solutions over the next few weeks. Coveney said that EU member states would most likely be briefed by the commission on the possible retaliatory options should the UK trigger article 16, suspending parts of the current post-Brexit arrangements, but that the focus remained on success in the ongoing talks. He said: You’re likely to see probably an informal, verbal briefing of member states in terms of the approach that the EU would likely take. And I think that’s positive thinking on the commission’s behalf. What we don’t want now is a focus on the consequences of triggering article 16. Coveney said there was “hope” that the talks could be successfully concluded by Christmas but that this depended on whether the UK government was sincere in its recent claims to want a deal. He said: It’s just hard to know whether this is a tactical sort of pullback for now or whether it’s a genuine effort to try to find a way forward. But our job is to be positive, to be optimistic, and to try to create windows of opportunity when they are there ... I have to say, everybody is now focusing on negotiation and trying to find solutions. But if that fails, and if article 16 is triggered, and the British government decides to take that unilateral action, then I think there will be strong unity. Sir Lindsay Hoyle, the Speaker, puts the motion to a vote. Those in favour shout aye. No one objects, and the motion passes without a division. For reference, here it is in full. That, notwithstanding the practice of this house relating to questions already decided in the same session, this house: (1) rescinds the resolution and order of 3 November 2021 relating to the third report of the committee on standards (HC 797) and the appointment of a new select committee; (2) approves the third report of the committee on standards (HC 797); and (3) notes that Mr Owen Paterson is no longer a member of this house. Bryant says the standards committee is looking at how it can improve its appeal process. But it is wrong to say there is no right of appeal under the process. There is, he says. MPs can appeal to the committee over the findings of the parliamentary commissioner for standards. By comparison with many other appeal bodies, they are “remarkably generous”. They will allow an appeal on any grounds, appeals can be heard in person, and people can rehash all the arguments. He says various options are possible. They could tighten the grounds for appeal, but that might not be popular. The committee could turn itself into two bodies, one of which would deal with appeals. Or they could get an outside figure to hear appeals. Or they could get the expert panel do do that. But it is not simple, he says, because then the Commons as a whole could not change the sanction. He denies reports that cross-party talks on an appeals mechanism have already started. And he says his committee will soon publish a report on how the standards system could be changed. It will come before Christmas. He urges people to wait. Chris Bryant, the chair of the standards committee, says he is mystified why the PM tried to block the report into Owen Paterson. The evidence against Paterson was “stark and compelling”, he says. He says the government has made a serious of mistakes, even up to last night, when it tried to pass the report without a debate. He says Paterson kept saying that he would have done the same again; that was an aggravating factor, he says. Mark Harper (Con) says he thinks Jacob Rees-Mogg was wrong when he suggested the standards committee had not taken into account the tragedy afflicting Paterson. He says Paterson did get a degree of leniency from the committee because of his wife’s suicide. Jess Phillips (Lab) says the remark Chope made about Alicia Kearns (see 2.09pm) was unacceptable. But she says, as a woman, she has found some of his remarks problematic in the past too. But she says Chope had a point about the case for a fresh debate. She says she finds the references by Paterson’s friends to “natural justice” difficult. She says this is a term always used by people who do not like what happens to them. She says Paterson was given every opportunity to defend himself. And he had much better legal support than other MPs, or people facing legal proceedings outside the Commons. And she complains about the way Andrea Leadsom, the former leader of the Commons, was used by the government. I feel a little bit for [Leadsom], because the way these things work in this House usually is that you find a backbencher who’s got credibility and you make her take it through - and it’s often a ‘her’ - and you make her take it though on behalf of the executive. And that is what I feel happened last time. And I feel that she has been totally sold down the river, and her credibility, unfortunately, which was good on these issues, has been damaged by the executive. Sir Christopher Chope (Con) says rescinding a motion passed less than two weeks ago is a “major constitutional decision”. That is why he thought it was important to trigger a debate (which he did last night, by preventing the motion backing the support going through on the nod). He says he is glad opposition MPs have welcomed the chance to have a debate. Alicia Kearns (Con) says MPs have already spent four and a half hours debating this already (in the original debate, and in the subsequent three-hour emergency debate called by the Lib Dems). Chope claims Kearns has not “applied her mind” to the point he is making, about the need for the house, not the executive, to decide if it wants to rescind a decision it has already taken. Shall I express shock or outrage at what she is saying? Because clearly in the time to which she has been referring she hasn’t applied her mind to the principle issue and that is that the government encouraged everybody, including her probably, to vote for a motion on November 3. That motion was passed by resolution of this house and for that motion to be rescinded or changed is a matter for this House rather than for the executive and the government. He says Rees-Mogg raised three concerns with the process by which Paterson was investigated two weeks ago: the fact that 17 witnesses did not give evidence in person; the apparent reinterpretation of rules relating to whistleblowers; and the penalty applied. He says MPs should not be subject to “mob rule, or mob justice”. From the Labour MP Alex Cunningham Wendy Chamberlain, the Lib Dem chief whip, says the government has not issued a proper apology. She says ministers have expressed regret. But children often express regret when they are caught doing something wrong. But that is not the same as apologising, she says. Sir Bill Cash (Con) says the inquiry into Paterson did not involve the creation of a independent panel to examine the facts. This process is allowed, but was not used. He says for this reason he does not think Paterson received natural justice. Mark Harper (Con) intervenes. He challenges Cash to identify a single instance where the facts of this case were contest. He says he has read the report and cannot see any, which is why he thinks a panel was unnecessary. Cash cites as an example what Prof Chris Elliott, one of the witnesses supporting Paterson, said in his evidence about the public safety aspects of the carcinogenic elements identified in bacon and harm. Pete Wishart, the SNP spokesperson on Commons affairs, says this affair has been an “utter disaster”. He points out that Jacob Rees-Mogg did not even apologise. If he had “a smidgen of self-respect”, he would have resigned. He says the government wanted to set up a “kangaroo court committee of corruption” to review the Paterson case, chaired by a Conservative MP. He says there is a new generation of Tory MPs. “Some of them are even quite good,” he says. He tells them they are being let down by their older colleagues, like Rees-Mogg, who have been responsible for this affair. Rees-Mogg has “opened a Pandora’s box of Tory sleaze”, he says. He says it is not over yet; in fact it has only just begun, he says. Theresa May, the former Conservative prime minister, is speaking now. She says she hopes no MP will vote against the motion today. I trust that no member of this house is thinking of doing anything other than supporting the motion that is being moved by the leader of the house. Passing this motion will be a step in the right direction but it will not undo the damage that has been done by the vote of 3 November. Let’s be clear this is not a party political issue. Damage has been done to all members of parliament and to parliament as a whole. She says she read the Paterson report. I believe the conclusion was clear and fair, Owen Paterson broke the rules on paid advocacy and the attempt by members of this house, aided and abetted by the government, under cover of reform of the process effectively to clear his name was misplaced, ill-judged and just plain wrong. It would be a mistake to think that because someone broke the rules, the rules were wrong. The rule on paid advocacy is a longstanding one. The problem came because there was an attempt to effectively let off a then-member of the house. That flew in the face of the rules on paid advocacy and in the face of the processes established by this house. Thangam Debbonaire, the shadow leader of the Commons, begins her speech: “Where to start?” She says Jacob Rees-Mogg has complained about two issues being conflated in the original debate. But it was Rees-Mogg himself who conflated those issues, because he was backing the amendement in which they were tied together. And she asks if he had his “fingers in his ears” two weeks ago, because the objections that he says he has now listened to were raised in that debate. She says it has been chaotic. And she says standards matter. She goes on: To anyone who really loves democracy standards are the bedrock of everything we do. Sir Christopher Chope intervenes. He thanks Rees-Mogg for facilitating this debate – which is intentional irony, because it was Chope who facilitated the debate himself by objecting to the motion last night for the standards report to be passed. (See 9.25am.) Chope points out that in the debate two weeks ago Rees-Mogg cited various concerns with the way the Paterson allegations were investigated by the standards committee. He asks Rees-Mogg if he still thinks that the flaws he cited with the process still apply. Rees-Mogg says he has already covered that. He says the problem last week was that two issues – the case for reforming the standards process, and the Paterson case in particular – were conflated. And that’s about it. He winds up his speech. Jacob Rees-Mogg, the leader of the Commons, is opening the debate. This is an awkward occasion for him because he was the minister who proposed the motion two weeks ago saying that Owen Paterson should be spared from suspension from the Commons. He says he has listened to MPs since the original vote. Today’s motion rescinds the house decision of November 3 to appoint an ad hoc committee. It also approves the third report of the committee on standards while noting Owen Paterson is no longer a member of the House. I have listened carefully to the views expressed since the debate and decision on November 3, and I want to make it clear that MPs must uphold the highest standards in public life. We expect all members to abide by the prevailing rules of conduct, paid lobbying is wrong and members found guilty of this should pay the necessary penalties. Our standards system must function robustly and fairly to support this, so that it commands the confidence of members and of the general public. Stephen Timms (Lab) asks why the government got it wrong two weeks ago. Rees-Mogg says the answer is simple. He says the tragedy that affected Paterson (the death of his wife) “coloured and clouded” his judgment. “It is as simple and as sad as that,” he says. I think it was simply the tragedy that afflicted Mr Paterson coloured and clouded our judgement, and my judgement, incorrectly and it is as simple and as sad as that ... I regret that the amendment conflated an individual case with more general concerns, that was a mistake. MPs are about to debate the standards committee report on Owen Paterson. It will be the third time the matter has come to the house. The first time, MPs voted to shelve the report saying he should be suspended for 30 days for breaking lobbying rules, in a move that backfired catastrophically for Boris Johnson. And last night, following a government U-turn (or, arguably, two - first the government decided to scrap the committee set up in the original vote to review the case, and then the government agreed to a fresh vote on the Paterson report, after first implying one was unnecessary), the report was supposed to go through on the nod - until the Tory MP Sir Christopher Chope objected. As the i’s Paul Waugh points out, Conservative MPs are largely staying away for the latest attempt to get this through. Here are the main points from the Downing Street lobby briefing, which ended a few minutes ago. Downing Street gave a cautious welcome to the news that Germany has suspended approval for the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline from Russia. Asked about the news, the prime minister’s spokesman said: We have noted that Germany has, at least temporarily suspended, certification on Nord Stream 2. We have long set out our opposition to Nord Stream 2 and the risks that it can pose to security in the region. It is something the prime minister has talked about for a long time now and we will continue to speak to our European partners, and indeed Ukraine, on this issue. According to the readout from cabinet, Boris Johnson also raised this when he spoke with his ministers this morning. No 10 said: [Johnson] reiterated his concern about the ongoing situation on the Ukraine border and emphasised that the UK will continue to support the territorial integrity of Ukraine. Following his speech last night he underlined the UK’s opposition to the Nord Stream 2 pipeline which would divert supplies from the Ukraine and could have significant security implications for the region. The spokesman said that the future of the Elgin Marbles was a matter for the British Museum. Asked how the PM would respond to a request today from the Greek prime minister for the marbles to be returned to Athens (see 11.31am), the spokesman said: I won’t pre-empt their meeting. Possession of the marbles is a matter purely for the museum. It is not one for the UK government ... The British Museum operates independently of the government. It is free, rightly, from political interference. Any decisions relating to the collections are taken by the museum’s trustees. And any question about the location for the Parthenon sculptures is a matter for them. But in the past Johnson has said the UK government is firmly opposed to the return of the marbles to Greece. (See 11.31am.) It was not clear from the briefing whether the UK government has actually changed its position, or whether No 10 is just offloading responsibility on the British Museum for today so as to give Johnson a polite means of disappointing his Greek counterpart. The idea that the British Museum can operate entirely independently from the government may also come as a surprise to anyone in this sector, for reasons set out very well by my colleague Charlotte Higgins in this recent column. The spokesman rejected the suggestion from former cabinet secretaries that his is not setting a good example on standards. (See 11.03am.) “The prime minister abides by the rules are set out, as he expects other MPs to do,” the spokesman said. Asked if the PM agreed with the ex-mandarins that the recent Committee on Standards in Public Life recommendations should be implemented, the spokesman said the government would be replying to them in due course. The spokesman would not say how government MPs will be whipped on the Labour motion tomorrow saying MPs should be banned from having paid directorship and consultancies. He said No 10 has not yet seen the wording of the motion, showing exactly what the party is proposing. But the spokesman again refused to back the principle of what Labour is proposing. Asked if the PM supported such a ban, the spokesman just said Johnson thought “that an MP’s primary job is and must be to serve their constituents and to represent their interests in parliament, they should be visible in their constituencies and be available to help their constituents with any matters of concern”. The spokesman would not comment on the allegation that the PM’s father, Stanley Johnson, touched the Conservative MP inappropriately. The spokesman said it was not for him to comment on specific allegations about a private individual. Asked if the PM condemned groping in general, the spokesman said: “Of course anyone that commits something which is a criminal act we would not condone.” Jacob Rees-Mogg, the leader of the Commons, has admitted that he was instrumental in persuading the PM to order Conservative MPs to vote in favour of sparing Owen Paterson from the 30-day suspension proposed by the Commons standards committee. In his latest Moggcast podcast for ConservativeHome, Rees-Mogg says that what he did was wrong, and that in hindsight it was an “obvious mistake”. He says he thought Paterson had been punished enough (by the death of his wife by suicide - which Paterson attributes partly to the stress caused by the inquiry into his lobbying). He goes on: That was clearly a mistake. It was not seen by the electorate as merciful, it was seen as being self-serving, and that has not been helpful to the government or to parliament. The Times’ Henry Zeffman has the full quote. In an interview with Times Radio this morning William Hague, the former Conservative party leader, said it was “awful” to hear what Caroline Nokes said about how Stanley Johnson treated her at an event in 2003. But he also said that conduct like this was “part of the culture of the time”. He said: What we’re seeing, of course, is people being caught out, as it were, and being named and shamed for things they did in the context of a past culture, and now standards are very, very different, so everybody better look out and be aware that standards are very different ... There was always something wrong with that sort of banter and behaviour anyway, and it wasn’t what everybody did by any means, but it was part of the culture of the time. The number of weekly registered coronavirus deaths is at its highest level since March, although levels remain low, PA Media reports. PA says: Some 995 deaths registered in England and Wales in the week ending 5 November mentioned Covid-19 on the death certificate, according to the Office for National Statistics (ONS). This is the highest number since the week to 12 March during the 2021 national lockdown, when 1,501 coronavirus deaths were registered. The latest weekly figure is up 16% on the previous week, with around one in 12 (8.6%) of all deaths registered mentioning Covid-19. Deaths involving the virus have been creeping up over the past four weeks, but remain significantly lower than those registered last winter during the second wave. Amanda Pritchard, chief executive of NHS England, is giving a speech to the NHS Providers conference later. In an interview on the Today programme this morning, she said that although the NHS has an ambition to end all hospital waits of more than two years by March next year, it would be “very difficult” to achieve this in some areas. She said: We’ve set that as an ambition and we I think recognise that within that there will be certain specialty areas where it’s going to be very difficult. Most of those people who’ve been waiting the longest - and you know I really do sympathise with people in this position - are waiting for inpatient care. And of course that is the bit that is most under pressure when we’ve got the demand for urgent and emergency care in the way that we have at the moment. But it’s an ambition that’s an important one for us because we have very clearly prioritised those patients who are most urgent over the last 18 months. We need to continue to do that, but certainly not lose sight of those people who have been waiting a long time now. The Conservative MP Caroline Nokes has posted this on Twitter - presumably in response to messages she has received following her disclosure about the PM’s father. (See 10.05am.) The Greek prime minister, Kyriakos Mitsotakis, is expected to challenge Boris Johnson over the return of the Parthenon Marbles to Greece when the pair meet later today, PA Media reports. In an interview with the Daily Telegraph ahead of the meeting, Mitsotakis said: Our position is very clear. The marbles were stolen in the 19th century, they belong in the Acropolis Museum and we need to discuss this issue in earnest. I am sure that if there was a willingness on the part of the [British] government to move we could find an arrangement with the British Museum in terms of us sending abroad cultural treasures on loan, which have never left the country ... You have to be able to appreciate the beauty of the monument in its entirety. We are not just talking about any artefact. We are talking about an artefact that essentially was broken into two. Half of it is in Athens and half of it is in the British Museum, so we’re talking about restoring the unity of the monument. It would be a fantastic statement by what Boris calls Global Britain if they were to move on this and look at it through a completely different lens. But Johnson has in the past ruled out returning the marbles to Athens. Earlier this year he told the Greek newspaper Ta Nea: “The UK government has a firm longstanding position on the sculptures which is that they were legally acquired by Lord Elgin under the appropriate laws of the time and have been legally owned by the British Museum’s trustees since their acquisition.” The Times this morning publishes a letter (paywall) signed by all living former cabinet secretaries. The main points are moderately interesting although, because they are all English civil servants accustomed to communicating by implication and nuance, the real message is much stronger than a superficial reading suggests. In their letter, the five mandarins - Lord Butler of Brockwell, Lord Wilson of Dinton, Lord O’Donnell, Lord Turnbull and Lord Sedwill - say the government should implement the recommendations in the recent report from the Committee on Standards in Public Life. They say the commissioner for public appointments and the independent adviser on ministerial interests should be put on a statutory basis, and that rules about former ministers taking up business jobs need to be strengthened. On the ministerial code, they say it should be “strictly enforced”, but with a mechanism for recognising “that some breaches are more important than others”. The committee report says there should be a range of sanctions available for ministers who break the code, including apologies, fines and resignation. But the letter gets most interesting at the end. The five peers go on: Rules, though, will only take us so far. Good people will behave well. Bad people may find ways round whatever rules there are, and we should aim to frame regulations to make cheating them harder. But ultimately we need all in positions of trust to set an example: as Lord Evans of Weardale [chair of the Committee on Standards in Public Life] said, our political system is a common good that we all have a responsibility to preserve and improve. Peter Hennessy, the historian and crossbench peer, is credited with coining what he calls the “good chaps theory of government”. What he means by this is that, because large parts of the British constitution are not codified (or at least weren’t - it has changed a bit in recent years), and depend on informal norms, the whole system depends on the assumption that the key players will behave decently. What the former cabinet secretaries seem to be saying is that this no longer applies, and that tighter rules are needed because the “bad people theory of government” is the one that applies now. Who could they possibly be referring to? You don’t need to be as clever as Hennessy to guess, although the ex-mandarins don’t say in their letter. On the Today programme this morning Nick Robinson was similarly coy when he asked Lord O’Donnell what might be done about a theoretical prime minister “who is not much interested in what the rules say”. Could rules ever force someone like that to uphold standards? O’Donnell replied: Well ... you could do quite a lot by rules and by legislation, by forcing people to behave in certain ways. But, ideally, you want people who have a strong instinct for public sector ethos and for obeying the rules. Good people make for good governance. This is what Nick Thomas-Symonds, the shadow home secretary, told LBC this morning about the vote on the Owen Paterson report. We’ve had a situation first of all where Owen Paterson, who was then one of the government’s senior backbench MPs, was found very clearly to have broken the rules. The government has firstly avoided endorsing that report by frankly ripping up the rules and deciding just because the government didn’t like the conclusion that had been drawn, it would change the system. We now are in a situation where, unbelievably, another of the government’s backbenchers still won’t accept the conclusion of the report. Why is it always one rule for this government and one rule for everybody else? In his interview round Damian Hinds, the security minister, was also asked about the claim from Caroline Nokes, the Conservative MP and chair of the women and equalities minister, that she was touched inappropriately by Stanley Johnson, the PM’s father, at an event in 2003. Johnson claims he does not remember Nokes. Hinds said that he only heard about the allegations overnight. But he added: “If there is an investigation to be had, if that is the appropriate course of action, then of course that will happen.” My colleague Jessica Elgot has the story here. The Manchester Evening News and other leading local and regional papers in the north of England have today launched a joint campaign calling on the government to honour its promises to the north on rail. It has been triggered by reports that Northern Powerhouse Rail will not be delivered in full. These are from the MEN’s Jennifer Williams. And here is an extract from Williams’ article. Enough’s enough. The prime minister has been prepared to use chronic central government neglect of Northern England to his political advantage. It is time to keep his side of the bargain. Where rail investment is concerned, that does not mean a smattering of piecemeal upgrades dressed up as a transport revolution, ready for deployment on leaflets at the next election. It means new inter-city lines to and across the North, a move supported both by Northern leaders and the Conservative manifesto. Damian Hinds, the security minister, was on interview duty for No 10 this morning and, when asked about this story, he said he could not comment on the specifics until the integrated rail review is published, on Thursday. But he insisted the government was committed to levelling up. He said: We’re absolutely committed to levelling up, I think that runs through ... is infused in everything government does, transport also is part of that, and so and so many other things. Record numbers of people in Britain moved from unemployment into work in the final months before the end of the government’s furlough scheme, official figures show. My colleague Richard Partington has the story here. Good morning. Ministers were hoping last night to be able to finally bury the Owen Paterson issue, with MPs set to nod through a motion finally approving the standards committee report saying he broke the rules on paid lobbying, which Boris Johnson originally ordered his MPs to object to. But, as my colleagues Aubrey Allegretti and Rowena Mason report, the embarrassment was extended for another day when the maverick and reactionary Tory backbencher Sir Christopher Chope blocked the approval of the report. This means that MPs will instead debate the motion for an hour today, before voting on it in the early afternoon. Chope does not seem to have given a public explanation for what he did yet, but he has a long record of objecting to parliament approving measures without proper scrutiny. That is one of the reasons why he devotes much energy to slaughtering private members’ bills. As Aubrey reports, Tory MPs are livid with their off-message colleague, whose behaviour last night allowed allowed opposition parties to say “after two weeks of this scandal, the government couldn’t even perform their sleaze U-turn successfully”. (That was the SNP, but Labour said much the same.) Here is the agenda for the day. 9.30am: Boris Johnson chairs cabinet. 10.30am: Andy Street, the Conservative mayor of the West Midlands, speaks at an Institute for Government event. 11.30am: Kwasi Kwarteng, the business secretary, takes questions in the Commons. After 12.45pm: MPs begin a one-hour debate on the standards committee report into Owen Paterson. 2.20pm: Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minister, makes a statement to MSPs on Covid. 2.30pm: George Eustice, the environment secretary, gives evidence to the Commons environment committee on labour shortages in food and farming. 2.30pm: Lord Burnett of Maldon, the lord chief justice, gives evidence to the Commons justice committee. 4.15pm: Amanda Pritchard, the NHS England chief executive, speaks at the NHS Providers conference. Also, at some point today, Johnson is meeting the Greek prime minister, Kyriakos Mitsotakis, in No 10. There is also what is likely to be a riveting select committee hearing this morning on Yorkshire’s county cricket club’s response to the racism allegations made by Azeem Rafiq. Rafiq is giving evidence at 9.30am, and my colleague John Ashdown is covering it on a separate live blog here. I try to monitor the comments below the line (BTL) but it is impossible to read them all. If you have a direct question, do include “Andrew” in it somewhere and I’m more likely to find it. I do try to answer questions, and if they are of general interest, I will post the question and reply above the line (ATL), although I can’t promise to do this for everyone. If you want to attract my attention quickly, it is probably better to use Twitter. I’m on @AndrewSparrow. Alternatively, you can email me at andrew.sparrow@theguardian.comFollowing your article on the pressures created by visitor numbers in national parks (Tourists’ cars may be banned from most popular parts of Lake District, 14 November), I would also question the common assumption that tourism makes local communities richer. It doesn’t. Tourism provides low-paid and largely unrewarding jobs to people who struggle to afford to live in honeypot areas, even when they have grown up there. Tourism artificially inflates the cost of living and provides revenue for high-stakes investors, not for middle- or lower-income families. Neither does it help community cohesion, the provision of houses for those who can’t even afford one, let alone a second, or give space for other spheres of work. The Lake District national park authority is labouring under a misapprehension. People will come to the area because this is a beautiful place and access should be for all. But it is a myth to think that visitors help communities and that we need the opportunity to serve them tea. Dr Julie Carter Portinscale, Cumbria • Who could disagree with Richard Leafe, chief executive of the Lake District national park, that something needs to be done about the number of cars in the area? But allowing – at the same time – motoring on fell tracks in the heart of the Lakes is jarringly inconsistent. We know that it affects the environment and ruins the enjoyment of walkers and cyclists. Why does the national park condone this destructive hobby of a small minority? Christine Muir Little Langdale, Cumbria • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Emma Raducanu will compete in Britain for the first time since her US Open triumph when she faces Elena-Gabriela Ruse at the Champions Tennis exhibition at the Royal Albert Hall this month. Since turning 19 on Saturday and appointing a new coach, Torben Beltz, after her final event of the season at the Upper Austria Ladies Linz tournament, Raducanu has been enjoying time off following a hectic and unprecedented first few months as a full-time professional. Ruse is one of Raducanu’s friends on tour. The pair trained together numerous times at the Transylvania Open in Cluj-Napoca last month and their teams went for dinner together. The 24-year-old was one of numerous Romanian players who welcomed Raducanu into their group during the tournament. “We started to be friends, she’s a nice person,” Ruse told the Guardian last month. “I enjoy the time with her so much. She is speaking really good Romanian but she’s so shy to do it.” After the exhibition, Raducanu will look towards pre-season training as she begins preparations for her first full season on the WTA tour. The Australian Open will mark just the third grand slam tournament of her young career. Meanwhile, the former British No 1 Kyle Edmund has withdrawn from the Battle of the Brits exhibition scheduled for 21-22 December in Aberdeen. Edmund underwent surgery on his left knee in April but his recovery has been slower than expected, meaning his presence at the Australian Open a few weeks later is in doubt. Edmund, a former world No 14, last competed in October 2020.John Harris is obviously right (The Lords is a scandal in plain sight. If we won’t abolish it now, then when?, 15 November), but he overlooks a revealing episode in the saga of failed attempts at modernisation. MPs gave a record 338 majority to the coalition government’s reform bill in July 2012, with overwhelming support in all three major parties. However, the Labour leadership was determined to undermine Nick Clegg, the minister in charge of the bill, and, alongside Tory reactionaries, prevented progress in the committee stage. Had they stuck to their principles, a much smaller elected senate – with no opportunities for purchased peerages – would now be well on its way to completion. Conservatives have backed wholesale reform when it suited them – to decry a Labour prime minister’s personal patronage, for example. The extra scandal is that party leaders choose to maintain this anachronism to divert attention from even more dangerous threats to our democracy elsewhere. Paul Tyler Former Lib Dem spokesperson on political and constitutional reform • Replacing the House of Lords is inevitably going to be a slow process, but a modest start would be removing half of its membership. A couple of independent auditors could list the number of days put in by peers (including Zoom appearances) as a percentage of the maximum possible for each individual over a particular period – say, for the five years up to 5 November 2021. The bottom 400 could be given a month or so to clear their desks, say goodbye to staff, hand in passes, etc. Taking their archaic titles with them could be optional. The remaining 400 might wish to express their mind as to how citizens’ juries could usefully play a creative role in working towards a new sort of revising chamber of perhaps 100 members. This simple shrinkage model could do wonders for public awareness of constitutional issues and create the right environment for completing reform. Getting a sensibly elected, modernised House of Commons may prove to be rather more difficult. Geoff Reid Bradford • John Harris raises many important points when highlighting the class-based anachronism and the corrupt cash-for-peerages scandals relating to the second chamber. However, he appears to miss another major problem, namely the right of Church of England bishops to sit in this legislative chamber, thus making the UK a de facto theocracy rather than a democracy, albeit with a monarch as head of state. There is only one other functioning state in the world currently known as a theocracy, with its religious leaders sitting in the state legislature: Iran. Francoise Murray Liverpool • In December 2019, the current administration promised us that in its first year it would establish a constitution, democracy and rights commission to look at “the broader aspects of our constitution” in order “to come up with proposals to restore trust in our institutions and in how our democracy operates”. Given the combination of a lack of any news from the commission, the current prime minister’s fondness for creating new peers, and the opposition’s vagueness on the subject, I wonder which we will see first – a comprehensive set of proposals from the commission, or the abolition of the House of Lords? Somehow I think we will see neither. Paul Tattam Chinley, Derbyshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Time to wrap up; here’s today’s main stories: And finally, this sartorial shock... Goodnight. GW It’s been another wild day in the electric car world too. First up, electric truck maker Rivian Automotive is now worth more than Volkswagen, after a five-day rally has seen its value double since last-week’s trading debut. That’s astonishing, as Rivian is yet to record meaningful revenues, let alone profits. As Bloomberg says: Rivian, which is backed by Amazon and Ford, overtook Volkswagen’s market capitalization of $139 billion, as investors awash in cash and eager to get into the EV sector now have another stock to invest in, apart from industry trailblazer Tesla Inc. “It is another sign that froth is creeping back into the marketplace,” said Matthew Maley, chief market strategist at Miller Tabak. “There is still an emergency level of liquidity flowing into the system long after the emergency has passed.” Secondly, JPMorgan Chase has sued Tesla for $162m, claiming that the automaker failed to make a required payment that was triggered after chief executive Elon Musk’s 2018 announcement that he was considering taking the company private. The case relates to warrants which Tesla sold to the bank in 2014, which give the right to buy a company’s stock at a set “strike” price and date. The suit, filed in a Manhattan federal court, centers on a dispute over how JPMorgan re-priced its Tesla warrants as a result of Musk’s 2018 tweet that he was considering taking the carmaker private at $420 a share. That tweet, and a later announcement that the transaction was off, both led JP Morgan to reprice the warrants, due to market movements in Tesla’s share price. A spokesperson for JPMorgan said in a statement. “We have provided Tesla multiple opportunities to fulfill its contractual obligations, so it is unfortunate that they have forced this issue into litigation,” More here: JPMorgan sues Tesla for $162 mln over warrants, Musk tweets Those tweets had already got Musk in hot water with the US Securities and Exchanges Commission, which charged him with securities fraud for misleading the market. Musk settled the lawsuit, agreeing to step down as chairman and have the company’s lawyers pre-approve written communications, including tweets with material information about the company. Europe’s stock markets ended the day at fresh record highs, despite the fresh uncertainty over gas supplies to the region. The pan-European Stoxx 600 closed 0.2% higher, with Germany’s DAX and France’s CAC both at new peaks too. Optimism over easing in U.S.-China tensions may have helped, after Xi Jinping and Joe Biden held a generally cordial cordial virtual summit (although Xi did warn Biden that China was prepared to take “decisive measures” if Taiwan makes any moves towards independence that cross Beijing’s red lines). Corporate results also helped the mood, with Dutch technology investor Prosus up 4.2% after lifting its profit forecasts, and French luxury goods group Kering rallying 4.4% after its Gucci brand said it expected 2021 revenues will meet or exceed their pre-pandemic level. European investors saw some solid growth data too, with confirmation that eurozone GDP rose by 2.2% in the third quarter of the year. In the City, the FTSE 100 index has ended 25 points lower at 7327 points, down 0.35%, despite the strong unemployment data. Cyber-defence firm DarkTrace led the fallers, down 4.3%, having been under pressure since the lock-up on insiders selling shares lifted earlier this month. Pharmaceuticals giant AstraZeneca lost 4%, and accountancy software group Sage fell 2.7%. Vodafone led the risers, up 4.8%, after raising its guidance and reporting a 5% rise in group revenues in the first half. The telco giant is also looking to maximise funding opportunities from the EU’s recovery fund. Property companies Land Securities (+3.7%) and British Land (+3%) also rallied, after LandSec came back into profit as shoppers and office workers returned to cities. Among smaller companies, the Restaurant Group (which owns Wagamamas and Frankie &amp; Benny’s) surged almost 17% after lifting its profit guidance after outperforming the market since mid-September. Danni Hewson, AJ Bell financial analyst, explains: “The thing about those good jobs figures is that they restart the rate hike merry-go-round and that’s one ride investors have just jumped off. It’s one of the reasons London markets have had a pretty gloomy day despite positive outlooks from a number of market movers including Vodafone, Land Securities and noodle specialist the Restaurant Group. Their brand of optimism just couldn’t quite cut through and it seems the investment roller coaster isn’t over for Cineworld which found itself back at the bottom of FTSE 250 losers, the Bond effect clearly licensed for just a couple of days. Is a rate rise a done deal for December? Not necessarily but an inflation update out tomorrow will lend more clarity, though it might seem prudent for the Bank of England to allow any Christmas effect to leach away before hitting the big red button. Nvidia has said it planned to address the initial concerns flagged by Britain’s Competition and Markets Authority in August, and will continue to work with the British government over the deal to buy Arm. An Nvidia spokesperson said. “The Phase Two process (in-depth investigation) will enable us to demonstrate that the transaction will help to accelerate Arm and boost competition and innovation, including in the UK.” Cryptocurrencies have had a bad day, as China intensified its crackdown on the sector. Bitcoin has fallen by over 5% to around $60,542.40, away from the record highs of around $69,000 set last week. Other popular crypto assets are also weak, with ether down 6.6% at $4,305 and solana shedding 7% to $224. The selloff came after Chinese authorities ramped up their ongoing crackdown on crypto mining, calling it an “extremely harmful” practice that threatens to jeopardize the country’s efforts to reduce carbon emissions. CNN has the details: The National Development and Reform Commission spokesperson Meng Wei blasted bitcoin mining during a press conference Tuesday in Beijing. She said that activity “consumes lots of energy” and “produces lots of carbon emissions.” Meng said that the NDRC — the country’s top economic planner — will launch a “full-scale” clampdown on cryptocurrency mining by focusing on commercial mining and the role of state-owned businesses in the industry. She also said that crypto production and trade produces “prominent risks,” and blasted the industry as “blind and disorderly.” More here: Bitcoin falls as China takes aim once again at ‘extremely harmful’ crypto mining Twitter’s chief financial officer, Ned Segal, also knocked sentiment after telling the Wall Street Journal that investing some of the company’s corporate cash in crypto assets such as bitcoin “doesn’t make sense right now”. The WSJ says: We [would] have to change our investment policy and choose to own assets that are more volatile,” Mr. Segal said, adding that the company prefers to hold less volatile assets such as securities on its balance sheet. JP Morgan’s billionaire chief executive Jamie Dimon was allowed to skip Hong Kong’s strict 21-day hotel quarantine rules because he runs “a very huge bank” with “key business in Hong Kong”, the territory’s chief executive, Carrie Lam, said on Tuesday. Dimon flew into Hong Kong on Monday on JP Morgan’s private jet, becoming the first Wall Street bank boss to visit the territory or mainland China since the pandemic began. Questioned about why Dimon was allowed to enter the territory without complying with coronavirus rules, Lam said: “The justification is related to economy, as this is a very huge bank with key business in Hong Kong. He needed to come and work for about a day in Hong Kong. But there are restrictions, including restrictions over his itinerary, so the risk is completely manageable.” More here: Nvidia’s acquisition of UK chip designer Arm is turning into a long-running saga, says Matt Evans, partner at law firm DLA Piper. And he thinks the parties now face a ‘mountain’ to climb, after the government announced an in-depth investigation that will last six months today: The deal was announced over a year ago but has still not completed. Far from it. Today’s decision by the Secretary of State to refer the deal to the CMA for a Phase 2 review was inevitable after the CMA had identified a large number of concerns on competition grounds (seven) and indicated that the undertakings in lieu of a Phase 2 reference proposed by NVIDIA were inadequate. That report landed on the Secretary of State’s desk almost four months ago, so the UK Government has certainly taken its time digesting that report and weighing up the national security implications of the deal. The Secretary of State’s thinking at this stage will likely make for unhappy reading for the merging parties. “On the competition side of the deal, the CMA took matters out of the hands of the Secretary of State by identifying concerns. It cannot be overruled on those, unless there are national security justifications to do so. On the substantive competition issues alone, therefore, the deal could be in trouble, although there is some way to go yet and a lot of data and documents for the CMA to review in Phase 2. By way of context, the CMA is not afraid to act as the world’s antitrust policeman and has blocked or caused the abandonment of several global deals in recent history, even where its counterparts elsewhere have cleared those deals. In addition, the security concerns flagged by DCMS Secretary of State Nadine Dorries could also sink the deal. Evans explains: “Perhaps more worrying for the parties, however, is the fact that far from thinking that there may be national security considerations in favour of the deal that outweigh the CMA’s antitrust concerns, the Secretary of State has identified five threats to UK national security that the deal raises. That raises the bar to ultimate clearance that NVIDIA faces in the Phase 2 review. The review typically will last 24 weeks from today, extendable by eight weeks, after which the CMA must report to the Secretary of State. The Secretary of State must then issue their decision – unconditional clearance, conditional clearance or prohibition – within 30 days of receipt of the CMA’s report. “The Secretary of State faces a potentially tricky balancing act of safeguarding national security – and will have a much more hands on and interventionist role in this regard when the National Security and Investment Act comes into force on 4 January 2022 – and encouraging inward investment into the UK. All the more so following Brexit when the primary message to business is that the UK is open and welcoming to friendly investors. It is likely to be the middle of 2022 before the UK rules on whether NVIDIA/Arm may go ahead, by which time it is possible that a competition authority elsewhere has shot the deal down. For example, the European Commission opened an in depth Phase 2 competition review into the deal last month and has until mid-March to decide whether to clear it. Perhaps the prospect of the deal being blocked elsewhere, taking matters out of the UK’s hands, is something the Secretary of State is quietly hoping for. Regardless, the parties appear to have a mountain to climb to keep the deal alive.” Two more UK energy suppliers have collapsed, affecting more than 35,000 UK domestic customers. Energy regulator Ofgem has announced that Neon Reef, which has 30,000 customers, and Social Energy Supply, with 5,500, are both ceasing to trade. The regulator says that the unprecedented increase in global gas prices has put financial pressure on suppliers [which will not be helped by today’s near 10% jump in wholesale gas prices]. Customers will be moved to a new supplier under Ofgem’s Supplier of Last Resort procedure, it says. It means that 21 suppliers have collapsed since the start of September, when the surge in wholesale gas prices began to hurt suppliers. The UK’s energy price cap means that companies who haven’t hedged themselves cannot simply hike bills - although the cap is likely to rise sharply again next April. Here’s Adam John of Utility Week’s take: Wall Street has risen in morning trading, as the increase in retail sales and pick-up in industrial output lifts spirits. The Dow Jones industrial average is up 96 points, or 0.25%, at 36,183 points, with the broader S&amp;P 500 and the tech-focused Nasdaq Composite also up around 0.2%. Nvidia’s shares are up 0.4%, despite its purchase of Arm now facing a Phase 2 investigation on national security grounds. While the fall in UK unemployment in the latest labour force survey has been widely welcomed, the TUC was quick to point out that black and minority ethnic (BME) unemployment rates are coming down much more slowly than the rates for white workers. Today’s figures show the rate has fallen by 0.2 percentage points for BME workers, compared to 0.7 percentage points for white workers. Frances O’Grady, general secretary of the TUC, said: “BME workers have borne the brunt of the pandemic. They’ve been more likely to be in low-paid, insecure work and have been put at greater risk from the virus “Black workers have been at much higher risk of unemployment for every year on record. We cannot allow this inequality in our jobs market. Ministers must hold down unemployment, create good new jobs and challenge the discrimination that holds BME workers back.” Here’s more reaction from the TUC: After a bruising couple of weeks, the government was in need of some good news and that was provided by the latest jobless figures this morning, our economics editor Larry Elliott writes: Fears that the end of the furlough scheme would lead to rising unemployment have proved groundless. It is, of course, early days. There are still only flash estimates of what happened in October once the Treasury’s wage subsidies had come to an end but the signs are promising. But rather than the expected surge in redundancies as firms had to cope without government financial support, there was a 160,000 rise in the number of payrolled employees. In the three months from August to October the number of job vacancies hit a new record of close to 1.2m – up almost 400,000 on the pre-pandemic level. The Office for National Statistics said in the July to September period – the months leading up to the scrapping of the furlough – the number of people moving from job to job was higher than ever before, but this was the result of choice rather than people being forced to move because they had been dismissed. Rishi Sunak said the figures were tribute to the “extraordinary success” of the furlough and few would dispute that claim. The unemployment rate fell by 0.5 percentage points to 4.3% in the three months to September and is only marginally higher than it was when Covid-19 arrived in early 2020.... More here: The number of workers on UK company payrolls rose sharply last month despite the end of the government’s furlough scheme, after a record increase in people moving from unemployment into work ahead of its closure. The Office for National Statistics (ONS) said Britain’s employers added 160,000 more workers to their payrolls in October, taking the total to 29.3million in the first month after the removal of the multibillion-pound wage subsidy scheme. The headline unemployment rate fell by more than expected, dropping to 4.3% in the three months to the end of September, from 4.5% in August. However, it still remains above the pre-pandemic level of 4%. It comes after the Bank of England held back from raising interest rates earlier this month while waiting to see what happened in the jobs market after the removal of furlough, confounding financial market expectations for the first rise in borrowing costs since the pandemic began. Some analysts said the jobs figures could provide Threadneedle Street with a green light for raising interest rates before Christmas – if a similar picture is maintained in the next set of official labour market figures on 14 December. More here. Sticking with the US, industrial output has bounced back after the disruption caused by Hurricane Ida. US industrial production rose 1.6% in October after falling 1.3% in September; about half of the gain in October reflected a recovery from the effects of Hurricane Ida. Manufacturing output increased 1.2%, led by a large gain in the production of motor vehicles and parts (where supply chain problems had been hitting output). Utilities output also rose 1.2%, and mining output jumped by 4.1%, as oil rigs in the Gulf of Mexico came back online after Ida’s 150 mile per hour winds caused havoc on offshore oil production platforms, and onshore oil and gas processing plants. Over in America, consumers are continuing to spend on goods, despite supply chain problems. US retail and food services sales jumped by 1.7% in October, and were 16.3% higher than a year ago, as people continued to buy electronics, cars and homeware. Spending at electronics &amp; appliance stores rose by 3.8% during the month, while motor vehicles and parts spending rose 1.8% and spending at department stores rose by 2.2%. Americans also spent more on gasoline, due to the surge in prices at the pumps. Spending at gas stations rose 3.9% during the month, and was 46.8% higher than a year ago, reflecting the surge in fuel prices hitting motorists. However, spending a food services &amp; drinking places was flat month-on-month, while spending at clothes stores fell 0.7%. Michael Pearce, senior US Economist at Capital Economics, says goods spending rebounding, but services still subdued: The breakdown showed that was driven by a 4.0% rise in non-store sales and a 3.8% increase in electronics and appliance store sales. By contrast, spending at bars and restaurants was flat, despite the rapid easing of the Delta wave in the South. With case numbers in the rest of the country now on the rise again, the recovery in services spending in the months ahead is likely to remain muted. The stronger rebound in goods spending is a positive sign for fourth quarter consumption growth, but the weakness of food services sales is a bad sign for the recovery in services consumption. Back in the UK, the government has launched a full-blown investigation into Nvidia’s takeover of Cambridge chip designer Arm, on national security and competition grounds. Digital secretary Nadine Dorries has ordered a Phase Two investigation into the $40bn sale of Arm, which is seen as the jewel in the crown of the British tech sector. The in-depth inquiry will be carried out by the Competition and Markets Authority (“CMA”), following an early investigation which found significant competition concerns over the deal. Dorries said: I have carefully considered the Competition and Market Authority’s ‘Phase One’ report into NVIDIA’s proposed takeover of Arm and have decided to ask them to undertake a further in-depth ‘Phase Two’ investigation. Arm has a unique place in the global technology supply chain and we must make sure the implications of this transaction are fully considered. The CMA will now report to me on competition and national security grounds and provide advice on the next steps. The government’s commitment to our thriving tech sector is unwavering and we welcome foreign investment, but it is right that we fully consider the implications of this transaction. Arm was taken over by Japanese technology conglomerate SoftBank in 2016, SoftBank agreed to sell Arm to US chip giant Nvidia in September 2020 for $40bn. Arm’s chip designs are used in tens of billions of chips worldwide, in devices such as smartphones, smart devices and sensors, and traces its history back to the Acorn Archimedes PC created in the 1980s. Having gathered evidence gathered from departments, Dorries has decided that the national security implications of the deal should be subject to further investigation. The government explains: While not all individual devices relying on Arm-based chips are necessarily classed as ‘critical’ in themselves, the security and resilience of the broader supply chain is important for UK national security. The CMA’s Phase One investigation into the deal (online here) found that it could lead to a substantial lessening of competition in the supply of CPUs, interconnect products, GPUs (graphics chips) and SoCs (system-on-chips) across four key markets: data centres, Internet of Things, automotive and gaming. The report says: After careful examination, the CMA found significant competition concerns associated with the merged business’ ability and incentive to harm the competitiveness of NVIDIA’s rivals (that is, to ‘foreclose’) by restricting access to Arm’s CPU IP and impairing interoperability between related 2 products, so as to benefit NVIDIA’s downstream activities and increase its profits. Nvidia has previously defended its plans for Arm, pledging to maintain the British chipmaker’s neutral licensing model. But, the CMA’s report warns that there would be incentives to restrict access to Arm’s intellectual property, to benefit Nvidia: With regard to the Merged Entity’s incentives, the evidence indicates that the benefits of foreclosure are likely to outweigh the costs of such strategy. The CMA believes that the Merger may create incentives to change Arm’s business model to favour NVIDIA and notes the rapid growth of the addressable Datacentre CPU and SmartNIC markets specifically. Here’s the Telegraph’s James Titcomb: he chief executive of Trafigura, one of the world’s biggest commodity traders, warned earlier today that Europe risks rolling power outages if there is a prolonged period of cold weather this winter. Speaking at the FT Commodities Asia Summit, Jeremy Weir said there was still insufficient natural gas in the region despite the promise of increased flows from Russia. Weir warned that a cold winter could lead to rolling outages, if supplies couldn’t meet demand., saying: “We haven’t got enough gas at the moment, quite frankly. We’re not storing for the winter period. So hence there’s a real concern that there’s a potential if we have a cold winter that we could have rolling blackouts in Europe.” More here: Trafigura chief warns of rolling power outages in Europe this winter Weir was speaking before the Nord Stream 2 certification suspension was announced, and his comments underline the concerns over supplies of energy this winter. At around 217p per therm (+7% today), the UK’s day-ahead gas price is more than three times as high as in January, when it was around 60p. Gas prices hit record highs in October, causing some UK energy suppliers to collapse, due to rising demand, and a drop in wind speeds which hit supplies of renewable energy. Gas prices eased back at the end of last month, after Russia’s president Vladimir Putin ordered state-run Gazprom to begin filling European storage facilities from November. But they have been rising since, as the weather has cooled, and amid little evidence that Russia had increased gas exports yet, despite Europe’s need for energy. Germany’s economy ministry has said the decision by Germany’s energy regulator to suspend the certification process for the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline concerns the organisation’s legal structure and is not part of the government’s assessment on supply security, Reuters reports from Berlin. The ministry in a statement on Tuesday: “It is about purely regulatory questions, concretely a question of company law, for which the regulator is responsible in the certification process,” The four-month deadline set for certification is also interrupted, it said. Rob Watts of German news site DW has a good take on the Nord Stream 2 situation: Russia’s controversial Nord Stream 2 pipeline faces another delay after Germany suspended a key step in the approval process this morning, warns Bloomberg: The announcement sent benchmark European gas prices surging as traders fear the decision means Europe won’t get much needed gas to ease tight supplies this winter. The continent is facing an energy crunch, having started the winter season with the lowest stockpiles in more than a decade, leaving the regional vulnerable when cold spells hit. “If one believes that flows could only start after certification has been completed, this means that flows via Nord Stream 2 will be further delayed, with negative implications for European gas balance over winter,” said Katja Yafimava, a senior research fellow at the Oxford Institute for Energy Studies. Gas prices have jumped, after Germany’s energy regulator temporarily suspended the certification of Russia’s controversial Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline. It has ruled that the Swiss-based consortium needs to form a company under German law to secure an operating licence, before certification to pump gas from Russia to Europe could be considered. The ruling is another setback to the Kremlin-backed gas project, and could increase concerns that Europe could run short of gas this winter, as cold weather drives up demand. Nord Stream 2 runs under the Baltic Sea, bypassing Ukraine, so would deprive Kiev of significant revenues from pipelines that currently carry gas by land from Russia to the West. The US has opposed the project, warning it is a Russian geopolitical project intended to divide Europe and weaken European energy security. Nord Stream 2 needs regulatory approval before it can start to transport gas. And today, the regulator, the Bundesnetzagentur, said: The Bundesnetzagentur has today suspended the procedure to certify Nord Stream 2 AG as an independent transmission operator. Following a thorough examination of the documentation, the Bundesnetzagentur concluded that it would only be possible to certify an operator of the Nord Stream 2 pipeline if that operator was organised in a legal form under German law. Nord Stream 2 AG has decided to set up a subsidiary under German law solely to govern the German part of the pipeline, the regulator said in its statement. So, the certification procedure will remain suspended until “the main assets and human resources” have been transferred to the subsidiary, which must then meet Germany’s requirements of an independent transmission operator. Reuters has more details: Nord Stream 2 said it had been notified by the regulator but added: “We are not in the position to comment on the details of the procedure, it’s possible duration and impacts on the timing of the start of the pipeline operations.” Ukrainian gas companies Naftogaz and GTSOU were given notice on Monday that they would be included in the German certification procedure of the pipeline. Ukraine opposes the pipeline and will lose revenues if gas from Russia bypasses pipelines on Ukrainian territory. The head of the Ukrainian energy firm Naftogaz welcomed the German regulator’s decision to suspend certification. The regulator also said the Berlin economy ministry and the European Commission had been made aware of its notice to Nord Stream 2. The Commission has two months after the German regulator’s decision to assess the application for its part. The price of next-day gas in the UK has jumped by 7.6% to 218p per therm, a one-month high. Gas for December delivery to the UK is up 9%. European gas prices have also jumped, with the benchmark Dutch front-month contract up almost 8%. Last night, UK prime minister Boris Johnson urged European nations to break their addiction to Russian gas. In a speech to City of London dignitaries at Mansion House, Johnson said Germany would have to choose between “mainlining ever more Russian hydrocarbons” and “sticking up for” peace and stability in the east. “So when we say that we support the sovereignty and integrity of Ukraine, that is not because we want to be adversarial to Russia, or that we want in some way strategically to encircle or undermine that great country, “We hope that our friends may recognise that a choice is shortly coming between mainlining ever more Russian hydrocarbons in giant new pipelines, and sticking up for Ukraine and championing the cause of peace and stability.” Energy news: the International Energy Agency has predicted that the surge in oil prices could ease, as production picks up. In its monthly report, the Paris-based agency explains that the rise in prices (Brent crude hit a three-year high last month) should spur global production, particularly in the United States. “The world oil market remains tight by all measures, but a reprieve from the price rally could be on the horizon ... due to rising oil supplies.” “Current prices provide a strong incentive to boost (U.S.) activity even as operators stick to capital discipline pledges.” The end of the furlough scheme in October has not sparked fresh a labour market shock as many had feared, says the Resolution Foundation. They point out that employment was rising and unemployment was falling as the scheme ended, with a record number of people moving into new jobs (see here) The early signs for the UK’s post-furlough labour market are encouraging too, with payrolled employment rising by 160,000 in October and vacancy levels hitting a record 1.17 million. But, Resolution also warns that pay could be a problem, as inflation threatens to rise faster than wages. Nye Cominetti, Senior Economist at the Resolution Foundation, said: “The furlough scheme has kept a lid on unemployment throughout the pandemic but many have feared that its closure on 30 September would spark a fresh labour market shock. “But early indications are that the UK’s jobs market has remained resilient, with record vacancies and job moves, and withstood the withdrawal of emergency support well. “But while unemployment is unlikely to be a problem this winter, pay may well be. The economy needs ‘goldilocks’ pay growth – fast enough to protect living standards, but not so fast as to generate excessive inflation.” They’ve written a handy thread on the jobs data: There’s ‘no sign of weakness’ in the UK’s labour market in the run-up to the end of the furlough scheme in September, says Paul Dales of Capital Economics. And if next month’s unemployment report shows a similar picture, the Bank of England is likely to raise interest rates at its December meeting. Dales explains: The first of the two labour market releases before the Bank of England’s 16th December policy meeting suggested that the labour market remained tight after the end of the furlough scheme. That supports our view that the Bank will raise interest rates in December. The further 14,900 fall in the claimant count in October and the 160,000 increase in the HMRC payroll measure of employment in October suggest that only a small share of the 1.1m people that were still on furlough on the last day of the scheme on 30th September lost their jobs. What’s more, the further rise in the number of vacancies from 1.108m to a record high of 1.172m in the three months to October suggests that the labour market remained tight. The number of insecure jobs, such as zero-hours contract, has also risen as the economy reopens, warns Ben Harrison, Director of the Work Foundation: “This month’s labour market statistics show early indications of recovery following the end of the furlough scheme, with PAYE data suggesting that there were 160,000 more individuals in work in October than September 2021. “With the unemployment rate decreasing slightly and the inactivity rate holding constant over the last quarter, this is a positive early sign that the economy is recovering from the worst effects of the pandemic. “Vacancies continued to rise to a new record of 1.17 million, an increase of 388,000 from the pre-pandemic January to March 2020 level. Nevertheless, with economic inactivity levels remaining high, there would be value in targeted employment support for people facing barriers in accessing work. However, these increases in employment are in part driven by growth in more insecure forms of work, including part time and zero hours contracts. If the Government is serious in its ambition to level up the economy, it must improve the quality of jobs being created to ensure reforms to the Further Education system break down barriers to lifelong learning.” The pound has rallied as this morning’s jobs report bolsters the prospect of a rise in UK interest rates. Sterling has gained almost half a cent to $1.346, its highest level in nearly a week. Victoria Scholar, head of investment at interactive investor, explains: We are seeing the number of employees on companies’ books at a record high, despite the end of the furlough scheme while job vacancies are also at all-time highs. On the plus side, there are plenty of job opportunities, which are set to rise in the run up to festive season, very low redundancy levels and the headline unemployment figure on a downward trajectory. However the downside is that there are not enough workers, with fewer overseas job-seekers after the pandemic, skills shortages and supply is struggling to keep up with demand amid a faster-than-expected post-covid recovery. The tighter labour market is contributing towards an unsettling inflationary environment. By holding off from raising rates this month, it was clear the Bank of England wanted to see more data before jumping the gun with today’s employment figures helping to paint a clearer picture. Wages saw the smallest gain in five months but were still above expectations, pointing to ongoing price pressures. The central bank governor Andrew Bailey sounded his concerns just yesterday about the tightness of the labour market, which today’s data largely appears to confirm. The pound enjoyed a boost, thanks to the headline unemployment figure, which fell to 4.3%, just 0.3 percentage points above pre-pandemic levels, and ahead of analysts’ expectations, raising expectations of a rate hike sooner rather than later. GBPUSD has pushed back above $1.345, going against the downtrend that has been in play since the June peak, with losses having accelerated in recent weeks. Estimating pay growth during the pandemic is difficult -- but earnings growth does seem to have cooled. The ONS reports that total pay grew by 5.8% per year in July-September, down from 7.2% a month earlier. Regular pay, excluding bonuses, rose by 4.9%, down from 6.0% in June-August. Average total pay growth for the private sector was 6.6% in July to September, sharply ahead of the public sector where it was 2.4%. But...these figures have been distorted by the impact of falling wages early in the pandemic, and by the loss of more low-paid jobs as sectors such as hospitality were hit hardest (which lifts average pay levels). The ONS estimates that underlying regular pay growth could be as low as 3.4%, but says that this should be interpreted with caution given the uncertainty. If pay growth is just 3.4%, then that’s barely ahead of September’s CPI inflation rate of 3.1%. Inflation is forecast to have jumped to around 3.9% in October (we find out tomorrow morning....). And with inflation likely to hit 5% next April, it suggests workers could face a real wage squeeze, rather than the ‘high-wage’ economy promised by the PM. TUC General Secretary Frances O’Grady says: “The furlough scheme is a union success story, and it’s good news that so far, the wind down of the scheme has not been accompanied by job losses. “But if ministers are serious about a high wage economy, they have work to do. The last 12 years have been the worst period for wage growth since Napoleonic times. “And today’s figures suggest workers will be waiting for some time for the pay surge the prime minister promised at the Conservative party conference. Real pay is less than £2 a week above the pre-2008 financial crisis peak. Kitty Ussher, chief economist at the Institute of Directors, says the UK government’s efforts to protect jobs through the pandemic have ‘largely paid off’: “Although this data relates to September, the final month of the furlough scheme, there is nothing here to give the Bank of England pause for concern when deciding whether to raise interest rates in response to rising expectations of inflation. “In particular, the number of people reporting in the Labour Force Survey at the end of September that they are ‘temporarily away from work’, a category that includes furlough, appears to be settling near its pre-pandemic level of around 2.5m people, and 7.5% of the total number of people in employment. This suggests that any remaining people receiving furlough payments from one employer are likely to be working elsewhere. “This is good news, and shows that the government’s policy to support jobs while the economy recovered has largely paid off.” The BBC’s economics editor Faisal Islam agrees that the furlough scheme does appear to have achieved its goals: At just 4.3%, the UK’s unemployment rate is much lower than economists feared early in the pandemic. Rushi Sunak, the chancellor of the exchequer, says it shows the success of the job retention scheme introduced back in spring 2020, which guaranteed most of the wages of workers temporarily sidelined. “Today’s numbers are testament to the extraordinary success of the furlough scheme and welcome evidence that our Plan for Jobs has worked. “We know how vital keeping people in good jobs is, both for them and for our economy – which is why it’s fantastic to see the unemployment rate falling for 9 months in a row and record numbers of people moving into employment. “Our Plan for Jobs is at the heart of our vision for a stronger economy for the British people, with schemes like Kickstart and Sector Based Work Academies continuing to create opportunities for people up and down the country.” The drop in unemployment also reflects the extraordinary success of the Covid-19 vaccines, swiftly developed and rolled out, which have allowed companies to reopen and take on more staff. This morning’s jobs report could encourage the Bank of England governor to vote for an interest rate rise, says the FT’s Chris Giles: ...ITV’s Joel Hills says the ‘early evidence’ suggests that most workers who were furloughed at the end of the scheme have remained in work: Reuters David Milliken says it’s an upbeat set of data: The jobs report also shows that workers switched jobs at a record pace over the summer. The increase in employment in July-September was driven by a record high net flow from unemployment to employment, the ONS reports. Total job-to-job moves also increased to a record high of 979,000, “largely driven by resignations rather than dismissals”, during the quarter, explains. That could be a sign that more workers are choosing to change jobs - perhaps attracted by higher wages, or keen for a fresh start after the pandemic. Or that the backlog in job moves caused by Covid-19 is clearing. The ONS also reports that the number of people in part-time work rose during the July-September quarter. There was also a rise in the number of people on zero-hour contracts, driven by young people. Hers are full details of the record vacancies at UK firms: The number of job vacancies in August to October 2021 continued to rise to a new record of 1,172,000, an increase of 388,000 from the pre-coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic January to March 2020 level, with 15 of the 18 industry sectors showing record highs. On the quarter, the rate of growth in vacancies continued to slow down; in August to October 2021 vacancies rose 222,000 (23.4%), down from 288,000 (43.4%) last quarter, and the largest quarterly increase was seen in “wholesale and retail trade; repair of motor vehicles and motorcycles” up 29,600 (24.8%). In August to October 2021 all industry sectors were above their January to March 2020 pre-coronavirus pandemic levels, with accommodation and food service activities increasing the most by 66,500 (79%). The ONS also points out that the ratio of unemployed people to vacancies hit a record low of 1.3 in July-September, showing a very tight labour market. And although the growth rate slowed in the quarter, all industries increased their vacancy numbers on the quarter. The fastest rates of growth in vacancies compared with last quarter were seen in construction (41.1%) and transport and storage (40.4%) (where supply chains have been struggling due to a lack of qualified lorry drivers). Redundancies rose slightly in the three months to September, for the second month running, but were similar to pre-pandemic levels, the ONS says: The redundancy rate increased by 0.2 per thousand on the quarter (the last three months of the furlough scheme), to 3.7 per thousand employees: Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. Unemployment across the UK has fallen again, as companies continue to add workers to their payrolls despite the end of the furlough scheme in September. The UK’s jobless rate fell to 4.3% in the three months to September, new data from the Office for National Statistics shows, with the unemployment total dropping by around 152,000 compared to the previous quarter, to 1.448m. That’s down from 4.5% a month ago, as firms continue to recruit as they recover from the economic shock of Covid-19 -- although it’s still higher than before the pandemic. In September alone, the unemployment rate is estimated to have dropped to just 3.9%. The furlough job-protection scheme ended on 30th September, and today’s report shows that companies continued to expand their workforces last month. The ONS estimates that there were 29.3 million employees on company payrolls in October, an increase of 160,000 compared with September. The ONS says: It is possible that those made redundant at the end of the furlough scheme will be included in the RTI data for a few further months, while they work out their notice period. However, responses to our business survey suggest that the numbers made redundant was likely to be a small share of those still on furlough at the end of September 2021. The number of people in work also rose, by around 247,000 to 32.523m, lifting the employment rate to 75.4%. The ONS explains: July to September 2021 estimates show a continuing recovery in the labour market, with a quarterly increase in the employment rate, while the unemployment rate decreased, and the economic inactivity rate was largely unchanged. Total hours worked increased, following the the relaxation of many coronavirus (COVID-19) restrictions. But the UK economic inactivity rate was estimated at 21.1%, 0.9 percentage points higher than before the pandemic, but largely unchanged on the quarter. Vacancies at UK companies hit a record level too in August to October, rising to 1,172,000. That’s an increase of 388,000 from the pre-coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic January to March 2020 level, with 15 of the 18 industry sectors showing record highs. Yesterday, the Bank of England governor Andrew Bailey told MPs he was “very uneasy” about the rising cost of living, but wanted to see post-furlough employment data before voting to raise interest rates. This jobs data could encourage some Bank policymakers to consider a rate rise at the next meeting, in December.... It looks like a quiet start to trading in the markets, with the UK’s FTSE 100 seen a little lower, and European indices near last night’s record highs. The latest monthly oil market report, updated eurozone growth figures, and new US retail sales figures could give new insights into the economic picture. Michael Hewson of CMC Markets says: Retail sales numbers in the US have been quite difficult to predict in recent months, with consumer confidence coming under pressure, due to rising prices in the shops and at the fuel pumps. In September US retail sales came in better than expected, rising 0.7%, against a forecast of -0.2%, while the August numbers were revised up to 0.9%. These better-than-forecasted numbers, along with the continued improvement in the US labour market helped convince the Federal Reserve that the economy was strong enough for it to proceed with its plans to start tapering its monthly asset purchase program starting this month. It is certainly true that the US consumer has been more resilient than consumer confidence numbers might suggest in recent months. We’ve come off two successive monthly gains since the -1.8% decline seen in July, and today’s October numbers are expected to see another gain of 1.3%. While this might chime with how well a lot of US retailers have been doing this past quarter, it is completely at odds with the direction of recent consumer confidence data, which has been weak. The agenda 7am GMT: UK unemployment report 9am GMT: IEA monthly oil market report 10am GMT: Eurozone third-quarter GDP (second estimate) 1.30pm GMT: US retail sales for October 2.15pm GMT: US industrial production for October 3pm GMT: House of Lords economic affairs committee hearing on Central Bank Digital CurrenciesMy friend Barbara Doris, who has died aged 99, was one of the 36 people who marched from Cardiff to Greenham Common in August 1981 to protest about the placement of cruise missiles at the US and RAF army base near Newbury, Berkshire. She was one of the founders of the women’s peace camp subsequently set up at the base. She lived there for several months during the first winter and returned frequently. For many years she remained a committed peace activist. Barbara was born in Liverpool to Gwen (nee Hall), a nurse and midwife, and Thomas Thomas, an electrical engineer who was in charge of Lister Drive power station. She won a scholarship to Holly Lodge girls’ school in Liverpool and then in 1940 went to Liverpool university to study science. This she had to abandon because of the blitz in 1941. During the war Barbara worked briefly as a chemist in industry (involved in bomb manufacture), and at a sawmill. Then she trained as a nurse in Glasgow, and in 1945 took an intensive course to become a teacher. Posts at various schools and colleges followed, and in 1961 she became a tutor at Carlett Park FE college, Eastham, Wirral, for a pre-nursing course, taking early retirement 20 years later. Barbara had suffered from depression at times and in the 1970s was a founder member of Depression UK (D-UK), earlier called Depressives Anonymous. She set up support groups in Liverpool and Wirral. All her life she was a rebel, developing a keen leftwing point of view. In the 1970s and early 80s, she joined CND to campaign against cruise missiles, and then became a member of Women Oppose the Nuclear Threat. She lived at Greenham Common peace camp throughout its first autumn and winter, when she suffered a frost-bitten nose, and returned many times to a tent she left there. Barbara was among the “59ers”, the group of older women, crucial to the ongoing protest, who volunteered to stay on so that younger women could return to their work and family lives. In December 1982 the women held an “Embrace the Base” protest, holding hands around the perimeter. It was based on a similar event that Barbara had attended at the Pentagon as a Greenham delegate. Later on, she became a member of Mothers for Peace, travelling to the USSR and the US to make contact with other peace groups. She also took a peace quilt to Geneva, embroidered with the faces of 40 children from the USSR and the US. In later life, Barbara spent more time enjoying her lifelong love of nature. She made her bungalow in Neston, Cheshire, more sustainable with insulation and solar panels, and in 2015 joined the Green party. She is survived by her daughter, Madeleine, from an early marriage.The United States will host a cricket World Cup for the first time in its history as the game seeks to extend its reach beyond its traditional borders. The news came on Tuesday as the ICC released details of the hosts of every men’s white-ball tournament from 2024-2031. The US will co-host the T20 World Cup in 2024 alongside the West Indies. The ICC has long seen the US as a potentially lucrative market. There are tens of thousands of regular players in the States, but the vast majority are drawn from the Commonwealth diaspora and there is very little awareness of the sport among the general US population. Paraag Marathe, the chair of the board of USA Cricket said he hoped the 2024 World Cup would change the current state of affairs. “The ICC has identified the USA as a strategic market for growth that will benefit cricket around the world,” he said on Tuesday. “A major event in 2024 will be the critical catalyst to improve facilities, develop a professional league, grow the fanbase and inspire public and corporate support. The West Indies will host two-thirds of the matches in the 2024 tournament, with the US staging the rest. Elsewhere, Ireland, Scotland and England were named as co-hosts of the 2030 T20 World Cup. The event will be the first time since 1999 that Ireland and Scotland have hosted games in a major cricket event, having staged three World Cup fixtures between them that year. Details of the schedule and host venues for the 2030 event are still to be finalised. Cricket Scotland chair Tony Brian, whose team reached the Super 12 stage of this year’s T20 World Cup, said: “It will be great for the Scottish cricket public to be able to see the stars of world cricket in person as well for Scotland to show off its history and beauty to the cricket lovers from around the world who will flock to see the finals. The event will bring significant economic benefit to the country.” Cricket Ireland chief executive Warren Deutrom said: “While we have hosted several ICC qualifier tournaments in the past and of course a 1999 World Cup fixture in Clontarf, this will be the first time multiple matches in a major world cricket event will feature in Ireland. “We appreciate that there are still a number of details to clarify around hosting arrangements, not just for the co-hosts but also to enable our government partners to move beyond in-principle support, but today’s announcement gives a greenlight for those discussions to begin in earnest.” The 2026 event will be staged in India and Sri Lanka, while Australia and New Zealand will share hosting duties in 2028. Australia was already confirmed as the host for next year’s T20 World Cup. Namibia, Zimbabwe and South Africa will stage the one-day World Cup in 2027 before India and Bangladesh stage the event four years later. India was already confirmed as the sole 2023 host. The Champions Trophy will be held in Pakistan in 2025 and India four years later. ICC chair Greg Barclay declared that having 14 members hosting eight events was a reflection of the “truly global nature of our sport”.Provocation or preparation? And for what? The exact intentions informing the large-scale deployment of Russian forces close to Ukraine’s eastern border remain opaque. But it seems increasingly clear that the tensions stoked by Vladimir Putin in the spring – when a prior military build-up took place – were the initial phase of a new approach rather than a one-off performative episode. After five years of frozen conflict, a worrying thaw appears to be taking place. In April, having marched tens of thousands of troops to the Ukrainian border, Mr Putin announced a partial pull-back, to the relief of Kyiv and the west. It has since emerged that the retreat was merely superficial; troops stayed in the region and many of the tanks, ballistic missiles and assorted artillery remain in place. This hardware is now supplemented by an estimated 100,000 troops to the north, south and east of the Donbass region of Ukraine, controlled by pro-Russian separatists since 2014. Nato’s secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, warned Moscow this week against “further provocation or aggressive actions” against an EU neighbour and ally. The US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, has said that any such aggression would be a “serious mistake”. But Tuesday’s decision by the German energy regulator to temporarily suspend certification of the controversial Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline adds another unpredictable dimension to an unstable situation. The pipeline, which will allow Russia to bypass Ukraine when transporting energy to Germany, is seen by Kyiv as a threat to both its finances and security. US intelligence suggests a high probability of Russian military intervention. An outright invasion would constitute an enormous geopolitical risk for the Kremlin to take, as sanctions imposed in 2014 continue to bite hard. But it is evident that Mr Putin has decided that the time is right to substantially raise the temperature in the Donbass. The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelensky, elected in 2019, has not proved as amenable to Russian influence and demands as anticipated, and Moscow has railed at treason charges brought against the pro-Russian politician and key Putin ally, Viktor Medvedchuk. The military build-up vastly enhances the Kremlin’s scope to convincingly sabre-rattle and react rapidly to alleged provocations. Moscow’s suggestion that a recent drone attack in a separatist-controlled area could “destabilise the situation” is likely to be a taste of things to come. Having decided that moribund peace negotiations no longer serve its primary purpose of bullying Kyiv and obstructing its relationships with the EU and Nato, Moscow appears to be enacting a highly threatening plan B. The military build-up thus represents a de facto escalation of a conflict that, while continuing to claim lives, has remained relatively static since the Minsk II agreement was signed in 2015. The west must make it clear to Moscow that upping the ante further will carry a substantial economic cost in the form of further sanctions and scupper the Nord Stream 2 project. From Bosnia to Belarus, Mr Putin’s baleful influence in the former Soviet sphere is deepening. Robust western solidarity with Kyiv will be needed to prevent a resurgence of the same in Ukraine this winter.British tax officials have ramped up efforts to claw back £1bn from fraudulent or incorrect furlough payouts, after opening up tens of thousands of investigations against companies. According to figures disclosed under freedom of information laws, HM Revenue and Customs has stepped up the number of investigations into potentially fraudulent pandemic support claims over the past eight months, with more than 26,500 interventions launched by officials since the spring. The details, shared with the Guardian, cover the multibillion-pound furlough programme, which was closed at the end of September after subsidising the wages of about 9 million workers in Britain at its peak last year. It also covers investigations into the Treasury’s parallel income support scheme for the self-employed, as well as Rishi Sunak’s “eat-out-to-help-out” restaurant discount scheme, which was taken up by thousands of hospitality venues across Britain last August. The latest figures are significant because HMRC had planned to target about 30,000 cases in total over a three-year period. The fact that officials have already opened nearly as many cases this year suggest the total is likely to be much higher than originally anticipated. With a cumulative cost of £70bn to taxpayers so far, the furlough scheme paid 80% of the wages of up to 11.5 million workers placed on leave since the pandemic first struck in March 2020, up to a maximum of £2,500 a month. Sunak extended the programme several times, helping to avoid high levels of unemployment across Britain. However, it is estimated that more than £5.5bn of taxpayers’ money was handed to fraudsters or paid out incorrectly for furlough, the self-employed income support scheme, and eat out to help out. HM Revenue and Customs acknowledged in its annual report earlier this month that about 8.7% of the £60bn it paid out under the furlough scheme in the 2020-21 tax year ended up in the hands of organised crime gangs, fraudsters or was awarded erroneously. Ministers announced additional funding for the tax authority earlier this year to invest £100m in a taxpayer protection taskforce of 1,265 HMRC staff, designed to combat fraudulent and erroneous claims for pandemic support. A spokesperson for HMRC said: “The Covid support schemes have helped millions of people and businesses through the pandemic, and the government was clear that the priority was getting money to those who need it as fast as possible. “The taxpayer protection taskforce is expected to recover £1bn from fraudulent or incorrect payments over the next two years, and work is already under way, with 26,000 ongoing investigations.”AstraZeneca’s halo has slipped. When it partnered with Oxford University, it promised to sell Covid vaccines at cost while the pandemic lasted; now it is signing its first for-profit deals, saying it believes that the illness is moving to an endemic phase. Even after more than 5m deaths, this is a highly questionable assertion. More than 250,000 new cases and 5,400 deaths were recorded globally on Monday. But it would be wholly wrong to focus on AstraZeneca’s record when its rivals have been minting money while it maximised distribution. Pfizer says it will net $36bn this year from Covid vaccine sales. The problem is that shots are still not going where they are most needed. This is becoming a pandemic of poorer nations. More than 7bn doses have been distributed, but while more than two in 10 people over 12 in the UK have had a booster, fewer than one in 10 health workers in Africa have been fully vaccinated in the first place. This is, in the words of Dr Maria Kerkhove, the World Health Organization’s technical lead on Covid-19, outrageous. Our use of vaccines is too often inappropriate “epidemiologically, economically, ethically”, she said. Pfizer says that by the year’s end, it will have shipped 1bn shots to low- and middle-income countries – but the more prosperous of these get the bulk of them. In correspondence with Amnesty International, it emerged that of 2bn doses sent by late September, only 15.4m had gone to the poorest nations. According to the research group Airfinity, approximately 84% of Johnson &amp; Johnson’s vaccines and 96% of Moderna’s have gone to upper-middle- and high-income countries – though the latter is reportedly close to a deal to sell more doses to low- and middle-income countries after pressure from Joe Biden’s administration. There are other signs of modest progress. Pfizer’s partner, BioNTech, is to build the first Covid vaccine manufacturing plants in Africa, in Rwanda and then Senegal. On Tuesday, Pfizer announced a deal allowing its new Covid treatment to be made and sold cheaply in 95 poorer countries. It follows a similar agreement made by Merck with 105 nations. The pills could be especially helpful in areas where people have trouble accessing hospitals. But, as welcome as the agreement is, it excludes several key countries – notably Brazil, which has been racked by Covid – requiring them to buy direct from Pfizer. A treatment is no use unless people have easy access to reliable testing and healthcare. And, of course, it will not cut transmission as vaccines can. Overall, we are seeing small, reputation-gilding advances in place of the giant leap needed to save lives. The EU and UK continue to block patent waivers for vaccines, and richer nations still grab more doses than they need. Britain threw away more than 600,000 AstraZeneca doses this summer after they expired and Oxfam believes at least 100m shots could expire unused in G7 countries by the end of the year, while others are given away so late that they cannot be distributed in time. While the WHO urged a moratorium on boosters, the UK will offer third shots to people as young as 40, and similar campaigns are under way elsewhere. Better use of mitigation measures, such as mandatory masking and vaccine passports, would have reduced the need for them. As experts are now weary of pointing out, hoarding vaccines is not only immoral but foolish, increasing the risk of new and perhaps vaccine-resistant variants emerging as the virus circulates virtually unchecked in many places. Proper sharing of doses and of the information needed to make them is essential. What the world needs is not limited gestures, but large-scale, substantive and principled action.When Ghislaine Maxwell came face-to-face with prospective jurors for her federal court sex trafficking trial in Manhattan on Tuesday morning, their candor brought moments of comedy to the staid process of jury selection – including a discussion of a famed TV police procedural and an exchange about fishing. Maxwell, 59, was arrested in July 2020 at a secretive estate in Bradford, a small town in New Hampshire. She is charged with sex crimes, conspiracy and perjury related to the actions of the financier Jeffrey Epstein, who killed himself in a Manhattan jail cell in 2019, while awaiting sex trafficking charges. After Maxwell’s arrest, Audrey Strauss, then acting US attorney in Manhattan, said the daughter of the late British press tycoon Robert Maxwell “played a critical role in helping Epstein to identify, befriend and groom minor victims” and “in some cases, Maxwell participated in the abuse”. The indictment charges that Maxwell “would try to normalize sexual abuse for a minor victim by, among other things, discussing sexual topics, undressing in front of the victim, being present when a minor victim was undressed, and/or being present for sex acts involving the minor victim and Epstein”. The indictment also says Maxwell attempted to hide her involvement in Epstein’s crimes, providing untrue information “under oath” amid civil litigation. That case was a defamation suit filed against Maxwell by Virginia Giuffre, a longtime Epstein accuser. The judge has ruled that the perjury counts will be tried separately. Giuffre claimed Maxwell and Epstein forced her into sexual encounters with Prince Andrew when she was only 17 years old. Maxwell pleaded not guilty to the charges against her. The Duke of York has vehemently denied all allegations of misconduct. Opening statements in Maxwell’s case are scheduled for 29 November. The trial is expected to extend into the new year. On Tuesday, Judge Alison Nathan started questioning potential panelists, a process meant to filter out candidates who might hold biases that could favor the defense or prosecution. Nearly 50 possible jurors were present, brought into the courtroom one by one. Nathan asked about familiarity with the case, backgrounds, hobbies and media consumption. “I’ve watched a lot of Law &amp; Order over the years,” one potential juror said. The woman, 69, is retired. The judge noted that Law &amp; Order is a “fictional account” of the criminal justice system, then asked if the woman’s partiality to Law &amp; Order would “in any way affect your ability to be fair and impartial?” “No,” the woman said. “I don’t think so.” Another retiree was asked if he had opinions about wealthy people that could bias him against Maxwell. He responded with a firm “No”. “I used to work as a personal assistant at parties and stuff,” the man said, adding with a laugh: “So of course I dealt with all the rich people – United Nations, Met Opera … they provided my livelihood.” Asked to describe his hobbies, the 72-year-old said he read at least a book a day and enjoyed tennis, golf and opera. Someone remarked that retirement sounded “nice”. “Fifteen years for me, [but] who’s counting?” Judge Nathan chuckled, apparently referring to her own retirement timeline. A 24-year-old woman, who said she had detached from social media, was asked: “How long have you been cold turkey?” “On Twitter, almost three years,” she replied, then laughed. “Sounds like an AA meeting.” A 63-year-old man said, “I’m a fisherman,” to which Nathan replied: “Me too.” “That’s all I do,” the man said. “It’s the season now,” Nathan answered. One possible juror, who said she didn’t read newspapers or magazines, told Nathan she was pursuing a master’s degree. Shortly thereafter, the 28-year-old woman said: “I’m currently not enrolled because of the vaccination status requirement.” Some prospects said they hadn’t heard of Maxwell but were familiar with Epstein. One juror interviewed before the morning break said he hadn’t heard of either. Maxwell, who again wore grey trousers and a black sweater, appeared to mostly look at Nathan. The same Maxwell family member who has attended prior proceedings was in the audience, taking notes. She appeared to doze off several times. Before questioning started, Nathan revealed that one contender had complained about being summoned. This possible juror “wrote a lengthy email to the court complaining about the process of getting into the courthouse”, Nathan said. The person said that having to check their electronic devices and go through security checks was akin to “juror harassment”.The US is going to stage a diplomatic boycott of the Winter Olympics in China and will not send an official delegation in protest against human rights abuses, according to a report on Tuesday. The report comes the day after a virtual summit between Joe Biden and Xi Jinping, in which multiple policy issues were raised but the Olympics were not mentioned, despite some earlier reports that Xi would deliver an invitation to the games. According to the Washington Post columnist Josh Rogin, who writes extensively about China policy, a formal recommendation for a diplomatic boycott has been presented to Biden and he is expected to approve it before the end of the month, just over two months before the games are due to begin in February 2022. Under such a diplomatic boycott, US athletes would take part as normal, but there would be no accompanying political delegation of officials and politicians. Asked for comment, a senior administration official said: “We don’t have any official update on the US position.” Andrew Bates, the deputy White House spokesman said only that the Olympics had not been “part of their conversation” at the Biden-Xi summit. The Biden administration has upheld its predecessor’s determination that China’s mass incarceration and forced sterilisation of its Muslim Uyghur population constitutes genocide. It has also been critical of the suppression of democracy in Hong Kong and repressive measures in Tibet. The US national security adviser, Jake Sullivan, said that Biden raised human rights abuses in his summit with Xi. “President Biden is always going to be Joe Biden. He is going to be direct and straightforward. And he’s not going to sand down the edges of direct messages on hard issues,” Sullivan told a Brookings Institution video conference assessing the summit on Tuesday. Leading Democratic and Republican figures have called for a diplomatic boycott that would send a message of disapproval but would not affect US athletes. The Biden administration will inform allies of its boycott but would leave it to them to make their own decisions. Michael Mazza, a fellow at the American Enterprise Institute, argued that the US and its allies should have pushed much earlier for the Winter Olympics to be taken away from China and held elsewhere. He said that simply refusing to send dignitaries and officials would have no impact on China’s human rights abuses. “We’re now faced with suboptimal options. The one the White House settled on may make us feel good about ourselves, but it shouldn’t. A diplomatic boycott will do little to actually help Uyghurs and other victims of abuses,” Mazza said. He argued a better option would be to send a delegation with the mission of highlighting the plight of the Uyghurs and other victims. “They would be talking to the press every day about what they’re seeing in China,” Mazza said. “There’s a risk here that, if the United States tried to send a delegation like that, China doesn’t let them into the country. And I say make them do that quite publicly.” In his assessment of the summit, Sullivan suggested the two leaders had agreed in principle to authorise discussions by their officials on major global issues, to reduce risks of misunderstanding and miscalculation. One of those issues would be the nuclear arsenals of both countries. “President Biden did raise with President Xi the need for a strategic stability set of conversations around [nuclear weapons],” Sullivan said. “That needs to be guided by the leaders and led by senior empowered teams on both sides that cut across security, technology and diplomacy. And the two leaders agreed that we would look to begin to carry forward discussions on strategic stability.”