Paul Dacre has pulled out of the running to be the next chair of the media regulator, Ofcom, after concerns were raised about the transparency of the recruitment process. After failing in his first attempt when an interview panel decided the former editor of the Daily Mail did not fulfil the required criteria, ministers then cleared the way for him to be given another shot. But when the Guardian revealed a lobbyist at a company with close connections to the Conservative party was picked to help select which candidates should be approved, Dacre announced he would not proceed with an application again despite being urged to “by many senior members of the government”. He said he had been judged inappropriate to head Ofcom the first time because his “strong convictions” were not compatible with the role. One government figure told the Guardian they were “genuinely disappointed” by Dacre’s decision to pull out and ministers had expected to back him to become chair of Ofcom. They insisted the former Daily Mail editor had taken the decision not to proceed after not enjoying the original interview process and reflecting on how it could be second time around. The growing public scrutiny of appointments and government sleaze following the Owen Paterson affair may have also played a role, although the source insisted ministers did not tell Dacre to step aside. The government had spent more than a year trying to ease Dacre’s application for the job. After he failed the first interview process the government spent the summer trying to find people willing to sit on a fresh interview panel for the job, with many individuals reluctant to put their name to the process. The job description was also rewritten to favour a more confrontational candidate, in another move seen as favouring Dacre. The government now has just 10 days to find another preferred candidate, with applications due by 29 November. Announcing his decision to drop out of the Ofcom race, Dacre described the process of civil service recruitment as an “infelicitous dalliance with the blob”, and suggested it was Whitehall workers rather than politicians “who really run this country”. Writing in a letter in the Times, he said: “To anyone from the private sector, who, God forbid, has convictions, and is thinking of applying for a public appointment, I say the following: the civil service will control (and leak) everything; the process could take a year in which your life will be put on hold; and if you are possessed of an independent mind and are unassociated with the liberal/left, you will have more chance of winning the lottery than getting the job.” Dacre said he wished Ofcom “all the luck in the world” as it prepared to grapple with “trying to regulate the omnipotent, ruthless and, as we’ve learnt, amoral tech giants without damaging freedom of expression”. In a final attack on the civil service, Dacre said he was taking up “an exciting new job” in the private sector that “struggles to create the wealth to pay for all those senior civil servants working from home so they can spend more time exercising on their Peloton bikes and polishing their political correctness”. Following the suspicion that senior politicians had interfered in an attempt to install Dacre despite his apparent unsuitability for the role, Boris Johnson was urged to rule him out of the running. The Conservative MP Julian Knight, the chair of the culture select committee, said earlier this autumn: “Where a previous candidate has been deemed to be unappointable for a post, they should be ruled out of reapplying.” A spokesperson for Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport said: “The recruitment process is fair and open and in line with the governance code for public appointments, which clearly sets out that assessment panels must be objective when deciding which candidates meet the criteria for a role. “The process is regulated by the Commissioner for Public Appointments, who is responsible for ensuring that the appointment is made in accordance with strict guidelines.” It came as the Scottish and Welsh governments raised concerns about interference in the recruitment of Ofcom’s next chair, saying it could “adversely affect the standing of the public service broadcasting system”. In a letter to the culture secretary, Nadine Dorries, ministers for both the devolved administrations said “delays, changes and an apparent lack of transparency have caused us to lose further confidence in the process”. They questioned the level of Downing Street’s interference, saying the appointment process had been “tarnished by delays and questions about the real independence of those involved”. Accusing Dorries and her predecessor as culture secretary Oliver Dowden of overseeing a selection that was “falling below the standards we expect”, the Welsh and Scottish government demanded to be brought in on the process. They wrote: “Given the importance of public service broadcasting to our nations and the real impact for our nations of any decision on selecting the Ofcom chair which is not transparent or impartial, we urge you to involve us fully in the process as is right to protect a system which is so important to the public in Scotland and Wales and all the UK.”Here is what has happened in the Rittenhouse case today. A jury on Friday found Kyle Rittenhouse not guilty on charges related to his shooting dead two people at an anti-racism protest and injuring a third in Kenosha, Wisconsin, last year The acquittal has been widely condemned as a “travesty” that could embolden others to take similar vigilante-style approaches to anti-racism protests and political activists in the future. Joe Biden commented on the Rittenhouse outcome, saying that he “stands by” the Rittenhouse decision.“I stand by what the jury has concluded. The jury system works.” Donald Trump “congratulated” Kyle Rittenhouse on today’s verdict. The former president put out a brief statement that read: “If that’s not self-defense, nothing is!” Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez condemned the decision as an indictment of America’s justice system: “What we are witnessing is a system functioning as designed and protecting those it was designed for,” she tweeted. And with that, we will close our blog for the day. Keep an eye on TheGuardian.com this weekend for more updates. Guardian columnist Cas Muddle has written on what the Rittenhouse verdict says about the state of rightwing vigilantism in the US today and the consequences for progressive demonstrators. Muddle writes: We know that “self-defense” – often better known as vigilantism – is legally protected and highly racialized in this country. Think of the acquittal of George Zimmerman of the killing of Trayvon Martin in 2013. In essence, the Rittenhouse ruling has created a kind of “stand your ground” law for the whole country. White people now have the apparent right to travel around the country, heavily armed, and use violence to protect the country from whatever and whoever they believe to be threatening to it. Given the feverish paranoia and racism that has captured a sizeable minority of white people in the US these days, this is a recipe for disaster. In the coming hours and days, many media outlets will eagerly await riots or other potentially violent reactions from the other side – from the anti-racists and progressives of all colors and races who are disturbed by this verdict – and use the existence of those riots, if they occur, to push a misguided “both sides” frame. If there is protest or rioting, don’t expect the police to be as courteous and supportive as they were towards Rittenhouse and his far-right buddies. The most worrying effect of this verdict may be this: giving rightwing vigilantes a legal precedent to take up arms against anyone they consider a threat – which pretty much runs from anti-fascists to so-called Rinos (Republicans in Name Only) and includes almost all people of color – means it is now open hunting season on progressive protesters. Read the full piece here: The acquittal of Kyle Rittenhouse – who killed two men and injured another during anti-racism protests in Kenosha, Wisconsin – came after a contentious and controversial trial that gripped America. For many people, Rittenhouse’s treatment was seen as revealing the favorable treatment a white and armed militia supporter received from law enforcement, compared to police attitudes toward anti-racism protesters. Here are five key moments that happened as the courtroom drama played out: In other reactions, Donald Trump has just “congratulated” Kyle Rittenhouse on today’s verdict. The former president put out a brief statement that read: “If that’s not self-defense, nothing is!” For more on how the reactions to the Rittenhouse verdict are highlighting America’s deep divisions, check out our earlier story: Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez strongly condemned the Rittenhouse acquittal on Friday, stating in a Twitter thread that “what we are witnessing is a system functioning as designed and protecting those it was designed for”. Her comments came after Rittenhouse was acquitted on all charges relating to his fatally shooting two protesters and injuring a third last year in Kenosha, Wisconsin. “My heart still breaks for the communities and families whose grief now compounds, and the countless others who will be denied and deprived in similar scenes across the country,” she wrote. She also noted the acquittal comes just days after multiple Republican lawmakers praised the accused killer and offered him Congressional internships. Kari Paul here on the west coast, taking over the blog to keep you updated on the fallout from the Rittenhouse acquittal. Stand by for more. Kari Paul is going to take this blog on from here. In lieu of a summary, I’ll thank Reuters for this round-up of prominent comments on the verdict: Joe Biden: “While the verdict in Kenosha will leave many Americans feeling angry and concerned, myself included, we must acknowledge that the jury has spoken. I ran on a promise to bring Americans together, because I believe that what unites us is far greater than what divides us. I know that we’re not going to heal our country’s wounds overnight, but I remain steadfast in my commitment to do everything in my power to ensure that every American is treated equally, with fairness and dignity, under the law.” Tony Evers, Wisconsin governor (Democratic): “No verdict will be able to bring back the lives of Anthony Huber and Joseph Rosenbaum, or heal Gaige Grosskreutz’s injuries, just as no verdict can heal the wounds or trauma experienced by Jacob Blake [a Black man shot by a white police officer earlier in 2020] and his family. No ruling today changes our reality in Wisconsin that we have work to do toward equity, accountability, and justice that communities across our state are demanding and deserve.” Ron Johnson, Wisconsin senator (Republican): “I believe justice has been served … I hope everyone can accept the verdict, remain peaceful, and let the community of Kenosha heal and rebuild.” Karen Bloom and John Huber, parents of Anthony Huber: “Today’s verdict means there is no accountability for the person who murdered our son. It sends the unacceptable message that armed civilians can show up in any town, incite violence, and then use the danger they have created to justify shooting people in the street. We hope that decent people will join us in forcefully rejecting that message and demanding more of our laws, our officials, and our justice system.” David Hancock, Rittenhouse family spokesman: “We are all so very happy that Kyle can live his life as a free and innocent man, but in this whole situation there are no winners, there are two people who lost their lives and that’s not lost on us at all.” Derrick Johnson, chief executive and president, NAACP: “The verdict … is a reminder of the treacherous role that white supremacy and privilege play within our justice system.” National Rifle Association: “A well regulated militia, being necessary to the security of a free state, the right of the people to keep and bear arms, shall not be infringed.” Rev Al Sharpton, civil rights campaigner: “These continue to be dark days for Black people killed at the hands of people that believe our lives do not matter. [The men killed and wounded by Rittenhouse were white, but the shootings came amid protests following the police shooting of Jacob Blake and murder of George Floyd.] This verdict was not only outrageous and dangerous, it was also an obvious signal that encourages and notifies ‘vigilantes’ that they can continue to use violence to assert their power, and more importantly that they are above the criminal justice system when they do.” Ben Crump, civil rights lawyer: “The Rittenhouse case has pulled back the curtain on profound cracks in our justice system - from deep bias routinely and unabashedly displayed by the judge, to apathy of officers who witnessed Rittenhouse’s actions and did nothing.” Black Voters Matter: “Disappointed but not surprised. This is not justice. This is not accountability. However, this is America.” Our video team have kindly put together footage from outside the court in Kenosha, after the verdict was read. You can see it here: From the progressive side of the political fence, here’s a statement from Rashida Tlaib, a Democrat from Michigan who was one of the first Muslim women elected to the US Congress: Our justice system is broken. It protects white supremacy. The two people who were killed deserved justice and so did our communities who continue be targeted with violence like this.” To recap, Kyle Rittenhouse, who is white, killed Joseph Rosenbaum, 36, and Anthony Huber, 26, and wounded Gaige Grosskreutz, 27; the victims were white. However, the shootings occurred during protests in Kenosha in the heated summer of 2020, when protests against racial injustice spread across the US in the aftermath of the murder of a Black man, George Floyd, by a white officer in Minneapolis. The protests amid which Rittenhouse took his gun to Kenosha from his home across the border in Illinois were stoked too by the shooting in the back of Jacob Blake, a Black man, by a white officer. The officer did not face federal charges. Madison Cawthorn, a young far-right congressman from North Carolina – and professional political gadfly – has this to say: “Kyle Rittenhouse is not guilty, my friends. You have a right to defend yourselves. Be armed, be dangerous and be moral.” A caption on his short video read: “Kyle, if you want an internship, reach out to me.” Unsurprisingly, legal professionals have been offering more considered, nuanced, responsible and simply grown-up takes on the verdict. Michael Graveley, the Kenosha county district attorney, said: “We respect the jury verdict based on three and a half days of careful deliberations. Certainly issues regarding the privilege of self defence remain highly contentious in our current times. We ask that all members of the public accept the verdicts peacefully and not resort to violence.” There is also a statement from Damon Hewitt, president and executive director of the Lawyers’ Committee for Civil Rights Under Law, who lamented “a long history in which our legal system has failed to hold perpetrators of violence against those who speak up in the name of racial justice accountable. “Kyle Rittenhouse was part of a self-appointed white militia whose only purpose was to threaten and intimidate protesters outraged by the unjustified shooting and maiming of a Black man [Jacob Blake]. “As the trial and Rittenhouse’s statements and actions made clear, he put himself and everyone around him in danger through his reckless, irresponsible and illegal wielding of a high-powered assault weapon that never belonged on the streets in the first place. He intentionally shot other people while committing a crime, resulting in the killing of two people and severe injury to a third. It is an insult to justice that he is not being held responsible. “It is also worth noting that Rittenhouse was a child when he committed these acts. Among the most gutting aspects of his trial and acquittal on all charges is that the court afforded him the kinds of protections and benefit of the doubt at every stage that most Black children and children of color are never afforded in this country. In fact, many children of color never quite get to be children at all in a society that labels and objectifies them, from the cradle to the grave. “Despite this absurd result and ongoing racial injustice, we will continue to fight for an America where everyone is safe from armed aggression, where everyone can also safely express themselves in a space that does not lead to fatal violence, and where all children are protected.” Speaking to reporters earlier, Mark Richards, the attorney for Kyle Rittenhouse, said he was “thankful in more ways than one that the jury finally got to hear the true story. And … talking about social media and things like that, the story that came out from the beginning was not the true story. And that was something that we had to work to overcome in court.” Asked if Rittenhouse felt remorse, Richards said: “I think he does. We’ve talked about it. There’s been so much talk about whether the tears [in court] were genuine. “All I can say is when we prepared Kyle and we worked on his testimony there were things we couldn’t talk about in my office because it got too emotional and he couldn’t handle it. He’s in, you know, counseling for PTSD. So he doesn’t sleep at night. “Remorse I think manifests itself some other ways. I don’t think he can ever walk out here and say that, because of the situation. But I know Kyle Rittenhouse and I know what he feels.” He also talked about Rittenhouse’s security – and his own. “He has to get on with his life the best he can. I think eventually some anonymity will come back to it. I don’t think he’ll continue to live in this area. I think it’s too dangerous. He has had 24-hour security since this happened. We’re thankful that the judge protected his address. “Everybody in this case and when I say that I mean prosecution, defense, to me it’s scary how many death threats we’ve had. You know, I was answering my phone on the way back into court in Kenosha. “After the third death threat, I quit answering the phone.” We have a full, formal statement from Joe Biden. It reads: While the verdict in Kenosha will leave many Americans feeling angry and concerned, myself included, we must acknowledge that the jury has spoken. I ran on a promise to bring Americans together, because I believe that what unites us is far greater than what divides us. I know that we’re not going to heal our country’s wounds overnight, but I remain steadfast in my commitment to do everything in my power to ensure that every American is treated equally, with fairness and dignity, under the law. I urge everyone to express their views peacefully, consistent with the rule of law. Violence and destruction of property have no place in our democracy. The White House and federal authorities have been in contact with Governor [Tony] Evers’ office to prepare for any outcome in this case, and I have spoken with the governor this afternoon and offered support and any assistance needed to ensure public safety. No mention, unsurprisingly, of his campaign video which showed Kyle Rittenhouse in a montage linking Donald Trump to white supremacist groups. Kyle Rittenhouse’s defense attorney, Mark Richards, has been speaking to reporters. In a long exchange, Richards was read Joe Biden’s short statement from the White House. The lawyer laughed. “I’m not laughing at President Biden,” he said. “What I’m laughing at is a friend of mine who’s a lawyer, he and I had done a big case together, seven, eight years ago, and he said, ‘Do you think this Rittenhouse is going to be bigger than that case?’ And I said, ‘You know I do.’ And he said ‘Why?’ “And I said, ‘I’ve never had a case and I don’t think I ever will where within two days or three days of one another, the president [then Donald Trump] and the presidential candidate comment on it. And both of them had such different beliefs.’ “President Biden said some things that I think are so incorrect. [Rittenhouse], he’s not a white supremacist. I’m glad that [Biden] at least respects the jury verdict.” Last September, an image of Rittenhouse was included in a Biden campaign video which accused Trump of being a white supremacist and supporting such groups, alongside footage of such activity. In light of the Rittenhouse trial and verdict, Republicans have seized on the video, demanding a presidential apology. Ronna McDaniel, the GOP chair, said: “Before he knew the facts, Biden prejudged the Rittenhouse case. He smeared a teenager to score political points and spread lies about this case. What Biden did was dangerous and inflammatory. Biden needs to apologise and ACT NOW before the left uses his lies to fuel violence.” Asked about the video at the White House today, Biden declined to answer directly. The author Don Winslow, a prominent anti-Trump voice on social media, thinks that was a mistake, writing: “I really wish that when President Biden was asked today about the Kyle Rittenhouse verdict he would have simply said ‘I am not going to comment on that’. Instead his answer will come back to haunt him and us.” Jerrold Nadler of New York, the Democratic chair of the House judiciary committee, is out with a much stronger statement than President Biden: “This heartbreaking verdict is a miscarriage of justice and sets a dangerous precedent which justifies federal review by [the Department of Justice]. “Justice cannot tolerate armed persons crossing state lines looking for trouble while people engage in first amendment-protected protest.” Here, too, is a taste of reactions to the Rittenhouse verdict from both sides of the political and racial divide in Wisconsin, from two local politicians with national profiles. Wisconsin’s lieutenant governor, Mandela Barnes, who is Black, denounced the outcome. “Over the last few weeks, many dreaded the outcome we just witnessed,” said Barnes, who is also a Democratic candidate for US Senate. “The presumption of innocence until proven guilty is what we should expect from our judicial system, but that standard is not always applied equally. We have seen so many Black and brown youth killed, only to be put on trial posthumously, while the innocence of Kyle Rittenhouse was virtually demanded by the judge.” The former Wisconsin governor Scott Walker, a white Republican who ran for the presidential nomination in 2016, welcomed the verdict and condemned the case brought against Rittenhouse. “All of us who knew what actually happened in Kenosha last year assumed this would be the verdict,” he tweeted. “Thankfully, the jury thought the same.” We have a statement from Joe Biden, and it is short and simple: I stand by what the jury has to say. The jury system works.” In other reaction, the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) said: “The verdict in the Kyle Rittenhouse case is a travesty and fails to deliver justice on behalf of those who lost their lives as they peacefully assembled to protest against police brutality and violence.” Bernice King, daughter of Martin Luther King Jr, offered: “Justice is not just about verdicts. It is a continuum. We can galvanise around changing our culture, including challenging the difference in how a Black male teen would have been engaged in Kenosha.” Among Republicans, there was celebration. Greg Abbott, Republican governor of Texas, tweeted: “Rittenhouse – NOT GUILTY!” Ron Johnson, a Republican senator from Wisconsin, said: “I believe justice has been served in the Kyle Rittenhouse trial. I hope everyone can accept the verdict, remain peaceful, and let the community of Kenosha heal and rebuild.” In court, the judge, Bruce Schroeder, praised the work of a jury the Associated Press reports “appeared to be overwhelmingly white”. “OK, folks,” Schroeder said. “Your job is done. And we started just about three weeks ago. And I told you it could last two weeks or two days. “… You were a wonderful jury to work with. You’re punctual, you’re attentive. The forgotten six over here” – the alternates, not on the panel – “had a very difficult job of keeping from discussing the case during the time that they were sequestered as well. “All of you, I couldn’t have asked for a better jury to work with. And it has truly been my pleasure. I think without commenting on the verdicts themselves, just in terms of your attentiveness and the cooperation that you gave to us justifies the confidence that the founders of our country placed in you. Judge Schroeder also addressed intense media interest in the case, telling jurors they were not “under any obligation to discuss any aspect of this case with anyone. “You’re welcome to do so as little or as much as you want … A number of media sources have requested the ability to talk to you and they have been allowed to present presentations to you that you’ll get in writing and it’s entirely up to you whether you want to contact them. They are not to contact you. “If anyone does contact you, just tell them you’re not interested in discussing if that’s the case. And if anyone persists in doing so, report that to us and it will be addressed.” Many moments in the trial captured attention across the US – not least when the defendant, Kyle Rittenhouse, broke down in tears. Our columnist, Moira Donegan, wasn’t buying it. His voice choked up and his face went red. The young man squinted and panted, his mouth pulled up plaintively towards his nose, his answers to the questions coming out in gasping little bursts. Kyle Rittenhouse, on the stand testifying at his trial for killing two people and wounding a third last summer at a racial justice protest in Kenosha, Wisconsin, was not crying for the men he killed, Joseph Rosenbaum and Anthony Huber. He was crying for himself, describing what he said was his mortal fear that night in August 2020, when he opened fire on the protesters using an AR-15. “I didn’t do anything wrong,” Rittenhouse gasped, describing how he had confronted and ultimately killed the two men while he was guarding the lot of a car dealership. “I defended myself.” Rittenhouse was 17 at the time of the shooting; he is 18 now. The young man’s emotional testimony had a practical purpose: it was a performance meant to make him seem helpless and childlike, and to convince the jury in his homicide trial that there was a reasonable possibility that he was in fear for his life when he shot the three men. But to many, the emotion of Rittenhouse’s testimony seemed to stem not from his memories of the incident, but from the indignant entitlement of a white man thwarted in the enforcement of his own privilege. Here’s the full piece: Jury deliberations in the case took around 25 hours, before the unanimous not-guilty verdicts were handed down by a panel the Associated Press reports “appeared to be overwhelmingly white”. Kyle Rittenhouse, the 18-year-old defendant, fought tears, took deep breaths, cried and struggled to keep his feet. He accepted water and tissues handed to him. He had faced possible life imprisonment. Here’s video of the moment: The parents of Anthony Huber have released a statement. They were not in court to hear the verdict though other family members were. The statement reads: We are heartbroken and angry that Kyle Rittenhouse was acquitted in his criminal trial for the murder of our son, Anthony Huber. There was no justice today for Anthony or for Mr Rittenhouse’s other victims, Joseph Rosenbaum and Gaige Grosskreutz.” Charles F Coleman Jr, a civil rights attorney, has been speaking to CNN about the verdict: I think that this may be a surprise to many people’s sensibilities, but it should not be a surprise to your logic. And what I mean by that is trials are oftentimes a tale of competing narratives. And I oftentimes say that the important piece is to control the narrative whatever side you’re on. And in this case, what we saw were the competing narratives of Kyle Rittenhouse on one hand being a victim and on one hand being a vigilante. Ultimately, what we know now is that the jury bought the narrative of Kyle Rittenhouse being a victim. … This was not a slam dunk from the prosecution from the get go. They had an uphill battle to climb [sic]. The judge did not do them any favors with many of his rulings all the way through the entirety of the case. “However, it should be noted that the prosecution did not have great facts to work with from the outset. And so while a lot of people out there may be looking at this case and wondering how could this have happened, if … they were watching the trial and paying attention to the details, you may have seen some of this coming. Coleman Jr also spoke to the likely lasting place of the case in American history: I think it’s important to understand that regardless of the outcome of this case, in some eyes, Kyle Rittenhouse was going to be a hero and some eyes he was going to be a villain. But what we now know after seeing him walk is that he’s going to be remembered pretty much forever going forward.” Before the verdict was handed down, Mario Koran reported from Kenosha about tensions over the case: … a crowd of supporters stood outside the Kenosha county courthouse, volleying chants in the cold November dark. “Black Lives Matter!” one group shouted. “Self-defense is not a crime!” the other responded. The dueling chants crystallize what the trial has come to represent for the millions of people watching the case in Wisconsin and across America. To some, it’s a case of a gun-wielding teenager who responded to racial unrest by taking justice into his own hands and shooting three anti-racist protesters – two fatally. To others, Kyle Rittenhouse used his weapon in self-defense after he was attacked by members of a violent crowd. That divide is evident in footage from the steps of the court now, broadcast by CNN, where tempers are fraying after the not guilty verdict. Justin Blake, an uncle of Jacob Blake, whose shooting by a white police officer sparked the protests which Rittenhouse went to with his gun, tells a reporter: “I just want the nation to know … the nation that you live in now isn’t the nation of the United States that we used to live in.” From the other side of the microphone, a supporter of Rittenhouse shouts angrily. It’s hard to make out what is being shouted but the supporter calls someone a “piece of shit” and CNN cuts back to the studio. Here’s Mario’s piece about tensions over the Rittenhouse case in Kenosha – again, written before the not guilty verdict came down. And here’s another piece from Mario, about racial tensions in the city: Maya Yang writes, about the five key moments in the Rittenhouse trial: The acquittal of Kyle Rittenhouse – who killed two men and injured another during anti-racism protests in Kenosha, Wisconsin – came after a contentious and controversial trial that gripped America. For many people Rittenhouse’s treatment was seen as revealing the favorable treatment that a white and armed militia supporter received from law enforcement when compared to police attitudes to anti-racism protesters. Here are five key moments that happened as the courtroom drama played out. … to further coverage of the Kyle Rittenhouse trial – and its aftermath. The jury in Kenosha, Wisconsin, in one of the most closely watched US trials this year, has delivered its verdict: not guilty on all counts. Rittenhouse was 17 when he travelled from Illinois to Wisconsin on the night of 25 August 2020. In a summer marked by protests against racial injustice across the US and beyond, Kenosha was host to demonstrations, which sometimes turned violent, particularly after the shooting of a Black man, Jacob Blake, by a white police officer. Rittenhouse was armed with a military-style rifle. He killed Joseph Rosenbaum, 36, and Anthony Huber, 26, and wounded Gaige Grosskreutz, 27, after curfew had been declared. Rittenhouse is white, as were the men he shot. But his case focused attention on questions of racial justice, unequal policing, and firearms rights which lie at the heart of America’s increasingly bitter partisan divide. Claiming self-defence, Rittenhouse pleaded not guilty to two counts of homicide, one of attempted homicide and two of recklessly endangering safety, for firing his weapon near others. He was also charged with the illegal possession of a dangerous weapon by a minor, but the judge dropped that charge. The judge, Bruce Schroeder, became the focus of intense attention himself, with a series of seemingly idiosyncratic outbursts and procedural rulings. Many analysts thought witnesses for the prosecution bolstered the case for the defence. The defence requested a mistrial, over access to evidence. We’ll follow reaction here.In a surprise move, Theranos founder Elizabeth Holmes took the stand in her own defense on Friday during a fraud trial that has held Silicon Valley in its grip. The former CEO of the blood-testing company is charged with deceiving investors and customers about a supposedly revolutionary device that could perform hundreds of tests using just a drop of blood. She faces 11 counts of fraud and up to 20 years in prison. Holmes’s testimony came just hours after prosecutors rested their case, as the trial approached the end of its 11th week. The unexpected decision to have Holmes testify so early in her defense was a bombshell development and a risky move by her legal team. Holmes walked slowly to the stand before a rapt courtroom filled with spectators and jurors, all wearing masks. She began her testimony by recounting her early years as a student at Stanford University and her interest in disease detection, culminating in her decision to drop out of school at age 19 and found the startup later known as Theranos. She recounted her early years as a student and interest in disease detection while working with a respected chemistry professor, Channing Robertson, who would later join Theranos. “He encouraged me to continue my research,” Holmes recalled. She spoke in a husky voice that became one of her trademarks as she raised hundreds of millions of dollars and touted the revolutionary potential of Theranos’s blood testing technology. After drawing up a business plan and securing patents for the blood-testing technology she was trying to perfect, Holmes testified that she used savings earmarked for college to finance her ambitions of shaking up the health care industry. “I started working all the time ... trying to meet people who could help me build this,” Holmes said. Holmes also discussed how the company had originally been called Real Time Cures but later changed its name. “I was doing it on my own … I raised the money to start a lab and hire scientists,” she told the court. Taking the stand in her defense carries significant risks as prosecutors can attack on any inconsistencies in Holmes’s numerous public statements. Federal prosecutors made it clear that they are eager to grill Holmes under oath as they presented their case against her. It’s unlikely they will get that opportunity until Monday, at the earliest, when the trial resumes. Over the course of the trial, being held in the San Jose, California, courtroom, government attorneys have attempted to prove Holmes knowingly misled investors and patients by misrepresenting the capabilities of her company’s blood-testing devices. At the close of their case, the defense moved to dismiss one count of fraud regarding a patient who was unwilling to testify. The prosecution called more than two dozen witnesses including former employees, investors and patients who testified that Theranos’s blood-testing devices did not work as advertised, returning inaccurate results. Witnesses also stated many blood tests were being carried out by external labs rather than on Theranos devices. The legal team for Elizabeth Holmes will argue the founder did not knowingly commit fraud but rather did not understand the shortcomings of Theranos technology. In opening arguments, her defense attorney Lance Wade painted a picture of a hardworking young female executive caught up in the Silicon Valley culture that encourages entrepreneurs to push cutting-edge ideas. “In the end, Theranos failed, and Ms Holmes walked away with nothing,” he said. “But failure is not a crime – trying your hardest and coming up short, is not a crime.” The defense is expected to argue that Holmes was influenced by her co-executive and former boyfriend, Sunny Balwani. As potential witnesses, the defense team has listed a number of domestic violence experts, suggesting they may argue Holmes was abused and not thinking clearly when she made business decisions that resulted in fraud. “There was another side of Holmes’s relationship with Balwani that the public never saw,” Wade said in opening arguments, adding that “trusting [Balwani] as her primary adviser was one of her mistakes”. Balwani has strongly denied these allegations. His defense team did not respond to request for comment. He faces his own trial for fraud charges in 2022. The Associated Press contributed to this report.Emergency crews in western Canada continued searching on Friday for victims of flash floods and mudslides which tore through the region this week, as survivors described harrowing escapes from the disaster. British Columbia declared its third state of emergency in a year on Wednesday after a month’s worth of rain fell in two days, swamping towns and cities, blocking major highways and leaving much of the province under water. So far, officials have confirmed just one fatality, in a landslide near the village of Pemberton. But gripping testimony from a journalist who survived that incident suggests that figure is likely to rise. Global BC cameraman Mike Timbrell was traveling along a mountain highway towards Vancouver on Monday as the storm raged. After picking his way past several smaller landslides he was eventually brought to a halt behind a line of cars. Other travellers had left their vehicles and appeared to be gathered around what appeared to be the aftermath of another rockslide. As he got back into his vehicle, Timbrell heard a “loud, terrifying roar” as a wall of snow and mud descended on the scene, toppling trees – and engulfing the motorists. “My truck was moving all over, getting hammered by trees. I thought I was a goner,” he said. Once the slide stopped, Timbrell escaped from his car and began running. “I turned around and looked at my truck and it was half-buried and all the cars that were on the road and all the people, they were just gone. Gone,” he said. “I couldn’t believe it, it was almost like – in the blink of an eye – there were roads, there were cars, there was people, and then bang, everything was gone, just gone. Not a sign of a car, not a wheel, just trees and mud. It was all you could see,” he said. Accounts from survivors have revealed that even successful rescue operations were far more dangerous than the public first realized. Search and rescue crews in helicopters navigated rain, high winds and thick cloud cover in what was described as one of the largest mass air evacuations in the region’s history. More than 300 people stranded on Highway 7 were rescued in the operation, during which one pilot was forced to land a Cormorant helicopter less than a meter from a broken power line pole. “It was probably the tightest confined area I ever landed in,” Capt Jonathan Groten told the Globe and Mail. On Friday, British Columbia imposed temporary restrictions on fuel and non-essential travel to ease supply chain disruptions and help the recovery effort. The orders, announced by deputy premier Mike Farnworth, limit people in some areas, including the Vancouver Island, to 30 liters (7.9 gallons) of fuel per visit until 1 December. Non-essential travel along severely affected highways will also be prohibited. The storms forced the closure of the Trans Mountain pipeline and cut two critical east-west rail lines owned by Canadian Pacific Railway and Canadian National Railway Co that lead to Canada’s busiest port of Vancouver, impeding the supply of fuel and goods. Farnworth said the province was also working with the federal government to import fuel via alternate routes, including by truck and barge from the USor neighboring Alberta. As water levels recede in areas and crews work to clear debris and assess damage to highways, many of the province’s small communities remained cut off from road systems or without power. On Thursday, fire chief Jody Woodford of Tulameen, a village of fewer than 300 people, told media the community had been without phone reception for days, and only pockets had power. “Some people made it out and actually had to swim, abandon their vehicles and swim to dry land and then walk to the fire hall.” she said. In the province’s lower mainland, as emergency crews work to stave of an impending disaster on the regions’ many farms, the mayor of the city of Abbotsford warned that homes may be destroyed in order to build emergency dikes, after the previous barrier was breached. “One house is too much. And if it was my house, I’d be concerned, too. But there are not many options here,” he said. Work on the 2.5km dike is set to begin on Friday morning, with the help of dozens of soldiers. Much of the area lies on the former site of Sumas Lake, a vast body of water which was drained in the last century. Four pumps currently divert water from the basin at a rate of half a million gallons a minute, but city officials feared earlier this week they could fail, inundating the area with even more water. Braun said the pump station is still an area of concern, as the waters of the Nooksack River continue to rise as it flows in from the United States and heavy rain is forecast for early next week. “We are not out of this by a long shot,” he said.In July 2017, Prigi Arisandi stood in the Surabaya River in East Java, Indonesia, and counted nappies. In one hour, “176 diapers floated in front of my face,” he said. The Indonesian biologist, who won the Goldman environmental prize in 2011 for his efforts to stem pollution flowing into the Surabaya, decided to make nappy waste his focus. He launched the Diaper Evacuation Brigade, a movement of volunteers who travel across Indonesia, wearing hazmat suits to fish used nappies out of the country’s rivers. Indonesia produces an estimated 6bn disposable nappies a year. Many end up thrown into rivers and the sea, in part because the country lacks waste infrastructure but also because of a belief among some that burning babies’ nappies could cause them pain. Disposable nappies made up 21% of the waste found in the waterways of 15 Indonesian cities, according to a 2018 World Bank study. In the water, nappies break down into microplastics, leach chemicals, damage marine life and potentially contaminate drinking water, most of which comes from the rivers. The problem of disposable diaper waste is not confined to Indonesia. While discussions of single-use plastics tend to be dominated by plastic straws and bags, disposable nappies are one of the biggest contributors to plastic waste globally. They are typically made from several types of plastic, including a polyethylene waterproof back layer and a polypropylene inner layer. A baby may get through 4,000-6,000 nappies by the time they are potty trained. Every year, an estimated 167bn disposable nappies are produced, requiring 248.5m barrels of crude oil. Because of the mix of materials, and the addition of human waste, they are very hard to recycle. The vast majority end up in landfill, where they take hundreds of years to break down. Globally, more than 300,000 disposable nappies a minute are sent to landfill, incinerated or end up in the environment, including the ocean. The problem is disposable nappies are easy and convenient. Parents may be too overwhelmed to cope with the extra work of reusable nappies, they may lack adequate washing and drying facilities or be put off by upfront costs. As a result, disposable nappy companies’ sales are booming in some regions, particularly south-east Asian countries such as Indonesia, with its rising population and growing middle class. One alternative is “biodegradable” or “compostable” nappies, which seem to promise a solution to this complex problem: the convenience of a single-use product with less guilt about what happens to it after use. However, the vast majority of biodegradable or compostable nappies still contain plastic elements, often the sticky tabs or the outer film. “The best example that I could find was made out of around 80% of biodegradable materials,” said Dr Charlotte Lloyd, an environmental biogeochemist at the University of Bristol, who is researching nappies available in the UK. After using a nappy, Lloyd said, “you tend to roll it up, stick it down, and then actually all of your biodegradable materials will be protected within that outer shell”. When the nappies end up in landfill – which almost all will – the biodegradable materials will have little contact with the oxygen they need to biodegrade. “So you spend more money on a biodegradable nappy, thinking that you’re doing the right thing. But actually, it’s just still sitting in landfill,” she said. It’s a situation that Laura Crawford, also based in the UK, finds incredibly frustrating. After a thwarted attempt to use reusable nappies with her baby – struggling with a toddler and colicky newborn “[they] were just the last thing I could cope with” – she decided to create an eco range. In 2018, she launched Mama Bamboo, producing nappies from sustainably sourced, FSC-certified bamboo with compostable bioplastic liners. However, eliminating fossil-fuel plastic is still “only half the answer”, she said. Her nappies break down in hot composters, which few people have, or industrial composters, which are not nationally available in the UK. “At the moment, we have a system where people are prepared to pay upfront for expensive nappies and then get their government to pay – and the environment to pay – to put them into landfill,” said Dr Mark Miodownik, a materials scientist at University College London. He has been working with Mama Bamboo and other biodegradable nappy companies as part of a research project on establishing a comprehensive industrial composting system for plastics. Small-scale efforts to create better systems for compostable nappies are popping up across the world. Paris-based social enterprise Les Alchimistes collects compostable nappies from childcare centres and takes them to a composting site on the outskirts of the city. It tests the compost, said Maïwenn Mollet, director of the nappies project, “to check there is no ecotoxicity and also to study microplastics”. Once they have proven the compost’s quality, they plan to sell it to farms. Kim and Jason Graham-Nye, founders of gDiapers, are trialling their 100% compostable nappy in West Papua, Indonesia. They work with an Indonesian company to do daily nappy drop-offs and collections, and to compost the used diapers locally. Other efforts focus on increasing uptake of reusable nappies. These create less landfill waste but their environmental credentials are not always clear cut. Many are made out of cotton, a thirsty crop often grown with a lot of pesticides. They also require laundering, which can be water- and energy-intensive. Reusables’ footprint depends on how they are used, according to 2008 UK government analysis, which found that line-drying, washing in full loads and using them for subsequent children would make reusables a better environmental choice than disposables. In the south Pacific archipelago of Vanuatu – where disposable nappies make up 27% of the nation’s rubbish – local social enterprise Mamma’s Laef and UK-based Bambino Mio have been providing modern reusable nappies to 150 mothers. Here, nappies tend to be hand washed and line dried. The pilot has been very popular, said Jack Kalsrap, who runs Mamma’s Laef with his wife, Mary, because “it can be expensive for families to set up buying a pack of reusable baby nappies”. Arisandi wants to make reusable nappies more accessible in Indonesia, too. He’s calling on the government to crack down on single-use nappies and to subsidise reusable cloth nappies to make the initial costs more affordable. He also wants nappy companies to be forced to take responsibility for the waste their products produce. Experts globally speak of a lack of policies around disposable nappies. “To date there’s no legislation [in the EU] regulating nappies,” said Larissa Copello, consumption and production campaigner at Zero Waste Europe. The organisation wants incentives for reusable nappies as well as pressure on big nappy companies to make their products more sustainable. “There definitely is a better route than plastic disposables but, at the moment, the system is just very broken,” said Lloyd, adding, “we’re morally obliged to do something better than we’re currently doing.”Saturday 20 November marks World Children’s Day, the anniversary of the UN general assembly’s adoption of the convention of the rights of the child (UNCRC). But despite the UK ratifying the UNCRC in 1991, many children in care are being treated in a way that violates this convention. According to the UN committee on the rights of the child, restraint against children should only be used if the child poses an imminent danger to themselves or others, under the direct supervision of a medical professional, and only after all other measures have been exhausted. It should never be used to secure compliance or as a punishment, and all incidents should be recorded, monitored and evaluated by the state. Shockingly, innocent children in care here in the UK are being placed in handcuffs by private providers when being transported. Ofsted has the power to record incidents of restraint in children’s homes, but there is no legal obligation on private transport providers to report any incidents of restraint. This has allowed a data gap to emerge, as there is no way to monitor the practice or hold private transport providers that violate children’s rights accountable. The Hope instead of Handcuffs campaign is calling on the government to plug this data gap by mandating that all organisations involved in the transportation of children be legally obliged to report any incidents of restraint. Only then can we move one step closer to upholding the rights of these vulnerable children. Sarah Champion MP John McDonnell MPIt was the house that stayed dry. In 2005, a storm and tidal surge devastated the coast of South Uist, damaging homes and taking five lives. But this low building, less than five metres above sea level, somehow escaped the flood. Cuir na Bhoir is a thatched blackhouse built on a delicate spit of land on the west coast of South Uist, now a holiday cottage. I have travelled here from Devon to help local thatcher Neil Nicholson re-thatch it. We are using water reed from Tayside – not Hebridean, but more local than most thatching reed used in the UK, over 80% of which is imported from as far away as China. The more traditional material in the Western Isles is marram grass, a spiky plant that grows among the sand dunes, and helps to stabilise them, too. Cutting marram grass for thatching is permitted, but strictly controlled to prevent coastal erosion – a particular concern on the west coast of South Uist, which is vulnerable to rising sea levels due to its large areas of fragile, low-lying machair (sandy, coastal grassland). Working on the lea side of the roof, we lay the reed over an old layer of marram grass, a technique known as “overcoating”. Beneath the marram sits an older “base coat” of peat turf, hung from nails driven into closely spaced vertical roof timbers known in Gaelic as cabar (as in – yes – tossing the caber). On this almost treeless island, timber was mostly salvaged from the shoreline. A neighbouring crofter, Ian Starkey, tells me he has seen sections of an old wooden loom built into a roof. The inside of this roof has been blackened by smoke from open fires and even now, 20 years after Cuir na Bhoir was converted into a modern dwelling, the attic space still carries the sweet reek of peat smoke. A quad of whooper swans thwump overhead. Above the darkening machair, a small flock of lapwing turn clumsy pirouettes. And I watch a big spring tide begin to push its way around the dunes, snaking in long pools behind the cottage. By nightfall, Cuir na Bhoir will be surrounded on three sides by water. And once again, for now, the house will stay safe above the sea. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryGoing Out: Cinema King Richard Out now Starring Will Smith, this biopic of Richard Williams, father of Venus and Serena, tells the story of a parent/coach so dedicated to his job that his daughters would transform tennis for ever. It’s a much-overused phrase, but the man is a literal gamechanger. Petite Maman Out now A delicate, autumnal, 72-minute dream of a film, the latest from the French director Céline Sciamma finds a little girl connecting emotionally with her mother, in a magic realist time-loop where they are both eight years old. Highly recommended, and not as twee as that premise might suggest. Drive My Car Out now A brainy and brilliant film based on a short story by Haruki Murakami, Ryusuke Hamaguchi’s stately adaptation takes its time to build an intimate portrait of a Japanese theatre director grappling with the infidelities of his late wife, an anxiety he expresses through his work staging a production of Uncle Vanya. Bruised Out now Halle Berry directs and stars as Jackie Justice, a disgraced former mixed martial arts fighter, who must get back in the ring to support the son she gave up as an infant following his father’s death. An underdog story as much about the feels as the fights. Catherine Bray * * * Going Out: Gigs Priya Ragu Manchester, 22 Nov; London, 23 Nov The Swiss-Sri Lankan newcomer brings her “Raguwavy” genre, a hypnotic blend of R&amp;B, hip-hop and south Indian music as showcased on her mixtape Damnshestamil. This two-city jaunt feels like a precursor to bigger things. Scenes from the Wild Southwark Cathedral, London, 25 &amp; 27 Nov The City of London Sinfonia marks its 50th-anniversary season with the first performance of a specially commissioned song cycle by Cheryl Francis-Hoad, based on the Wainwright prize-winning book by Dara McAnulty, Diary of a Young Naturalist. Andrew Clements London jazz festival Various venues, 20 &amp; 21 Nov The closing weekend brings saxophone great Charles Lloyd (Barbican Hall, Sat). Two very different virtuoso pianists, Stefano Bollani (Queen Elizabeth Hall, Sat) and Brad Mehldau (Barbican Hall, Sun) are among the other highlights. John Fordham * * * Going Out: Art Dürer’s Travels National Gallery, London, 20 Nov to 27 Feb Albrecht Dürer is the Leonardo of the north, an endlessly curious mind. This exhibition chases his restless Renaissance spirit by following his journeys to Venice, where he fancied the soldiers, and Flanders where he saw and praised Aztec art. His images of new landscapes and strange beasts are utterly beguiling. Lubaina Himid Tate Modern, London, 25 Nov to 3 Jul The art of Himid is not everyone’s idea of “modern”. She won the Turner prize, after all, with an installation that restages Hogarth and paints enigmatic and perturbing narrative scenes. Yet she switches to conceptual art to theoretically dissect media images. This show should be a bracing intellectual blast. Fabergé in London Victoria and Albert Museum, London, 20 Nov to 8 May Fabulous for fashionistas … and historians of Russian-British relations. This exhibition shows how Peter Carl Fabergé, egg-maker to the tsar, set up a London branch in 1903 to sell ornate wonders including a bejewelled cigarette case to the oligarchic Edwardian elite. It’s a glittering portrait of a gilded age. Howardena Pindell Fruitmarket Gallery, Edinburgh, to 2 May The 78-year-old Pindell has been fighting racism for decades. She combats injustice with direct, explicit interventions such as her 1980 video Free, White and 21, and paintings that engage with the history of slavery and apartheid. Yet she also makes gorgeously sensual abstract canvases that breathe the politics of beauty. Jonathan Jones * * * Going Out: Stage Outwitting the Devil Sadler’s Wells, London, 23 to 27 Nov UK premiere of choreographer Akram Khan’s take on the Mesopotamian epic poem Gilgamesh. The show opens a season celebrating 20 years of Khan’s storytelling. Lyndsey Winship Cabaret at the Kit Kat Club Playhouse theatre, London, to 14 May Tickets (very expensive tickets) are still available for this immersive reboot of Kander and Ebb’s powerful musical, set in a Berlin nightclub in 1929. Jessie Buckley, Eddie Redmayne and Omari Douglas star; it’s directed by the equally talented Rebecca Frecknall. A Christmas Carol Sherman theatre, Cardiff, 26 Nov to 31 Dec Another week, another Christmas Carol, although each is different. Joe Murphy directs his first show since taking over the theatre in 2019 and this adaptation is written by Gary Owen, whose work is always so daring and direct. It’s set in Victorian Cardiff, with a female Scrooge played by Hannah McPake. Miriam Gillinson Mark Watson Folkestone, 20 Nov; touring to 31 Jul Two decades into his career, Watson is among the most accomplished alternative standups in the country: always different and interesting, but never light on laughs. His latest show, This Can’t Be It, converts his recent existentialist meltdown into bracingly confessional comedy. Rachel Aroesti * * * Staying In: Streaming Partisan Available now, All 4 Life on an organic farm is not as idyllic as it first appears in this creepy Swedish drama, winner of best show at last year’s Cannes international series festival. Fares Fares (Westworld, Chernobyl) plays a new recruit who becomes unsettled by his increasingly strange surroundings. I’m a Celebrity … Get Me Out of Here! 21 Nov, 9pm, ITV; then ITV Hub This long-running reality show does more than just generate sponsorship deals. The now Wales-set competition is most entertaining when it plays with our collective nostalgia, taking famous faces from pop culture past and putting their personalities to a public vote. The Princes and the Press 22 Nov, 9pm, BBC Two The media portrayal of William, Harry, Kate and Meghan is a fascinating entity in itself: chronicling various newspapers’ agendas as well as society’s deeply ingrained prejudices alongside the lives of the new-gen royals. In this two-parter, the BBC’s media editor Amol Rajan unpicks the past decade’s coverage. Hawkeye From 24 Nov, Disney+ If you’re already struggling to keep up with developments in the Marvel Cinematic Universe, brace yourself: the fifth MCU TV show of 2021 is upon us. Hawkeye follows Jeremy Renner’s eponymous master archer as he trains up a young superfan named Kate Bishop (Hailee Steinfeld). RA * * * Staying In: Games Pokémon Brilliant Diamond &amp; Shining Pearl Out now These Switch remakes of classic Pokémon games will hit the nostalgia spot for the Zoomers who were kids in 2006. Sherlock Holmes: Chapter One Out now Video games are the best way to experience a mystery story, and developer Frogwares has good pedigree with the Holmesverse. Death’s Door Out 23 Nov An elegant adventure game about a little grim reaper, kind of like a morbid Zelda by way of Studio Ghibli, comes to Switch, PS4 and PS5 after making its debut on PC and Xbox earlier this year. Keza MacDonald * * * Staying In: Albums Smile – Phantom Island Out now Swedish producers Björn Yttling (Lykke Li) and Joakim Åhlund (Charli XCX), AKA Smile, return with a second album of psych-tinged pop. Highlights come from fellow Swedes, with singer-songwriter Freja the Dragon cooing on the mournful Eon, while Robyn lights up the 70s soft rock of Call My Name. Adele – 30 Out now The music industry’s Christmas present arrives in the shape of Adele’s fourth album, the follow-up to 2015’s 22m-selling 25. Inspired by her recent divorce, lead single Easy on Me is stadium-sized, while collaborations with producers Inflo (Little Simz) and Ludwig Göransson (Childish Gambino) push that voice into new directions. Elbow – Flying Dream 1 Out now Written remotely in London and Manchester, Elbow’s ninth album – the follow-up to 2019’s UK chart-topping Giants of All Sizes – started out as “little love notes” sent between band members. The song sketches were then perfected in the empty Brighton Theatre Royal, the intimacy lending the songs an added layer of wistfulness. Ladyhawke – Time Flies Out now Synthpop exponent Pip Brown returns after a period of ill-health with a sparkling fourth album, a hook-laden callback to 2008’s self-titled breakthrough. Fellow New Zealanders Broods add punch to lead single Guilty Love, while sashaying, disco-tinged highlight Think About You demands to be played on a light-up dancefloor. MC * * * Staying In: Brain food Wirecard: The Billion Euro Lie 25 Nov, 9pm, Sky Documentaries Once a bright star in European financing, the German tech company Wirecard collapsed in 2020 after almost €2bn went missing from its accounts. This fast-paced doc covers the subsequent arrest of its CEO and the continuing scandal. The Paris Review Podcast The literary magazine has recently launched the third season of its inventive podcast, boasting interviews on craft and composition with revered writers such as George Saunders and Joan Didion. OpenLearn Online Operating in affiliation with the Open University, OpenLearn is a treasure trove of free curated knowledge, hosting more than 1,000 short online learning courses, ranging from introductions to analysing poetry, to forensic psychology and modern languages. Ammar KaliaThree years, seven months, and 19 days. This is the length of time I spent incarcerated inside the psychiatric system. I look back on my years living on inpatient wards with a mixture of grief and sorrow. And I still wonder: is institutionalised care really the only option for the most critical cases? When I was 27, I had a psychotic episode. Psychosis is merciless. It preyed upon everything I knew about myself and left behind a dark void of a person. I was sectioned under the Mental Health Act and detained against my will in hospital. I arrived on the ward depressed and delusional. A psychiatrist quickly diagnosed me with bipolar disorder and prescribed medication. My mood lifted; the doctors tinkered with cocktails of drugs until the delusions subsided. Being here was a holiday for my mind, a place of safety, a place to get better. But life on a psychiatric ward is regimented and controlled. I took my medication at the same time every day, ate at the same time and slept at the same time. I lost my autonomy: staff dictated when I went outside and for how long. They counted the cutlery after every meal before I was allowed to leave the dining room to check I had not taken anything I could harm myself with; any sharp objects I owned – razors, tweezers, even glass makeup bottles – were taken from me and kept in the security cupboard. I was searched whenever I came back from going outside. I know this was done to protect me, other patients and staff – but it was suffocating. At 18, I had trekked across Nepal on my own – now all my freedom and autonomy had been taken away. In the year to March 2021, there were 53,239 new detentions under the Mental Health Act – an increase of 4.5% on the previous year. Mental health professionals will say to you that they always seek to keep people out of hospitals if they can: long hospital stays can lead to dependency and institutionalisation, rather than the autonomy and freedom people need to make long-term recovery. Currently, 8 million people are shut out of NHS mental health care because they don’t qualify as ill enough, and a further 1.6 million who do are sitting on waiting lists. With this in mind, it is easy to see how mental ill health can spiral out of control. This crisis in care means that the idea of supporting people like me in our communities, where we can access professional help alongside a network of family and friends, is becoming more and more distant. I met patients who had languished on psychiatric inpatient wards for years – some even decades. It is no life. I got used to the alarms going off all through the day and night as staff rushed to the bedroom of whichever patient was the latest to have self-harmed. If a patient couldn’t be managed, they were taken to seclusion, a completely bare room. The aim of putting them there was to calm them down. I could hear their cries and shouting and it still haunts me. One time, a fellow patient stopped taking her medication and relapsed. She wrote expletives on the walls in felt-tip pen, wrecked the ward garden and smashed her bedroom window with a snooker ball. Another day, a patient came into my room and swallowed the batteries out of my television remote control and had to be rushed to A&amp;E. I learned after that never to leave my door open again. I owe my life to the staff on the ward – their inexhaustible energy and supply of compassion and patience gave me back my dignity and self-worth. I learned the importance of taking care of myself. “Self-care” has been hijacked by advertisers as millennial, middle-class platitude, but it is so much more than an expensive bubble bath. It is making sure I take my medication on time. It is ensuring I am not under too much stress academically or professionally. It is cultivating my friendships and support network. Most importantly, self-care is a mentality; it is forgiving myself and prioritising time and kindness for myself. I also started an Open University course while an inpatient. It gave me purpose, drive and motivation. I was no longer just a patient or a diagnosis; I was a student with aspirations and goals. Still, I do question whether I really needed to be in hospital for as long as I was beyond my initial crisis period. I became, as Sylvia Plath wrote, imprisoned by the bell jar, “stewing in my own sour air”. The jar – my mental state and the rules of the institution – smothered me over the years as I fought to get better. The psychiatric ward taught me many things, but mainly it taught me how important freedom is. We must have a national conversation about whether the best way of treating patients with severe and enduring mental illness is to leave them on psychiatric wards. As I recovered from my illness, every step towards being free was a small victory. I gradually began to care about my appearance, having stopped bothering when I first fell ill. When I was discharged, I would go for long walks in the park, read and write in cafes, and go out for drinks with friends. Regaining my freedom was like going from sepia to colour. I still think back to my time in the psychiatric ward and wonder how my fellow patients are doing. Are they out now, living their lives, or are they still confined to the labyrinth of hospital life? I pause, and then I move on. Now I have to write my own story. Jen McPherson is a student and freelance journalistIt is 8.44am, and my wife and I are arguing on the way to pilates. We’ve been exercising together for about a year – with assorted Covid-induced breaks – and over time it has got competitive. The first competition is to be the person with the most legitimate reason for running late. “Sorry,” I say, pulling the front door shut behind us. “I couldn’t find my shoe.” “That’s fine,” my wife says. “I was making a business call.” “And I didn’t sleep well, due to existential worry,” I say. None of this matters, because our pilates instructor, Ruth, only lives down the road. It’s a 30 second walk. “Sorry we’re late,” my wife says when the door opens. “You’re not late,” says Ruth. “It’s his fault,” my wife says. “He’s preoccupied.” “With what?” says Ruth. “I don’t know,” she says. “Thoughts of impending death.” “Oh dear,” says Ruth. “That’s a private worry,” I say. “Death, death, death,” my wife says. “Am I on this thing today?” She is pointing at the reformer. The second competition is to be the first to use the only reformer, because lying on it is the closest thing pilates offers to going back to bed. “You had it last week,” I say. “I guess it doesn’t really matter,” my wife says, lying down on it. “So Tim, if you can start on the mat,” says Ruth. “Legs in table-top position.” “Ow,” I say, lying down. “Oh dear,” says Ruth. “What hurts?” “All of it,” I say. The final competition is to be the one who complains the most, thereby sucking up most of the attention and doing the least actual exercising. My wife used to be much better at this than I was, but I’ve learned from her: complain hard, complain early. “Maybe just lie there for a minute, feeling your lower spine against the mat,” says Ruth. “Yes, I can do that,” I say. I lie still, eyes closed, listening as my wife pushes the sprung carriage of the reformer backwards with the balls of her feet, over and over. “Right, enough of that,” she says. “Eight more,” says Ruth. “Go on,” I say. “Dig deep.” “You shut up,” my wife says. “Tim, when you’re ready, come into a kneeling position,” says Ruth. “Yes, I’m on my way,” I say. “Something weird going on with my left thigh, but I’ll cope.” “So, hands on the mat in front of you, right hand on top of the left, back straight, and then you’re going to reach the right leg out behind you,” says Ruth. “OK,” I say. “Wait, what?” “Look, he’s wasting time again,” my wife says. “I’m willing to comply, it’s just a lot to remember,” I say. “Do you get many married couples coming along together?” asks my wife. “No,” says Ruth. Back when I was going to the gym regularly I sometimes saw couples working out together, but it never lasted: one would eventually start turning up without the other. Years ago, when I shared a trainer with four or five other middle-aged men, I remember one of them getting divorced, disappearing for months and then suddenly re-joining the sessions with his much younger girlfriend. The rest of us were disapproving: we resented being minor characters in someone else’s short story. I am trying to remember that guy’s name when I find myself crouched sideways on the reformer, head forward, pushing the carriage away with one leg in the manner of a speed skater, having lost count somewhere around 15. I’m exhausted and sweating, and I can’t remember if I’ve done the other leg already. My wife, meanwhile, is doing step-ups on the box while describing the pain in her lower back – claiming attention, seizing the initiative. “Is it nearly over?” she says. “Nearly,” says Ruth. “Remember to keep your weight on the outside of your foot.” I dig deep, perform five more extensions and stop, the springs twanging as I stand up and breathe slowly – once, twice, three times. “When you’re done resting, Tim,” says Ruth. “You can turn round and do the other side.” I look up to see them both staring at me. “You’ve got to watch him every minute,” my wife says.Ivan on Ethan What were you hoping for? Someone I could enjoy a meal and good conversation with, and maybe a second date. First impressions? He was on time and waiting at the table. He had a big, beaming face with a nice smile and a chatty mouth. What did you talk about? Living in London, because he is from America. Family, travelling, work and gay dating. Free Britney. Any awkward moments? I knocked over my drink the second it was brought. We were about to go cheers and it slipped out of my hand and spilled across the table towards Ethan. Luckily, he stood up just in time. Good table manners? Yes. Tacos and burgers were eaten so there were messy fingers but that’s OK. Best thing about Ethan? He was very talkative and I was happy to listen. I am normally the chatty one. Would you introduce him to your friends? I would. Describe Ethan in three words Vibrant. Chatty. Optimistic. What do you think he made of you? That I am a nice, friendly guy. Did you go on somewhere? No, it was lashing down so we both walked back to the tube in a rush. If it weren’t for physical distancing, would you have kissed? No. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be? More food. Marks out of 10? 6.5. Would you meet again? As friends. Ethan on Ivan What were you hoping for? A new experience. I’d never been on a blind date before. First impressions? He was tall and really sweet. What did you talk about? Cultural differences: both between us – he’s from Galway and I’m from Washington DC – and between the UK, Irish and US LGBTQ+ communities. Any awkward moments? There was a spilled drink within the first 15 minutes. Shit happens – the only thing to do was laugh. Good table manners? He ate his burger with a knife and fork. Would I call it good manners? Yes. Best thing about Ivan? He’s a genuine guy and an open book. Would you introduce him to your friends? Yes, my friends would like him. Describe Ivan in three words Confident, chatty and resolute. What do you think he made of you? I honestly have no idea. Did you go on somewhere? Only to the station – it was pouring. If it weren’t for physical distancing, would you have kissed? He made it clear up front that the first date isn’t for kissing. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be? My outfit. I stayed at work late, so ran out to buy a shirt for the date, but it was too big, so I had to wear my work shirt. Marks out of 10? 6.5. Would you meet again? Yes, as a catch-up as friends. • Ivan and Ethan ate at Hotbox, Spitalfields, London E1. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com • This article was amended on 20 November 2021. The headings “Ivan on Ethan” and “Ethan on Ivan” were originally the wrong way aroundBefore modern archaeology, stone axes fashioned in the Neolithic era or earlier were known as thunderstones. They were believed to be created when lightning struck the ground, and to have magical properties. The first-century Roman writer Pliny called the stones ceraunia and said they were sought by the Magi, the priests of the Zoroastrian religion. He noted they resembled axe-heads but were of natural origin, being “found only in a place that has been struck by a thunderbolt”. Many ancient writers believed such stones provided protection against lightning and some Greek homes may still have an astropelékia (“lightning axe”) to protect the household. They were also supposed to ward off witchcraft, nightmares and other evils. In Scandinavia, they were thought to deter trolls. The belief that stone tools are actually lightning remnants has been recorded all over Europe, as well as parts of Africa and the far east. In Borneo, thunderstones were kept in rice barns to help preserve the grain. The ancient weather god Perkunos carried a weapon whose name means both “lightning” and “hammer”. The Greek supreme deity, Zeus, was normally depicted with a javelin-like thunderbolt, but occasionally shown with a stone axe. The association between lightning and Neolithic stone axes may also be the origin of the hammer wielded by the Norse thunder god, and more recently Marvel icon, Thor.Government prosecutors in the trial of Theranos CEO Elizabeth Holmes ended their case on Friday, capping off 11 weeks of testimony from witnesses detailing allegations of fraud against the founder. The Theranos saga has been widely covered since cracks began to emerge in the glossy image of the blood testing startup in 2015. But the first phase of the trial revealed more startling new details. Investors, former employees and customers chipped away at the successful startup image that Theranos presented during its meteoric rise, instead painting a picture of a chaotic workplace with a founder desperate to succeed – tolerating little dissent amid rising questions about the company’s technologies. Holmes has pleaded not guilty to the charges of defrauding investors and patients . On Friday, Holmes took the stand in her own defense, a risky move that opens her to being grilled in cross examination by the prosecution. Here is what we have learned so far. Former employees: Concerns fell on deaf ears Theranos launched in 2003 and claimed that its proprietary Edison machines could perform hundreds of health tests with just one prick of blood. The company gained momentum, forging partnerships with big names such as Safeway and Walgreens to distribute its tests, raising billions in funding. Amid this spectacular rise, four different lab directors at the company said they had voiced grave concerns about its technological abilities operations. Over six days of questioning, former lab director Adam Rosendorff said he repeatedly expressed doubts about Theranos’ tech to Holmes, but faced “tremendous pressure at the company to show that this technology was successful”. “I had frequent conversations with Elizabeth about concerns that I had in the laboratory,” he testified. Frustrated and disillusioned, he left the company in 2014, he said, noting that when he left he felt “very skeptical” of the Edison machine. Lynette Sawyer and Sunil Dhawan, co-directors of the lab in 2014 and 2015, testified to a disjointed lab operation, noting they never met one another in person and rarely visited the lab or met researchers. They alleged their roles consisted primarily filling out paperwork. “I was very uncomfortable with the lack of clarity about the lab,” Sawyer testified. A fourth former lab director, Kingshuk Das, testified that the Edison devices were returning unusual lab results – turning up prostate-specific antigens for female patients, for example. “I found these instruments to be unsuitable for clinical use,” Das said of the devices. When Das questioned Holmes about the inconsistencies, Das said, the founder became defensive and offered “implausible” explanations as to why the machines were malfunctioning. Investors: Theranos over-promised without showing results Theranos attracted large amounts of funding in part due to high-profile investors, including former secretary of states George Schultz and Henry Kissinger, media tycoon Rupert Murdoch and former defense secretary James Mattis. Several of those investors told the jury about their initial excitement about the company and their growing reservations as red flags piled up. Testifying early in the trial, Mattis said he personally invested $85,000 in Theranos, finding the technology “pretty breathtaking”. He was asked to serve on the company’s board, a request he said he questioned as he was “not a medical person” but agreed to (He was paid $150,000 to serve on the board). Mattis said he ultimately lost faith in the company after the Wall Street Journal revealed Theranos’ testing devices were not actually being used to perform most of the analyses the company offered. “There came a point where I didn’t know what to believe about Theranos any more,” he said. Former estate attorney and Theranos investor, Daniel Mosley, testified how he became enamored with the company’s mission and convinced a number of wealthy clients and contacts to invest in it. His recruits included Walmart’s Walton family and Michigan’s billionaire DeVos family. Along with his own investment of $6m, Mosley brought an estimated $380m to Theranos. Several other financial backers of Theranos told the jury they were troubled by the extensive secrecy around the company’s operations, which made it difficult to properly vet whether it was a smart investment. Meanwhile, they reported a pressure to get in on a much-hyped opportunity before it was too late. Lisa Peterson, who handles investments for the DeVos family, said she feared Holmes would ice her out if she asked too many questions about the company. “We were very careful not to circumvent things and upset Elizabeth,” she said. “If we did too much, we wouldn’t be invited back to invest.” Drug companies and other business partners: We were manipulated Among the most shocking allegations in the trial so far was the prosecution’s accusations that Theranos used false and misleading documents implying that external labs had vetted the products – when in reality they had not – to promote its Edison tests to potential partners. Walgreens CFO Wade Miquelon revealed during his testimony that Holmes had implied drug firms Pfizer and Schering-Plough had validated the company’s blood-testing technology. Holmes, Miquelon said, shared with investors and potential partners a document carrying the Pfizer logo, purportedly showing the pharmaceutical company’s support. But the document had been forged, the prosecution claims. “Pfizer did not write this,” prosecutor Robert Leach said in opening arguments for the trial. “Pfizer did not put its logo on this. Pfizer did not give its permission to put its logo on this. Pfizer did not make the conclusions in this report.” Trusting such reports, Miquelon said, Walgreens made a $140m deal with Theranos in 2013 and launched testing in 40 stores across Arizona and California. That partnership fell apart over the next year and Walgreens ultimately sued Theranos in 2016, settling for $25m. Meanwhile, scientists at the pharmaceutical companies Holmes claimed had endorsed Theranos, told the jury they had repeatedly expressed doubts. Former Schering-Plough director Constance Cullen said when vetting Theranos technology in 2009, she found Holmes to be “cagey” and indirect in answering technical questions. She was left “dissatisfied” and ceased responding to emails from Holmes. Similarly Shane Weber, a former Pfizer scientist, said he was left feeling unsettled by an interview with Holmes in 2008 to assess a potential partnership. “[Theranos] provided non-informative, tangential, deflective or evasive answers”, Weber wrote in a report referenced during the trial, testifying that he recommended Pfizer halt potential partnerships with the company. What’s next Holmes stayed silent in the court room during prosecutors’ presentation of the case, writing notes by hand in a notebook, flanked occasionally by supporters including husband, Billy Evans, and her mother. She took the stand on Friday, laying out the trajectory of the startup, and testifying that she believed Theranos had developed technology capable of running any blood test. “We worked for years with teams of scientists and engineers to miniaturize all the technologies in the laboratory,” she said, testifying for about five hours before the court closed for the day. Holmes’s decision to testify is a risky one, since it means she’ll face cross examination from the prosecution. Holmes’s legal team is expected to argue in the coming weeks that Holmes made decisions in good faith and did not purposely deceive investors and customers. “Theranos failed for a lot of reasons, but it failed in part because it made mistakes,” Lance Wade, a defense lawyer for Holmes, said during opening statements. “Ms Holmes made mistakes, but mistakes are not crimes. A failed business does not make a CEO a criminal.” Early court filings indicated the defense may also use an argument that Sunny Balwani, Holmes’s former boyfriend and Theranos co-executive, abused and controlled her, influencing her to commit fraud. Balwani faces his own trial on charges similar to Holmes’s in 2022. Holmes faces a maximum of 20 years in prison. Jurors could come to a verdict before the year’s end. Legal teams for Elizabeth Holmes and Sunny Balwani did not respond to the Guardian’s request for comment.Empire State of Mind 9pm, Channel 4 “I’ve learned how to hide my feelings in public but actually ... I get really, deeply upset. I’m regularly on the verge of tears when this subject comes up.” Empireland author Sathnam Sanghera takes an emotional, comprehensive look at the ongoing legacy of the British empire in the UK today. In this first of two episodes, Sanghera speaks with people from all perspectives as he retraces contemporary racism and draws disturbing parallels between then and now. Hollie Richardson Strictly Come Dancing 6.35pm, BBC One It’s week nine, and as Glitterball time edges ever closer, the celebrities must strut their stuff to musical soundtrack hits. Will Rose and Giovanni, and AJ and Kai continue to lead the way – or could another couple hit the right notes for the judges? Hannah J Davies Paul McCartney at the BBC 7.55pm, BBC Two It’s Macca’s turn to get the “at the BBC” treatment in this 90-minute celebration of his musical legacy. Cue a seemingly endless reel of recorded performances. Snippets from a recent interview with superfan Bob Mortimer provides plenty of Beatles anecdotes. And no prizes for guessing with which song they choose to sign off. HR The Chase Celebrity Special 8.30pm, ITV The ubiquitous Bradley Walsh invites four more celebrities to try to stay one step ahead of the Chaser to earn cash for their chosen charities. Can former Corrie star Catherine Tyldesley, saucy entrepreneur Levi Roots, comedian Chris McCausland, and keyboard wizard Rick Wakeman keep up the pace? Graeme Virtue Queen of Speed 9pm, Sky Documentaries Zip through the glamorous, deeply sexist 1980s with this rich biography of rally driver Michèle Mouton. She and her co-driver Fabrizia Pons – the first women to get anywhere near the top of the sport – recall how open-shirted boors constantly doubted them as they, nevertheless, challenged thrillingly for the 1982 world championship. Jack Seale The Jonathan Ross Show 9.30pm, ITV Tonight, David Walliams, Mel Giedroyc and Sue Perkins join Ross to provide the laughs. Louis Theroux also plugs his new book, Theroux the Keyhole, while Kevin Hart – star of Netflix series True Story – joins over Zoom. HR Film choice The Queen of Spades, 2.15pm, Talking Pictures TV Director Thorold Dickinson only came on board this 1949 adaptation of a Pushkin story with five days’ notice, but you wouldn’t guess it from the meshing of its sumptuous design, expressionist camerawork and melodramatic acting. A supernatural period drama set in 1806 St Petersburg, it stars Anton Walbrook as a lowly army engineer who believes frail, old aristocrat Edith Evans knows the secret to winning a card game, and he’ll do anything to get it, including seducing her naive companion (Yvonne Mitchell). Simon Wardell Live sport International Rugby Union: Scotland v Japan 1pm, Amazon Prime Video. From Murrayfield. Followed by England v South Africa at 3.15pm, and Wales v Australia at 5.30pm. Premier League Football: Liverpool v Arsenal 5pm, Sky Sports Main Event. From Anfield.To prolong the life of onions, take them out of any plastic packaging, put them in a breathable container, such as a basket or mesh bag, and store in a cool, dry space, such as an outhouse or a porch. If you don’t have a cool spot, the next best option is the fridge, where they should keep for a couple of weeks. Even if your onions sprout, all is not lost: peel them down to the sprouts inside, plant in the garden or in pots, and they will grow into fresh onions. If you have a bounty of onions that need using up, try slicing and freezing them raw for later use, or make something extra-delicious with this quick pickle recipe. It works with both red and white onions, though the former make a brilliant vivid-pink garnish. Quick pickled red onions Whenever I have onions to use up, this is my go to “waste not” recipe. It not only preserves them, but upcycles them into a delicious garnish to use on top of stews, salads and stir-fries. Come to think of it, their bright pink colour and sour twang will make almost any savoury dish sing. To sterilise a jar, wash it in very hot water, then put on its side in a cold oven (ideally, sterilise a batch, to make the most of the oven energy). Turn the oven to 150C, then, when it reaches temperature, turn it off. Leave the jars inside until needed. To sterilise the lids, put in a saucepan of water, bring to a boil, then turn off the heat and leave in the water until needed. Makes 1 x 500ml jar 2 large red onions (about 400g), peeled and thinly sliced 275ml water 100ml vinegar 10g salt 1 tsp sugar (optional) ¼ tsp coriander seeds 1 bay leaf ¼ tsp chilli flakes (optional) Put the onions in a 500ml sterilised jar. In a saucepan, combine the water, vinegar, salt and sugar, if you like your pickles sweet and sour. Add the coriander seeds, bay leaf and chilli flakes, if using, then bring to a boil, stirring occasionally, until the salt and sugar dissolves. Carefully pour the hot pickling liquor over the onions a little at a time, so as not to crack the jar, until covered, then loosely cover with the lid. Leave to cool, then tighten the lid to seal and store in the fridge. The pickles are ready to eat immediately; once opened, they’ll keep for two or three weeks.The first surprise came when he climbed into the battered Volkswagen van. “I get in the passenger side and I sit down in the front seat and I get harpooned in the buttock,” tennis coach Rick Macci recalls in a phone interview. “There’s a spring sticking up and there’s four months’ worth of garbage, McDonald’s wrappers, dirty clothes, tennis balls in the back. I mean, it was crazy, and there’s little Venus and Serena sitting in there and I’m going, ‘Jesus, this is like I’m in a movie.’” Now Macci is in a movie: King Richard, based on the true story of maverick Richard Williams guiding his daughters from working-class Compton, California, to the pinnacle of world tennis – with the help of that first encounter with Macci in May 1991. Once out of the van, they headed for the Williams’s regular tennis courts and were hailed by some basketball players who shouted: “Hey, King Richard!” Macci continues: “They call this guy ‘King Richard’ in 1991. We go across the basketball court and it parts like the Red Sea.” For the first hour of practice, Macci was quite impressed by Venus, then aged 10, and nine-year-old Serena, but no more than that. Once he asked them to play competitive points, however, there was an epiphany. “What blew me away was their burning desire to get to the ball. I never saw two young female athletes try so hard to get to the ball. They’d run over broken glass to get a ball. “I could see the speed, the quickness, and I knew how tall they were going to be. I went right up to Richard and I said, ‘Let me tell you something. You’ve got the next female Michael Jordan on your hands.’ He puts his arm around me and he goes, ‘No, brother man, I got the next two.’” This prophetic exchange is recreated by actors Will Smith as Williams and Jon Bernthal as Macci in King Richard, now out, directed by Reinaldo Marcus Green and executive produced by Venus and Serena along with their sister, Isha Price. The biopic offers a touching portrayal of a family unit and of Williams as a fiercely determined, infuriatingly headstrong man with a plan, willing to shred conventions and upset the rarefied elites of a sport long synonymous with white privilege. It suggests this impulse flows at least partly from his own traumatic childhood in the deep south. Now 79, Williams, who is African American, was born in Shreveport, Louisiana, in the Jim Crow era of racial segregation. In his autobiography, Black and White, co-authored by Bart Davis, he writes: “Hatred fueled Shreveport. I often had to run from whites who tried to beat me up. I was chased with a stick, a bat, guns, and chains. “My body had a lot of reminders of the violence I knew as a child. My nose was broken three times and my teeth were knocked out. I limp to this day because, as a child, I was stabbed in the leg with a railroad spike and an ice pick by members of the Ku Klux Klan.” Smith convincingly portrays a man who still carries that world on his shoulders. In Compton he works unsociable hours as a security guard and, trying to protect his daughters, falls foul of violent gangs. But he and his wife, Oracene (Aunjanue Ellis), are resolved to give their daughters – Isha, Lyndrea, Tunde, Venus and Serena – the best possible education and opportunities. In one scene, Williams tells them: “This world never had no respect for Richard Williams, but they are going to respect y’all.” In his memoir, this can come over as tough love. Williams writes that Venus and Serena “didn’t have any choice but to be strong” and, when they were five years old, had to learn taekwondo to protect themselves. He laments about society: “We’re too soft on ourselves and on our kids. We don’t demand excellence. We don’t train them to work hard from an early age. We want to give them kindergarten and ring-around-the-rosy and nonsense that does not really give you any security. Security comes from knowledge. Knowledge is power. Power is the ability to win.” When Venus and Serena – played on screen by 15-year-old Saniyya Sidney and 14-year-old Demi Singleton – emerged as incandescent sporting talents, Williams worked hard to preserve their focus on school, church and fun. Macci witnessed this first-hand after the family moved to Florida so Venus and Serena could join his tennis academy, which had produced stars such as Jennifer Capriati. Speaking from Boca Raton, Florida, he recalls: “That’s why I love the guy, I tell everyone he’s the best father of all time. The public look at this tyrant but he always kept balance in their lives. He wanted them to be kids. “They would always bring their books to the court. If it rained, they would go up to my office and study. If they didn’t want to play, they didn’t play; they’d go to the mall or the beach or Disney World. The guy was in no hurry and that’s why I respect him so much.” Williams’s irreverent and mercurial style, and determination to tear up the sporting parents’ playbook, posed challenges for the coach. Macci, who is 66 and still teaches 50 hours a week, says: “At the end of the day, the guy was amazing, even though I had to work around it. I told many people, ‘Listen, doing that for four years, I should be in the hall of fame just for that!’ But that’s part of coaching. I had to coach the parents too. “You figure out how to do it. It takes a certain personality but I was on a mission. The cost didn’t matter; nothing mattered because the girls were like family. Richard and I were best friends and when you love what you’re doing and you love the people you’re doing it with, you don’t keep score. You find a way to make it happen and the rest is history.” Williams had no background in the sport and few financial resources but marched to the beat of his own drum, shrugging off media vilification as a brash self-promoter. In Smith’s portrayal he is a visionary unmolested by self-doubt. Macci comments: “The guy is bulletproof. He’s one of the most confident people I’ve ever met in my life, and I’ve met a lot of people in all walks of life. He early on instilled that into these two little girls. “If any two people would have felt more pressure – which ruins some people – it could have been Venus and Serena. It made them stronger because Richard and Oracene prepared them for how the world was going to react and respond. Venus said it best: ‘We were almost brainwashed to think we were going to be number one.’” There is no doubt in Macci’s mind that Serena, who is now 40 years old and has won 23 career grand slam titles, is the greatest female player of all time, with Venus not far behind. He believes that both transcend tennis, and all sport, as role models. King Richard depicts another coach earlier in the sisters’ career: Paul Cohen (Tony Goldwyn), who first met them when Venus was seven and Serena six. In an interview from his home in San Rafael, California, the 84-year-old disputed several details in the movie, including its portrayal of Williams repeatedly interfering during a lesson to argue over the girls’ on-court stance. Cohen, who coached star players including John McEnroe, also rejected the film’s telling of how the men parted ways, insisting that he was not fired by Williams but simply relocated with his wife to northern California and so could not continue to coach Venus and Serena. “Richard and I got along really well,” he says of their three years together. “He was my assistant coach and he got an A-plus. We never had a disagreement; we were good friends. Venus was like a big sister to my daughter, who was like a little baby. “It couldn’t have been a better relationship and he couldn’t have been a nicer guy. They kind of portrayed him as pushy and manipulative. He never was that with me, ever. The girls were perfect students. Whatever I told them to do, they did. We never had an argument.” When Venus was nearly eight, Cohen recalls, she suffered a debilitating condition in her feet. “Richard said, ‘My baby can’t walk.’ I said, ‘Richard, that’s the best thing that could ever happen.’ He was shocked. I said, ‘I’m going to stand there and pitch balls to her underhanded. She’ll stand on the baseline and I’ll create a Michelangelo perfect tennis game.’ We did this for nine months. She couldn’t run and she was in pain but we just did it. Those nine months were the key.” King Richard culminates with Venus’s debut in a professional tournament and a match against one of the best players in the world. It leaves viewers in no doubt about the historic significance of two young African American women rising to the top of the tennis world. Stacey Allaster, chief executive of professional tennis at the United States Tennis Association, says: “They definitely helped to break barriers for our sport to be more inclusive of people of colour and of other diversity, and we still have a long way to go. We can’t as a sport say we’re there yet. “We’ve been given so many gifts from Serena and Venus and Richard and Oracene and the entire family, and one of them has been inspiring other little Black girls and other little Black boys that they could play tennis and they could achieve their dreams.” Allaster, who is the former chief executive of the Women’s Tennis Association, adds: “Richard knew Venus and Serena were going to shake up the world. They have, and it has transcended just tennis. Sport is a microcosm of society and, whether it was intentional or not, they have used their gifts on court to make a difference in the world. “It is one very strong family of courage and love and the film does a wonderful job sharing everything that family has sacrificed and gone through. It’s such an inspirational story.” King Richard is now out in US and UK cinemas and available on HBO Max in the USAbout 200 protesters in Portland, Oregon, broke windows and threw objects at police on Friday night as reaction poured in after a jury cleared Kyle Rittenhouse over the shooting deaths of two people at an anti-racism protest in Kenosha, Wisconsin, last year. Sheriffs in the city declared a riot downtown after “violent, destructive behavior by a significant part of the crowd”, with reports some talked about burning down the Justice Center. Police used loudspeakers to ask the crowd to disperse or face the use of force, including “pepper spray and impact weapons”. By 11pm the crowd had broken up and largely dispersed. In Kenosha, shouting matches flared on the courthouse steps between supporters of opposing sides, embodying the wildly different lenses through which a divided America viewed the case. Protest marches were also held in Chicago and New York. With reaction pouring in from both sides of the political divide, the Rittenhouse case has split the nation, with many pointing out the discrepancy between the law enforcement’s treatment of the armed white militia supporter and anti-racism protesters. Rittenhouse has become a cause célèbre for many conservatives, who have raised money for his legal team. He had traveled to Kenosha from Illinois amid disturbances in the city after a white police officer shot Jacob Blake, who is Black, in the back. After the announcement that Rittenhouse had been acquitted on all charges, politicians and public figures shared their views on the verdict via social media. “The verdict in the #KyleRittenhouse case is a travesty and fails to deliver justice on behalf of those who lost their lives as they peacefully assembled to protest against police brutality and violence,” tweeted the NAACP. Bernice King, a minister and daughter of Martin Luther King Jr, said on Twitter: “Justice is not just about verdicts. It is a continuum. We can galvanize around changing our culture, including challenging the difference in how a Black male teen would have been engaged in Kenosha.” Joe Biden, addressing reporters on Friday, said that he “stands by” the jury’s decision. “I stand by what the jury has concluded. The jury system works,” said Biden before answering questions related to his health following a colonoscopy he had earlier in the day. In a later statement the US president appealed for calm and said: “While the verdict in Kenosha will leave many Americans feeling angry and concerned, myself included, we must acknowledge that the jury has spoken. I ran on a promise to bring Americans together, because I believe that what unites us is far greater than what divides us.” The Missouri representative Cori Bush commented on the verdict via Twitter, saying she was “hurt”, “angry”, and “heartbroken”. “It’s white supremacy in action. This system isn’t built to hold white supremacists accountable. It’s why Black and brown folks are brutalized and put in cages while white supremacist murderers walk free,” tweeted Bush. Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez strongly condemned the Rittenhouse acquittal, writing on Twitter: “What we are witnessing is a system functioning as designed and protecting those it was designed for. “My heart still breaks for the communities and families whose grief now compounds, and the countless others who will be denied and deprived in similar scenes across the country,” she wrote. The governor of Illinois, JB Pritzker, also weighed in, saying: “Carrying a loaded gun into a community 20 miles from your home and shooting unarmed citizens is fundamentally wrong. “Twenty-six-year-old Anthony Huber and 36-year-old Joseph Rosenbaum, a father, had their whole lives ahead of them. They deserve to be alive today. They deserve justice,” Pritzker wrote in a statement. “We must do better than this.” Many conservative politicians have celebrated the acquittal of Rittenhouse, who many on the right sought to portray as someone who stood up to rioters. “Rittenhouse -- NOT GUILTY!” tweeted the Texas governor, Greg Abbott, shortly after the verdict was announced. The Wisconsin senator Ron Johnson tweeted: “I believe justice has been served in the Kyle Rittenhouse trial. I hope everyone can accept the verdict, remain peaceful, and let the community of Kenosha heal and rebuild.” Representative Madison Cawthorn of North Carolina also commented on the verdict, tweeting out, “NOT GUILTY” and offering Rittenhouse a congressional internship. “You have a right to defend yourself. Be armed, be dangerous, and be moral,” said Cawthorn on Instagram following the decision. Donald Trump, meanwhile, “congratulated” Rittenhouse on the verdict. The former president put out a brief statement that read: “If that’s not self-defense, nothing is!” Rittenhouse killed Joseph Rosenbaum, 36, and Anthony Huber, 26, and wounded Gaige Grosskreutz, 27, when he shot them with an assault rifle as he roamed the streets of Kenosha with other self-described militia during protests in August 2020.Kyle Rittenhouse is now a free man after fatally shooting two men and wounding a third during anti-racism protests last year, but his trial has left behind a divided America – and done little to ease tensions in the city of Kenosha, Wisconsin, where the killings took place. Rittenhouse, 18, who faced charges of homicide, was acquitted in full on the grounds of self-defense. But the jury’s decision did not calm the people outside the Kenosha county courthouse in the hours after news of the verdict rippled across the city, and the rest of the United States. The shouting matches that flared on the courthouse steps between supporters of opposing sides embodied the wildly different lenses through which a divided America viewed the case. On one side many saw the different treatment a white and armed militia supporter received from law enforcement when compared with anti-racism protesters. Meanwhile, conservatives hailed Rittenhouse a hero defending a city on fire, and raised money for his legal defence. Those different world views played out across the US as Democratic and Republican politicians weighed in with statements that either condemned or supported the jury’s decision. But on the streets of Kenosha the reaction was more immediate and visceral. Drivers voiced their views from the open windows of passing vehicles. “Everyone go home!” shouted one man from his car. A Black woman raised her fist in solidarity with those protesting racial injustice, while a white man said nothing, but blasted “Celebrate!” from the window of his truck. Meanwhile, a small group of men atop the stairs chanted “Let’s go Brandon” – a coded jab at Joe Biden. But aside from the jeers and heated debate, reactions in Kenosha remained largely peaceful, standing in stark contrast to the smoke-filled chaos that erupted on the nights of protest in August 2020 that left Joseph Rosenbaum and Anthony Huber dead and maimed Gaige Grosskreutz. But what the jury determined to be a justifiable case of self-defense was viewed by many outside the courthouse as the latest example of a system biased toward white defendants and a legal system uncaring to Black deaths and injuries, after the violence had been sparked by the police shooting of a local Black man. “When these types of things typically happen, we expect the worst but hope for the best. And today we saw the worst,” said Johnathon McClellan, the president of the Minnesota Justice Coalition. McClellan, who came from neighbouring Minnesota for the case, pointed to judge Bruce Schroeder, Wisconsin’s longest-serving circuit judge, whose controversial statements and rulings have drawn scrutiny, and at times, rebukes from those watching the case. McClellan and the Minnesota Justice Coalition are calling on the Wisconsin’s attorney general to recharge Rittenhouse with possession of a dangerous weapon by a person under 18, a misdemeanour charge that seemed a likely conviction for prosecutors until Schroeder dismissed the charge on Monday. “I think that we need to have more legal professionals speak up and speak out because this isn’t what our system is supposed to be, irrespective of the process,” said McClellan. Alana Carmickle, a 17-year-old from Kenosha, said she came to the courthouse straight from school after she heard the verdict because she wanted to represent the voices of teenagers who, she said, are not being heard. “I’m not surprised, but I’m deeply, deeply upset by the verdict,” Carmickle, who is Black, said. “It’s very heartbreaking. It makes me question everything, including my own safety. “Had Kyle been a Black boy or man, the verdict would be completely different. Everybody knows it … The whole country is watching our city fall apart. It’s now known for letting a killer go free.” Brook Love, a 63-year-old from Milwaukee, said the outcome was typical of the racial injustice she’s seen throughout her life as a Black woman. “What happened today is not right,” she said. “Any reasonable person can see that. People call this a judicial system. I call it a non-system, because most systems work. This non-system is not working. It’s a miscarriage of justice. “If a person of colour would have shot those people, they’d be under the jail. There’s a double standard. How dare anyone call this a judicial system?” But Kevin Mathewson, a former Kenosha alderman who in August 2020 put out a call on Facebook for civilians to take up arms and protect the city, had a very different view on the verdict – and the events that led to shooting. “I’m just so relieved. I am filled with joy,” said Mathewson, who had been criticised for putting out a call to action that brought armed civilians like Rittenhouse to Kenosha. Mathewson, who is white, like Rittenhouse’s victims, said the case had nothing to do with race, but instead a “fundamental right to defend oneself against somebody who wanted to kill you, or at the very minimum, do you great bodily harm”. He described Kenosha as a lawless, dangerous place during the nights of protests in August 2020 and said the government showed through inaction it could not protect the city’s citizens. Fires burned, streetlights were torn out and police officers were attacked with bricks. “We were on our own. So I went on Facebook and I said, ‘We need help. Arm yourselves, protect your neighbourhoods, your homes, your businesses. We need to do this because the government isn’t.’ That’s what I put out. And I stand by that,” Mathewson said. In order for the city to move forward, everyone needs to accept the verdict and go back to living their “normal, everyday lives” – just like he had to do when Donald Trump lost the 2020 election, he said. But a return to normal living, said Dayvin Hallmon, who served on the Kenosha county board for 10 years, is a continuation of the status quo that set the stage for the events of August 2020. Kenosha, in fact, is a city that has long suffered from the effects of a Black community feeling vulnerable and sidelined. “The important thing is not the verdict here,” Hallmon said. “Focusing only on the verdict is scapegoating the real problem, which is the fact the opportunities for the young Black and brown residents of Kenosha are dismal as shit.” Hallmon said for years he pushed his colleagues on the county board to rewrite use-of-force policies for law enforcement officers and pass resolutions to denounce violence. If Kenosha leaders were serious about moving forward from the past year, they’d be focusing on rooting out racism within the police department and listening to the city’s young people, who “feel like Kenosha is not for them and doesn’t want them”. “If we focus only on the verdict here, this will all happen again,” he said.One of the fastest-growing banking apps is letting its teenage customers make contactless payments using their iPhone or Apple Watch. Revolut, which has almost 4 million users in Britain and more than 16 million globally, said this week its Junior account holders in the UK and Europe can now make use of Apple Pay. The company offers a bank-style account with a debit card, plus a range of other financial services. Revolut Junior is designed for children between the ages of six and 17, and is an extension of the parent’s Revolut account. The move will allow the company’s younger customers to use Apple Pay instead of their physical payment card anywhere contactless payments are accepted, with the exception of stores classed as “adult retailers”, such as off-licences and betting shops. Apple Pay requires having an Apple ID; in the UK, teenagers from the age of 13 can sign up for one. The company says the move was a response to feedback received over the past few months from parents and their children. It adds that bringing Apple Pay to teens “simplifies payments … and adds an extra layer of safety”. In the UK, Revolut Junior has more than 200,000 users. The company says Apple Pay will soon also be available to Junior users in the US, Australia and Singapore.In 1972, the people of Okehampton turned out in force to wish a fond farewell to the Devon moorland town’s regular passenger rail service. The mayor, Walter John Passmore, carried a funeral wreath and his wife, Daisy, waved the green flag to signal the final train’s departure, just about managing a sad smile for the cameras. Almost half a century on, the Dartmoor line is being reopened, and the first 40-minute service was due to arrive in Okehampton from Exeter St David’s shortly after first light on Saturday. “It’s great news for the town and for the whole area,” said Dennis Le Worthy, a retired police officer, who was among the lucky ones treated to a trial trip on the revamped branch line this week. “The town has been crying out for this. It will bring more visitors in and make it easier for Okehampton people to get into Exeter for work, college, shopping, the hospital whatever.” He disembarked the trial train beaming. “It was exceedingly smooth.” While there is gnashing of teeth in northern England at Boris Johnson’s announcement that major rail projects have been shelved, there was at least some train joy in west Devon. Okehampton businesses reckon it will be a financial boost for the town. “It’s going to be amazing,” said Paul Elston, who manages the youth hostel and bike hire store next to the station. He is anticipating carriages full of cyclists and hikers heading to Okehampton and the moor. The estate agents are seeing an increase in interest in the town. Miller Town &amp; Country has a sign in its window announcing: “Home buyers from Exeter are coming.” Sales negotiator Helena Thomas said people would be able to buy in Okehampton and commute far and wide – even as far as London. “We’re selling everything as soon as it comes on the market,” she said. Kevin Ball, a borough councillor, said it was not just about people making a fast buck. “When the railway first came here 150 years ago it helped tackle rural isolation,” he said. “The closure of the line brought that back. This new train service will make people feel more connected.” Andrea Davis, Devon county council’s cabinet member for climate change, environment and transport, hopes more people would leave their cars at home and use the branch line to reach Dartmoor. “It’s giving people greener choices,” she said. And it will also, hopefully, ease pressure on the A30, the main route into Devon and Cornwall. Although the line was closed as part of the Beeching cuts, the track was not ripped up. Volunteers helped run a heritage service on the line, including children’s Christmas specials, and since the late 90s the county council has subsidised limited Sunday Great Western Railway services between Okehampton and Exeter. Earlier this year the Dartmoor line was awarded £40m through the Department for Transport’s Restoring Your Railway Fund. The project to reopen the line took just nine months and came in under budget. Network Rail praised its engineers who had worked so quickly but also emphasised it had been an effort by the whole community, who had worked alongside professionals, doing jobs ranging from helping hack back vegetation at the side of the line to sprucing up the station. Among the volunteers were wife and husband Sue and Tom Baxter, stalwarts of the Dartmoor Railway Association, which has campaigned for the return of the Dartmoor line. “It’s wonderful to see the trains back,” said Sue, who was to be found fussing over bunting on the station before the reopening and is about to go on a GWR customer services course so she can work as a volunteer station helper. Network Rail and its partners say that if the Dartmoor Line is well used, it will help build the case that other closed branch routes should be reopened. Many would like a rail line to the town of Tavistock and then on to Plymouth restored. But the glory days of rail travel when you could whizz from London to the resorts of north Cornwall are still far away. Malcolm and Amanda Mitchell, from Bude in north Cornwall, had made the winding 30-mile road journey to reach Okehampton to view the last-minute preparations. They are supporters of the pressure group Connect Bude, which is campaigning to bring the line back to their town. “We’ve still some way to go before we get our route back,” said Malcolm. “This is great for Okehampton but we may not see our line in our lifetime, which is a sad thought.”A shame-faced Boris Johnson told his own MPs this week that he had “crashed the car into the ditch” by misjudging the Owen Paterson scandal. As he heads to his country retreat of Chequers this weekend, some at Westminster have begun to wonder if he has what it takes to get the show back on the road. As well as exposing Johnson’s lax approach to probity in public life, the Paterson debacle highlighted what those who have worked with him say is one of his most maddening characteristics – the impetuous style of decision-making and tendency to sudden reversals cruelly caricatured by Dominic Cummings as “like a shopping trolley”. And it played into wider worries about his competence and whether the Downing Street machine is working as it should. “No 10 is a really difficult job and he doesn’t have the skillset to run it, he just doesn’t,” said one senior Tory. “He’s a great campaigner; a terrible administrator. But he doesn’t trust anyone to run it for him.” Johnson’s longtime adviser Ben “Gazza” Gascoigne was recently persuaded to return to his side, in a sign that all was not well with the post-Cummings setup. One Conservative MP likened the impact of the events of the past fortnight to a hurricane hitting the government. “Obviously morale is low, and people have felt dispirited,” he said. “I think it’s completely up to him to turn it around.” Yet Tory MPs’ perceptions of Johnson are inevitably heavily influenced by his ability to help them try to hold their seats at the next general election, and so far there is only modest evidence that the negative headlines are damaging the Conservatives’ appeal. “People have noticed it, and it has added to this general sense that was already there, of a slight loss in confidence in the government compared to the giddy heights of the vaccine rollout,” said James Johnson, a pollster with JL Partners who previously worked for Theresa May. “What I don’t think it is, is the definitive brand-changing moment for Boris Johnson.” He said the prime minister remained protected by the “reputational screen” of the pandemic, and the sentiment of many voters in recent focus groups he had carried out continued to be that “they’re in an unprecedented situation, they’re doing their best job”. It is unclear how long that screen will continue to deflect voters’ concerns about other issues. Prof Rob Ford, an elections expert at Manchester University, likened the impact of sleaze stories on a government’s popularity to the children’s game Jenga. “You’re watching Johnson pull Jenga blocks out from the bottom and put them on the top. You can see that the pile is becoming more unstable, but you can never really know for sure whether any particular block that you pull out is going to be the one that pulls the whole thing down.” Remembering the mid-1990s, when John Major’s government was dogged by a slew of sleaze stories, he said: “Once it sets in as an atmosphere, as a miasma, and once voters begin to expect it, then there’s an air of self-fulfilling prophecy to it.” Labour strategists have long believed that by highlighting alleged corruption – whether the prime minister’s wallpaper or the Covid contracts VIP lane – they can chip away at Johnson’s reputation, but they wouldn’t have dared hope for the self-inflicted damage of the past fortnight. “It’s brought out the best in lots of people in the party, not least Keir [Starmer] and Angela [Rayner],” said one Labour insider, referring to the party leader and his deputy. “It’s a bit of a gift to us, the fact that Keir is strait-laced, and with his career history – he doesn’t exactly scream corruption. And it also plays into Angela’s strengths as someone who can really tear chunks out of them. It creates a really nice dynamic for us.” Labour is under no illusions that this alone will help it to dislodge Johnson, but it believes the cracks are starting to show on domestic policy delivery too, particularly against the backdrop of a deteriorating economic environment. Two announcements at the end of the week made clear that delivering on Johnson’s promise to “unleash Britain’s potential” in a way his voters will appreciate will not be straightforward. The cap on costs for social care and plans for new rail links across the north of England have been significantly scaled back – with red wall voters set to benefit less than had been previously expected. The changes have been driven by cost-cutting, with Rishi Sunak keen for the Conservatives to avoid clobbering the middle classes with more tax increases and to hold on to their reputation as guardians of the public purse, something he sees as a key dividing line with Labour. But Sunak’s cautious approach underlines the tensions between the disparate groups of voters who handed Johnson his majority in 2019 – the red wall of newly Tory seats, and the blue wall across the home counties, now firmly in the Liberal Democrats’ sights after their victory in Chesham and Amersham. “The two halves of the Conservative coalition, the only thing they agree on is ‘get Brexit done’,” said Ford. “Any policy that actually falls under the category ‘unleash Britain’s potential’ involves one half of that coalition paying for something the other half wants, or one half of that coalition getting it in the neck for something the other half doesn’t want.” He pointed to planning proposals – now under review by Michael Gove – that would have led to significant increases in housebuilding in the south, and the changes to the social care plans. Handing Gove the levelling up portfolio in the latest reshuffle was an indication that Downing Street takes seriously these issues of how, where and at whose cost its promises can be delivered. But there are inherent tensions, and they are evident not just within the Tories’ voter base but in the parliamentary party too. Another of Johnson’s character traits was highlighted by the backlash against the scaled-back rail plans – namely, his boosterish tendency to make lavish promises he then fails to deliver. The transport select committee chair, Huw Merriman, put it most brutally in the Commons, saying: “This is the danger in selling perpetual sunlight and then leaving it for others to explain the arrival of moonlight.” But it was striking how many other Conservative MPs expressed their anger publicly. Many more did so in private. Downing Street hopes Johnson has now wrenched the car back on to the road after a torrid few weeks, but he can’t expect much gratitude from his shaken colleagues. As Ford put it: “I can’t think of a story when there’s been so much harm wilfully inflicted by a government on itself.”The Black Friday discount day is back with a bang this year with shoppers expected to spend almost £9.2bn next weekend – 15% more than in 2020 when much of the UK’s high street was in lockdown. John Lewis, Asda and Currys said they were planning more deals this year for the event, which accounts for more sales than Christmas week, despite struggles with sourcing stock and recruiting drivers for home deliveries. Some stores, such as Next and Marks &amp; Spencer, do not take part in Black Friday and others are taking a different approach. Ikea, for example, is offering 20% extra in refunds on old furniture items brought back for resale. Gary Grant, the founder and chairman of toy chain The Entertainer, said consumer confidence had been knocked by rising living costs such as higher food and fuel bills and shoppers would be eager to save money in the Black Friday sales. “The consumer wants Black Friday deals,” he said. While experts agree that Black Friday sales will rise, as families prepare to gather after the pandemic put a dampener on celebrations last year, there is debate over how well high street stores will fare in comparison to online. Online spending is expected to rise by a fifth compared with last year, according to research by analysts at GlobalData for the VoucherCodes Shopping for Christmas report, despite the reopening of high street outlets. However, Andy Mulcahy, the strategy and insight director at the online retail trade body IMRG, thinks web sales for November, and Black Friday itself, could be down as much as 10% now shoppers have the option to go in to stores. This would be the first time less money was spent online on Black Friday than the year before in the UK since the event was first imported from the US a decade ago. Concerns about online players’ ability to deliver goods and shortages of some ppular products, such as computers and gaming consoles, may also dampen spending. Mulcahy said retailers were still upbeat, and for those with good stock holdings Black Friday would be a “banger”. “They [sales] will be very high still, it’s just that those volumes are rationalising a bit following astronomical growth in 2020,” he added. In the battle for shoppers rival stores have engaged in one-upmanship by launching deals well before Black Friday. Amazon, for example, started its sale nearly a fortnight ago, Currys launched deals for its loyalty card holders on 5 November and John Lewis launched its first 900 offers on Friday. Of the 317 retailers IMRG monitors about a quarter had launched their Black Friday promotions by Friday, a similar number to last year. Jon Williams, the trading operations director at John Lewis, said the retailer was expecting a return to 2019 levels. He said sales were already ramping up by 40% week on week as shoppers prepared for Christmas. The department store plans to have 17% more offers than last year when stores were closed and a special “crisis group” will meet every day up to Christmas to head off problems with deliveries or stock supply. Williams said that despite a shortage of drivers across the industry the company was confident of being able to meet demand for home deliveries as they expected more sales in stores. “We expect about 70% of sales online and 30% in stores so that amount going through the shops should take the pressure off,” he said. He expects strong demand for technology products and said John Lewis had worked hard to get enough computers in stock given the global shortage of microchips that had put the squeeze on availability across the industry. Williams said there would be “pockets were some suppliers of big brands are stressed”. Grant said the pandemic had “trained” people to shop online, a trend that had been to the detriment of high streets and shopping centres. To coax shoppers out, The Entertainer will offer an additional 10% off to customers who spend more than £30 in its stores next week. In what is likely to be a widespread problem, The Entertainer was experiencing problems with agency staff not turning up for shifts in its warehouses – even though it is offering retention bonuses for workers who stay on until Christmas. “In the first three days of this week we have had 86 people not turn up for work and that has a huge impact on your productivity,” Grant said. “If we can’t pick it, we can’t get it on a lorry and the shop can’t have their stock delivery.” Some top Black Friday deals picked by consumer group Which? TV: LG 55NANO806PA – was £899, now £599 (a third off) at AO, John Lewis or Very. Laptops: Apple MacBook Pro 13-inch 2020 (Core i5) – was £1,999, now £1,799 (10% off) at John Lewis; Samsung Galaxy Book Pro 13.3-inch – was £1,099, now £949 (about 13% off) at Currys or AO. Washing machine: LG F6V1010WTSE – was £949, now £749 (21% off) at AO or John Lewis. Electric toothbrush: Oral B Smart 5 5000 – was £169.99, now £64.99 from Amazon (62% off according to the retailer).• Molly Oldfield hosts Everything Under the Sun, a weekly podcast answering children’s questions, out now as a book. Does your child have a Christmas-themed question they would like to feature in a special festive quiz? Submit one hereThe mother of one of the victims of David Fuller is campaigning for the boss of the hospital where Fuller serially abused corpses undetected for 12 years to resign. The body of Azra Kemal was sexually abused three times in July 2020 in the morgue of Tunbridge Wells hospital by Fuller, a hospital electrician, who is known to have violated at least 100 corpses between 2008 and 2010. Nevres Kemal, a key whistleblower in the Baby P scandal in Haringey in 2007, is furious about what happened to her daughter and is demanding the resignation of Miles Scott, the chief executive of Maidstone and Tunbridge NHS trust. “Scott needs to go,” she said. “That man must not wait to be thrown out, he needs to walk.” At a meeting she had with Scott, she says he admitted that he was responsible for what goes on at the trust – an account supported by another hospital official present. She said: “Accountability starts with the man at the top. He is responsible, but he doesn’t want to lose his fancy job.” Last week, the government bowed to calls by Kemal and others to hold a public inquiry into what went wrong, and replaced an internal inquiry by the trust with an independent inquiry, chaired by Sir Jonathan Michael. Kemal said: “They were pushed into holding a public inquiry – how can an organisation investigate itself over something that is so horrendous?” She said the issues involved were relatively straightforward. “I want to know how on Earth they could let it happen, but there’s a simple answer – they didn’t check security. Why aren’t the dead afforded proper security that is checked? He [Fuller] went into the morgue thousands of times – that obviously should have raised alarms.” Kemal is jaded by her experience 14 years ago at Haringey, when as a social worker she warned the council and the government that the toddler Peter Connelly was not being properly protected, six months before he died. Instead of acting on her concerns, the council issued an injunction against Kemal banning her from speaking about childcare. “I don’t trust any system any more after the Baby P debacle,” she said. “It’s always the same with every bloody inquiry: either you have to push people out or it becomes so obvious that they just have to go.” She added: “It doesn’t matter what Sir Jonathan or Sir whatever says. I’ll be calling for Scott to go. I’ll do it with a megaphone.” Kemal, who is being supported by the Centre for Women’s Justice, is determined for the views of families of the victims to be the main focus of the inquiry. “Ordinary voices of the families of the victims are not heard, and that has to change.” She also wants to see sentences for necrophilia increased from the current maximum of two years to a minimum of 10 years in jail. The extent of Fuller’s abuse only emerged earlier this month after he pleaded guilty to sexually assaulting and murdering Wendy Knell and Caroline Pierce in Tunbridge Wells in 1987. Kemal never uses Fuller’s name. “I call him ‘insignificant’ because I don’t want to call him by his name.” She was reading about his trial as she travelled home on 9 October, the day police told her how Azra’s body had been violated. “I was reading about the bedsit murders on the train, and within a couple of hours the insignificant had entered my life.” Azra, who worked for Sky News and was about to train as a lawyer, was killed in July last year after falling through a gap in a motorway bridge over the Medway while fleeing from a burning car. October’s visit by two female officers reminded Kemal of being told of her daughter’s death. When she was told Azra had been sexually penetrated three times in the morgue, Kemal said “all hell broke loose – I can’t describe the rage I felt”. She was informed that the first assault happened hours before she had been to see her daughter in the mortuary. “She didn’t look at peace and now I know why,” she said. Kemal, who was speaking on what would have been Azra’s 26th birthday, said her daughter would have wanted her to speak out. “She never kept her mouth shut, so I’m determined to fight for Azra. People don’t like speaking about death, never mind raping the dead, because it taps into people’s fears. But I have to speak up.” She added: “I may be seen as a nobody, but I’m Azra’s mum and that’s a somebody. The proudest thing in my life was to be mum to Azra.” Maidstone and Tunbridge NHS trust referred to a statement issued by Scott earlier this month in which he apologised to the families of Fuller’s victims and said he was “determined to see if there are any lessons to be learned or systems to be improved”. • This article was amended on 22 November 2021 to include Baby P’s full name, Peter Connelly; it was also amended with reference to the terminology used to describe Fuller’s crimes.With his new book, Woody Holton shows the US at its founding much as it is today. Then, as now, it was stratified by class and riven by race, religion and gender. Marshaling a prodigious amount of scholarship, the University of North Carolina professor and Bancroft prize winner challenges much of what we once imagined we knew. A privileged few conceived and advanced the break with Britain. But because both sides promised freedom and land to Black people and Native Americans willing to fight on their behalf, the marginalized came to see revolt as a golden opportunity too. Pursuing the promises implicit in the declaration of independence and Bill of Rights, even some women, unmentioned in either document, joined the poor, slaves and Native Americans in alliance with disgruntled white colonists. With much to gain, they resolved to forge a new nation that would put an end to indignities and abuses long endured. Unfortunately, this was at odds with the aims of the American elite. Notwithstanding all the Enlightenment-inspired sentiments they expressed, a large measure of their intent on gaining independence was to appropriate still more Native land while expanding Black bondage, all to grow ever richer. Holton shows how the American revolution evolved out of the Seven Years war in Europe, in part pursued in North America as the French and Indian war. “No taxation without parliamentary representation!” So protested American rebels even more provoked by Britain’s imposition of a monopoly on trade. “How else,” the motherland countered, “are the Crown’s expenses, incurred defending our colonial frontier from Indian attacks, to be paid?” It is remarkable that American colonists took on the world’s mightiest naval power – and won. At the Battle of Long Island in August 1776, 25,000 redcoats faced 9,000 soldiers of the Continental Army. British leaders, however, recognized that fighting in unfamiliar surroundings was hazardous. Another British advantage raises another issue which confronts us today. As Britain was far more densely populated than the 13 colonies, a much larger number of her fighting force had contracted smallpox already, gaining lifetime immunity. As the disease raged throughout the war, George Washington was left in a quandary. “During the British occupation of Boston,” Holton informs us, “Gen Howe responded to a smallpox outbreak by inoculating every soldier who had never had it.” Inoculation was the cause of Washington’s worry. An injection of the actual virus, as opposed to vaccination with cowpox, inoculation left patients recovering for as long as a month. Mass inoculation would have incapacitated Washington’s force. But gradual inoculation, a unit at a time, ran the risk of untreated men being infected by those just treated. Worse still, sick soldiers might contaminate civilians. Holton expounds at length about the double game both sides played against Black people and Native Americans. Beguiled into service with promises of treaties, land, bounties and freedom, both groups were double-crossed again and again. White Americans, from Washington to the pioneer farmers, knew it was wrong to enslave Africans and to dispossess tribes of land and life. Why then did they do it? Neither Christianity nor philosophy could dissuade them from maintaining the privilege and power of wealth. Again, Holton’s book echoes to our own time, when billionaires eschew progressive tax rates and the masses lose income and purchasing power. Holton’s American founding is flawed by venality but, paradoxically, made more robust by diversity and, ultimately, redeemed and made “more perfect” through atonement for slavery’s original sin. This is at odds with a rival scholar of the American revolution, Gordon Wood. His America dawned pristine, like Venus from the sea. Slavery, antisemitism, misogyny, Native American massacres? What are these among so abundant a fount of freedom? When the two men met recently, to debate, sparks flew. Holton fared better. Illustrative of e pluribus unum, his new book shows the US has always been a richly complex, multifaceted nation. Though he includes so many hitherto unheard voices, he has hardly included all who were there. Naturally, we read of Abigail Adams and well-to-do white widows dreaming of the vote. We read of Margaret Corbin, a wife who went with her husband to battle at Fort Washington in upper Manhattan, and who after he was fatally wounded manned his cannon, and who was voted a veteran’s pension by Congress. Mary Murray also makes an appearance. She is supposed to have contributed before the Battle of Harlem Heights, offering British officers refreshments of cake and wine and thus delaying the redcoats’ advance. But where is Miss Lawrence? Hannah Lawrence was a determined patriot and propagandist, ignoring the danger of imprisonment or worse. A Quaker in Manhattan, she wrote and distributed rhyming denunciations of the British occupiers. Her modus operandi was to saunter down to the Battery, where soldiers promenaded, and allow her missives to slip to the pavement before hurrying away. For all her patriotic zeal, though, she found herself defenseless when the authorities billeted Jacob Schieffelin, an officer of German descent, in her father’s house. They married. Where too is Haym Salomon, a Polish-born Jewish financier? At a critical moment, he underwrote the Americans. His efforts were subordinate to those of English-born Robert Morris, along with Alexander Hamilton and Albert Gallatin credited as a key founder of the US financial system. But Salomon’s work, and that of other Jews, was of enormous importance too. These are quibbles. Thanks to Woody Holton’s work, now better than ever we are made aware it is not just a small cadre of rich white men who deserve recognition as American founders. Apprised of the true scope and scale of all those involved in our country’s birth, we can celebrate founding mothers, brothers and sisters too. Like us, they were multiracial and of every class. Liberty is Sweet: The Hidden History of the American Revolution is published in the US by Simon &amp; SchusterThe website of the Oklahoma Republican party has a running countdown to the 2024 presidential election measured in “Maga days”, “Maga hours”, “Maga minutes” and “Maga seconds” – Maga being shorthand for Donald Trump’s timeworn slogan, “Make America great again”. The state party chairman, John Bennett, a veteran of three combat tours in Iraq and Afghanistan, has described Islam as a “cancer in our nation that needs to be cut out” and posted a yellow Star of David on Facebook to liken coronavirus vaccine mandates to the persecution of Jewish people in Nazi Germany. This is just one illustration of how Republican parties at the state level are going to new extremes in their embrace of Trump, an ominous sign ahead of midterm elections next year and a potential glimpse of the national party’s future. Yet the radicalisation often takes place under the radar of the national media. “We are not a swing state and we’re nowhere near a swing state so no one’s looking,” said Alicia Andrews, chair of the Oklahoma Democratic party. “And because no one is looking at Oklahoma, we are allowed to be way more extreme than a lot of states.” Andrews pointed to the example of a state law passed by the Republican majority in April that grants immunity to drivers who unintentionally injure or kill protesters and stiffens penalties for demonstrators who block public roadways. “Only three states passed it, with Oklahoma being the first,” she said. “And you know why? Because there wasn’t national attention. We were talking about Florida passing it and Texas passing it. No one was even considering what was going on in Oklahoma and it quietly passed in Oklahoma.” Similarly, Andrew argues, while other states were debating “critical race theory” in schools, in Oklahoma a ban was rammed through with little coverage. Another concern is gerrymandering, the process whereby a party redraws district boundaries for electoral advantage. Andrews, the first African American to lead the Oklahoma Democratic party, said: “Our legislators are in a special session right now to review our maps and they are really eroding an urban core, taking at least 6,000 Hispanic Americans out of an urban district and moving them to a rural district, thus denuding their votes. I didn’t think that they could make it worse but they are.” Oklahoma is a deep red state. As of August, its house and senate had 121 Republicans and 28 Democrats. It continues to hold “Stop the Steal” rallies pushing Trump’s “big lie” that Joe Biden robbed him of victory in the presidential election. Andrews warns that Republicans in her state are indicative of a national trend. “Their stated strategy is start at the municipal level, take over the state, take over the nation. So while everybody’s talking about the infrastructure plan and the Build Back Better plan, they’re rubbing their hands together and making differences in states.” She added: “We’re like the testing ground for their most radical right exercises, and once they perfect it here, they can take it to other states.” ‘Owning the libs’ Republican state parties’ rightward spiral has included promotion of Trump’s “big lie” about electoral fraud, white nationalism and QAnon, an antisemitic conspiracy theory involving Satan-worshipping cannibals and a child sex-trafficking ring. It can find bizarre and disturbing expression. Arizona staged a sham “audit” of the 2020 presidential election that only confirmed Biden’s victory in the state. Last month in Idaho, when Governor Brad Little was out of the state, his lieutenant, Janice McGeachin, issued an executive order to prevent employers requiring employees be vaccinated against Covid-19. Little rescinded it on his return. The Wyoming state party central committee this week voted to no longer recognise the congresswoman Liz Cheney – daughter of the former vice-president Dick Cheney and a hardline conservative – as a Republican, its second formal rebuke for her criticism of Trump and vote to impeach him for his role in the US Capitol attack. Nina Hebert, communications director of the state Democratic party, said: “Wyoming is not exempt from the extremism that Trump has intentionally cultivated and fuelled and continues to court today. “He was a popular figure in Wyoming in the 2016 election and he retains that popularity amongst voters in the state, which I think is the most red in the nation.” Gerrymandering is a longstanding problem, Hebert said, but Trump’s gleeful celebration of the 6 January riot has opened floodgates. “They have created situations where Republican-controlled state legislatures have no reason to pretend even that they’re not just trying to hold on to power. This has become something that is acceptable within the Republican party.” The shift has also been evident in policy in Florida, Texas and other states where Republicans have taken aim at abortion access, gun safety, trans and voting rights. Often, zealous officials seem to be trying to outdo one another in outraging liberals, known as “owning the libs”. The drift is not confined to red states. When Republicans in California, a Democratic bastion, sought to recall Governor Gavin Newsom, they rallied around a Trumpian populist in the conservative talk radio host Larry Elder rather than a more mainstream figure such as Kevin Faulconer, a former mayor of San Diego. Kurt Bardella, an adviser to the Democratic National Committee who was once an aide to a leading California Republican, said: “To me that was a bellwether. If even a state like California can’t get a more moderate, pragmatic Republican party at the state level, there’s really no hope for any of the parties in any state at this point. “They’re leaning so hard into this anti-democratic, authoritarian, non-policy-based iteration and identity. The old adage, ‘As goes California, so goes the country,’ well, look at what the California Republican party did and we’re seeing that play out across the board.” ‘Wackadoodle Republicans’ Like junior sports teams, state parties are incubators and pipelines for generations of politicians heading to Washington. The primary election system tends to favour the loudest and most extreme voices, who can whip up enthusiasm in the base. Trump has been promiscuous in his endorsements of Maga-loyal candidates for the November 2022 midterms, among them Herschel Walker, a former football star running for the Senate in Georgia despite a troubled past including allegations that he threatened his ex-wife’s life. Other examples include Sarah Sanders, a former White House press secretary running for governor in Arkansas, and Karoline Leavitt, a 23-year-old former assistant press secretary targeting a congressional seat in New Hampshire. This week, Amanda Chase, a state senator in Virginia and self-described “Trump in heels”, announced a bid for Congress against the Democrat Abigail Spanberger. Chase gave a speech in Washington on 6 January, hours before the insurrection, and was censured by her state senate for praising the rioters as “patriots”. The former congressman Joe Walsh, who was part of the Tea Party, a previous conservative movement against the Republican establishment, and now hosts a podcast, said: “I talked to these folks every day, and for people who think [members of Congress] Matt Gaetz and Marjorie Taylor Greene and Lauren Boebert are nuts, they ain’t seen nothing yet. “The Republicans at the state and local level are way, way more gone than the Republicans in Washington. We’re talking about grassroots voters and activists on the ground and eventually, to win a Republican primary at whatever level, every candidate has to listen to them. “So you’re going to get a far larger number of wackadoodle Republicans elected to Congress in 2022 because they will reflect the craziness that’s going on state and locally right now.”Employees want it, employers know they have to offer it; flexible working has transformed almost every office during the pandemic and it’s here to stay. It is a change that has been demanded for decades by groups including women, those with caring responsibilities and disabled people. But economists and employment experts are warning it could lead to more inequality at the office, particularly for working mothers. The latest to voice concerns was the Bank of England policymaker Catherine Mann, who warned of a “she-cession”, and said women who accept their employer’s offer of working mostly from home risk damaging their careers, as they aren’t returning to the office after Covid to the same extent as men. Mann told an event for women in finance hosted by the newspaper Financial News that technology and virtual working methods couldn’t replace spontaneous office conversations that are also vital for career progression. “There is the potential for two tracks,” she said. “There’s the people who are on the virtual track and people who are on the physical track. And I do worry that we will see those two tracks develop, and we will pretty much know who’s going to be on which track, unfortunately.” Traditionally, more women than men – particularly those with children or caring responsibilities – have requested flexible working. Women were found to have taken on more responsibility for household chores during the pandemic, and surveys suggest they also bore the brunt of home schooling. The switch to working from home has, more than 18 months on from the start of the first lockdown, changed a traditional office-based culture for good, even prompting the government to consult on making home working the “default” option. For some, however, the more flexible approach has resulted in setbacks. Jennifer*, a mother-of-two from Kent, recently returned to her role as a user experience researcher after her second maternity leave. During the pandemic her employer decided to close its London offices, and now rents space in a co-working building. The 38-year-old has opted to work three long days each week and is continuing to work from home, but she worries about missing out. “What I have seen is the people who can go, will, and are, doing the networking and having the coffees and the informal chat, and meeting the new CEO. I am very conscious it doesn’t feel like something I can easily do, as I need to go and pick up the kids,” Jennifer said. Her experience differs vastly from her husband’s, who was one of a rare group of remote workers pre-Covid. His company has now shifted to permanent remote working for all employees, which she believes has put him on an “equal footing” with the rest of the workforce. “He’s not a second-class citizen. I also don’t get the feeling he’s looked down on for being a parent,” she said. Anna Whitehouse, a broadcaster and the founder of Flex Appeal, a campaign for the adoption of flexible working across all UK jobs, believes women are disadvantaged because they usually take responsibility for looking after children. “I got so frustrated with Catherine Mann’s comments, that it’s a female issue, for us to fix,” she said. “We’re obviously going to be taking up more flexible working because of the way the system is, the burden of childcare is still firmly strapped to female shoulders. But that’s not to say that there are these hapless dads who don’t want to step up to the challenge.” Whitehouse, who runs the popular Mother Pukka blog, is calling for families to discuss how they divide up household chores and childcare, and for more men to push for flexible working. “We are in a system set up for women to fail, to an extent, and I think we need companies to help us bridge that gender pay gap.” Indeed, some campaigners advocate increased uptake of flexible working by men as one way of improving pay disparity, especially given data from the Office for National Statistics which suggests that the gender pay gap widened during the pandemic. Last Thursday marked Equal Pay Day – the date when women effectively begin working for free each year, because on average they are paid less than men – as calculated annually by the Fawcett Society. “Flexible working is here to stay,” said Andrew Bazeley, the policy and public affairs manager at the society. “There are a number of people who will prioritise it in job applications, so in a tight labour market employers will realise they have to offer it, especially if they don’t want to widen the gender pay gap.” The challenge for managers is that many have not been trained on how to supervise remote workers, according to Ann Francke, the chief executive of the Chartered Management Institute (CMI). Nearly a third (29%) of managers said they felt promotion opportunities would decrease for remote workers, according to a recent CMI poll of 1,200 UK bosses, although 58% said they thought remote working would make no difference to staff prospects. The majority of organisations have not yet done anything to ensure that a home office is not an obstacle. According to the survey, 30% of managers admitted their organisation had not taken steps to ensure employees were not passed over, while 38% did not know. Only a third of (33%) companies had put procedures in place to ensure staff working remotely home workers had an equal shot at future promotions. “Even though both men and women wish to work flexibly, of course more women than men will request it, and the implication is they are the ones who will suffer,” said Francke. “It is extremely important that organisations are not complacent. They need training on judging people and promotions by productivity not presenteeism.” * Not her real nameSarah Greaves*, a single mother who has spent the last six months renovating a home near Stroud, was left facing a winter without proper heating because no energy supplier was prepared to take her on as a customer and install a meter. Over the last few months the UK energy market has seized up. Spiralling wholesale gas prices have led to the demise of 21 energy suppliers – two failed this week – and about 2 million customers having to be switched to a new supplier appointed by the energy regulator, Ofgem. For most of those affected, it has been a story of big price increases as they have found themselves switched to a price-capped tariff. However, a new problem has emerged that could affect anyone connecting a home to the grid for the first time: suppliers are refusing to take on new customers in case they end up making a loss. As part of the plan to modernise her home, Greaves asked builders to rip out the old, inefficient electric storage heaters and replace them with gas central heating. While the house is set to be connected to the mains at the beginning of December – with most of the building work finished about the same time – she says there is no prospect of having a working gas supply any time soon. “To my horror, I’ve discovered that no suppliers or independent installers are installing gas meters at the moment,” she told Guardian Money. “They are all blaming the current situation in the market and refusing to take us on as a customer. My daughter and I are supposed to be moving in when the work’s finished but I have no idea how we are expected to heat the place this winter, if no company will supply us with gas.” She says she first approached SSE, which already supplies the property’s electricity, but was told that it was not currently taking on new customers because of the “strain the fuel market is under”. Since then she has approached British Gas, Ecotricity, E.ON, EDF, Octopus and two smaller suppliers, which have all refused. E.ON told her via Twitter that it had taken the difficult decision to “pause new connections due to the market conditions”. Wales &amp; West Utilities, the company responsible for connecting the property to the gas network, told her it could not intervene as only her supplier could install the meter. “I can’t be the only person in this position – lots of people renovate old homes and put in modern heating – but there appears to be no solution,” she said. “We will have no hot water and are going to have to use portable electric heaters during the coldest time of the year. Surely there is some obligation on firms to connect customers who need heating?” After Guardian Money’s intervention, SSE, which is now part of Ovo, told Greaves that it will now connect her home, and install the meter on 10 December. It is also reviewing why her request was not escalated to the correct team internally, and the messages she was sent. An Ofgem spokesperson says suppliers are obliged to take on customers when requested: “We’ve been clear that suppliers must comply with licence conditions despite the challenging market situation. “Suppliers must offer to supply a domestic household once approached by a customer, including where this necessitates the installation of a meter to enable supply. If supplier actions leave consumers at risk of going off supply, and where we have evidence that this is the case, we will take action.” * Not her real namePickled roast beets (pictured above) We all have our own traditional dishes at Christmas, but each one can have a new dimension with condiments. These pickled roast beets go amazingly with roast potatoes and turkey; chopped up finely, they can also be added to braised cabbage; and they’ll make your cheese board sing on Boxing Day (or any other day). Prep 15 min Cook 1 hr 40 min Makes 4 x 200ml jars 800g small beetroot, unpeeled 190ml red-wine vinegar 40ml balsamic vinegar 125ml water 125g soft brown sugar 1 tsp peppercorns ¼ tsp ground allspice ½ tsp whole cloves 3g salt Heat the oven to 200C (180C fan)/390F/gas 6. Roast the beetroot on a baking tray for an hour and 20 minutes, until the skins are blistered. Once cooled, peel (the skins should easily slough off) and cut into ½cm batons. Put all the other ingredients in a small saucepan, bring to a boil and simmer for three minutes. Put the beetroot batons in sterilised jars, then pour over the pickling liquor and seal. The beets will keep for three months in a cupboard and, once opened, four weeks in the fridge. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from Ocado Carrot and parsnip chutney My sister-in-law created the base of this chutney when attempting to recreate one in an iconic Wensleydale sandwich. It’s so simple and versatile; the addition of nigella seeds would make it perfect for curries, while lime zest and chilli would give your nachos another layer of flavour. Here, the carrot is matched with parsnip, barberries and star anise to give a fragrant, festive twist. This chutney is more candied than sticky, so don’t worry if it seems dry in texture. Prep 15 min Cook 1 hr Makes 4 x 200ml jars 250g carrots, peeled and coarsely grated 150g parsnip, peeled and finely grated 1 small onion, peeled and finely chopped 2 garlic cloves, peeled and minced 50g barberries 200ml cider vinegar 250ml water 150g caster sugar 2 star anise 3 bay leaves 1 tsp crushed black peppercorns 3g salt Put everything in a small saucepan and bring to a boil. Immediately turn down the heat and simmer gently, uncovered, for 50-60 minutes, until thickened – you’ll need to stir periodically to stop it sticking. Transfer to sterilised jars (any excess liquid will thicken while cooling), then seal. Keep for three months in a cupboard and, once opened, for four weeks in the fridge. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from Ocado Christmas ketchup There is almost nothing I won’t dip into ketchup, and there is nothing better than a rich, spicy homemade one. This is a perfect gift, not only because it goes so well slathered on Christmas dinner leftovers, but because the winter months call out for chips, fritters and patties, and they will not be the same without this ketchup. Once opened, keep in the fridge and use within a month. Prep 10 min Cook 1 hr 15 min Makes 4 x 200ml jars 2 medium onions, peeled 100g celery 3 glugs vegetable oil ¼ tsp ground allspice ¼ tsp cinnamon ½ tsp ground cumin ½ tsp ground coriander Red chilli, chopped – you decide how much depending on how hot you want to go 2 x 400g tins good-quality chopped tomatoes 3 garlic cloves, peeled and minced 2 tsp salt 100ml cider vinegar 70g soft brown sugar 30ml maple syrup Finely chop the onions and celery, put in a medium saucepan with the oil and fry gently, stirring, for about 10 minutes, until soft and golden. Add the spices, fry for another minute, then stir in all the other ingredients and bring to a boil. Simmer uncovered, giving it a good stir every 10 minutes, for an hour, until the sauce thickens and reduces. Blend until really, really smooth, then pass twice through a fine sieve into a jug. Pour into sterilised jars, seal and store. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from Ocado Festive marinated feta Feta (or Bulgarian serene, which is similar, but usually creamier) is a tangy, crumbly, salty cheese that marries well with an earthy, sweet, fragrant marinade. It can take big aromatics, so experiment with your favourite flavours. Each jar will keep unopened for two months, but in my experience it rarely lasts that long. Once opened, keep in the fridge and use within three weeks. And once you’ve eaten the cheese, keep the oil and use it for frying eggs or in dressings. Prep 20 min Makes 4 x 200ml jars ½ orange 400g feta-type cheese 3 garlic cloves 1 small bunch thyme 30g dried cranberries 500ml olive oil Cut the orange into thin slicesPat dry the feta using a clean tea towel, then cut it into 1cm cubes. Peel and finely slice the garlic cloves, then rub the thyme between your hands to bruise the leaves. In sterilised jars, layer the cheese, orange, garlic, thyme and cranberries, then pour over the oil to cover (top up with more oil if needed), seal and store. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from OcadoFRANCE Saint-Malo, Brittany Roll off the overnight ferry from Portsmouth or Poole and into the enchanting Bretagne port city of Saint-Malo, with its walled old town, broad sandy beaches and history of seafaring. Lunch Book a table at Breizh Café, on Rue de l’Orme, a Saint-Malo institution that serves superior crispy pancakes made with golden buckwheat flour. Its sweet and savoury specials tap into the flavours of the season, while the regular menu matches local produce with an occasional nod to global cuisines. It started in Tokyo, when Breton owner Bertrand Larcher opened the first creperie in Japan, then brought the concept home and now has branches all over Paris, too. Galettes from €8, breizhcafe.com Shop Rue de l’Orme is also packed with foodie stores, so try Maison du Beurre for top-quality Breton butter in myriad flavours, from yuzu to Madagascan vanilla, as well as a great selection of cheese. There’s a bakery, La Maison du Pain, a few doors up for your baguette. Also try La Maison du Sarrasin opposite for buckwheat in all its guises, as well as salted caramel and bonbons. Wander over to L’Epicerie Roellinger (10-12 Rue Saint-Vincent), a cornucopia of spices, peppers and herbs from around the world, created by top chef Olivier Roellinger and inspired by the town’s links to the spice route. Dinner If all the galettes, crêpes and salted caramels don’t give you a big enough butter hit, then book a table at the Bistrot Autour du Beurre. It belongs to Jean-Yves Bordier, the chef behind Maison du Beurre, and his menus of succulent fish married with fresh local produce weave the butter in gently, with a selection of decadent desserts, such as hazelnut mousse and roasted figs. Mains from €23 (three-course lunch menu is also €23), lebeurrebordier.com Stay Saint-Malo’s Plage de la Hoguette is a sweeping fine-sand beach; low tide sees sand yachts darting about, while at high tide the waves beat the mighty sea wall. You can enjoy it all from the sea-view rooms at Les Charmettes, a friendly hotel in two 19th-century villas right on the front. The 16 rooms, eight in each villa, feature bright walls and lively art, and there are triple and quadruple rooms for families. The popular restaurant is set on the ground floor with a large deck at the front and serves a varied menu of salads, surf and turf. Doubles from €74 room-only, hotel-les-charmettes.com Montreuil-sur-Mer, Pas-de-Calais Just over an hour south of Calais, the little town which inspired some scenes in Victor Hugo’s Les Misérables reinvented itself in 2017 as “la destination gastronomique”, with about two dozen foodie businesses joining forces to offer a gourmet hotspot and events throughout the year. Lunch The hottest table in town is the brand-new Grand Place Café from local chef Alexandre Gauthier. His Michelin-starred restaurant La Grenouillère is down the hill in La-Madelaine-sous-Montreuil, while he also has the more casual Froggy’s Tavern and Anecdote to his name in Montreuil. The Grand Place Café brings his flair to local bistro classics, such as Le Welsh (a north-France version of the croque-monsieur, €15) and mussels (€15) in its airy space with exposed brick walls and wooden tables. Shop After strolling around the ramparts of the town’s mighty Vauban citadel, duck into the cobbled streets that run between the fine-bricked architecture and out into the main square, Place du Général de Gaulle, to pay a visit to the potent Fromagerie Caseus for a huge selection of cheeses, including local delicacies such as mimolette and maroilles. For wine to match, head to La Cave, also in the square, where they’ll kit you out with well-priced vintages to enjoy back at the hotel, and to take home. Dinner Stay on Place du Général de Gaulle and book a table at Le Clos des Capucins, an elegant restaurant with a sunny terrace. Run by ebullient chef Guillaume Duvivier and his wife, Isabelle, their dishes blend top market produce with locally caught fish and seafood, along with classics such as sole meunière. Mains from €14, on Facebook Stay Maison 76 is a beautiful four-room B&amp;B set in an old apothecary, complete with a pretty little garden and its own dinky swimming pool. Spend the evening relaxing in the elegant wood-panelled salon, and the breakfast is nothing short of gourmet. It’s run by Tim Matthews, one of the brains behind the Destination Gastronomique enterprise, so he can give you all the insider tips on what to eat and where. Rooms €175 B&amp;B, maison76.com French picks by Carolyn Boyd BELGIUM Ghent Ghent is a pioneer in ecotourism, it’s offbeat and fun, but it’s also a great destination for food lovers. As the birthplace of the Flemish Foodies movement, it offers many farm-to-table, local and seasonal dishes, with zero carbon footprint. Lunch Roots is set in a romantic 17th-century cottage where chef Kim Devisschere specialises in the creative use of vegetables and sustainably caught North Sea fish. There are only fixed tasting menus, but you will not be disappointed with dishes such as chunky poached cod with crunchy garden peas, a herring fillet smothered with chives and dunked into a hollowed-out cucumber filled with a tangy mustard sauce, or succulent pork cheeks accompanied by smoked mashed potatoes, topped off with fermented daikon and a plump oyster. Lunch €35 for three courses, rootsgent.be Shop Ghent’s reputation as a sustainable destination is symbolised by the Lousberg market (open Mon-Sat), a 20-minute walk from the city centre. It is housed in a luminous former textile factory that is also home to a city dairy, Het Hinkelspel. As well as showcasing the dairy’s organic cheeses, three farms sell their seasonal fruit and vegetables, bakers bring along different kinds of bread, and two cooks, Stephanie and Sofie, run a canteen, preparing main dishes, soups and cakes using market produce. The speciality shop not to be missed is Tierenteyn, which looks more like an apothecary than a delicatessen. Everyone comes here for its unique mustard, dating back to 1790; the recipe is shrouded in secrecy. lousbergmarkt.be Dinner Craft brewery Gruut is housed in an old leather factory filled with copper vats, long wooden tables for beer tasting and comfy leather sofas. The menu is minimalist: Ghent’s most famous recipe, waterzooi (a tasty chicken-and-vegetable stew), beef braised in its own brown ale or vegetarian lasagne. The artisan beers are delicious, brewed from a secret mixture of herbs rather than hops. Dishes from €17-19, gruut.be Stay The cosy Restaurant Alix is a popular spot for lunch and dinner, with brunch and picnics served in their townhouse garden. But you can also base yourself here in their comfortable three-room B&amp;B, Chambre d’Amis. Doubles from €125 room-only, breakfast €15pp, alixtablejardin.be Antwerp Antwerp became a global food hub last month when it hosted the World’s 50 Best Restaurants awards, dazzling visitors with a dining scene that ranges from innovative Michelin-star restaurants to old-fashioned estaminet bars serving traditional recipes such as beef slow-cooked in beer (carbonades Flamandes). Lunch The Butcher’s Son offers the total Antwerp foodie experience: with an open kitchen and communal tables, it serves classics such as a huge entrecôte steak, béarnaise sauce and frites, or the best “vol-au-vent” (€33) you have tasted, bursting with creamy veal sweetbreads. It is in the red-brick De Koninck brewery, so you can also enjoy a tour and beer-tasting. Then visit the Van Tricht cheese refiners and an artisan chocolate maker, all in the same 19th-century building. Mains from €32, butchersson.be Shop After a walk through the botanical gardens, plunge into the teeming stalls and crowds that pack Antwerp’s outdoor Exotic Market every Saturday (23 Meistraat). The square historically hosted the city’s vegetable market, and today it’s known for its multicultural mix of products: Moroccan spices and harissa paste, Tunisian olives and dates, Turkish dried apricots. But it’s also the place to pick up organic fruit and vegetables produced on surrounding farms, surprising Flemish cheeses, many, such as Westmalle, aged with a local Abbey-brewed beer, freshly caught shrimp, and tasty maatjes soused herrings. On the square you can also discover local wines at Belgian Wine Bar (their Entre-deux-Monts bubbly is excellent), vegan ice-creams at Icelab, or delicious cheese and shrimp croquettes sold in the unmissable Faro, a red-and-white-striped street-food lighthouse. Dinner Invincible may be closed on Saturday and Sunday but weekend visitrs can still kick off in style by reserving a Friday-night slot at this local favourite. A three-course meal comprises creative dishes mixing classic Flemish ingredients, such as sautéed crunchy brussels sprouts with intense bone marrow, or pairing flaky line-fished hake with the salty sea vegetable salicorne. Owner Kenny Burssens is host, chef and sommelier, making everyone feel at home. Try to bag a seat at the kitchen bar to get the whole Invincible experience. Meals from €39, invincible.be Stay The modern design hotel Tryp by Wyndham’s rates are good value. It’s located in a residential art nouveau neighbourhood, 10 minutes’ walk from Centraal station. Doubles from €62, trypantwerp.com Belgian picks by John Brunton SPAIN San Sebastián One of the world’s top gastronomic destinations, San Sebastián glitters with Michelin stars. But don’t worry if your budget won’t stretch to a string of fancy tasting menus – the quality filters down to more workaday bars and restaurants in this gorgeous seaside city, where strolling, surfing and shopping will help build up an appetite between lunch and dinner. Lunch Eating at Casa Urola in the old town is a terrific way to kick off a gastronomic weekend. Whether you go for pintxos (tapas) in the bar or a proper meal in the restaurant upstairs, you’ll want to return. It’s all about the best local produce – off the scale in this part of Spain – prepared in seemingly simple yet ingenious ways by chef Pablo Loureiro Rodil. Try the delicate kokotxas (hake necks), the artichokes and cardoons on ajoblanco (a smooth almond and garlic emulsion), the lobster salad and any mushroom dish on the menu when they are in season. €60 a head or more in the restaurant (about half of that being for pintxos), casaurolajatetxea.es Shop You could spend all morning mooching around the magnificent La Bretxa market, but if you have left your gourmet gift shopping until the last minute – which is quite likely with all the tempting distractions – save yourself time by popping into Zapore Jai in Parte Vieja for carved-to-order ibérico ham, artisan Basque country cheeses, and wine, oils and vinegars from all over Spain. Behind the counter, Sylvain Foucaud and Aurkene Etxaniz Ituarte are more than happy to offer advice on local specialities and will pack it all up nicely for transporting home. zaporejai.com Dinner While there is more than enough to keep gastronomes amused in Parte Vieja forever, there are a few other neighbourhoods worth venturing into. Gros, just across the river, is another foodie paradise, particularly for cool, contemporary places to eat. At Galerna Jan Edan, Jorge Asenjo and Rebeka Barainka are only just in their 30s but already have a lot of fans in gourmet circles in Spain. Working with small local producers, they create intriguing menus that always feature oysters. This winter, dishes include red tuna with aguachile (shrimp ceviche), wasabi and pickles, and organic chicken with mushroom ragout. Tasting menu €82,galernajanedan.com Stay On an elegant square in the town centre, Room Mate Gorka delivers oodles of style without the designer price tag. It’s walking distance from the restaurants, shops and beach, and has a smart bar for cocktails. Doubles from €123 room-only, room-matehotels.com Santander Elegant Santander is one of those places where people live – and eat – very well, day in day out, but don’t make a massive song and dance about it. Superb local produce (meat and cheese as well as seafood), spectacular beaches and a dynamic cultural scene make the Cantabrian capital a clever choice for a city break. Lunch It may look like a bright-and-breezy gastrobar but Vermutería Solórzano was actually founded 80 years ago and is a Santander institution. Ask the barman to recommend a vermouth (from a list of more than 100) to sip while you have a look at the menu, then pick a few things to share to get a flavour of the traditional dishes of northern Spain. Rabas – strips of super fresh squid in batter – are the quintessential tapa here, so start with those. Order the Santoña anchovies with peppers grown in Isla, a few miles along the coast, too, as well as the pastel de cabracho, scorpionfish terrine (a lot better than it sounds). And leave room for the homemade cheesecake. Around €25pp, on Facebook Shop The iron-and-glass Mercado de la Esperanza has been Santander’s main market for more than a century. Most of the dazzling array of fish on sale downstairs has been landed earlier in the day at the wholesale market on the quayside, while upstairs you can buy fabulous cheeses produced in Cantabria, such as the punchy blue picón bejes-tresviso or the creamy gomber from the Cabuérniga valley. Pretty cans and jars of the excellent bonito del norte (albacore tuna) make great gifts. For the full experience, grab a stool at the bar for a quick beer and a few tapas. On Facebook Dinner For the best contemporary Cantabrian cuisine and an idea of what life in Santander is all about, book ahead at Cañadío – or just snag a space in the tapas bar or on the terrace. One of its specialities is hake, maybe in tempura batter with a mild allioli sauce, or with salsa verde and clams. There are superb steaks and the oxtail with lamb sweetbreads is also popular. And its rice pudding and homemade ice-cream with liébana cheese make dessert a memorable part of the meal. About €50pp, restaurantecanadio.com Stay Overlooking the marina, Vincci Puertochico offers the full-on seaside vibe with wonderful views across the bay. Beaches are a stroll away along the promenade, and the streets behind the hotel are lined with bars and restaurants. Doubles from €99 room-only, vinccipuertochico.com Spanish picks by Annie BennettThe questions 1 Dafydd ap Gruffydd was the first nobleman to suffer what fate? 2 Which German monument is topped by a quadriga? 3 METI is an attempt to do what? 4 Which continent lies in all four hemispheres? 5 What was the filling of a humble pie? 6 Which people called themselves the Mexica? 7 Inge Lehmann discovered that what was solid? 8 Who repeatedly painted Mont Sainte-Victoire? What links: 9 South American country; US federal district and two state capitals? 10 Jubilee; Harris; Gripp; Rocky; Erin; Poppy; Georgie? 11 Silence film; A Pale View of Hills novel; Madama Butterfly opera? 12 Anglerfish; lanternfish; vampire squid; click beetle; firefly? 13 Peyton Manning and Tom Brady? 14 Khaki (1900); coupon (1918); flapper (1929)? 15 Phra Phrom statue; tetrahedron; Mount Rushmore? The answers 1 Hanged, drawn and quartered (1283). 2 Brandenburg Gate. 3 Contact aliens (Messaging to Extra-Terrestrial Intelligence). 4 Africa. 5 Deer (or other animal) innards. 6 Aztecs. 7 Earth’s inner core. 8 Paul Cézanne. 9 Places named after Columbus: Colombia; District of Columbia; Columbus, Ohio and Columbia, South Carolina. 10 Ravens at the Tower of London. 11 Set in Nagasaki. 12 Bioluminescent organisms. 13 Only (starting) quarterbacks to win the Super Bowl with two different teams. 14 Nicknames for UK general elections. 15 Four faces: Thai representation of Brahma; solid; four US presidents.Ann is sitting in a windowless and sparsely furnished white room with high ceilings and a red concrete floor. There is a bed in the corner, next to shelves full of medical equipment. She seems small against the large black sofa, her hands clasped together to minimise the involuntary swaying caused by her Parkinson’s disease. She is in pain, she is tired and, for the first time that day, she is getting a little anxious. She is waiting for someone to arrive with the drug that will kill her. Her fear is not of dying; she passed that point a long time ago. She is worried about the pharmacy’s supplies, suddenly scared that the people in whose hands she has put her death could let her down. Ann Bruce, my aunt and my friend, died in Switzerland on 26 June 2021 at the age of 73. She was a quiet, intelligent woman, slender and unassuming, yet determined and plain-speaking. She started her career as a doctor, and ended it as a psychotherapist. She sang, she held legendary dinner parties, and she adored the theatre – she was the master of her successful life. She was diagnosed with Parkinson’s seven years ago, and knew then that she did not want to let the disease run its full course. She told me that, for her, nothing tasted right any more, literally and metaphorically: “I can still enjoy things like the first snowdrop, bits of nature coming to life. But there’s not enough. My life is still good. What’s gone is my capacity to engage with it and embrace it and enjoy it.” As a doctor, but also as a friend and relative, she had witnessed so many people’s last days. Perhaps she had seen too much. Her parents were pragmatic people who both told her they would want to have an assisted death “if they had something nasty and incurable”. But neither got their wish. Her father died of lung cancer, and her mother died in a nursing home after a long and slow decline – towards the end, she needed help to drink a cup of tea. Ann would later lose her husband, David, to cancer, followed by her close friend Don. “Life became so limited that there was nothing for either of them to enjoy,” she said of the two men she had cared for as they died. “Even basics like food, because of the vomiting, the nausea, the pain.” These experiences built a stark awareness of how lives can deteriorate at the end. “Although very often the actual death is peaceful, what gets lost is the last few weeks, the running up to the dying,” she told me. “Both my parents were very calm, unconscious and died nicely. But they’d had a good deal of suffering in the run-up, and suffering that couldn’t be completely managed.” Ann wanted her death to be different. By the time she started to organise her final journey from her home in Ditchling, East Sussex, to a small village near Basel, in Switzerland, this year, she also had osteoporosis, a serious heart condition and macular degeneration. Her Parkinson’s had developed rapidly, leaving her in a great deal of pain, her dyskinesia (involuntary movements) exhausted her and she was nauseous much of the time, the sickness taking her down to 6st (38kg) as her life shrank around her. “I don’t think Parkinson’s itself is necessarily the great horror,” she said, “but Parkinson’s with all the other bits is.” She had come to see death not as a departure, but as an arrival, a concept embodied in a poem called The River Cannot Go Back by Kahlil Gibran, about a river that ends in the vastness of the sea. “It acknowledges the fear but also the release,” she said. I told her that she gave the impression she was looking back having reached her end point, like the river in the poem, rather than feeling her journey had been cut short. “Yes, that’s a nice way of thinking about it,” she said. “I like the idea of going back into some pool of unconsciousness that we came from, but it may just be nothing and that’s OK.” My aunt was a very private person, but she shared her thoughts with me before she died for one reason: to help those who came after her. She didn’t want to have to travel to a different country to end her life. Her fervent desire was that her words might affect the views of those responsible for the law. *** Assisted death is legal in Switzerland, as well as in several other countries including Canada, the Netherlands and Belgium. Although the details differ, the success of each system is grounded in tight regulation and documentation. In England and Wales, however, anyone who does anything that could be construed as “encouraging or assisting” another person to die, such as buying their plane ticket, pushing their wheelchair through an airport, or even talking about how it might happen, may be committing an offence that carries a potential prison sentence of up to 14 years. The British Medical Association recently dropped its opposition to assisted dying but, despite widespread support from the public and half of doctors surveyed personally believing there should be a change in the law to permit them to prescribe life-ending drugs, little has changed. A bill that would allow some people with a terminal illness to end their life at a time of their choosing is progressing through parliament, but is not expected to become law. “It’s unlikely to pass unless it gets taken up by MPs in the Commons and the government gives it time for debate,” says Trevor Moore, chair of the campaign group My Death, My Decision, which is calling for a public inquiry into the law. “There are some supportive MPs, but it takes up parliamentary time, and there are a lot of other things going on.” The main opposition to change is rooted in the fear that assisted dying could be used as a state-condoned form of suicide, but for Ann it was something altogether different. She never liked the phrase “assisted suicide”. “‘Suicidal’ has a negative feel of wanting to destroy life,” she said. “We need a new name for dying when you’re ready. For a completed life and a comfortable, assisted death.” She knew this path was not for everyone, that many people live comfortably with Parkinson’s for years. My father, Ann’s brother-in-law, died with Parkinson’s and multiple myeloma two years after Ann’s diagnosis. As his health deteriorated, he had absolutely no desire to die, and she had admired his robust attitude to life: “I often think of Philip and his amazing capacity to carry on and do things, and not care if the dinner goes all over the floor.” Nevertheless, Ann was determined in her own decision. Yet, because of the law in England, she felt very alone in that choice. Organisations such as My Death, My Decision can campaign for a change to the law, but they are not allowed to support those in Ann’s position. She was not able to talk to anyone doing the same thing, to know if the emotions she was going through were “normal”. “I think there’s an important shift from something being a nice idea in here, to a reality out there,” she told me about her decision-making process. “And that needs a bit of working through. I feel like I’ve got through the worst of that, and I’m quite calm and together and in this more joyful place, but it might have been nice to be able to hear someone say they had similar experiences.” The last few weeks of Ann’s life were consumed by bureaucracy. To avoid putting her supporters at risk of prosecution, she had to do everything herself: booking accommodation, flights, taxis and Covid tests; organising special permission to enter Switzerland; and wrangling over a date with an assisted-dying clinic overwhelmed with applicants who had not been able to travel sooner because of the pandemic. Choosing when to tell people turned out to be difficult, too. Ann had thought about having a party to celebrate her death, but she was concerned that any gathering before she went could alert the police to her trip. “If the law had been different, I think I’d probably be much more into the joyful celebratory release bit of it,” she said. Instead, she went through it with friends individually, and often had to support them. “I have to recognise that their immediate reaction is grief and loss, and they’re in a very different place to me. I have to look after them a bit.” She even found herself consoling a member of staff at her bank: “When I tried to make the first payment to the clinic, the bank queried it. When I explained to this young woman what I was doing … she became quite distressed. She didn’t know how to handle me, someone who was being very pragmatic and straightforward and answering questions.” When someone close dies, people often don’t know what to say to the bereaved. Ann found this discomfort intensified when they were faced with someone planning their own death. People had no map, no guide for how to react. Some responded with openness, saying things they wished they had said sooner. But not always. “There was someone who came to say goodbye and, when she left, I felt there was something more she wanted to say and I hadn’t heard it.” Ann even joked about feeling a little awkward if she bumped into someone she had already said goodbye to. “I feel like one of these pop stars who keep coming back for a return concert, that goes on and on,” she said. “But if I leave it too late they don’t have time to get through that grief and be with me in something a bit more positive.” The process would have been so much easier if Ann had been able to do it out in the open. She wondered if so many people were conditioned to oppose legalisation partly because we were kept away from death, and had so few forums to discuss it. “People tend to be very protected from it because it happens in hospital or it’s often managed off-site,” she said. There were some friends she felt she could not tell about her plans for fear of them reporting her to the authorities, robbing them of the chance to say goodbye. Ann dreaded the journey to Switzerland, but she worried even more about the many things that could stop it happening: that she would have a stroke or a heart attack – or that Covid regulations might change. But in the end, nothing could stop her. *** It is the morning of Friday 25 June, a grey but mild day in Ditchling. Ann strides out of her small flat, leaving her bed unmade and her clothes strewn around her room, with just a small backpack hanging loosely from her thin shoulders. She might have been going for a walk but for her body language – her muscles are taut, her eyes fixed on the path ahead, her mind already on the release she will find at the end of this road. Three people follow her, her friend Janet Bark, her sister-in-law (and my mother), Barbara Naughton, and me. We all know we could face investigation by the police on our return, but we understand how resolute she is and we cannot let her die alone. As we travel, the world outside our solemn bubble carries on relentlessly cheerfully. In the taxi to Gatwick, I fail at small talk with the friendly driver, my stomach churning at the prospect of an airport interrogation that could end our journey. Ann, meanwhile, chats to him about the latest roadworks, despite her discomfort. Covid anxiety is still quite high in the UK, masks are mandatory on all forms of transport, and when we arrive at the airport it is quiet, with almost as many staff as passengers. The plane is full, however, despite restrictions on entry into Switzerland, as few flights are making this journey; it feels claustrophobic after avoiding crowds for a year, and the cramped conditions are excruciating for Ann. We weren’t able to get seats together, but I can see her across the aisle sitting next to a stranger, eyes closed. We touch down in glorious sunshine and emerge into a hot and busy Basel airport. We are collected by a driver commissioned by the clinic, who cheerfully declares that he will give us a tour, then helpfully points out the casino, a medical centre and a rubbish processing facility. “All this instead of just doing it in Brighton,” Ann muses wistfully. We finally arrive at a small village dominated by our hotel, in which the clinic that has organised her death owns an apartment. Ann is ashen, exhausted and in pain. When we reach the apartment she collapses into a chair, with her head resting on a small table, knowing her day is not over. She has a long evening ahead waiting for, then making arrangements with, the head of the clinic, who comes late – but seems kind, thoughtful and passionate about his cause. He talks a lot, but in gentle tones. Barbara, Jan and I excuse ourselves, retreating to the balcony to give them some space. I look back at the two of them sitting inside – Ann’s dyskinesia is so bad she can barely hold her head up, and she is swaying from side to side as she continues to discuss plans for her death the following day. When he leaves, she asks us to fetch her a gin and tonic. She wants to celebrate: she is finally here, and tomorrow she will end her life. When I first started talking to Ann about going to Switzerland, she called it “the procedure”, but tonight she is more blase. “We’ll plan to leave the hotel about 10.30, and I want to be dying by about 12,” she announces. On the morning of her death, Ann is calm and serene. She eats her breakfast in the apartment with the sun streaming through the balcony doors, then discusses the next steps. We make a playlist to go with her death. My mother and I go down to the restaurant to book a table for the evening, for three people. The proprietor looks at us. “Not four?” he says. “No, three.” It is hard for me to say the words. After breakfast we are driven to the clinic, which is done up as nicely as you can do up an industrial estate unit next to a garage with few windows and the whiff of petrol in the air. Enormous ferns and white modern furniture dot the large reception area, where we are greeted by a kindly woman who speaks some English. We fill out forms, and hand in our passports for the police to look at later. She takes us into the back room away from the heat of the day, where the waiting begins. We settle on sofas and chairs and talk quietly about how difficult it must be to set up such a place; the weather; the music Ann has chosen for her last moments. But it’s clear all she wants is for the drug to arrive. She is growing impatient for the peace she has travelled all this way for. *** When the drug is finally delivered from the pharmacy about an hour later, the staff get things ready, and Ann moves to the bed. She gives no indication that she feels any fear. A cannula is put into her arm, a drip is set up and it is explained that she needs to push a little wheel to release the drug that will kill her. She is asked questions about why she is there and whether she understands what is about to happen, while a video camera records her. At her bedside, we tell her we love her, and Jan and Barbara hold her hands. Barbara reads The River Cannot Go Back. Ann tells me to write a good article. She was never interested in famous last words, and didn’t think there was anything left to say. We are synchronising the playlist with her Quaker friends back home, who are “lifting her into the light” from afar, so we message them to play the music and start it in the clinic. She pushes the wheel, she thanks the staff, she says goodbye to us, and then, in seconds, she is gone. Forty-five seconds. For her, even then, it is a long time. Even after so much preparation, there is suddenly, almost violently, a huge gap where she had been, in the room and inside me. For some reason, I hadn’t been expecting to feel so low. I think that, through her serenity, Ann had convinced me of the joy in this moment – but now she is gone there is only loss. We hug each other and sit with her for what feels like a long time. Then the police come. The clinic’s operations are legal in Switzerland, but a woman has died, and some formalities must be observed before we can leave. We move back to the waiting room, leaving an officer and photographer to document what just happened. I am yearning to be released. I don’t want to be perched uncomfortably on this white sofa, sitting with this hollow feeling, exchanging tearful glances with Jan and my mother as the clinic staff work at their laptops and chat in Swiss German. I don’t want to have lost Ann. I want us to be four again. I want to be anywhere but here so I can work out how I feel and start to mourn. After a long hour, the police come back into the room and address the clinic staff. “Alles ist tip-top,” is the only phrase I catch. I take that to be a good sign. When we get back to England, the first thing we do is contact the British police. I am interviewed under caution on 14 July – a gentle questioning by a sympathetic officer, who does her best to put me at ease. Then we wait to hear whether it will be taken any further. Two months later, on 7 September, the officer calls to say the case will be filed. The police have chosen not to refer the investigation to the Crown Prosecution Service, but it was a possibility we had all had to face, and my tearful relief when the call finally comes shouldn’t take me by surprise. I wish I could tell Ann. Not long before we made the trip, I asked Ann if she had any regrets. She confided that she would have liked to know what happened next in The Archers. I told her she would have to create her own ending, and asked her about stories in real life that she would not see completed. She was sad not to see what her best friend did next. “She’s at quite a crossroads in her life, there are loads of possibilities. And I’d like to know what happens with the family, with you.” Her biggest regret, however, was not having children. But her work as a doctor had involved visits to struggling new mothers, and she wasn’t sure she would like it. “The picture of endless nappies – I somehow hadn’t got a very good image of what it could be like to have small babies around and enjoy them … I think looking back I could have done it and I wish I had, but we make these decisions as best we can at the time. I guess it gave me freedom that other people might not have had.” I asked her if she had perhaps seen the worst side of chronic illness in her work, too, and whether she might end up with a different view of dying naturally if she didn’t go through with this. She looked at me aghast. “What, plodding on until it gets me?” She would never have regretted her decision to end her life. Not all of us are ready to hold a party at a deathbed, but perhaps we can at least listen to people who are desperately ready for life to stop. Ann felt that in England we had got dying wrong by avoiding discussion and focusing too much on extending life at all costs. She was sad for what she had lost, but she wanted to be in control, to make her own choice to die, not be forced to live in suffering. She felt she had reached her river’s end and wanted to join the sea. But she had to travel too far to find it. • This article was amended on 22 November 2021 to clarify that UK government laws related to assisted dying only apply in England and Wales.Thousands of people have marched in “freedom” rallies in Melbourne, Sydney, Brisbane, Perth and Adelaide, with the largest crowds in the Victorian capital as protests against the state government’s pandemic legislation ramped up again. Protesters marched from Victoria’s state parliament, down Bourke Street and up to Flagstaff Gardens, carrying Australian flags and placards bearing anti-vaccination, anti-lockdown and anti-government slogans, while chanting “kill the bill”, “sack Dan Andrews” and “Aussie, Aussie, Aussie, oi, oi, oi”. The rally drew a significant increase in numbers following weeks of protests against the Victorian premier’s Public Health and Wellbeing (Pandemic Management) Bill 2021, which previously came to a head last weekend, when thousands of people marched through central Melbourne in a demonstration that included a prop gallows, protesters posing with nooses, and chants of “hang Dan Andrews”. The bill as introduced by the Victorian government would allow the premier to make an indefinite declaration of a pandemic and state of emergency, give the health minister power to make broad public health orders, and grant authorised officers the power to detain people under quarantine. The Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, has been racing to pass the pandemic legislation before the state of emergency is due to lapse on 15 December. If the bill fails to pass, the Victorian government may not have the legal framework to enforce and create Covid-19 orders to manage the pandemic. The bill has been criticised by the Law Institute of Victoria, the Victorian Bar Association, and the Human Rights Law Centre, who say it lacks oversight and transparency. Speakers at the Melbourne rally included the rightwing fringe pundit Morgan C Jonas and Harrison McLean, who was charged earlier this year with incitement for allegedly encouraging people to breach the chief health officer’s directions with regards to Melbourne protests on 18 September, in the middle of the city’s sixth lockdown. Speakers claimed credit for the pandemic legislation bill being delayed in parliament this week and called on the crowd to “go to any length necessary to rid our parliament of those traitorous politicians”. At least one protester was detained before being led away by police. A counter-demonstration organised by the Campaign Against Racism and Fascism, a coalition of progressive activists and leftwing organisations, which met at the Eight Hour Day Monument in Carlton, attracted a crowd of about 300 to 500 people. While it seemed initially like a confrontation was imminent, the anti-fascist demonstrators took a route through Carlton rather than making their way into the CBD. Nahui Jimenez, an organiser from the campaign, said on Saturday that the purpose of the rally was to draw attention to the conspiracy theorists and far-right elements that were a feature of the “freedom” rallies. “Hostility to vaccines and other important health measures has become a gateway to the far-right globally,” Jimenez said. “We will not allow fascist groups to propagate their bigotry and occupy our streets without resistance.” The Victorian parliament was the site of ugly scenes this week as protesters occupied the front steps to demonstrate against the proposed pandemic laws. A crowd staged a mock execution of the premier using wooden gallows on Monday evening, while another demonstrator attended an earlier protest with three nooses in an apparent reference to crossbenchers who have supported the bill. It was also reported figures associated with the neo-Nazi movement had joined the protests. In Sydney on Saturday, several thousand protesters also marched through the CBD. The sound of bagpipes echoed through York Street as a man dressed in white screamed “destroy the new world order” and others chanted “walk with us”. A Sydney demonstrator carried a “kill the bill” sign, despite there being no such bill in NSW, while others waved Australian flags. United Australia party leader and federal MP Craig Kelly addressed the crowd at Martin Place after attending a Melbourne protest last weekend. “We will hold every politician and every bureaucrat responsible for forcing injections upon the Australia population,” he said, drawing chants of “sack them all”. The party’s founder and former senator, Clive Palmer, was at the sister rally in Brisbane’s Botanical Gardens. He criticised a number of politicians, including the prime minister, Scott Morrison, who he said “abandoned Australia”. When the Brisbane crowd was asked by a protester giving a speech what they thought of the Queensland premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, someone yelled: “Hang the bitch.” It came after Queensland MP Brittany Lauga contacted police after she and other members of state parliament received an email with “threats of terrorism, extremism and violence”. “I understand local doctors have been sent death threats and other threatening letters,” she wrote on Twitter. “I unequivocally condemn these threats of violence, terrorism and extremism. This is not peaceful protest.” On Friday, key Victorian crossbench MP Andy Meddick revealed his daughter Kielan had allegedly been attacked on a Fitzroy street the previous evening and had suffered a head injury after being confronted by an unknown man over the spray painting of an anti-vax poster. The incident drew condemnation from Morrison and the Victorian premier. Experts say protesters in Melbourne have capitalised on criticisms of the bill to maintain the momentum of anti-government protests, which began as anti-lockdown protests last year, morphed into anti-vaccine mandate protests in July, and were fuelled by outraged construction workers in September after the two-week shutdown of the state’s construction industry. • Australian Associated Press contributed to this reportWell, dear readers, Saturday evening is upon us, so I’ll leave you here for now. Thanks for being here, check out the highlights below, and we’ll be back tomorrow morning. Thousands marched across Australia in the so-called “freedom” rallies. The youngest Australian to die with Covid is a Victorian boy – he was under 10. The search for William Tyrrell could go for months, and new evidence has emerged. Parts of NSW are bracing for wild weather. Allegra Spender, daughter of late fashion designer Carla Zampatti, will challenge the Liberal MP Dave Sharma in Wentworth. And I did promise something a little lighter after all the Covid news, so please enjoy this eggcellent goog recipe from Nornie Bero! Ready for some big numbers? There have been at least 256,678,601 Covid cases globally, and at least 5,140,194 deaths. And at least 7,338,228,587 vaccine doses have been administered, according to a snapshot pulled together by AAP. In Australia, the national death toll is 1,938. Some 91.37% of Australians 16 and over have had at least their first dose and 84.87% are double dosed. OK I’m going to hunt around for something a little less heavy to share with you now. Here’s Andrew Stafford’s lovely, sad, nostalgic and beautiful piece on the Warumpi Band. Chuck My Island Home on the old ghettoblaster and have a read. “We just wanted to give our music to everybody”: I suspect the comedian Adam Spencer isn’t being entirely complimentary of the United Australia party MP Craig Kelly here ... Thousands apparently at the Adelaide protest. Which is, on one measure, even more ridiculous than the other “freedom” rallies. Covid-free South Australia has barely been locked down, and is in the weird situation where it’ll open its borders next week and let Covid in ... Once upon a time, Clive Palmer (now the United Australia party boss) gave my soccer team a half-time pep talk. It was about as useful as this. Here are some more details about the ongoing search for William Tyrrell. Police have only searched a small fraction of the area near Kendall in NSW where they are hoping to find his remains, and it could take another nine weeks to cover the whole area. Catch up here: Here’s a great, nuanced read from Myke Barlett on arguing with anti-vaxxers. I have given up on the idea that facts alone will change a zealot’s mind. Just as I have abandoned any notion that being a good, decent and intelligent person will immunise you against conspiracist paranoia. Wrap your noggin around the whole thing here: Allegra Spender – fashion designer Carla Zampatti’s daughter – will challenge Liberal MP Dave Sharma in Wentworth. She wants more action on climate change, including a 2030 target of at least a 50% reduction in emissions. Spender worked with her mother before becoming chief executive officer of the Australian Business and Community Network. Read all about it here: Severe weather will hit parts of NSW tomorrow. Thunderstorms, hail, strong winds and heavy rain are expected across the Blue Mountains and the north-east of the state. The Bureau of Meteorology has issued flood watches for the Upper Macintyre, Gwydir, Peel, Castlereagh, Belubula, and Macquarie to Bathurst. The NSW State Emergency Service has called on people to be prepared, and not to drive, walk or ride through flood waters on roads. Lots of great observations and colour from Stephanie Convery in Melbourne below. Meanwhile, thousands of protesters have also gathered in Sydney to march through the CBD. People are waving Australian flags, there are a few United Australia party signs, and they’ve been singing the national anthem. The UAP MP Craig Kelly has addressed the crowd, claiming Australians are living in a “prison camp”. (Organisers claim there are more than 100,000 people protesting, but that number hasn’t been verified.) The ABC reports about 2,000 people are protesting in Adelaide. “Freedom” rallies are also being held in other capital cities. Speeches have started at Flagstaff Gardens. Rightwing pundit Morgan C Jonas leads chants of “kill the bill” before claiming this is the biggest protest in Australian history (it isn’t, anti-war protests, climate protests and union marches in Melbourne over the last two decades have drawn equal or bigger crowds). He’s also claiming credit on behalf of the movement for the pandemic legislation bill being delayed in Victorian state parliament this week and expressed admiration for Adem Somyurek, who he says “will not sell out”. “Are we willing to go to the absolute end?” Jonas says, and the crowd cheers. “Is it fair to say that we will go to any length necessary to rid our parliament of those traitorous politicians?” More cheers. “There is no doubt in my mind that we are winning.” Forensic teams digging up a patch in dense bushland in search of the remains of William Tyrrell have found another piece of evidence, which they have taken for specialist testing. On the sixth day of the search next to the Kendall home William was last seen at in 2014, officers found an empty green hessian sack, understood to have been a sandbag. Its significance to the investigation is unclear, and it has been taken for forensic testing. Two other pieces of evidence have also been found at the dig site – a piece of red thread found on Wednesday that initially fuelled speculation it could have been linked to the Spider-Man costume William was last seen wearing. On Friday, searchers found a small piece of light-blue fabric by a creek next to the dig site that had been pumped. All evidence is still being forensically examined. You can read more about the revived search for William here: Melbourne’s Flagstaff Gardens is slowly filling up with people as the end of the anti-bill rally snakes through the city. There’s music playing from loudspeakers at the top of the hill to a particular theme –David Bowie’s Rebel Rebel, John Farnham’s You’re the Voice, the White Stripes’ Seven Nation Army – interspersed with chants of “freedom”. On other cultural touchstones, I’ve seen a few Make America Great Again caps and Infowars T-shirts in the mix since I got here too. I’m told the anti-fascist counter-rally is moving down Swanston Street now from Carlton. A child under 10 has become Australia’s youngest person to die with Covid. The Victorian child had “other serious comorbidities”, AAP reports. Before that death, a 15-year-old from Sydney was the youngest known person to die with Covid – although the virus was not the cause of his death. Osama Suduh was also being treated for pneumococcal meningitis. Some more from the NT, which has just ended its mask mandate – with some exceptions. Masks are still required in Katherine and Robinson River. The NT outbreak has grown to 21 cases, and there are concerns it has spread into more Indigenous communities. There are also concerns about a positive result in wastewater in the Marlow Lagoon catchment. Meanwhile, police have been handing out fines to people for breaching the health orders. Read more about the fears for those Indigenous communities here: One new Covid case has been recorded in the Northern Territory overnight, the chief minister, Michael Gunner, says. The 31-year-old woman was in quarantine when she tested positive, so there are no new exposure sites at this point. The front of the anti-bill rally is all the way up at Flagstaff Gardens now, which, for anyone who isn’t particularly familiar with Melbourne’s layout, means they’ve crossed almost the entire CBD. When I left Russell Street not long ago, people were still streaming down from Parliament. There are thousands of people here. There is a lot of nationalism on display. Not just the Australian flags, which are everywhere, but I’ve also seen flags and scarves from Poland, France and Greece. I’ve also seen a rainbow flag and an Aboriginal flag. Politically, it all feels completely topsy turvy. To give you a bit of a flavour of this protest, here are some of the slogans I can see from my current vantage point: Dan Andrews is the #1 enemy of the state You divide, We Unite Permaculture: local solutions to global problems Mandates are keeping families apart Silence is compliance No jab, no job, no way Dan is an Illuminati puppet No vax passports It is not OK to grant unchecked power to government The crowd is composed of a cross-section of ages – lots of families – though it is mostly caucasian as far as I can see. A few masks on, not many. The rally at Trades Hall is on the move now, heading towards the city. The rally out front of parliament is moving now, heading down Bourke Street, to chants of “Kill the bill”, “Sack Dan Andrews” and “Aussie, Aussie, Aussie, Oi Oi Oi”. This anti-bill rally is huge. People are packed in from Parliament to past Swanston Street now. I’ve seen a lot of protests but I’ve never seen this many people at a rightwing rally in Melbourne. Numbers at Trades Hall are also growing, I’m told. A “cowardly” drive-by shooting of a suburban Sydney home could easily have killed the two men inside, police say. AAP reports the shooting may have been a case of mistaken identity: Officers were called to a house in Connells Point around 9pm on Friday night after neighbours reported hearing gunshots. They arrived to find the upper storey of the house and a car parked out the front riddled with bullet holes. Half an hour later a vehicle that was seen in the vicinity of the shooting was found nearby, burned out and with stolen or fake plates. NSW police Superintendent Jason Box on Saturday said the two men inside the home at the time of the shooting were lucky to escape uninjured. “Shooting indiscriminately into a premises in a quiet suburban area is not only a cowardly act, it’s also extremely dangerous,” he said. “For the number of shots that were fired into the residence ... it could have quite easily been a fatality for them.” The men don’t have any links to crime groups or figures, and police have found no explanation as to why they may have been targeted. “(The shooters) obviously have planned this to a certain extent, but it would appear that they have made a mistake,” Box said. “There’s nothing to suggest that anyone in that street at this point is a target.” Police will maintain a visible presence in the area as detectives continue to comb over the crime scene. Anyone with information is urged to contact CrimeStoppers. Melbourne’s CBD is the busiest it’s been in months, and down by Flinders Street station you’d hardly know there are protests only a couple of blocks away. Protesters are gathering out the front of state parliament. The relatively small contingent that has been camped out there all week has grown hugely this morning and now fills the whole Spring Street/Bourke Street intersection. There are a lot of flags here, mostly Australian flags but also Eureka flags and what I think is the Victorian flag. And more people are coming in all the time. On the way here I passed dozens of people holding placards, wearing T-shirts saying “Community building not social distancing”, or boasting slogans about freedom and against “compulsory vaccination”. Anti-fascist activists are also gathering near Trades Hall. I’m told there are some 300 people up there, with more trickling in. Needless to say there are also a lot of police, mounted and on foot. Many of the immediately adjacent intersections are blocked off. NSW Health has released more Covid information – including that sewage surveillance has detected fragments of the virus in Tumut, Uralla, Wardell, Eden, Jerilderie and Tweed-Kingscliff, where there are no known current cases. Get tested if you have any symptoms, people! They’ve also put out this video with more information: Some sad news this morning from Victoria – a toddler is fighting for his life after being found unresponsive in a hotel pool. AAP reports: Emergency services were called to the complex on Whiteman St in Southbank after the two-year-old boy was discovered unresponsive in its pool about 10pm on Friday. The child was treated at the scene by paramedics and taken to the Royal Children’s hospital in a critical condition. Police are investigating the circumstances of the incident. An Aussie start-up is part of a plan to turn space junk into rocket fuel. One company will trap debris, deliver it to another to cut up, then it’ll go to a space foundry to be melted and made into metal rods, which can then power Neumann Space’s propulsion system. Phwoar! (PS. I’m not just putting this up because I wrote it. It’s genuinely fascinating!) My colleague Daniel Hurst had a truly extraordinary chat with Chinese diplomat Wang Xining. They covered Aukus, Huawei, Xinjiang, and so much more. Read all the highlights here: But to get across the whole gamut, it’s in this week’s Full Story podcast: Good morning, lovely people. I started the day by putting chilli in my eye, hope you are all doing better than me ... and thanks to Stephanie Convery for getting us off to such a good start! And with that, I’m going to handball this here blog over to my colleague Tory Shepherd, who will take you through your brunch-time news. Until next time! Theatre is back! Theatre! People performing in front of you while you watch it in the same room as other people! If you’re in Sydney, Steve Dow recommends you check out the new Sydney Theatre Company production of Shakespeare’s Julius Caesar. The new production uses just three actors, he writes, “employing a combination of live and pre-recorded performances that allows the trio to play multiple roles in a work normally requiring an ensemble five times greater.” Shakespeare seems to be the playwright of choice for theatrical revival campaigns – Melbourne Theatre Company just opened As You Like It a couple of days ago. Read the four-star review of Julius Caesar here: Some Australian Open news via Reuters: all players, including world No 1 Novak Djokovic, will have to be vaccinated against Covid-19 to compete in the tournament next January, Australian Open chief Craig Tiley said today. Djokovic has declined to disclose whether he is vaccinated and said that he would wait until Tennis Australia revealed the health protocols before he made a decision about playing at Melbourne Park. Tiley said: There’s a lot of speculation about vaccination and just to be really clear, when the [state] premier announced that everyone on site ... will need to be vaccinated ... we made that clear to the playing group. [Djokovic] has said that he views this as a private matter for him. We would love to see Novak here, he knows that he’ll have to be vaccinated to play here. I was going to give you a nice neat teaser extract from my colleague Katharine Murphy’s column this week, but it’s one of those pieces that actually needs to be read in full. She starts with Israel Folau in 2019 and takes us all the way to Scott Morrison “double-speaking to extremists” (as Daniel Andrews put it on Friday) this week in order to, as she says, “set up the final parliamentary sitting fortnight of 2012”. Get thee to the column, here: Australians planning to return to Queensland for Christmas say they have cancelled international flights after being told their overseas-born spouses or young children would still be forced to complete two weeks of hotel quarantine. The Queensland premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, announced the “plan to reunite families” last month, saying the state had to “give certainty” to the thousands of people who had been locked out during the pandemic. Under the plan, Australian citizens and permanent residents will be able to return to Queensland and quarantine at home after 17 December. Other international arrivals would be directed to hotel quarantine. Australian Pip and her husband, Greg, who is a US citizen, had booked a flight to travel from their home in San Diego to Queensland on 18 December, after restrictions were relaxed. They are both double-vaccinated. But the couple have now cancelled their flights after Queensland Health advised that Pip would be allowed to quarantine at home, but Greg would be required to stay in a hotel. All the details here: Those stats represent quite a substantial one-day drop in active cases in Victoria – from 13,813 yesterday to 9,581. And those vaccination rates are still not quite but oh-so-tantalisingly close to 90% of eligible people. Come oooon Victoria! If you’re in or heading to New South Wales, please keep an eye on the weather this weekend! It could get a bit gnarly, per the BOM: An extra $91.5m from the NSW Covid-recovery fund has been set aside to boost eco-tourism in the state’s nationals parks, AAP reports. New walking trails and improvements to existing facilities will be brought forward. The treasurer and environment minister, Matt Kean, says since the pandemic, visitation levels to parks have skyrocketed – and they were already receiving 60m visitors a year. “[This highlights] the role parks play in supporting the physical and mental health of the community. Put simply – national parks are good for the soul,” Mr Kean said in a statement on Saturday. “From western Sydney to the far west of NSW, families are flocking to national parks and we want to make sure facilities are up to scratch and able to meet this increased need.” The funded projects include an upgrade to the elevated rainforest boardwalk in Budderoo national park in the Illawarra, improvements to road access to the Royal national park and $600,000 for enhancements to the mountain bike track network at Glenrock State Conservation Area near Newcastle, improved visitor facilities in Georges River National Park and Guy Fawkes River National Park, and $795,000 to build short stay accommodation at Kinchega and Paroo Darling national parks in the far west. We’re still waiting for Victoria’s Covid numbers this morning ... our favourite teens over at Covid Base say this is much later than usual. And finally, on the “religious freedom” bill, Wilson says it’s incorrect to call it a “religious freedom” bill: We didn’t propose a religious freedom bill. We proposed a religious discrimination Act. Currently, you have an age, race, sex and disability discrimination commission Act. We don’t have one on the basis of religion, which is what exists in state law. ...Now, there are always, in anti-discrimination laws, tricky, grey areas about how to get the balance right to respect the rights and freedoms of everyone. And that’s the approach the Attorney-General has taken in developing this latest installation of the bill. There have been two previous exposure drafts to get feedback, like with the anti-corruption body, so that we get feedback so that we get it right. And that’s the approach we’re seeking to take when we introduce this bill into the Parliament. The real question is whether, if we get the balance right, the Labor Party is going to vote for it Asked about whether we can expect to see the introduction of a legislation for a federal anti-corruption commission in parliament in the next couple of weeks, Tim Wilson says it’s important that they “get the legislation right”: Because what we’ve had too often is proposals which are designed to establish, kind of, kangaroo courts, and actually would do more to breed distrust in the political conversation. We’ve seen that particularly in the consequence of what’s happening in Icac in New South Wales. We want a process that’s based around integrity, that’s been consulted with the Australian community, and is actually going to do the job we need it to do, which is actually to breed trust and strength in the political system, not simply to create show trials, as I’ve seen it many times. The Labor party has referred members of parliament off to the Australian federal police, investigations go nowhere, but they get the headline, and they actually actively breed distrust in our political process for partisan political gain. Jason Clare is asked if Labor is being “nit picky or pedantic when they compare Scott Morrison to President Trump”. His response: I think this is pretty simple. You’ve got a group of people marching down the street with a life-sized execution device. You’ve got people threatening to kill the premier of Victoria. If you’re any sort of leader, you just condemn that, full stop. You don’t go on and then say, ‘But I understand why people are frustrated.’ I think it is legitimate to point out that Scott Morrison has pulled the sheet out of the Trump handbook here. Lie, deny, blame other people, never take responsibility for anything, try and divide the community, pander to the extreme right – this is Trump without the toupee. And, seriously, I think the Australian people deserve better than that. Liberal MP Tim Wilson and Labor’s Jason Clare have been on ABC News Breakfast this morning. They were asked whether the prime minister – who was accused of “doublespeak” with regard to threats of violence from protesters this week – should have been clearer in his message. Here’s Wilson’s response: The prime minister has been crystal-clear in condemning political violence, and I would hope that it’s one of the points that unites Jason and myself – which is we condemn political violence, period. There’s no justification for it. There’s no room for it in Australia. And it actually disrespects democracy. That, of course, does not stop you debating the issues at hand, and nor should it stop you debating the issues at hand. But we condemn it resolutely. But there are many Victorians, particularly, who have gone through the world’s largest, longest lockdown, and people have a diversity of views about the legislation being put through the Victorian parliament, and they have every right to debate the substance of the laws. And there are many people who do have their concerns. And to try and use the vehicle to shut down that conversation, I think, is inappropriate as well. Bit of chat about this morning regarding the latest Newspoll results, which say Victorian Labor is massively ahead of the Liberal party in public opinion. A new candidate threw her hat into the ring yesterday for the federal seat of Wentworth – that’s Dave Sharma’s electorate – Allegra Spender, daughter of Liberal politician John Spender QC and fashion designer Carla Zampatti. She’s running as an independent in the blue-ribbon seat. Here’s a picture of that flower moon above the Story Bridge in Brisbane last night. Australia’s skies were graced by a blood-red moon last night, with a partial lunar eclipse that lasted for six hours and two minutes. Brisbane viewers were reportedly the luckiest, with the clearest skies (I can confirm it was pretty overcast where I am in Melbourne). From AAP: The almost-perfect 99.1 per cent coverage of the moon by earth’s umbra creates a dark reddish hue, as the light from the earth’s atmosphere is refracted onto it. Friday night’s spectacle is also known as a flower moon, the last full moon before the summer solstice. The partial eclipse was visible around the country, and will also be seen from North America, South America and parts of Europe and Asia. If you’d like to understand a bit more about what’s been going on in Melbourne this week, and the various elements feeding into the protests outside parliament, my colleague Nino Bucci has this excellent feature up today that will get you up to speed. Good morning, I’m Stephanie Convery and I will be taking you through the news of the day for those of you up bright and early to read about it. We’re expecting protests outside Victoria’s state parliament to escalate today as anti-fascist activists vow to counter-rally against another wave of planned “freedom rallies” they claim have been infiltrated by far-right groups. The protesters have been campaigning for days against the Labor state government’s pandemic bill. A series of protests against vaccine mandates and Covid-19 restrictions has been flagged for Saturday in Melbourne, Sydney, Brisbane, Perth, Adelaide and Hobart, as well as other regional centres, with details circulated via an encrypted social media platform. The protests in Victoria sparked a heated back and forth between the Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, and the prime minister, Scott Morrison, yesterday. Meanwhile, Victorians embraced the lifting of a whole swathe of Covid restrictions. Elsewhere, NSW is in for some wild weather this weekend – the state is bracing for more flooding, with heavy rainfall expected to lash much of the east coast and possible thunderstorms predicted to hit Sydney. We’ll keep an eye on the developments in the renewed William Tyrell investigation; yesterday detectives drained a creek and found a light-blue piece of fabric which has been sent for forensic testing. There are fears a week-long Covid-19 outbreak in the Northern Territory that’s grown to 21 cases has spread to two more Indigenous communities. Authorities have detected viral fragments in wastewater from Binjari, a community on the outskirts of the town of Katherine, 320km south of Darwin. Three close contacts have been identified in the remote community of Yuendumu, 1,600km south of Darwin. Greater Katherine and Robinson River are currently under a seven-day lockdown order, which is scheduled to end late Monday. And we will of course bring you all the latest Covid stats as they’re released around the country. Got your coffee? Good. Let’s get cracking.If he hadn’t become a musician, Paul McCartney says, he would probably have been an English teacher. He has fond memories of his English teacher, Alan Durband, who studied with FR Leavis and taught the young Paul the value of close reading. When he wrote songs with John Lennon, the chords and melody came first. But the words mattered too. Where the straight-up, irony-free early lyrics wooed their audience through a flurry of pronouns – She Loves You, From Me to You, Please Please Me, etc – the later lyrics aspired to poetry. Take Eleanor Rigby, which began as a song about the kind of old lady McCartney did chores for as a scout during bob-a-job week and who he thought of calling Daisy Hawkins until working with Eleanor Bron on the film Help! and spotting a shop sign with the name Rigby in Bristol. “The secret to successful songwriting is the ability to paint a picture,” he says, and the picture of Eleanor Rigby “picking up rice in the church where a wedding has been” perfectly captures her loneliness, just as the line “writing the words of a sermon that no one will hear” does with Father McKenzie (originally Father McCartney, till a trawl through the phone book turned up a suitable trisyllabic alternative). It’s a homespun English lyric – “the face that she keeps in a jar by the door” alludes to Nivea cold cream, a favourite of McCartney’s mum – with universal resonance: Allen Ginsberg and William Burroughs were among the song’s biggest fans. Numerous biographies have traced the origins of Beatles songs. This is the McCartney version. Spread over two lavish volumes and more than 900 pages, and supplemented by memorabilia from the million-plus items in his archive (photos, posters, paintings, jottings and letters), the book came about through conversations with the poet Paul Muldoon: 50 hours of them, in 24 sessions between 2015 and 2020, covering 154 songs. On the face of it, the two Pauls have little in common: one a complex poet, the other a pop star. But they share an Irish heritage. And a few of McCartney’s rhymes (pataphysical/quizzical, Edison/medicine) wouldn’t look out of place in a Muldoon poem. At any rate the two hit it off. Though Muldoon has edited himself out of the text, you can sense him in the background, prompting and prodding. In effect the book becomes an autobiography, with Muldoon playing the part that Dennis O’Driscoll played in the interviews that became Seamus Heaney’s autobiography, Stepping Stones. The biggest influence on McCartney’s music was the death of his mother, Mary, when he was 14. He used to deny that she lay behind the words of Yesterday (“Why she had to go I don’t know, she wouldn’t say”) but now accepts she must have been. He wrote more directly about her in the year she died, 1956, in I Lost My Little Girl, a song not released till 1991. And she is namechecked (“When I find myself in times of trouble/Mother Mary comes to me”) in Let It Be, a phrase she liked to use and one that also appears in Hamlet, which McCartney read at school. A midwife in life, she was also a midwife in her afterlife, helping to deliver some of his finest songs. McCartney has similarly fond memories of his trumpet-playing father, whose love of crosswords he compares to his own approach to writing songs. When he sat down with Lennon – two guitars, two notepads, two pencils – they would have a song written within three hours: “After that your brain goes a bit.” You’d think there must have been sessions when nothing came off but he doesn’t remember any. He talks a lot about Lennon, nostalgically and with affection (“I still have him whispering in my ear after all these years”), and is keen to emphasise that they ended on good terms; at their last meeting “we talked about how to bake bread”. Harsh words were exchanged when the Beatles broke up, with the acerbic John scornful of Paul’s taste for “silly love songs”, to which he retaliated by writing a song called Silly Love Songs. But till the breakup their differences were productive: “I could calm him down and he could fire me up.” They mirrored each other, John with his right-handed guitar, Paul with his left-handed one. And their tug-of-war rivalry produced brilliant harmonies. “We thought of ourselves as Lennon and McCartney from early on,” he says, a double act like Gilbert and Sullivan or Rodgers and Hammerstein. The lyrics he wrote as a solo artist and for Wings are included here too. And many aspects of his offstage life are discussed along the way: his pacifism (which began after he met Bertrand Russell), vegetarianism, bird-watching, parenting, painting (which took off after a chat with Willem de Kooning) and unapologetic cheeriness (“it’s OSS: Optimistic Song Syndrome”). All kinds of music influenced him, Cole Porter as well as Little Richard: “No one thought it at the time but we were really big fans of the music that came out of our parents’ generation.” But the real revelation is how much he took from books – “intertextuality as they call it in posh circles”. Among the writers he alludes to are TS Eliot, George Orwell, James Joyce, Philip Larkin, Harold Pinter, Adrian Mitchell (“a good friend”), Eugene O’Neill, Lewis Carroll, Edward Lear, Sean O’Casey, Charles Dickens, LP Hartley and Louis MacNeice. And though the tone of the book is conversational, Muldoon’s editing ensures that it’s also quote-worthy: “Writing a song is like talking to a psychiatrist”, “The vignette is really my stock in trade”, “It’s not so much that I compose songs, they arrive”. The most startling such arrival was Yesterday, the tune of which was in his head when he woke up one day and which seemed very familiar; only when he played it to others did he realise it existed only in his head. Getting it down, he used dummy words: what became “Yesterday all my troubles seemed so far away” began as “scrambled eggs, oh my baby, how I love your legs”. The backstories to the songs are often as interesting as the lyrics. With Ticket to Ride he and John were also thinking about a trip they’d made to Ryde, on the Isle of Wight; Blackbird, with its “broken wings”, was written after the assassination of Martin Luther King; “Hey Jude was originally Hey Jules and written for the young Julian Lennon after John had divorced Cynthia;the portrait of a community in Penny Lane took its bearings from Dylan Thomas’s Under Milk Wood while She’s Leaving Home “was almost like a shooting script for the Wednesday Play”. The book won’t persuade the Nobel literature committee to honour McCartney as they did Bob Dylan, and though he once wrote a song about the Queen (“a person I admire very much”), he won’t be the next poet laureate. Stripped of the music, the words on the page can look random or banal. But at best he’s a wonderfully versatile lyricist: troubadour, comedian, elegist, social commentator, pasticheur. And anyone with even half an interest in the Beatles will find The Lyrics fascinating. • The Lyrics: 1956 to the Present is published by Penguin (£75). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Dick Ogg, a silver-haired former electrician who switched to making his living catching crabs two decades ago, is a staunch supporter of the union representing fishing boat captains along America’s western seaboard. But when he heard that the Pacific Coast Federation of Fishermen’s Associations was suing some of the world’s largest oil companies for causing the climate crisis, Ogg took stock of the barrels of diesel oil stacked on his vessel, the 54-foot Karen Jeanne, and wondered if the litigation was not only a mistake but hypocritical. “How do we run our engines without oil? How do we fish without oil? Electricity? I’m a small vessel. I’m only 68 tons and my God, I don’t know how that would work,” said Ogg, who fishes out of Bodega Bay, about 70 miles north of San Francisco. The environmental harm brought by rising ocean temperatures has severely undercut fishing seasons and supplies, at a steep cost to the industry. And so in response to years of setbacks, union leaders pursued a novel strategy to reclaim lost earnings: by going after one of the culprits responsible for driving global temperatures. Three years ago, the PCFFA became the first private organisation to join the growing number of lawsuits accusing the oil and gas industry of covering up research that warned about the dangers of burning fossil fuels. The plaintiffs want compensation for damage caused by global heating and to meet the cost of new infrastructure to cope with the climate crisis. They also demand the oil industry change its ways. Ogg is not alone among west coast fishing boat owners in questioning the association’s lawsuit – and the head of the PCFFA, Mike Conroy, knows it. “When I first heard of this lawsuit, I had that very same thought. This is ridiculous,” he said. Conroy said that he understands the lawsuit looks hypocritical to many people because the fishing industry is so dependent on oil. But he said his view shifted when he looked more closely at the actions of the fossil fuel industry, particularly its cover-up of the warnings from its own scientists and its continued efforts to undermine measures to contain global heating. The scepticism among Conroy’s members about suing big oil reflects sharp divisions in American society about responsibility for the deepening environmental emergency and the challenges litigants face in attempting to hold the industry to account. “It’s controversial. I get it,” Conroy adds. “But then I learned that these oil companies were doubling down on these things they knew were bad, and if we’re putting forth effort to reduce our impacts on the climate then we shouldn’t be doing that alone.” *** The PCFFA, representing about 900 family-owned fishing boats on the Pacific coast, sued after a surge in blooms of toxic algae shut down fishing for Dungeness crab. The crabs are Oregon’s most valuable catch, pumping about $75m a year into the state’s economy, and account for about one-quarter of California’s revenues from fishing. In 2013, a huge pool of warm water that became known as the Blob appeared off the Pacific coast. Two years later, the Blob had grown to more than 2,000 miles long, running from the Mexican border to Alaska. Water temperatures rose to 4.5F (2.5C) above normal, causing an increase in the neurotoxin domoic acid that delayed the opening of the 2015 Dungeness crab season along the west coast by months. The shutdown cost more than $100m in lost earnings and wages by some estimates. Two-thirds of boats were docked and others had to move to different fisheries. The total catch was only about half of a normal year. “I know a number of folks that lost their boats, lost their homes, lost their families,” said Conroy. Commercial crabbers faced shortened seasons again in the following years because toxicity levels remained high and marine heatwaves shifted krill closer to the shore, drawing endangered humpback and blue whales into crabbing areas, where they are in danger of becoming entangled in fishing lines. In its lawsuit, the PCFFA blamed the Blob on global heating caused by the burning of fossil fuels, and is seeking compensation for “a harmful algal bloom unprecedented in its extent and persistence”. A National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration study last year concluded that climate change is likely to result in a sharp rise in marine heatwaves and the perpetuation of toxic blooms that might otherwise have washed away, with domoic acid hotspots becoming more frequent and more intense. The Dungeness crab season was again delayed late last year on parts of the west coast after new domoic acid hotspots were identified off the Oregon coast, including near the port of Newport. Clint Funderburg, a member of the Oregon Coast Crab Association who fishes out of Newport, said he was reluctant to pin responsibility for the domoic acid outbreak solely on the climate crisis, and therefore the fossil fuel industry. “They were some hard years but these problems come and go. I’m not saying there isn’t climate change but there’s a history of domoic acid on this coast and I don’t know if we can say it’s one thing or the other causing it,” he said. Ogg does domoic acid testing for the state along a 30-mile stretch of coast in his area. He said the readings are consistently up but, like others fishing his Pacific coast, he notices that it coincides with an intensification of the vineyard industry. “Climate change definitely is real. We know that and it is impacting us. But it’s really at times a cyclical thing. What we’re looking at is a combination of a lot of things that are breaking down the system. It’s not one thing in particular,” he said. Toxic algae blooms have made regular appearances along the west coast. An outbreak is believed responsible for “the great bird frenzy” around beachside communities in Santa Cruz, California, in 1961, which played a part in shaping Alfred Hitchcock’s classic film, The Birds. But the intensity of the recent outbreaks, and the scale of the Blob, has scientists worried. Studies also show that the ocean is absorbing more carbon dioxide from the atmosphere, making it more acidic. Among other things, higher acid levels affects the ability of crustaceans to build their shells. In the early 2000s, the increased acidity killed off large numbers of young oysters and mussels unable to form shells. Last year, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration released a study that showed that baby Dungeness crabs were being exposed to the same corrosive waters. *** Still, there remains the question of culpability. “We all use diesel on our boats,” said Funderberg. “I’m not going to point the finger just at the oil companies. They sell it, we buy it.” The oil and gas industry has spent years deflecting from its central part in global heating, pushing the claim that it is doing no more than selling a legal product and that it is the individual user who bears responsibility for putting greenhouse gases into the atmosphere. Four of the companies sued by the PCFFA – Chevron, Exxon, BP and Shell – are responsible for more than 10% of the world’s carbon emissions since 1965. Nineteen of the 20 largest carbon emitters over the same period were oil and gas producers. But the major polluters have had some success in following the tactic of the tobacco industry and gun makers in seeking to disperse responsibility by putting the onus on the individual user rather than the manufacturers. A Guardian opinion poll published in October showed that strategy has paid off, with 31% of Americans saying that individuals are completely or mostly responsible for the climate crisis. For his part, Ogg is fatalistic. “The problem for me is suing never seems to solve the problem. The oil companies aren’t going to be hurt by a lawsuit. In fact, they want to continue, they’re going to continue,” he said. Conroy sees it differently. He says the lawsuit is intended to “punish bad behaviour” and pressure the oil industry into changing its ways. “A lot of my members don’t have the time to sit back and actually give this a lot of thought, which is unfortunate. But after the last crab season in California, I think more and more of them are starting to ask the questions that need to be asked,” he said. This story is published as part of Covering Climate Now, a global collaboration of news outlets strengthening coverage of the climate storyWildlife film-making in Britain is booming as global subscription platforms rush to commission original natural history programmes to attract family audiences. Bristol, jokingly known as Green Hollywood, is experiencing a mini-employment boom with a burgeoning forest of independent wildlife production companies. Wildstar Films, founded in 2018, already has 140 staff. Silverback Films, created in 2012, has more than doubled in size since lockdown. Plimsoll, formed seven years ago, has a 150-member natural history department. Despite this competition, the reason the indies are in the city, the BBC’s famous Natural History Unit (NHU), is bigger than ever, with 400 staff. It is making more than 25 productions, not only for the BBC but for newcomers such as Apple TV. “I’ve never known anything like it – it’s absolutely astonishing,” said Mike Gunton, the creative director of NHU, who has worked there for more than 30 years and never seen it so busy – or well-staffed. The NHU has just taken its first original commission from NBC in the US, for an epic 10-part series. Programme-makers say the demand for wildlife series is driven in part by environmentally aware audiences but also by “the streamers” – well-resourced subscription services such as Discovery+, Disney+, Netflix and Apple. Gunton said media executives woke up to natural history the moment Planet Earth 2 trounced the X Factor in the primetime Sunday night slot. Streamers rushed in after the 2019 success of Silverback Films’ Our Planet, the first big series commissioned by a streaming platform on which David Attenborough made his Netflix debut. “All the big players are looking for cross-generational viewing, repeat viewing and ‘appointment to view’ – all these things that are so difficult in the fragmented media landscape today,” Gunton said. “And they come to us for this.” “There’s a real demand from the audience but what we make is exactly what the streamers need,” said Vanessa Berlowitz, who took the well-trodden trail from the NHU to found the independent Wildstar with Mark Linfield. “Natural history has always travelled globally, whereas something like comedy doesn’t,” said Alastair Fothergill, the former head of NHU who set up Silverback Films with his ex-BBC colleague Keith Scholey. Insights into animal behaviour are timeless and global, says Fothergill, with appealing practicalities: foreign buyers do not need to pay repeat fees or dub actors. The boom is causing a shortage of experienced specialist camera operators while senior producers can name their price. “Good wildlife producers are very thin on the ground because it takes 10 years to train them,” Fothergill said. “You really need to know your natural history, and be good in the field.” But the flourishing industry has opened a door for young people. A year ago, the Bristolian Leah Hale, 19, had finished college and was working in a pub, worrying about her career. She became a runner at Silverback Films in January and next year she will take on a trainee production coordinator role. “When I was in college, Silverback was quite small. Now there are 140 people, we are going to Cop and interviewing Obama and doing all these things for climate change,” she said. “I’m massively grateful for landing in Silverback – they are absolutely lovely people.” Film-makers admit it can be a challenge to find new ideas – and new series are so jealously guarded that streaming platforms make film crews sign non-disclosure agreements. Martha Holmes, the head of natural history at Plimsoll, which has just made Tiny Worlds for Apple, said: “It is hard to find original ideas. There’s a certain number of animals and a certain number of behaviours and you have to serve it up in ways that feel fresh for the audience.” New technology helps, and natural-history-makers are targeting young adult audiences with new digital forms. Silverback’s YouTube series A Seat at the Table gave a platform to traditionally voiceless people in the run-up to Cop26, finishing the series with Obama at the Glasgow climate conference. BBC’s NHU has turned Attenborough into a hologram for a 5G virtual reality version of The Green Planet, in which people will be guided around a virtual world of plants by the 95-year-old, who enthused to Gunton about the joys of “ploughing a new furrow”. Programme-makers argue that the old divide between hard-hitting environmental documentaries and anodyne natural history series that fail to reveal planetary crises no longer applies. Some, such as Our Planet, contain direct messages about the dire state of nature; others are indirect but still spiky. A female-led Wildstar team is making Queens, a series celebrating matriarchal animal kingdoms, which has smart feminist resonances. Sentient, also for Disney+, explores animal cognition and poses questions about animal rights. Wildstar is also partnering with indigenous film-makers as well as offering them mentoring to break the perception that wildlife film-making is the preserve of posh white men. Some wonder whether wildlife series will soon be entirely made by skilled crews who live in the same country as the natural stars – particularly with environmentally minded film-makers striving for carbon neutral productions. All say they are increasingly using in-country crews. But Holmes is confident Bristol will retain its supremacy. “The epicentre will aways be here,” she said. “That’s partly historic and partly because the UK audience loves their wildlife. This is where a lot of the talent comes, is grown and is taught.” According to Gunton, there is “a buzz” in Bristol, and Hale agrees. “Bristol is a massive hub for media right now and it’s only going to grow,” she said. “You’re putting Bristol on the map and shining a light on how magical nature is.”One year to go, 11 in the making. Welcome to Qatar 2022, the final countdown, and a World Cup that for all the noise, the sense of fingers crossed and a gaze averted from the bloodier details, still makes no real sense at all. It was easy to feel a bit distracted as Sepp Blatter read out the word “Qatar”, with a slight break in his voice, shortly after lunchtime on 2 December 2010. There was an edge of hysteria in the chamber at Fifa House. Ten minutes earlier Blatter had broken the red wax seal on another padded envelope, and said “Russia”, to protracted squeals of joy. The crowd had already begun to seethe. Flushed-looking media types veered towards the exits. Blatter himself, so priapically alive in the presence of his fellow shiny gleaming golden orb, the World Cup trophy, had begun to wilt a little on stage, perhaps feeling in that moment the first stirrings of the storm that was to come. The Qatar announcement brought a more localised surge of noise. Sat in the row behind, you could feel the whoosh of wind as the winning delegation leapt up, all except for Zinedine Zidane, whose smooth, bald, muscular head remained motionless above the back of his chair. No surprise there. Zidane went on to wear the same look of a man worrying vaguely about his dry cleaning ticket though three successive Champions League victories. But it is also hard to argue with that quizzical expression. As of this weekend we have exactly a year until ignition. The opening game of Qatar 2022 will kick off at 10am GMT on 21 November at the Al Bayt stadium in Al Khor City, 50 miles from Doha on the north-east coast. It has, safe to say, been an unusually fraught journey to this point, trailed still by so many unanswered questions. It’s not about the “how”. We know now that this was a supremely well executed plan to procure a first Gulf World Cup, one that makes the English FA’s freebie handbags, the David Cameron-in-a-waistcoat optics, look toe-curlingly naive. Zidane was paid a million dollars to express his support for Qatar’s bid, providing a visible face – along with Pep Guardiola and Alex Ferguson – for a vast machinery of lobbying and back-channelling. If you believe Blatter the fate of the bid had been set two weeks before Zurich around a lunch table at the Élysée Palace in Paris. Michel Platini has robustly denied switching his vote to Qatar at the request of the French president, Nicolas Sarkozy, and crown prince Sheikh Tamim. In Blatter’s version Platini phoned from that lunch saying, “Sepp, it’s not going to work, we will have a problem.” Which would at least stand as one of the few unarguably true statements in this whole sorry process. Of the people present at that Elysée tableau, Sarkozy is currently serving a one-year sentence for political chicanery. Blatter and Platini have been banned from football and pursued by prosecutors. That Fifa voting committee has been ravaged by bans and indictments. Zoom out and the light turns darker. Qatar is adamant there have been only a tiny number of deaths around its World Cup preparations. A Guardian report concluded at least 6,500 migrant workers from India, Pakistan, Nepal, Bangladesh and Sri Lanka have died in the country since Qatar won hosting rights. If we accept this figure then we must also accept that this is a World Cup washed in blood, played out in grand illuminated structures that will stand as monuments to the suffering of those who built them. Welcome to Qatar 2022, already one of the most mind-boggling sporting stories ever told. Albeit one that still slips from view. The real question is still, why? Why does Qatar want this? The assumption has been that it is a propaganda event. The phrase “sportswashing” was coined recently, but that process has circled around Fifa since Benito Mussolini’s World Cup and on into assorted post-war despot affairs. It has been assumed that this is what Qatar wants, to present itself as a more liberal, open state, ready to dance the YMCA, to hand over your limited-edition pint of World Cup lager, to reposition itself from illiberal Gulf power to just another player in the sunshine leisure economy. And through this door we enter a labyrinth of conflicting principles, a place where no one is ever really clean. Does it matter that Britain and Qatar are so intertwined on every other level? Should the World Cup ever be played in a nation where, for example, homosexuality is still a crime? That was certainly the case in England in 1966, so there is at least some precedent. It makes for a convenient blurring of lines and interests. And how much easier to take a shortcut into this world through pop culture, to expend your resources on paying David Beckham to look handsomely baffled in scenic locations, on the spectacle of Alexa Chung “putting on a leggy display” at the Qatari Fashion Trust Awards. Look more closely, however, and this feels blindly Eurocentric. Qatar is one of the wealthiest nations on earth. It is currently the UK’s gas provider of last resort, benevolently directing four spare tankers to these shores only last month. Why would it need to sell itself? Do we think those in power care what a dwindling strain of western liberalism thinks about their attitude to things such as freedom of expression? Are they sweating in the marbled corridors over another arch tweet from user @islingtonguy5555, another moralising column in the pages of Guardian Sport? Perhaps the key is to realise that Qatar is speaking to its neighbours, not to us. In a tiny nation ringed by hostile powers, the greatest fear is security. The real currency of the World Cup is noise, eyeballs, the rolling news machine, Beckham in pristine white robes juggling a ball in front of a massive fountain. This is all a form of visibility. And who knows, perhaps Qatar 2022 has already served its key purpose through the blockade crisis, when the fear of coups and takeovers seemed to lurk just out of sight. Cut back to day zero in Zurich, and that room was already crammed with A-list oddities, from sporting royalty, political royalty and actual royalty to the sight downstairs of the mayor of London, Boris Johnson, shambling through the press zone burbling out details of the voting, rolling his eyes and saying, “we never stood a chance”; to Vladimir Putin ambling out unexpectedly and sitting in a small chair, centre stage, to take questions from behind his wired-up security. Qatar 2022, the football entity, will pass in the usual glare of TV product. But this is the company sport keeps now, the forces that have taken us this far, leaving a trail of crooks, goons and victims in its wake. Just watching this thing feels like complicity at times. All we can really do, one year out, is keep telling the story.Carlos Ghosn knows how compelling his story is. Born in Brazil to Lebanese parents, he scaled the corporate ladder to the very top of global industry to be crowned head of Renault and Nissan, before suffering a spectacular downfall: arrested in Japan and, in a dramatic finale, escaping in a box to freedom in Beirut. “There are going to be a lot of movies,” he said via video interview just before the third anniversary of his arrest. “This story is very rich. There are so many facets.” Ghosn has already given extensive access to one documentary, with versions from Apple TV+ and Netflix in the works. He is also to be played by François Cluzet, a French cinema legend and star of international hit The Intouchables, in an unauthorised television series, and is working directly with another miniseries about the events. Before his arrest in 2018 on charges of concealing income, Ghosn ran a car manufacturing behemoth second only to Volkswagen in volume. His empire included France’s Renault and Japan’s Nissan, and he had masterminded a carmaking alliance that also took in Mitsubishi. He is now living the life of a free man with his wife in Lebanon (which does not have an extradition treaty with Japan) and still working on refuting the Japanese charges, as well as doing consulting work via video calls. Ghosn’s freedom has come at great cost to other people. An American former special forces soldier and his son were jailed in Japan for their part in helping Ghosn escape, as were two pilots and an airport official in Turkey, where the plane stopped en route to Lebanon. Ghosn has also been unable to testify in the months-long trial of Greg Kelly, an American former Nissan executive arrested at the same time as him whose movements have been limited to Japan since November 2018. The judges in Kelly’s case have given themselves until March to reach a verdict. Kelly denies the charge of helping Ghosn conceal income. While the judges deliberate, and three years after the initial arrests, Ghosn’s public relations advisers contacted the Guardian to offer separate interviews with him and Kelly’s wife of 43 years, in which both protested Kelly’s innocence and criticised the slow-moving Japanese criminal justice system. Dee Kelly has had to start a Japanese language course in order to qualify for a student visa, which allows her to stay in Japan with her husband. She watched all but one day out of 71 of Kelly’s extended trial. “Your life is taken from you,” she said, speaking via video from Washington, where she was lobbying senators after the end of her husband’s trial. “It’s thrown out the window.” She said she did not blame Ghosn for fleeing Japan. “He had to make the decision that was right for him, right for his family,” she said. Asked if he felt he shared any blame for the suffering of others, Ghosn said Japan’s “hostage justice system” was at fault. “Yes, I feel bad about the fact that something that should have been dealt with in the boardroom in a very simple way, straightforward manner, cleared with the audit committee, whatever, be dealt with with the hostage justice system in Japan,” he said. Ghosn is barred from international travel by an Interpol “red notice” that he is seeking to have lifted. However, he has taken on new consulting work via Zoom calls. He has worked with several unnamed automotive startups, as well as environmental technology startups working in wastewater, fertiliser and plastic recycling. In some cases he has taken equity in companies he has advised, although his confinement to Lebanon has prevented him from sitting on boards, he said. He also ruled out working directly in the car industry in the future. He has few qualms about portraying himself as an electric vehicle visionary. Under his watch in 2010 Nissan launched the electric Leaf, but the carmaker is widely acknowledged to have squandered its lead in electric vehicles even before Ghosn’s exit. “In 2007-2008 I was the only one with Elon Musk who [said] clearly that we think the future is going to be electric,” he said. “The market after 13 years, it’s just saying: ‘These guys are right, the market is going to be electric.’” Ghosn said the sky-high valuations of electric car startups such as Musk’s Tesla and the Jeff Bezos-backed Rivian – some of which are worth more than most major legacy carmakers despite in some cases having minimal revenues – are not comparable with the likes of Nissan or Renault. “It’s not a question of is it too high, is it too low?” he said. “It’s a completely different ballgame. If you look at Tesla or Rivian, I think you should put them in the valorisation of Google, or Facebook, or Nvidia, etc. They are in this category.” On Nissan, which collaborated with Japanese prosecutors to bring him down, Ghosn is unsurprisingly withering, arguing it does not have a vision to exist in the electric car age. The Japanese carmaker has not given up on seeking what it deems to be justice for what it alleges to be Ghosn’s crimes. The company is seeking civil damages from Ghosn in two cases in Japan, one in the Netherlands (the home of the Renault-Nissan alliance offices), and one in the British Virgin Islands. A Nissan spokesperson said the company had found “serious misconduct by Carlos Ghosn and Greg Kelly which was later corroborated by multiple government agencies who conducted their own thorough, independent investigations”. They added: “The facts of the misconduct will be shown during the court proceedings and the law will take its course.”The postbox just off the high street tells the tale of the contrasting reactions the arrival of the I’m a Celebrity … jamboree is provoking in the north Wales market town of Abergele. The Rhyl Toppers, a group of yarn bombers (street artists using colourful displays of knitted or crocheted yarn rather than paint), has lovingly crafted a woolly vision of the show’s hosts, Ant and Dec, as knights in shining armour to crown the postbox. But, rather less artfully, someone has stuck a scrawly, sweary note on to the box suggesting the ITV show is “utter crap” and urging McPartlin and Donnelly to “go home”. “There’s always one or two critics,” said Tracey Brennan, who runs a gift shop and fruit and veg store in the town as she scraped off the offensive sign “But the vast majority of people love the show and what it is doing for the town. “It’s been brilliant for Abergele – I reckon visitor numbers were up by 50% in the summer. It’s been good for people’s mental health at a time when we need it and it’s even meant housing prices have increased. It’s put us on the map.” The reality show, in which celebrities take part in gruelling challenges and are tormented by close encounters with creepy-crawlies, arrived in the town last year when Covid put its usual milieu, the Australian jungle, out of bounds. At a time of lockdowns and firebreaks, fans lapped up the trials and tribulations that celebrities endured in and around the cold, damp surroundings of Gwrych Castle. But there was also concern from animal rights campaigners that live creatures were being used as entertainment and the police investigated claims that non-native insects such as cockroaches could have been accidentally released into the wilds of Wales. There was also a human tragedy when a 58-year-old woman, Sharn Hughes, died after being hit by a car after stopping to take a picture of the illuminated castle. The show will be back on television on Sunday night and a stroll around the town seems to confirm Brennan’s view that most people are still onboard. Children from local schools have created “bug bunting” that is draped on many of the buildings. Shops and other businesses have competed for the best window display. “I think it has brought energy to the town,” sai thed artist Pam Peters, who has created a splendid artisan fused glass rendering of Gwrych Castle for her shop window display. An old bank building has been turned into an I’m a Celebrity … gift shop selling souvenirs, from tea towels and fridge magnets to handmade soaps. People drop in for packets of dried insects such as honey roast crickets, to re-enact their own “bush tucker trials” as they watch the show. The town’s Pen-y-Bont Inn is stocking up on mealworms, grasshoppers and crickets to grind up and add into I’m a Celebrity … cocktails. The television presenter and naturalist Iolo Williams will be watching the show not for fun but to keep an eye on the animals. He is pleased that the show has upped the profile of north Wales. “But I’ll be dismayed if they continue to use live animals for entertainment,” he said. “My main worry, once again, is the use of non-native and potentially harmful species such as cockroach and locust. Should these get a foothold in such an ecologically sensitive area, the outcome could be disastrous.” The show refuses to give details of where its creatures come from. A spokesperson said: “The team have many years of experience in producing the show and have rigorous protocols in place to ensure that animals are handled safely before, during and after filming, in compliance with animal welfare law. Welfare and safety is always our primary priority.” Sian Williams, the head of operations in north-west Wales for Natural Resources Wales, said it had discussed non-native species and biosecurity issues with ITV and the production company to safeguard the local environment. She said: “Any individual or organisation must obtain a licence from NRW under the Wildlife and Countryside Act or the Invasive Alien Species Order before transporting, keeping or releasing relevant non-native species. “No licence applications have been received from the production company in relation to non-natives as part of their production of I’m a Celebrity.” If the production company does not use species covered by the legislation or if they put measures in place to ensure that non-native species used in the production are not released or allowed to escape, it may not be necessary to obtain a licence from NRW. The return of the show is also highlighting tensions between residents and the castle over access to footpaths in the grounds. Some locals accuse the castle of blocking off paths they have used for decades to exercise and walk dogs. County councillor Andrew Woods said he believed most locals embraced I’m a Celebrity … and it had boosted the economy but he was working hard to keep the paths open. “There’s bitterness about that,” he said. The castle, which is using I’m a Celebrity … to boost an ambitious restoration project, insists it is within its rights and argues the show is good for the town. Mark Baker, the chairman of the Gwrych Castle Preservation Trust, said: “Everywhere you turn there’s pictures of Ant and Dec. It’s a festival atmosphere.” Self-confessed superfan Sylvia Jones, a partner in a north Wales building company, agrees. She remembers trips to the castle as a schoolgirl to watch jousting. “It’s great to see the castle being used again for something as exciting as this,” she said. “I love it.”A property developer forecasting a profit of tens of millions of pounds from a luxury apartment complex on London’s “Billionaires Row”, has claimed it cannot afford to subsidise a single affordable home there. In a move that has caused anger in a borough blighted by an affordable housing crisis, Harrison Varma argued its plan to build 109 “high-end” homes with an indoor pool, gym, spa and underground parking on The Bishops Avenue in north London, left no money for cheaper housing. In planning documents, the firm’s consultants estimated the scheme would make £37m in profit from £213m in revenue on a road considered one of Britain’s most expensive addresses, where oligarchs from the former Soviet states, Saudi royalty and Nigerian oil barons have bought palatial mansions. The new homes will cost about £2m each on average. The case will focus attention on highly complex negotiations between developers and councils over private housebuilders’ payments towards affordable housing. For the last three years about 50% of all affordable homes in England have been funded by such developer deals. Yet social housebuilding fell 12% in the year to April 2021, according to official figures released on Thursday that show just under 6,000 homes let for the cheapest “social rents” were completed in England. Analysis by the housing charity Shelter showed just one social home was built in England for every 195 households on waiting lists. About 46,000 other “affordable” homes were built, but these include shared ownership properties and housing that costs 80% of market rent. On the scheme at The Bishops Avenue, Conservative-controlled Barnet council agreed with the developer’s financial viability assessment that it “cannot viably support the provision of any affordable housing”. The borough’s Labour opposition leader, Barry Rawlings, has accused the council of being “utterly negligent”. “We’re in the middle of a housing crisis with nearly 2,500 families trapped in temporary accommodation [in Barnet],” said Rawlings. “If the council had done its job properly and negotiated the maximum possible … it would have funded enough affordable homes to re-house most if not all of these families.” The council later accepted a £1.1m payment from Harrison Varma – sufficient to buy four two-bedroom apartments in cheaper parts of the borough. The deal comes despite a council target that all new developments of over 10 homes must include 40% affordable units. Anil Varma, co-owner of the development firm, defended the arrangement saying that given the cost of land and the returns expected by private investors (profits of 17.5% are forecast for the scheme on The Bishops Avenue), affordable housing was not viable. He accepted that affordable housing was desperately needed but said: “If you don’t get a deal with investors you don’t get anything built.” He added that over the course of the project the rate of return worked out at about 5% a year. The viability assessment argued that the £2m luxury flats would make “a valuable contribution toward housing provision” in Barnet. However the median annual salary in the borough is just under £30,000. The Bishops Avenue is popular with foreign buyers and investors and many plots stand empty or derelict after being left unused for years. But Varma said that if affordable housing was mandatory without viability assessments on such high-value sites “people who own the land won’t sell it, they will sit on it”. He said the scheme would make a “phenomenal” contribution to the economy, including £26m in stamp duty receipts, 25% tax on any profit made, 265 construction jobs for two years and a community infrastructure levy of over £3m He said he was not avoiding any affordable housing obligations, that the calculations were scrutinised by the council’s own experts and were published. “We are not developers making vast amounts of money,” he said, pointing out he had previously made substantial losses. A spokesperson for Barnet said providing affordable housing was integral to its housing plan. “In the past 10 years, 3,500 affordable homes have been built in Barnet as part of housing schemes,” they said. “We are on track to offer 800 more new affordable homes for rent by 2024.”One day a British government will return the Parthenon marbles to Athens. The only question is: who will obtain Greece’s undying credit and thanks? The obvious candidate was surely Boris Johnson. In 1986, the classics scholar invited the Greek culture minister Melina Mercouri to speak at Oxford University, pledging to help her restore the Parthenon’s glory. Yet this week it became yet another of Johnson’s Don Giovanni promises – words meant only at the time. Visiting London earlier this week, the Greek prime minister, Kyriakos Mitsotakis, challenged him to “think out of the box in terms of global Britannia” and stage a “fantastic coup for public diplomacy”. Johnson pretended the issue was for the British Museum to decide, and nothing to do with him. Anyone who has seen the other half of the Parthenon frieze, now on display in Athens’ magnificent Acropolis Museum, will agree that this greatest of European treasures should not be cut up and divided between Athens and London. It belongs where it was created, radiant in the Greek light and laid out within sight of its original temple. Half of it should not be sitting, frigid and out of context, in a bleak Bloomsbury mausoleum. The Parthenon marbles saga has lately become enveloped in a wider debate over cultural identity and restitution. The British Museum has long argued, for a time powerfully, that its amassing of global artefacts over two centuries of British empire has delighted and educated tourists to London. The marbles were not looted but were cut from the Acropolis between 1801 and 1805 by the British ambassador to the Ottoman Empire, Lord Elgin, with permission from Greece’s then conquerors, the Turks. No one asked the Greeks, but otherwise it was legal. The British Museum now protests that what it has, it holds with care. Yes, it did come close to wrecking the marbles when cleaning them with wire brushes in 1938, but at least they were safe from war and pollution. The whole world can get to London to see them, rather than traipsing to a distant Balkan capital, the museum says; we don’t want to open the floodgates to every tinpot regime seeking to boost its cultural image by raiding London basements for ancestral stuff. Museum curators love worst-case scenarios. Yet the world is moving on. Cultures are craving their homelands, settings, identities. Museums across Africa and Asia are improving. They are seeking to rediscover and interpret their ancient narratives. Surely we should respect rather than impede this desire. There may be no rules governing the restitution of museum objects, but dealings between peoples require qualities of courtesy, generosity and common sense. To be fair, western museums are responding. Paris is returning looted artefacts to south-east Asia and Senegal. Benin bronzes have been returned to Nigeria from Cambridge, Aberdeen, Germany and France. The British Museum returned royal jewels to Ceylon in the 1930s and regalia to Burma in 1964. It even returned part of the Sphinx’s beard to Egypt. To circumvent rules forbidding “deaccessioning”, these moves are often couched as “permanent loans”. In 1941, during the second world war, the British Foreign Office actively considered the Parthenon marbles’ return as a gesture of support for Greek nationalism, as and when the war should end. The British Museum has occasionally mooted lending them to Athens for an exhibition, but does not trust the Greeks to return them. Nor is it moved by Greek offers of sumptuous objects lent in return, such as the golden Mask of Agamemnon. This debate has been further transformed by developments in replication. Computerised 3D printing and etching pioneered in Italy and at Oxford’s Institute for Digital Archaeology can now recreate with microscopic accuracy ancient buildings and statues, even using the original stone. There are plans to “reprint” Palmyra’s Temple of Baal, destroyed by Islamic State in 2015, and replicate monuments tragically lost in Mosul and Nimrud. The Parthenon marbles could now be reproduced as indistinguishable from the originals, even if snooty art critics can dismiss them as fakes and “not the same thing”. This then raises the question of which museum, London or Athens, should get the “originals” – and does it really matter? We can admire the second casting of a Rodin statue or the fourth state of a Rembrandt etching as much as a first. Who cares? To this there is only one answer: that the Greeks do care. The missing Parthenon frieze in its original state is a reminder of the country’s humiliation by the Turks, and by a British aristocrat. They feel these stones are theirs, just as the Stone of Scone belongs to Scotland, and Stonehenge would “belong” to every Briton, had the Emperor Claudius decided to cart it back to Rome. If Londoners want to experience the aesthetic appeal of Greek carving, they can: technology can replicate it for them, as it is now replicating famous statues across Europe. But let the stones return. This issue, so important to the Greeks but not to the British, could be sorted out with goodwill in an instant. Precisely such a negotiation on the marbles was demanded in September by Unesco, and rejected by Britain. If it requires a “perpetual loan” or an act of parliament, then get on with it. If money is required, raise it. Johnson is being feeble in fobbing off Athens’ request as not being under his purview. The museum is a state institution. Instead of keeping his promise and doing the right thing by the marbles, he has performed another U-turn and funked it. Simon Jenkins is a Guardian columnistAbout halfway through Tick, Tick ... Boom!, the new movie directed by Lin-Manuel Miranda, the patrons of a diner in 90s New York all turn to the camera and sing. The movie, Miranda’s directorial debut, is based on the autobiographical stage show of the same name by Jonathan Larson (creator of Rent) and tells the story of Larson’s late 20s as a struggling writer and waiter. Andrew Garfield is extraordinary in the lead, but it’s the people around him who make this particular scene; as the number unfolds, it becomes apparent that every extra in the diner is a legend of musical theatre, from Bernadette Peters, to Brian Stokes Mitchell (a veteran Tony award winner), to Roger Bart (original cast, Tick, Tick ... Boom!), to Jim Nicola (artistic director of the New York Theatre Workshop) to a blink-and-you’ll-miss-it shot of Joel Grey, chasing the waiter for the bill. “I don’t know that I’m the guy you hire to make your next Marvel movie,” Miranda says, speaking via video from his office in uptown New York, “but I am the guy you hire to make this musical about a guy who wrote musicals.” It is simultaneously funny, moving and monstrously self-indulgent – or, as Miranda puts it, “about as musical theatre nerdy as it can get.” Imagining Miranda as the steward of an alternate Marvel universe – Comic-Con, but for musical theatre geeks – restores him to what, prior to the opening of Hamilton in 2015, was his quieter role in the cultural landscape: as the champion of a much-loved, much-mocked art form that rarely troubled mainstream popular culture. Hamilton changed all that. The show not only won 11 Tonys, a Pulitzer, and more than $850m in box office receipts, it conferred on Miranda a singular status, variously crediting the 41-year-old with reanimating history, diversifying Broadway, and provoking children all over the world to memorise large chunks of lyrics about America’s revolutionary politics, some of them concerned with the restructuring of the national debt. (“Hey yo, I’m just like my country / I’m young, scrappy and hungry / And I’m not throwing away my shot” – still being hammered out at a million barmitzvahs). The most surprising thing about all this, perhaps, is that Miranda, appearing today in his customary flat cap and goatee, has the boundless enthusiasm and apparent absence of cynicism of the aspiring artist still untouched by success. If you had to find the antithesis to Hamilton, Tick, Tick … Boom! – a piece of musical theatre of outlandish obscurity – would be a good place to start. The show, written in 1990 as Larson turned 30, his fifth year as a waiter at the Moondance diner, was never produced beyond an off-Broadway read-through in 2001. It is small in scale, telling the story of Larson’s failure to find a backer for one of his earlier musicals, as well as his difficult relationship with his girlfriend and their life in the grungy downtown neighbourhood that would later provide him with the foundations for Rent. That show, which opened off-Broadway in tragic circumstances in 1996, was the project Larson began writing after Tick, Tick … Boom! failed to get off the ground. When it reached Broadway later that year, its impact was similar in scale to Hamilton’s, 20 years later. Rent ran for 12 years and made more than $270m at the box office. Tick, Tick … Boom! is not the story of how Larson wrote Rent, or rather, not directly. If its premise sounds unpromising – I’m a big fan of musicals, and even I hesitated – to Miranda, it seemed the perfect project for his directorial debut, a way to celebrate Larson and create a broader portrait of the artist as a young man; in particular, how years of sunken cost and effort can predate an artist’s big hit. Miranda saw Rent as a teenager, when it first opened in New York, an experience so profound that he sees Larson’s biography as inextricably linked to his own. “That’s the guy who got me writing musicals,” he says. “Rent was when I changed from liking musicals and being in the school play, to thinking I could actually one day write one. It was truly the first contemporary musical I had ever seen – this story that took place in the Village, about artists trying to survive, deciding whether to stick with what they’re doing, living and dying. And it just felt like, ‘Oh, anyone’s allowed to write a musical?’” Inspired by Larson’s example, the musical Miranda ended up writing was In the Heights, the show that launched his career on Broadway at the age of 28, which he says has “a lot of shared DNA with Rent”. Unlike his hero, Miranda did not have an extended period of failure when it seemed foolish to go on writing, but other than that, the parallels between the two men are strong. Both lived in New York neighbourhoods concerned with “fighting gentrification”: 1980s SoHo in Larson’s case, Washington Heights in Miranda’s. Both believed that “popular music and theatre music can be friends” – Larson tipped towards rock, while Miranda incorporates the Latin, pop and hip-hop of his upbringing. Both were straight men in a genre latterly dominated by gay ones, and both were mentored, a generation apart, by Stephen Sondheim, who appears in Tick, Tick … Boom!, played with uncanny accuracy by Bradley Whitford. (After watching an early cut of the film, Sondheim told a nervous Miranda, “you treated me gently and royally, for which I am grateful”). Larson’s score riffs on Sondheim’s Sunday in the Park With George, another musical about the creative process, and if the music is less ersatz than Rent’s, one suspects it is in part thanks to this influence. The main reason for the movie’s success however, is Garfield, who is sensational as Larson, by turns maniacal, crushed, furiously hopeful and heading, as most in the audience will know, towards an early death at the age of 35, from an aortic aneurysm he had the night before Rent opened off-Broadway. Miranda had seen Garfield on stage four years earlier in the National Theatre’s epic production of Angels in America, Tony Kushner’s show set during the Aids crisis in the US in the 1980s. “He carried the hardest part of a six-hour play,” Miranda says, and it occurred to him that night that, if he ever got Tick, Tick … Boom! off the ground, this was the man to play his hero. “I remember cocking my head to one side and thinking, ‘Can I see Jonathan Larson there? Maybe with a perm?’” There is a physical resemblance – “I think they share a gangliness, which is helpful” – but it’s the power of the performance that makes the men seem in tune. “I think that Andrew can do anything.” It’s a feature of Miranda’s post-Hamilton career, of course, that for a few years he, too, has been able to do anything, and the fact that, apart from reheating In the Heights for the screen, he has largely pivoted away from Broadway towards Disney, taking on acting roles (Mary Poppins Returns) and collaborating on big Disney soundtracks (Moana, the forthcoming The Little Mermaid), has invited some sniffy commentary along the lines of: Sondheim would never have done that. It’s a tension addressed in the movie – the conflict between art and commerce; what constitutes selling out – that Miranda finds largely amusing. He has, he says, always accepted work on the basis of what any individual project might teach him, and said yes to Poppins, for example, for the chance to work with director Rob Marshall. But in any case, he invites those judging to put themselves in the place of the struggling young writer, braced for years of disappointment so that if success finally comes, he has perhaps earned the right to say yes to everything. In 2001, while Miranda was still at college, he saw that off-Broadway production of Tick, Tick … Boom! and it felt, he says, “like watching a message in a bottle. It was like, ‘Hey? You’re graduating with a degree in theatre? Good fucking luck!’” He bursts out laughing. “And guess what? Those people you’re sitting with, who are so talented and are also theatre majors, they’re going to grow up and get a real job and you’re going to be the only motherfucker banging your head against a wall. Are you ready for that?” *** Lin-Manuel Miranda’s temperament is famously chill. He’s not a tantrum-thrower, or a diva. He is, by reputation, a nice guy, approachable, self-deprecating and uxorious (his wife, Vanessa Nadal, was at school with him), who wrote the bulk of Hamilton while wandering around his neighbourhood or riding the subway to Brooklyn. This equanimity, which in the first flush of success contributed to Miranda’s popularity, inevitably later became a target for satire. Hamilton was so loved, so lauded and for a while so universally present across every medium, that Miranda’s affable dorkiness – his Joe Biden-levels of folksiness – started to show up as snarky TikTok memes (many riffed on Miranda’s omnipresence, pasting him, Where’s Wally?-style, into every conceivable background, or mocking what students of his acting divined to be his single doleful, facial expression). The show itself, meanwhile, was criticised for being insufficiently tough on the founding fathers’ involvement with slavery, and the movie version of In the Heights was slammed by some commentators for casting light-skinned over Black and Afro-Latinos. Miranda humbly accepted all charges and promised to learn from them. But the bloom had come off the rose. The truth is that with the exception of a petulance he admits comes over him when a producer or collaborator sends him notes on his work – “my back can go up” – he is pretty even-tempered. Does he have a particularly stark example of this petulance? He does. “We were working on In the Heights and they brought in a mentor composer, Andrew Lippa, who is great. At one point he goes, ‘Are all of your songs in 4/4?’ And I go, ‘Yeah.’ And he goes, ‘Yeah, that’s a problem.’ And I went, ‘Excuse me?’ He said, ‘You need some rhythmic variety, because I felt it.’ I left that meeting cursing him out.” An hour later, Miranda says, “I was sitting under a tree going, ‘Oh god!’ And I immediately made a decision to put all of Nina’s songs in 3/4 – to make her literally, rhythmically out of step with the rest of them. It was a great note, to which I reacted with remarkable hostility.” Miranda has no formal music training. He learned piano as a child and cobbled together enough musical expertise while at college to enable composition (his arranger, Alex Lacamoire, carries a lot of the weight for the Hamilton score). Miranda’s family, immigrants to the US from Puerto Rico, had a theatrical streak – you only have to look at the video of his wedding, during which he leads his family through a choreographed rendition of To Life, from Fiddler on the Roof, to see what a showman his father, Luis, is. (Vanessa expected her new husband to pull some theatrical number, but had no idea how far it would go. “It’s when she sees her brother – who’s in real estate – get up and start line dancing with us, that she really starts bawling,” Miranda says). Luis Miranda spent his working life as a political consultant, and is characterised by his son as a “bit of a frustrated artist”, who thought music and writing were best left as hobbies. “He had an uncle in Puerto Rico who was a beloved theatre actor, but my dad’s just too practical to make a go of that.” Miranda smiles. “Lo and behold, he has this son who has no such practicality. I always think of my grandmother, who under her breath, every time I was drawing something or making something, would say, ‘That boy and his inventions.’” His parents weren’t discouraging, exactly. But both Luis, and Miranda’s mother, Luz, a psychologist, wanted him to apply to law school after college as insurance. This is where, Miranda says, the Panamanian singer Rubén Blades “messed up the curve for everyone. Because Rubén Blades, who is one of the great Latin songwriters and an incredibly accomplished actor, also went to Harvard Law School. So my dad would be like, ‘Rubén Blades! Rubén Blades!’ And I’m like: ‘I’m not as smart as Rubén Blades, it’s not going to happen.’” The pressure was real and Miranda, a conscientious son, had to summon real courage to resist it. At the same time, he says, his parents never missed a show. During his first year at college, Wesleyan University in Connecticut, where he was emphatically not studying law, he was cast in a student production of Jesus Christ Superstar. Miranda blanches at the memory. “They had to hold the curtain,” he says, “because my dad’s bus of 40 people from New York was late. And they were like, ‘We’re holding for the Miranda bus!’ while I’m mortified, in the wings.” Miranda assumes the wide-eyed, stricken face of a teenager wishing the floor would open up to eat him. “But they were always supportive in terms of showing up, even when they were scared for me.” Miranda started writing In the Heights when he was 19 and still in his first year. It would, he says, probably have gone nowhere – if things had been slightly different, Miranda might, like Larson, have had 10 or more years in the wilderness before a hit – had he not met Thomas Kail, a director several years ahead of him at college. The pair only met, through theatrical circles, after both had graduated, but something in the quality of the collaboration pushed Miranda forward. “When I met Tommy Kail, I met someone who was much smarter than me, who I enjoyed collaborating with, and made deadlines for me. And also someone who was not focused on where the end product would go. I don’t think Tommy and I said the word ‘Broadway’ for the first three years of our collaboration. We’d be like: what else do we need to do? We need to make the best show we can, and not worry about where it’s going.” From a technical point of view, there are probably better songwriters in the world than Miranda. His real skill, beyond his originality, lies in an ability to communicate huge volumes of feeling via small, often superficially dry transitional moments in a song. In one small example from Hamilton, it remains mysterious how, exactly, Miranda manages to invest the phrase “the Hamiltons move uptown”, from a song about the loss of Hamilton’s son, with more emotion than is managed in many entire two-hour musicals. Whenever you return to the show, it hits you afresh; the pure impact of the score, the imaginative feat not only of putting himself in the shoes of the 200-year-old architects of modern America, but of the father grieving for his child. Miranda had no template for that. It remains, as a piece of writing, a staggering achievement. He has been helped, Miranda says, by Vanessa, whom he calls his “home field advantage”. Although the two were at the same high school in New York, they only met and started dating after college, when Vanessa was a scientist at Johnson &amp; Johnson. She later enrolled at MIT to study chemical engineering, before eventually becoming a lawyer – she now works in cosmetics law – and more than a decade after their wedding, Miranda remains in awe of her real-world skills. She does not, he says, “really care about musicals. She likes good ones, but she doesn’t like any old musical. They have to be good. I will watch anything; I think the worst musical is better than a good movie.” Hamilton would not, he says, zip along with the pace and energy it does, were it not for Vanessa. “Because if it took too long she’d be like …” he drums his fingers on the desk. The coulple have two young sons, Sebastian, six, and Francisco, three, and in the early years of their marriage, Vanessa was the breadwinner. The frustration of this arrangement is one addressed in Tick, Tick … Boom! – the habit of content creators to disappear into their own heads around deadlines, and to use everything around them as grist. Whereas Larson’s girlfriend Susan understandably rails at him for never being fully mentally present, Vanessa is unusual, Miranda says. “When we started dating, I felt no self-consciousness about writing in front of her – and what I look like writing is crazy.” He makes a wild face. “It’s me putting on the character until I’m telling the truth; that looks like a person talking and singing and screaming to themselves. And she was totally not fazed by that.” There’s one scene in the movie when Larson, mid-hug, starts absent-mindedly doing air-piano on Susan’s shoulder, writing a song in what is supposed to be a tender moment. She goes bananas. It was a direction that came from Miranda, which he calls “a bit of a dirty laundry thing for writers – the mic’s always hot if you live with us. Sondheim said it better than anyone – there’s a part of you always mapping out a sky. For any writer, in any form, there’s a part of you that’s living, and a part of you that has a tape recorder on: remember this for later.” Even that, he says, doesn’t faze Vanessa. Miranda tries to be present for his children, which entails making sure “I can carve out writing time”. But when Vanessa saw the scene with the air piano, she told him she would never blow up as Susan did. “She said, ‘If you had an idea for a song, I’d say I’m glad you got something useful out of this fight we had’; it wouldn’t be, ‘Fuck you for writing while we’re fighting’; it would be, ‘Well, something’s come out of this’.” She sounds like a saint. Another strand of Tick, Tick … Boom! is how hard it is for writers to spend years on a single project without seeing the thing to fruition. Miranda felt that keenly with In the Heights, he says – “the feeling of I’m-going-to-explode if this giant thing that only exists in my brain doesn’t get out of my brain on to a stage”. But it was the slow-going early stages of Hamilton that really got to him. After reading Ron Chernow’s biography, Miranda had decided to adapt it as a musical and was, in the first instance, partnered with a playwright. It was hell, he says, “the feeling of being already too pregnant with the work” to have to wait for the busy playwright to be free. “I had done all the research and it was starting to distil and I had that impulse that I just need to get writing – I can’t worry about lining up with this playwright and figuring out how to fix this. I’ve just gotta go.” In the end, he ditched the co-writer and wrote Hamilton singlehandedly, which in a different writer, might indicate problems with collaboration. This isn’t the case with Miranda, who is so far from the stereotype of the gruff, ornery genius that it can be tempting – unfairly, I think – to read his real talent as marketing. One of Miranda’s advantages is an ability to admit to not knowing things, and to reach out and ask for help. For Tick, Tick … Boom!, Miranda says he picked up the phone and called on every passing friend and acquaintance better qualified at directing than him, who had ever casually offered advice. “Edgar Wright, Ava DuVernay, anyone who I’d met on my travels. I called Tommy [Kail] and Jon [Chu] a lot. I called Rob [Marshall] when I was planning and storyboarding, because Rob is the best storyboarder.” Miranda is so endlessly, boundlessly sunny about everything, you start to wonder if there’s anything he hates. In the new movie, Larson takes a crack at the parlous state of Broadway as exemplified by Cats, but Miranda won’t knock Andrew Lloyd Webber. (He recently saw Phantom of the Opera, now that Broadway has reopened. “It was great!” he says. “There were all these alums in the audience, and I talked to a gaggle of Christines who said they’ve never seen the show looking so clean or the choreography this sharp. There’s never been a better time to see theatre, because everyone had to start from scratch.”) OK, but there must be something – anything – he really despises? He thinks, hard. “I have dislikes within the genre. Like, I’m not good at meta musicals. I don’t love a musical that makes fun of the fact that it’s a musical. That’s my personal taste; I’m like, don’t apologise! You like musicals, too, otherwise you wouldn’t be writing one. I don’t like things that apologise for what they are. So when a musical’s like, ‘We’re singing a song, isn’t that crazy?!’ I’m like, ‘No; I came to see a musical, it’s not crazy that you’re singing a song. Sing the fucking song’.” This is a very satisfying rant, but it is, of course, delivered with pitch perfect good humour. On the subject of Disney, Miranda says it’s “super scary” writing music that will, if it succeeds, be built in to children’s memories, where it will stay for ever. “With Moana, I was the last guy hired, and I was also working on Hamilton at the same time,” and these things are scarier than usual, he says, “because you know you’re going on a playlist with [The Little Mermaid’s] Part of Your World, and [Frozen’s] Let it Go. That’s tricky company to be in.” How did he calm himself? “You know what I did, actually? I was working Tick, Tick … preproduction and Mermaid at the same time, and at the same time that Heights was shooting. And the way that I psyched myself out was to tell myself: I’m back in college; these are all just courses I’m taking.” What?! “Yes. I’m doing an internship with Alan Menken [who wrote songs for The Little Mermaid, and worked with Miranda on Tick, Tick … pre-production]; I’m doing my Columbia history project [with Hamilton]. If I think of it as classes, and projects, they feed each other rather than, ‘Oh god, I have so much work to do.’ I think of it as cross-curriculum; I’m getting a very well-rounded education.” During the heights of the craziness around Hamilton, he was saved by an almost polar opposite mental trick, which was intense, singular focus on the show. “Doing it every night became my meditation. For two and a half hours, I only have one job. That saved me, because I couldn’t go and party, I couldn’t go to half the things I was invited to; I was like: no, I have two shows on Saturday, which kept my head from getting off the swivel. Being in a Broadway show is like being a cook in a restaurant; they don’t care about how much people liked it last night, it’s about tonight.” Is he relieved no longer to be the hot young thing? Miranda looks taken aback. “In terms of no longer being the hot young thing – to use your words, and I really appreciate that – I think it is very surreal to be on the other side of Hamilton, and realise that for some people my name is synonymous with musical theatre.” It seems absurd to him that the opinion of the kid from Washington Heights has so much sway, “but I try to take whatever that is in the most responsible way”. This means promoting those with less exposure than he has, as Sondheim once helped him along. In that spirit, he says, “I went to [Douglas Lyons’ comedy] Chicken and Biscuits yesterday, it was great, and I laughed my ass off and you should go see it.” He also raves about Ruben Santiago-Hudson’s Lackawanna Blues and makes a short speech about how safe, with masks and vaccine mandates, it is to visit Broadway and “get together in the dark to see a show”. Miranda looks briefly surprised. Then he smiles, and starts laughing at the sheer improbability of it all. “I’ve become an elder statesman.” • This article was amended on 22 November 2021 because Jim Nicola was described as former artistic director of the New York Theatre Workshop. He remains artistic director until June 2022. • Tick, Tick … Boom! is available on Netflix now.Halifax has cut the interest rate it pays on its Kids’ Saver account, despite expectations of an imminent increase in the Bank of England base rate. Savers into the account will have their returns cut from 1.45% to 1% on savings up to £5,000. On balances above that the account will continue to pay 0.01%, The change has already come into effect for new customers and existing accountholders will have their returns cut from 25 January 2022. The account was once a best-buy but other providers have already been offering better rates. According to Moneyfacts, several other high street banks pay a better rate on instant access savings for children, although most entail a parent or grandparent being an existing customer. The market leader is Santander, which is paying up to 3% on its 123 Mini Account, although it can be opened only by someone with a current account at the bank who has to hold it in trust for the child. HSBC’s Children’s Account pays 2.5% and is available to the children and grandchildren of its Premier Account customers. Halifax says the change follows regular reviews of its products, and that customers can get a higher rate on some of its other products. A spokesperson said: “We have written to customers with Kids’ Saver accounts to let them know their rate will be changing. “We continue to offer a competitive range of accounts for younger savers, including our Halifax Kids’ Monthly Saver at 2.5%, and make it easy for customers to check their rate on their account or move their money if there is a different account that is better for them.” Monthly savings accounts do typically offer higher rates than those available on instant access, but requite a regular commitment to save and the headline interest rate is earned only on the early contributions.Single-use plastic items such as plates, cutlery and polystyrene cups could be banned in England as the government seeks to eliminate plastic waste. Under proposals in a 12-week public consultation, businesses and consumers will need to move towards more sustainable alternatives. A separate call for evidence will also investigate how to limit other polluting products such as wet wipes, tobacco filters and sachets. Possible options include banning plastic in these items and mandatory labelling on packaging to help consumers dispose of them correctly. An estimated 1.1bn single-use plates and 4.25 billion items of single-use cutlery – most of which are plastic – are used in England each year, but just 10% are recycled after disposal. Environment Act powers could be used to introduce new charges on single-use items to end “throwaway culture” and give consumers an incentive to choose sustainable alternatives. The proposals follow a ban on microbeads in rinse-off personal care products, reducing the number of plastic bags being used and restricting the supply of single-use plastic straws, stirrers and cotton buds. The environment secretary, George Eustice, said: “There is growing recognition of the damage that plastics cause to our environment and marine life in particular. We want to reduce the use of plastics in packaging and ban its use in items linked to littering. “We have already banned plastic straws, stirrers and cotton buds and now plan to extend the ban to cutlery and balloon sticks where alternative materials like wood can be used.” Marcus Gover, the chief executive of sustainable resource use charity Wrap, said: “We welcome the consultation to expand the range of single-use plastic items to be banned in England. “Eliminating problematic and unnecessary single-use plastic is essential if we are to turn the tide on plastic pollution and keep plastic out of the environment. “The UK Plastics Pact set an ambitious target to take action in this important area and its members have already eliminated problematic plastic by more than 40%. We now need regulation to follow and ensure that all businesses take steps to eliminate problematic and unnecessary plastic.” The devolved administrations of Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland are responsible for their own policies on plastic waste.Manchester City’s strength in depth is going to be seriously tested against Everton. Kevin De Bruyne and Jack Grealish have been ruled out while Phil Foden is a doubt with a leg injury so Raheem Sterling has the perfect opportunity to remind Pep Guardiola of what he has been missing. Everton will hope City fail to overcome the significant absences but, after five games without a win, they still are likely to struggle as Rafael Benítez continues to miss talisman Dominic Calvert-Lewin. City may even improve without De Bruyne as the midfielder has been well below par this season. This could be a very strange encounter. Graham Searles Sunday 2pm Sky Sports Premier League Venue Etihad Stadium Last season Manchester City 5 Everton 0 Referee Stuart Attwell This season G7 Y23 R0 3.29 cards/game Odds H 1-6 A 19-1 D 8-1 MANCHESTER CITY Subs from Steffen, Carson, Palmer, Fernandinho, Aké, Mbete, Zinchenko, Foden Doubtful Foden (leg) Injured Grealish (knock, 24 Nov), Torres (foot, Jan), Delap (ankle, unknown), De Bruyne (Covid-19, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y18 R1 Form WDWWLW Leading scorers Foden, Silva 3 EVERTON Subs from Begovic, Tyrer, Lonergan, Kenny, Branthwaite, Gbamin, Iwobi, Rondón, Dobbin, Tosun, Whitaker, Onyango, Welch, Mina Doubtful Mina (thigh) Injured Doucouré (foot, Dec), Calvert-Lewin (thigh, Dec), Gomes (calf, Dec), Davies (knee, unknown) Suspended Holgate (first of three) Discipline Y20 R1 Form WDLLLD Leading scorers Calvert-Lewin, Gray, Townsend 3The era of ultra-cheap mortgages is apparently nearing an end as lenders pull their lowest-cost deals in preparation for an increase in the Bank of England base rate. But for thousands of borrowers it never started. More than a decade on from the financial crisis, these homeowners remain trapped paying interest rates well above the average and unable to move to a cheaper deal. With predictions of a rise in the base rate before the winter is out, and increases in other living costs, many of these households – known as mortgage prisoners – are becoming anxious about how they will meet their monthly bills. “Everyone is extremely on edge about the rate rise,” says Rachel Neale of the campaign group UK Mortgage Prisoners. “These people are already struggling. Some are using food banks, some are facing repossession.” A price war among lenders meant that until recently it was possible to lock in for five years at a rate below 1% if you had enough equity, while the average 10-year fixed-rate had fallen to only 2.36%. In contrast, those stuck on standard variable rates (SVRs) are typically paying a rate of about 4.39%. Earlier this year MPs voted against a cap on SVRs that would have limited the amount lenders could charge to a rate of two percentage points above the base rate, which would have meant a current pay rate of 2.1%. A base rate rise from 0.1% to 0.25% either in December or January has been widely predicted, which would add about £12 a month to a £150,000 mortgage. If the base rate goes up to 1% and lenders’ SVRs follow suit, the typical monthly home loan bill for the same property would increase by £71. About 250,000 borrowers were thought to be mortgage prisoners but earlier this year the City regulator, the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA), said it believed this figure was an underestimate. Many originally took out their home loans with lenders that had to be rescued during the financial crisis, including Northern Rock and Bradford &amp; Bingley, and have since had their mortgages sold on to another provider. Most of the providers are “inactive”, which means they do not offer new mortgages for people to switch to. Issues such as negative equity, having an interest-only mortgage, missed payments or changes in circumstances have prevented people from switching to a different lender despite interventions from the FCA. As well as not offering new deals, the inactive lenders are typically charging higher SVRs than those of the mainstream lenders. Paying a much higher rate of interest than that available on the open market is not only frustrating – it has knock-on effects on the rest of people’s finances. “It’s not just the mortgage that is the problem: people aren’t able to put away money for pensions,” Neale says. “When they go to any other type of lender, the fact that they are with an inactive lender creates a black cloud over them – they’re with a debt collector, basically.” Neale and some of the other members of the group have helped more than 100 people renegotiate with their lenders over the past year, including one case where a desperate borrower was moved from a rate of 4.79% to 1.55%. But they say more needs to be done to help the group and that the Treasury has let them down by allowing lenders to buy their mortgages without making guarantees about how much they will be charged. Marc Jelfs and his partner are among those who have been unable to make the most of record low interest rates and are worried about what will happen to their payments when the Bank decides to act. They took out a mortgage with Northern Rock in 2004. At the time it was possible to “self-certify” – where, instead of providing evidence of your income, you only needed to state what it was on the application form – and, as Marc was self-employed, they took that option. In November 2007 they were lined up to move to a new deal with the bank when it was pulled – and then the credit crunch hit. “We were moved on to a rate of 6.5%-7%. My monthly payment was £1,100 interest-only,” Marc says. “That lasted for three years, and I got into debt on my Visa.” The family’s mortgage ended up with the bailed-out bank and then got sold to a company called Cerberus, which bought up mortgages from the failed lenders. Despite guarantees that they would be able to move on to better deals after the sale, borrowers such as Marc found they were unable to move and stuck on the lender’s SVR. “I’m paying 4.18% now, which includes a 0.25% discount because I’ve been a good customer,” he says. “It’s £682 a month interest and we have eight years left on our mortgage. After that my home will be taken from me.” The rate is variable and subject to change at the lender’s discretion, and Marc fears for an increase in the monthly cost. The house originally cost £110,000 and the family spent £50,000 on refurbishment. It is now worth about £220,000-£230,000, so they have plenty of equity, but their damaged credit record has so far meant that they have been told not to even bother applying for a loan. “We will have spent £280,000 on interest by the time the mortgage ends and we will still owe £110,000,” he says. “My partner won’t even talk about it. She can’t believe that when she’s 58 she could be homeless.” Seema Malhotra MP, a co-chair of the all party parliamentary group on mortgage prisoners, says the FCA and the government need to ensure that the borrowers can access good value fixed interest rates to give them certainty over repayments. “On top of a rising cost of living, mortgage prisoners face increases to their already high standard variable rates,” she says. Earlier this year the City regulator said it would review the effectiveness of measures it put in place to make it easier for lenders to offer loans to mortgage prisoners. These gave banks and building societies some flexibility around affordability assessments. It is also reviewing the data it holds on the number of mortgage prisoners and how much they are paying. It is expected to report back later in November. A Treasury spokesperson says: “We know that being unable to switch your mortgage can be incredibly difficult. Many borrowers could now find it easier to switch to an active lender thanks to recent rule changes by the FCA. “We will work with the FCA to review the effectiveness of these changes and establish whether there are any further possible solutions that can be found for these borrowers that are practical and proportionate.” How one lender is helping Many borrowers have struggled to switch but one lender has been taking on mortgage prisoners and helping them move to a better rate. Jonathan Westhoff, the chief executive of the Midlands-based West Brom building society, says that when the FCA introduced new rules to enable switches, “quite simply, we knew it was the right thing to do – it is totally aligned with our purpose”. The society was the first to use the modified affordability tests and had to adapt its systems so that borrowers would not be automatically blocked. “Despite it being during the height of the pandemic, my colleagues solved this problem, and we then created a dedicated team that works on the mortgage prisoner cases, as each one is different and has to be reviewed individually,” he says. The society has had “a steady stream of applications” from those affected but Westhoff says it wants to hear from more. “Some borrowers have saved up to a £1,000 a month on their mortgage payments, which is an incredibly substantial amount, and we are certain, therefore, that there are many more that we can help,” he says. Initially, it thought that borrowers were going to bigger lenders but Westhoff says anecdotally that does not appear to be the case, and more needs to be done to raise awareness of the action mortgage prisoners can take. “We are keen to stay close to the regulator’s review of mortgage affordability and continue to contribute wherever we can,” he says. “We have seen, understandably, the concern in respect of the threat of rising energy costs but in some cases, the impact of being a mortgage prisoner can be more financially adverse in just one month than that of a dramatic increase in energy bills; and these borrowers have to cope with both.” From 23 November the society will offer mortgage prisoners a two-year fixed-rate deal starting at 2.19% for borrowing of up to 75% loan-to-value, rising to 2.59% on 85% loans – both rates well below the SVR they are likely to be paying. The deals have a £499 fee but come with a free valuation and help with legal fees. Westhoff adds: “We’re also only a mid-sized lender, and when we first launched these products we were clear that we can only do so much due to our size, and it will take a whole industry response to be able to help more borrowers. That said, we have significantly reduced the monthly payments of many borrowers who were mortgage prisoners, and we encourage anyone in the same position to get in touch.” westbrom.co.uk/mortgages/mortgage-prisoners“Several years ago, I counted more than 300 cranes in the wetlands near my rice field,” says farmer Khean Khoay, as he reminisces about the regal-looking eastern sarus crane. Khoay’s village, Koh Chamkar in Kampot province, lies on the outskirts of the Anlung Pring protected landscape in south-west Cambodia, in the fertile and biodiverse Mekong delta. The region has been enriched by centuries of silt deposited by the Mekong, the longest river in south-east Asia and a lifeline for millions who depend on its resources. But as more and more land is converted for agriculture and aquaculture, and the impacts of the climate crisis, such as erosion and saltwater intrusion, are felt, the area’s wildlife has become increasingly threatened. Among the birds affected are the cranes that once visited the land near Khoay’s rice field in large numbers. NatureLife Cambodia, BirdLife International’s partner in the country, says only 91 eastern sarus cranes visited Anlung Pring this year. The future of these birds may lie in the hands of 16 farmers from Koh Chamkar village, including Khoay, who lease their land to NatureLife. At 176cm (just under 6ft), the sarus crane is the tallest flying bird and is classified as vulnerable on the IUCN’s red list of threatened species. But the eastern sarus crane (Antigone antigone sharpii), found in south-east Asia, is considered highly endangered: fewer than 200 are estimated to remain across the wetlands of Cambodia and Vietnam, a sharp decline from nearly 900 in 2002. About half of these visit Anlung Pring during their non-breeding period, arriving before the rice harvest in late December and staying until the dry season ends in May. Oum Chrein, another farmer involved in the scheme, says: “When the crop has not yet been harvested, the cranes walk on the embankments around the fields and eat the grains from [the stalks at] the plot edges.” The farmers who lease their land to NatureLife are paid 10 years’ rent upfront, calculated at 30% higher than their net income from the land. NatureLife, with the support of Cambodia’s ministry of environment and funded by IUCN Netherlands, uses the land to grow native short-grain rice varieties such as boka teourm and pong roluk (Khmer names), which are the cranes’ favourites. At harvest time, half of the crop on the 17 hectares (42 acres) of leased land is left to supplement the diet of the cranes and other birds. NatureLife also offers the farmers the option of a daily allowance for cultivating the land, which provides a regular income. Bou Vorsak, acting chief executive at NatureLife, says: “We commit to the farmers that we will use the land only for growing rice and that the soil will remain suitable for cultivation in the long term.” This arrangement also prevents farmers from selling land to developers or changing its use, thus retaining the area for visiting cranes for the next decade. It is not a scheme, however, that makes money. The first harvest from NatureLife’s leased land programme was in December 2020. The high salinity conditions, along with the use of organic fertilisers and pesticides (instead of chemical ones), meant that the yield was not high, with less than one tonne of rice harvested a hectare, compared with the usual two tonnes. “We are aware of the yield limitations but we don’t mind as we are keeping [half] the rice for the cranes,” says Vorsak. After milling and packaging, most of the harvested rice was bought by a local Covid-relief effort, while the rest was sold on the open market. One tonne was set aside to be used as seeds for the next planting season. The rice did not fetch a good price, says Vorsak, because “we focus on the rice varieties that the cranes prefer. These native varieties are short-grained and not very soft after cooking. They cannot compete with jasmine rice.” Jasmine rice, which is popular internationally and earns a premium price, is long-grained and aromatic with a soft texture after cooking. Vorsak adds: “A consumer may not view the native rice varieties we grow as premium quality but we are committed to them, as these are the varieties that the cranes prefer.” Farmer Tom Ke, also from Koh Chamkar, didn’t know much about the eastern sarus crane until he joined another NatureLife project earlier this year. “I only recall seeing this strange, tall bird with a red head,” he says. “I have now started to pay more attention to them.” Under this new scheme, participating farmers leave 5% of their rice crop unharvested for the birds. They receive seeds at a subsidised rate, organic fertilisers and pesticides and training in organic farming techniques are provided for free by NatureLife’s partners. “With more food available for them, I hope they won’t become extinct,” says Ke. The farmers have to agree to 12 guidelines, the most important being that they will cultivate a rice variety preferred by the cranes, they will not use chemicals on their crops, they will not hunt or snare visiting wildlife, and will not encroach on protected land. If the farmers adhere to all criteria, NatureLife pays the market rate for the 5% of the crop left unharvested. More than 40 farmers from Koh Chamkar and nearby Chress village have joined the initiative. In August, they planted boka teourm on their plots, bringing almost 38 hectares under the programme. The first harvest will be in December, 5% of which will be left standing for the cranes. Vorsak is hopeful that these crane conservation initiatives are just the beginning and will garner more support. “Together with these landowning rice farmers and private landowners, NatureLife’s long-term vision is to protect more than 1,000 hectares of the landscape for the cranes,” he says. Find more age of extinction coverage here, and follow biodiversity reporters Phoebe Weston and Patrick Greenfield on Twitter for all the latest news and featuresWill the real Harry Kane please stand up? The striker helped himself to seven goals in two games during the international break but his feats for England are in stark contrast to his club form, with Kane having only scored once in the Premier League for Tottenham this season. Antonio Conte will be desperate to lift Tottenham’s talisman out of the malaise he has been in since a move to Manchester City failed to materialise during the summer and a Leeds defence which has conceded 18 goals could help him achieve that. Stephen Hollis Sunday 4.30pm Sky Sports Premier League Venue Tottenham Hotspur Stadium Last season Tottenham 3 Leeds 0 Referee Andre Marriner This season G6 Y30 R2 5.33 cards/game Odds H 3-4 A 19-5 D 16-5 TOTTENHAM Subs from Gollini, Austin, Tanganga, Ndombele, Roden, Lo Celso, Alli, Bergwijn, Clarke, Scarlett, Gil Doubtful Gil (hamstring), Højbjerg (knee), Lo Celso (knock), Injured Romero (hamstring, unknown), Sessegnon (hamstring, unknown) Suspended Skipp (one match) Discipline Y24 R1 Form LWWLLD Leading scorer Son 4 LEEDS Subs from Klaesson, Firpo, Gelhardt, Roberts, Bate, Hjelde, Cresswell, Shackleton, Klich, Drameh, Summerville, McKinstry Doubtful None Injured Bamford (ankle, unknown), Ayling (knee, unknown), Koch (pelvis, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y22 R1 Form LWLDWD Leading scorer Raphinha 5This has been a great year for African writing,” announced Damon Galgut, accepting the Booker prize earlier this month for his multilayered novel, The Promise, which tells the story of an Afrikaner family amid the political and social upheaval that followed the end of apartheid. “I’d like to accept this on behalf of all the stories told and untold, the writers heard and unheard from the remarkable continent that I come from.” It was not an overstatement. Galgut’s Booker win comes at the end of a year when many of the literary world’s major awards have been scooped by writers with origins and heritages in the countries of Africa. In June, David Diop’s second novel At Night All Blood Is Black, translated from French by Anna Moschovakis, won the International Booker prize, its visceral story inspired by the accounts of Senegalese riflemen’s experiences in the first world war. In the last few weeks, Senegal has again come to the fore, as Mohamed Mbougar Sarr’s La plus secrète mémoire des hommes (The Most Secret Memory of Men) won France’s Prix Goncourt, making its author the first writer from sub-Saharan Africa to do so. Last month, the Nobel prize for literature was awarded to Abdulrazak Gurnah, the Zanzibar-born novelist who came to Britain in 1968 following his country’s revolution, and who has explored themes of displacement and dislocation over the course of 10 novels. Gurnah’s work, which includes the novels Paradise, By the Sea and, most recently, Afterlives, has gained critical respect for the subtlety and potency with which it examines what he calls the “tragic havoc” that has affected so many in the post-colonial era. Now that work is likely to reach new readers. Along with Galgut, fellow South African novelist Karen Jennings was also on the Booker longlist this year for her novel An Island, about a lighthouse keeper’s encounter with a refugee. As with Gurnah, the prize will radically widen her readership – An Island had a print run of just 500 copies until the Booker nod, when thousands more were ordered. Meanwhile, Somali-British author Nadifa Mohamed was shortlisted for The Fortune Men, about a Somali sailor wrongly accused of murder in Wales, based on a real-life miscarriage of justice in Cardiff’s Tiger Bay. Reading the runes of these triumphs is a task that requires caution, however, and begins with important caveats. These are European prizes, with all that that implies: their histories are intertwined with the valorisation of the novel as a European creation, adopted and curated over centuries as, it might be argued, a bourgeois art form; if its self-appointed custodians are now concerned to recognise its wider potential, and to widen its parameters, who shapes that process and decides who is allowed to speak? Which readerships are they addressing? And, in speaking of both “African countries” and the “African diaspora”, which identities are privileged and which are marginalised? Literary prizes are the visible tip of an iceberg formed of writers’ careers – often long, diligent and unsung – the endeavours of publishers and booksellers, and the creative ecologies of countries, languages and regions. As Ellah Wakatama, editor at large at the publisher Canongate and chair of the AKO Caine prize for African writing, notes of this year’s victories: “It’s not a moment that suddenly happened. It’s a moment that’s happened because of lots of work to open up the spaces.” And that work won’t be finished, she says, “until you get to the point that writers are being published in enough volume that they can contend for the Booker prize as part of our culture, not as something strange and unique.” The final point of an intricate process, prizes are indicators of something – the constitution of the panels that bestow them, changing tastes, responsiveness to different kinds of work – but that something is complex and not always immediately obvious. Speaking to the writers in question, two elements recurred: that any discussion of a “phenomenon” must encompass the variousness of literary cultures with African heritage, and that this should be seen as the beginning of a conversation rather than its culmination. In Galgut’s words: “What I would hope is that conversations such as this will focus people’s thinking on it in a particular way, so that it does crystallise into being noticed, and being taken into account.” I ask Gurnah whether he has any sense of a wider world beginning to listen to stories to which it has been resistant in the past. “That could be so,” he replies. “I hope so, of course. But I think that it’s maybe as a result of a great many things that have happened recently. There is perhaps a greater sense of what’s going on elsewhere; not just what is reported in the newspapers. I think there is a kind of counter narrative that’s also going on; not quite as much reliance on the established story, as it were, or the approved story.” He points to responses to events in Iraq, Syria and Libya – countries that have experienced heavy involvement from the US and the UK: “All of those have demonstrated the ugliness of the policies and the cruelties that are inflicted on weak governments. I think also the Black Lives Matter movement, and the business that’s been going on in Britain over the last few months, culture wars, statues and so on … all of these things probably do generate a kind of a greater awareness, but I doubt very much that they are what leads to literary prizes. I would like to think that the reason these prizes have been awarded is very much to do with the work that these writers have produced.” Gurnah is acute – and also drily amusing – on the culture wars he alludes to, describing them as a “pointless conversation going on between people who are, it seems to me, mindlessly resisting things that are going to sweep them away anyway” (he is at pains to point out the sweeping away is purely intellectual) and maintains that he doesn’t give them too much headspace. “I don’t have a problem with them battling and contesting, it’s their business, but the argument, it seems to me, has been lost for at least a century and a half. In the sense that there is no moral position that such arguments can defend any more. And yet to continue somehow, they have to find another little platform to stand on and shout the same old rubbish. So, let them talk, I’m not bothered about it.” Nonetheless, it’s clear that novelists are affected by the political and social climate in which they create their work, and in particular by how literary culture is regarded. For Galgut, the recognition of the Booker jury has yet to be echoed in South Africa; he hasn’t, for example, heard from the department of arts and culture, not an omission he takes personally, but one that is indicative of the regard in which writers are held in the country. If it does come, he suspects it will be a matter of optics; a bright spark to seize on in a gloomy political landscape. “The more cynical side of me says that most politicians in South Africa just don’t give a damn,” he says. Like many writers, Galgut is keen to underline – as he did in his Booker acceptance speech – the need to support and strengthen literary culture through concrete practices, including addressing the prohibitive cost of books by removing VAT on them, a campaign that has been waged in South Africa for some years. Though it might seem a technical point, it’s one that is key to fostering reading and writing, and to ensuring that literature is not seen as a pastime of the elite – which, as The Promise explores, often equals the white population. “You have to create a culture in which reading and writing is valued,” Galgut says, “before people are going to invest the many, many hours required to be able to start doing this well. And that’s just not a priority.” Talking to Timothy Ogene, a poet, academic and author who grew up in Nigeria and now lives in the US, yields fresh perspectives. His forthcoming satirical novel Seesaw is the story of an obscure and failing Nigerian novelist seized upon by a rich white American and brought to Boston to “represent” his country. Like Galgut, Ogene is acutely aware of the wealth and privilege inherent in western literary ecology, from publishing and distribution to the funding of prizes. But he also believes that recent prize successes highlight the variousness of voices from both within Africa and the diaspora, drawing attention to, for example, the cultures of Asian and Arab Africans and of the Indian Ocean. The question we should be asking, he says, is what constitutes African writing: “We’ve had a very narrow definition, and that comes from the 1950s and 60s when the Chinua Achebes and the Soyinkas began to emerge,” he argues. “You know, the anti-colonial national; those trends have become what we now see as African literature. But it’s beginning to change, I think. A lot of contemporary writers that begin to explore various strands of ideas, how to be African, look at different epistemologies.” Fundamental to creativity is agency; and agency includes the ability and power to resist external expectations and constraints. For Ogene, who says that he tries to go to “places that are not typically frequented by African writers”, and thereby to open himself up to “new ways of approaching race or identity or being African in the world”, the challenge is to escape binaries. “It’s time to begin to move beyond that and find connections that are not just ideological and political.” Mohamed Mbougar Sarr’s The Most Secret Memory of Men, which focuses on a “forgotten” writer nicknamed “the black Rimbaud”, who is discovered years later by a young Senegalese novelist, is a narrative that is powered by “the ambiguous reception of black African writers in the western literary field,” he tells me. It’s striking that his novel is based on a real writer, Yambo Ouologuem, a Malian novelist who, having been feted, was accused of plagiarism and subsequently dropped out of view, and whose work raises fascinating questions of authorship and authority. For Sarr, his latest novel brings into focus the apparent “anomaly” of becoming the first writer from sub-Saharan Africa to win the Prix Goncourt since its inception in 1903. It’s an exclusion that raises “structural questions and issues of literary sociology linked to colonial domination and its consequences (racism, editorial contempt, ignorance, a lack of interest among the literary milieu and the French public in the output of novels coming from the [global] francophone space of French-speaking writers, particularly African).” While this anomaly may appear to have been “corrected” with this recent award, he says, “I think it would be a mistake to interpret it as a rare and precious stately grace. If it’s seen as an exception to the norm, that would still mean that nothing has changed, that this prize is a simple exemption of the rules and we’ll soon be back to the old order.” Plurality and empathy are characteristics of this year’s prize-winning novels. The crucial impetus for the future is to keep spaces not only open, but expanding. As Sarr says: “The Prix Goncourt is a tremendous encouragement for me in the construction of my work, but also for African writers, especially young people. The future is theirs … Above all, I don’t want to be an exception. I must not be. I am not.”Queueing for petrol, I turn on the radio and there are Abba, singing their latest hit. Shortages on shop shelves are headline news, with warnings of a panic-buying Christmas. And national debt is sky high. But this isn’t the 1970s; it’s 2021. People who weren’t born then have been calling this a return to that decade. There are similarities, of course: this retro-thought was sparked by the recent petrol queues, people as frantic to fill up to get to work as I remember back then. Elsewhere, flowing floral midi dresses are back, just like the ones I wore; Aldi is selling rattan hanging egg chairs; and, as well as Abba, the charts have been topped by Elton John. But is this really a 1970s reprise? No, nothing like it; not history repeated, not even as farce – just a stylist’s pastiche, as bold as the wallpaper I’m posing in front of here. Folk memory preserves only the 1974 three-day week; the miners’ strike blackouts, with no street lights and candle shortages; the embargo that quadrupled the price of oil. True, I did queue at the coal merchant’s to fire up an ancient stove for lack of any other heat or light. But the decade shouldn’t be defined by this, or by 1978-79’s “winter of discontent” strikes, a brief but pungent time of rubbish uncollected and (a very few) bodies unburied by council gravediggers. Most 70s imagery is a deliberately manufactured caricature, with its garish wallpaper and avocado suites, an ignored time zone between the swinging 60s and glitzy greed-is-good, big bang, big hair 80s. It’s an image that obscures the radical social changes and great progressive leaps forward that took place then. True, we all construct our own pick’n’mix memorabilia and there’s a risk anyone my age will pine for the decade when they were in their 20s. But that’s not why I reject any comparison to Boris Johnson’s Brexit-stricken regressive and corrupt era. So why does history record the 70s as nothing but a time of strife, shortages, hyper-inflation and decline? Well, it’s because history is written by the victor. And that victor was Margaret Thatcher, whose 1979 election conquest sought to uproot, marketise and diminish the role of the postwar state. Her political tribe used all their media power to expunge inconvenient 70s memories that didn’t fit her narrative, as surely as Stalin purged Trotsky from the photographic record. It was a goodbye to John Maynard Keynes’s generous social democratic state and hello to Friedrich Hayek’s desire to let the market rip; Thatcher kept his book The Road to Serfdom in her handbag to waggle at her cabinet. *** In 1970, I was travelling the country researching my book A Working Life. I took jobs at Unilever’s soap factory in Port Sunlight, Merseyside; in a cake factory; as a hospital ward orderly; and I joined the Women’s Royal Army Corps for a while. Working as a switch-cable operator in one of the 11 Lucas car parts factories in Birmingham (all now closed), I watched a strike by our foremen and charge hands, who were trying to restore their differentials – the extra pay they received above those they supervised. By the second day, 19,000 car workers were laid off, so just-in-time supply chains were fragile even then. However, unions were simply striving not to fall behind a rate of inflation that later soared to nearly 30%; the reality I saw was unrecognisable from the “grasping workers” vilified in the anti-union Tory press (Rupert Murdoch had bought the Sun the year before). Union membership peaked at 13m by 1979. Now less than half as many belong. Strong, 70s-style unions would never have let this current zero hours gig economy destroy rights that had been hard-earned back then. Here’s another crucial contrast. Look at the relative ease with which Edward Heath’s Conservative government took the country into Europe in 1973, a move confirmed in Labour’s referendum two years later on a 67% to 33% vote. Yet now we’re out, a country adrift and wrenched apart by an acrimonious Brexit. For all the turmoil, Britain’s democratic institutions never buckled. Now they come under greater threat from the prime minister himself, who assails the powers of regulators, judges, scrutiny committees and all the checks and balances of our unwritten constitution. He sends in his culture warriors to spearhead “a war on woke”. But for my friends and me, “woke” began in 1970 with Germaine Greer’s The Female Eunuch, an electric shock of awakening. Spare Rib and Gay News heralded liberation for millions more. Each new iteration of activism rolls those freedoms forwards, as #MeToo energises a new generation to break silence on sexual harassment by bosses. Back then, I’m afraid, we wearily fended off beware-the-stationery-cupboard lecherous gropings, regarding them as part of women’s working life. I joined the Guardian’s women’s page in 1977 when the great and funny writer Jill Tweedie broke every mould, challenging every assumption, including those of SCUM, the Society for Cutting Up Men, pretty much a one-woman crusade by Valerie Solanas. Jill never dodged the dilemma of “liberation” from men we loved and lived with: she had lost two children stolen abroad by an abusive husband. Her influence sometimes shocked her: a woman called her in the Guardian office one day from a public phone box, saying: “Right, I’ve left my husband. I’m in a caravan with my children, what do I do now?” Feminism was always plagued by rifts: Jill and I were locked in at an angry meeting by radical feminists threatening not to release us until the Guardian backed abortion of all male foetuses. Now, I tear my hair out over the latest feminist arguments over trans issues. How far have we come? Never far enough. Of demands drawn up at the first National Women’s Liberation Conference in 1970, there is still no equal pay or opportunity, no abortion on demand, or free 24-hour nurseries. Despite some state aid, Britain still has some of the most expensive childcare in the developed world, costing parents more than their rent or mortgage, often for poorly trained staff paid a pittance. The first women’s refuge opened in 1971 – but 80 women a year are still murdered by a partner or ex-partner in England and Wales. When I worked in a Wimpy bar half a century ago, no single women were allowed in after midnight: those who were unaccompanied were presumed to be prostitutes. It could be hard to get served in a pub. Some things slide backwards: as I buy presents for my newest granddaughter, I find the pinkification of “girls’” toys has got worse since my daughters were small: there were no pink space hoppers. Children are more shut in now, parents too afraid to let them roam, more anxious about threats of every kind, from strangers to impure food. There were always a thousand ways to make mothers miserable: in 1975, only 57% of women worked, with rightwing papers running a drumbeat of spurious research on the damage done to children to make working mothers guilty, often wheeling out John Bowlby’s “attachment theory”. Now women’s employment stands at 78%, but with the absolute necessity of two incomes to keep an insanely expensive roof over the family, full-time work and lack of childcare feels less like liberation for many. Newly married in 1970, aged 23 with a full-time job, when I bought a washing machine I needed my husband’s signature on the hire purchase agreement. The rampant misogyny and racism of “jokes” in 70s TV comedy has made some of those programmes unrepeatable. The “political-correctness-gone-mad” brigade should be made to watch the revolting Benny Hill chasing bikini-clad young girls, or the sitcom Mind Your Language, with its riot of immigrant jokes in a night school class, to appreciate how Labour’s Equal Opportunities Commission and Race Relations Board in 1976 began the long, slow culture change. For all the Enoch Powellite anti-immigrant racism, it was a decade that saw more people emigrate than immigrate. As feminists, we thought Barbara Castle’s 1970 Equal Pay Act and the Sex Discrimination Act would fix everything, but here we are, still fighting old battles. Three-quarters of mothers say they face discrimination at work for being pregnant, with shocking cases of sackings and demotions from the Pregnant Then Screwed campaign. Some glass ceilings shattered through that decade: the Old Bailey got its first woman judge in 1972 and now there are equal numbers, but still only 28% of university professors are women. By the 70s, the worst brutalities of childbirth were ending: Sheila Kitzinger had rebelled against enforced pubic hair shaving and giving birth with legs strapped up in stirrups. I had my first two children in the 70s, and I worked as a ward orderly in a maternity ward in a run-down hospital, and it’s striking that women had kinder care and attention then. A full week in hospital was a blessing for many, and health visitors were closer at hand for everyone. My daughters were turfed out within hours of their children being born and, compared with 2015, there are a third fewer health visitors, leaving them to struggle with impossible caseloads. A great landmark of the decade was Harold Wilson’s Open University. With its first students starting in 1971, it offered second chances, especially to women, and is now Britain’s biggest university by far. Women’s new freedom and opportunity helped triple divorce rates in the 70s: better child benefits made escape easier. But the penalty for single parenthood is higher now, with 49% of children in lone-parent families living below the poverty line, according to the Child Poverty Action Group. We have more things now, but many more children are left outside the consumer society. Now, civilisation is on a climate knife-edge, but then world-ending fear focused on nuclear war. Alarm at extinct species and environmental pollution was rife, but concern could be gently laughed at in the Surbiton of 70s sitcom The Good Life. I was keenly aware, because my father, a millenarian by nature, founded an ill-fated agricultural commune in Monmouthshire in the 70s, designed to be self-sustaining. He used to wag a finger at me and my city ways, warning I’d come crawling to their door begging for cabbages when my unsustainable lifestyle caught up with me. The venture collapsed in 1979. For a family on the left, with a relaxed attitude to sex, I don’t think there was any greater gap between my parents and me than between me and my children and they and my grandchildren. I went on an anti-Vietnam war demo with my father, and pro-EU membership and climate protests with my grandchildren. But I see how each generation has a greater sensitivity on race, gender and privilege, which I find encouraging. Here’s the greatest generational difference: we boomers had it all in the 70s – free university, plentiful good jobs with pensions, cheap homes to buy, but none of those are there for millennials. *** Don’t be tricked by false parallels between the 70s and now. Look at the hard economic facts: in the 70s, Britain reached its most equal point ever in pay and wealth. In a century-long trajectory, super-taxes and inheritance taxes had gradually eroded the mega-incomes of the rich to pay for a growing welfare state with pensions, benefits and the NHS. That’s how my generation was taught O-level social history: as a story of unstoppable progress from reforming factory acts, working and voting rights to a social security safety net. To understand the 70s, remember that the unions’ struggle was about holding on to that progress against a tidal wave of inflation. In 1979, that battle was lost and everything went into reverse. The slump of 1980-81 caused by an extreme austerity budget tipped millions, especially the young, into unemployment, which rose above 11%. Later, deregulating the City blew the lid off top earnings, so the income and wealth gap widened astronomically. The victors’ history tells a story of militant strikers making outrageous demands, designed to justify Thatcher’s crushing of the unions and the deep inequality that has endured ever since as a result. As I write, the number of people falling into poverty is growing rapidly, after universal credit cuts. Last month’s budget cemented the fact that pay – stagnant for the past decade – will continue to be so through the next. I can see why some look back now, imagining the 2020s – full of political, economic and environmental doom – as a reprise of those times. Look how many of that era’s icons retain their cultural clout. I’ve just read John le Carré’s posthumous bestseller Silverview, and I urge his 1974 classic Tinker Tailor Soldier Spy on my older grandchildren as the best evocation of a cold war that framed our thinking and fears. Debbie Harry, still magnificent when she goes to Glastonbury, Led Zeppelin’s Robert Plant back in the charts, ditto Nile Rodgers of Chic – 70s icons have been revived or never went away. Back then, the UK could win Eurovision song contests, too, but a repeat of that feat seems unlikely now that everyone hates us. Style? The flowery dress I’m wearing for this photoshoot reminds me of Laura Ashley in her heyday, though her clothes strove to be more authentic Victorian country print copies, with mutton chop shoulders, and I even had one with a bustle. Yes, I had an egg chair, but – as Aldi shoppers will find – they’re more for posing than comfort. And I did have one room with wallpaper that looked like fried eggs. Are these lurids really back in vogue? Not with me. But do reject the rightwing trashing of the 70s as a time of “decline” and “failure”, the Austin Allegro of decades. Thatcherites needed to invent that history to disguise their social vandalism and promote the myth of her glittering capitalist renaissance. Take it from me, and from all the social statistics: the 70s were a good time to be alive.Street photographer Dimpy Bhalotia works out where she will spend the next month shooting by walking in the direction of the sun. “I land at my location and set off on foot,” she says, reflecting on her time in countries including Germany, Sri Lanka and Portugal. “I use only the light from the sky, and aim to capture life as it’s happening. I’m drawn to beaches. There is so much energy and freedom there.” This series was captured in cities across India, Bhalotia’s first home; she moved to London in 2005 but returns for visits. She won’t reveal the location of her photographs, concerned that others may visit and disturb the wildlife there. “I’ve seen it before – the birds stop coming, the nature adapts. Some photographers forget to draw the line. I spent two and a half months returning every day to one beach, and I never once asked anybody to do anything.” Bhalotia shot these two street dogs in Delhi. “Before, I had a phobia of dogs. I spent a week getting closer and closer, not allowing myself to run away when they barked at me. Eventually I started to pat them on the head and treat them like humans, and I realised my fear was man-made. “I use black-and-white mode so my audience isn’t distracted or diverted from the action,” Bhalotia adds. “I don’t want people to focus on colour and miss the captured moments and the emotions they might evoke.”Leeds council, along with authorities across the north and Midlands, has spent 10 years planning for the arrival of HS2’s eastern leg based on the government’s proposal. High-speed rail would have brought the millions of people between Leeds and Birmingham closer; provided new opportunities for commuting; and created much-needed capacity on the existing network so that local, express and freight trains would no longer compete for space on two-track Victorian infrastructure. All this would have supported 160,000 new jobs, stimulated a gross value added uplift to the economy of £200bn, and provided the opportunity to develop as many as 38,000 new homes. In fact, the plans had already started to draw businesses to Leeds. We are the proud home to major businesses and institutions such as Channel 4, the Bank of England, and the UK Infrastructure Bank. We at Leeds council had made great efforts to accommodate HS2’s arrival so the city could continue to grow. These plans became even more valuable to our city’s future as we began the recovery from the pandemic, and to tackle the climate emergency. Despite this, and despite research that shows the eastern leg provides a better economic return than any other stretch of HS2, much of the route has been shelved. Recent months saw a steady buildup of rumours in the press to this effect – and the first confirmation we received was in the media on Thursday morning. In its place we’ve been offered yet another study to determine how to bring high-speed rail to Leeds that would connect us with Sheffield, the wider north and the Midlands, and for our region only, small-scale improvements to existing networks. This simply isn’t enough to match what was previously on the table. After 10 years of investment and planning based on the government’s clear proposal to bring HS2 to Leeds, we have been left extremely disappointed and frustrated. But sadly we are not surprised, because this is not the first time Leeds has had a major transport project cancelled or curtailed by a government. Even Thursday’s announcement of the electrification of the TransPennine route is only a rehashed version of a scheme that was promised in 2011 but has so far remained undelivered. And with only a quarter of West Yorkshire’s railways electrified so far, against a deadline of 2050 for the full network to be completed, it’s difficult to be optimistic that this will be achieved. Plans for a Supertram were also originally scrapped by the government in 2005, with proposals for a trolleybus also cancelled in 2016. Reports say that the scrapping of the extension was about reducing costs, but Leeds is one of only two core cities outside of London that are net contributors to the Treasury. To grow further, the city needs investment to support current and future demand for travel. Three quarters of people using our railway station are travelling from outside our district – so clearly there is a demand for enhanced regional connectivity. Passenger levels at Leeds railway station are now above pre-pandemic levels, bucking national trends. In Leeds we are not shy about our ambitions – we want to be the best city in the UK. Decisions like this to cancel infrastructure are bitterly disappointing, but we will continue to fight for the city as we always have. Now the pressure is on the government to deliver. We are calling for the Leeds to Sheffield work to be fast-tracked and delivered without delay, alongside an urgent review of safeguarded land across the city that will bring greater certainty, and a fundamental reform of the way transport policy decisions are being made. If the people drafting national policy actually used our station and knew the city, they would make better decisions. We remain determined to make sure that this is the last time a major project benefiting Leeds is cancelled. James Lewis is leader of Leeds city councilHoney mustard and sesame cashew clusters These buttery cashews, with a deep golden coat of colour from the turmeric and a peppy kick of mustard, demand very little work but much restraint: both not to mix too much, because you want the nuts to cluster, and not to taste as soon as they come out of the oven, because they will be very hot. Packed into a sealed bag or jar, these will make a fantastic gift, though you’ll need to exercise further restraint not to eat the lot before gifting – better double up the batch. Prep 10 min Cook 15 min Makes 1 x large jar 80g vegetable oil 80g honey 80g dark brown sugar 10g flaky salt 1 good sprinkle freshly ground black pepper 1 pinch ground turmeric 2 tbsp mustard powder 2 tbsp whole mustard seeds (optional) 350g cashew nuts 150g sesame seeds (you can use a mix of white and black) In a large saucepan, heat the oil, honey and sugar until it just starts to boil, then stir to combine into a bubbling lava pit. Mix in the remaining ingredients until well combined, then transfer to a large baking tray lined with greaseproof paper. Bake in the centre of a 180C (160 fan)/350F/gas 4 oven for 10 minutes, then mix well and bake for another six minutes. Remove, mix again a little, then leave untouched to cool on the tray. Break into very rough clumps, then store in an airtight jar or container, where they’ll keep for up to a month. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from Ocado Oat and rosemary biscuits Very savoury and only slightly sweet, these biscuits are a great cheeseboard companion. They will pack beautifully into a bag or jar and keep well for two to three weeks so long as they stayed sealed (mind you, they’ll never last that long). This dough freezes really well, so it’s worth doubling up (sensing a theme here?) and freezing half as a gift to your future self. Prep 20 min Cook 15 min Makes 35-40 200g plain flour 150g oat flour 60g rolled oats, plus extra for sprinkling 70g caster sugar 1 tsp flaky sea salt, plus extra for sprinkling 2 tsp baking powder 2 tbsp chopped rosemary fronds 150g cold butter, diced 100ml milk (plus maybe a dash more, if needed) Rub the flours, oats, sugar, salt, baking powder and rosemary with the butter to form a rough crumb, then add just enough milk to bring together into a smooth dough. Roll out to about 1cm thick between two sheets of baking paper, then cut into 35-40 5cm x 3cm rectangles and put on a baking tray (or trays). Brush with a little extra milk, sprinkle with a little more salt and a little more oats on each, and bake at 190C (170C fan)/375F/gas 5 for 15-17 minutes. Leave to cool on the tray before storing. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from Ocado • Sarit Packer and Itamar Srulovich are co-owners of Honey &amp; Co, Honey &amp; Smoke and Honey &amp; Spice in London.The first thing Ivan Markov grew was a mango tree. His father showed him how to take the seed out of the mango when it is fresh and put the head of it into the soil. “One mango bean can produce over 20 plants,” says Markov, 57, who lives in Lewisham, south-east London. “Can you believe that?” Markov grew up on Bougainville Island, Papua New Guinea, and learned to love nature in these tropical climes. “I used to chase butterflies through bushes and walk through the creeks,” he says. When he was 12, he moved to Brisbane, Australia, to go to school. As an adult, he worked as a built environment consultant and structural landscaper. In his spare time, he grew things. “At every property I’ve ever lived in,” he says, “I planted bananas, mangoes, pawpaw trees.” Gardening gives Markov the “feeling of creating something from nothing. It gives me so much pleasure.” Sign up to our Inside Saturday newsletter for an exclusive behind-the-scenes look at the making of the magazine’s biggest features, as well as a curated list of our weekly highlights. In 2007, he moved to London to work as a teacher. One morning in 2010 he woke up feeling horribly sick. Markov clawed his way to the kitchen and called out to his daughter for help. He was having a heart attack. “Every breath I took was pure pain,” he remembers. “It was pure horror.” Diagnosed with heart failure, he limped on doing part-time work until 2016, when he was signed off for good. The doctor said the best way Markov could improve his health was with exercise. He read about a Lewisham council award for best residential garden, and though he only has a front garden outside his council flat, he thought the competition would be something to work towards. He worked on his patch for most of the year, planting seeds and plants from pound shops, and cuttings given by neighhours: bleeding hearts, daffodils, tulips, berries and herbs. He won the best front garden prize. “I couldn’t believe it,” he says. “I nearly fell off my seat.” That was the start. Markov created a community nursery at the side of his house, and started planting bushes across the road. “I had so much beauty in my garden,” he says. “I wanted to share what I had.” One day, Markov heard a chainsaw. Council workers were cutting down some conifers. “I started a new garden on the spot where they chopped down the trees,” he says. “Got beautiful things growing there – stone fruit, strawberries, figs.” News of Markov’s green-fingered altruism began to spread through the estate. He started offering free one-hour consultations. “I go to someone’s property and give them advice on how to plant a garden,” he says. He delivers cuttings and seeds and helps people repot plants – he charges a pound to cover the soil, but everything else he does is free. Slowly, Markov’s estate was transformed. “It’s a tranquil paradise here,” he says. “There are vegetable gardens. The kids can learn how to pot and propagate plants.” When he sees a young person with an interest in gardening, he nurtures it. “As soon as a kid comes over and is inquisitive,” Markov says, “I give them a shovel, and show them how to dig a hole properly with their foot.” Residents’ associations from neighbouring estates began contacting Markov for advice. His first project was in nearby Deptford. To date, Markov has helped six estates embrace sustainable gardening. “What amazes me,” says Sian Griffiths, who met Markov through a local community centre and nominated him for a treat, “is how he uses everything, including grass clippings and weeds.” He wants to show people you don’t have to live in the country to create beauty. “It doesn’t matter how much space you have. Outside my place there’s a tiny square, tiny. I grow tomatoes there for my supper. The opportunities are endless.” Markov does all this despite living with heart disease. He walks with a stick and is often dog-tired after a day weeding or digging. Just speaking to me, Markov is out of breath. “I get angina when I’m pushing it,” he says. “But it’s OK. I know what my body can do.” His dream is to create a meadow next to his estate, and he is in negotiations with the council. When I offer to make something nice happen for Markov, his thoughts go immediately to the community gardens. He says, tentatively, that if it wouldn’t be too much bother, a battery-powered lawn mower would be life-changing. He would finally be able to mow around the nursery and central courtyard – where there’s no power supply. Online retailer Very offer to send Markov a complimentary Einhell cordless lawnmower. I catch up with him the day after it arrives and he’s already put it to good use. “It’s fantastic,” he says. “Much better than I thought.” He has run it around the communal gardens and used it to mulch some leaves, which he will bag later this week and take to an estate in Deptford. “I’m making a daffodil and tulip bed,” he says. “I’m going to layer it into the soil.” With one bag of mulch at the time, and a new mower, Markov is making this corner of south-east London a bucolic paradise for all. Want to nominate someone for Guardian angel? Email us – with their permission – and suggest a treat at guardian.angel@theguardian.comLubaina Himid has waited a long time for a show at Tate Modern. She is now 67, and in 2017 she had the bittersweet honour of being the first Black woman, and the oldest-ever artist (at 63), to win the Turner prize. Bittersweet because “I knew very definitely, in the way that you don’t necessarily if you’re 45, that I had more years behind me than in front. You could think, if you won it at 45, that you might have the same amount of time again to try things, to fail, to try things again. To live fast and loose, and have big parties. And I suppose at 63 I thought: ‘Well, at the best, I’ve probably got 20 years of making.’” We are in Preston, the city where she has lived since the age of 36. She holds a chair at the University of Central Lancashire, and her studio, where we are talking, is in a Victorian block above the Citizens Advice Bureau, right in the city centre, looking out over the covered market and a step away from the grandly Grecian Harris Museum. All is neat and white in her eyrie, aside from a few unfinished canvases that are bright with blues, oranges and greens. On a table are dozens of tubes of acrylic paint, set out in ordered rows. A sizable chunk of floorspace is occupied by an antique handcart that at some point she will use to make a work; there are some old wooden drawers whose interiors she has painted with male heads. Wasn’t the win an enormous spur, I ask? “That, of course, is what happened,” she says. “I thought: ‘Have I got time to be this brave and this exciting?’ and then I realised I just had to do it. And it has been fabulous.” The real turning point, she says, was being picked up by a London gallery, Hollybush Gardens, in 2013. Until then she’d working away steadily and successfully, showing regionally, but without recognition by the big metropolitan institutions. That’s all changed now, and since the win her international reputation has grown, too, with shows at Wiels in Brussels and the New Museum in New York. For the big one, at Tate Modern, she is eagerly trying to “break rules”, she says – not an easy task. Just now she is dealing with the paradox that once a work leaves her studio and enters the museum it stops being provisional – something she handles, changes, paints over – and becomes a precious artefact. “You want to say: ‘It’s only art, it’s OK.’ But they treat it with incredible respect. And then perhaps expect the audience will be careless with it. But I’m a great believer in audiences. I’m trying to make this show so that the audience member believes they’re the most important person in the room.” The whole exhibition is designed to be like a theatre set, in which you, the visitor, are the protagonist – completing the works by your presence , just as a play exists in its truest form when it’s brought to life by actors in front of an audience. There will be a sonic element to the show, composed by her close friend and collaborator, Magda Stawarska-Beavan, drawing out the sound that she feels is implicit in her work – “It’s just that they are paintings,” she says reasonably, “so you can’t hear it.” She gestures to a canvas she’s working on, a large scene of two women on the deck of a boat. “The sea is making a noise, isn’t it? The birds are making a noise, the boat’s creaking away … ” Himid’s work deliberately beckons you into it. There’s always an invitation for you to step on to the deck of the boat, to join the party; or, if it’s a work such as The Operating Table, in which three seated women seem to be debating how to design a city, you’ll find Himid has left space for you to join them at their table. The works show dramatic moments, but not in any grandiloquent sense: no Chekhovian gun is introduced in her paintings that must, perforce, go off. Rather, she shows us the small, gestural dramas of daily life, encounters like the ones she sees being played out outside her studio window. (“Scenes from Dickens or Hogarth, if you’re in Preston: all life is here.”) Her paintings exhibit “private moments in public places”, she says. The small decisions and minor negotiations on which entire lives might hang. Conversation is often key: aside from her groups of competent women, she often paints dandyish fellows, each “trying quite hard not to be the most dominant man in the room”. She points out that in the history of art, men are often pictured either owning or dominating something: her work is, she says, “much more interested in how people are; people, that is, who don’t often get painted. The men who have market stalls, or the men playing dominoes, or the man who has just cooked while the others are eating. There’s drama in the everyday, in the small-seeming moments.” Much of this dramatic impulse comes from her early training in the theatre. Himid’s British mother met her father, who was from Zanzibar, when they were students. They settled together on the Tanzanian archipelago, but her father, a teacher, died from malaria soon after Himid was born. “The beginning of my life,” as she baldly puts it, “was a terrible tragedy.” Her mother – who herself died last year, aged 92 – brought her four-month-old baby to the UK, and settled in London. She was a textile designer, who passed on her eye for pattern to her daughter, and often took the teenage Himid to museums and department stores (both, in their different ways, 19th-century temples to material culture). Himid remembers seeing Bridget Riley’s 1968 painting Late Morning on one of these trips, in the Tate gallery, hung behind some Giacometti sculptures. (“I objected to them using the Bridget Riley, it seemed to me, as a backdrop for the Giacomettis.”) She found herself absolutely struck by “the sheer gall of Bridget Riley to say what she says with those paintings – to imagine she can manipulate you in such a way so that you want to look, then can’t look – that kind of: ‘Come here … then fuck off.’ They are the sorts of works that really taught me what paint could do.” Nevertheless she was drawn to study theatre design rather than fine art – even if it was rather a disappointment to her, with her teachers invested in the velvet-and-gilt world of ballet and opera rather than in the more political, European theatre that she was excited by. (She would love to work with a theatre designer, now, she says, to create sets for an opera or play.) After college, she did a bit of this and that – waitressing, working in galleries and designing restaurants. It was in restaurant spaces that she started putting together exhibitions of her and her peers’ work. “I absolutely knew from an early age that African people, Black people, made art, but everywhere around was telling me that we didn’t,” she says. Eventually, in the 1980s, she wound up doing a cultural history MA at the Royal College of Art, and sought out other Black and Asian artists. “And of course they were working all up and down the country: Eddie Chambers, Chila Kumari Singh Burman, Sonia Boyce, Veronica Ryan, Sutapa Biswas … various of us in different ways gathered those people together and started to put on shows.” These and other artists of colour, like Himid herself, have found themselves thrust into the limelight recently, with prominent exhibitions and projects; Sonia Boyce, for example, is to represent the UK at the Venice Biennale next year; last winter Berman illuminated the facade of Tate Britain with a light installation. “They were always artists of quality,” says Himid. “I think some people might say: ‘Oh, we’re showing them now because now they’ve got really good.’ Yeah, but even I who didn’t have a degree from the Courtauld could tell they were really good 30 years ago.” Himid worries that this current prominence is a fashionable moment, rather than solid progress, but she also thinks “it’s very good that a lot of those artists that were in their 20s in the 1980s are seen by younger [Black and Asian] artists to be still making it. I think, though, that younger artists are also thinking: ‘Yeah, whatever. I can do something more interesting, better, more experimental, more dynamic.’ I would hope that now there’s no stopping that momentum.” Himid wants her exhibition to be a place of encounter, a place where action might start. That’s what drew her to the theatre in the first place: “It seemed like it was somewhere you can make things happen, where things change, costumes change, sets change, locations change, emotions change.” When her work is shown at Tate Modern, you’ll be able to see the backs of her lifesize painted cutouts, appreciate the fact that her work is often made from humble things, transformed from everyday bits and bobs (boxes, old cardboard, bits of wood, old chests of drawers). Her work shows – and takes pleasure in – its own artifice. “What I want,” she says, “is for people to see that you can, for example, turn a jelly mould into a model for a pavilion, or you can put a chair on the back of a cutout to make it stand up. That actually the ability to shift something from this to that is possible.” And this kind of shift, she suggests, might stand in for – or be part of – an ability to create change more broadly. “Not that it’s easy; it’s not easy to make a painting, it’s actually very difficult. But it is possible to change something about yourself or about your surroundings or about the world. I want people to think: “If she can do it, then it must be possible for me to do it, too.’” Lubaina Himid is at Tate Modern, London, from Thur to 3 July 2022.A ex-midwife is urging other former NHS workers to check they are not being underpaid in retirement after securing a five-fold increase in her pension, plus a £19,000 lump sum payment. Luci Rozanski received the extra cash after a long battle with the NHS pension scheme, which is one of Britain’s biggest, with 1.7 million active members. She and her husband, Nick, say the scheme had apparently “lost” 10 years of her pension records. They claim it is possible there could be many health service workers who have been “cheated” out of money they are due. The former pensions minister Steve Webb, now a partner at actuaries LCP, told Guardian Money he strongly suspects Rozanski is “far from being alone” in losing out to the apparent error. The NHS pension scheme is a “defined benefit” arrangement open to all NHS employees and those of other approved organisations. On top of the 1.7 million active members, there are more than 700,000 deferred members (those who have left the NHS) and about 1 million scheme pensioners receiving payments. Rozanski, 61, was originally paid an annual pension of £1,513 but this has now been upped to £7,883. If the mistake had not been corrected, it could have cost her almost £200,000 over a 30-year retirement, based on current figures. She also received the lump sum, plus more than £8,000 in underpaid monthly pension payments. Rozanski worked for the NHS as a full-time nurse and midwife from 1978 to 1993, and was based at several hospitals in London that over the years have moved between different health authorities. She started to receive her NHS pension when she turned 60, early last year, but says the sum she was receiving “seemed very small” given how long she had worked in the healthcare system. Her annual pension worked out at £126 a month, and her retirement lump sum was a little under £5,000. The couple investigated and say it became clear that only the first period of her employment – from October 1978 to March 1984, when she worked as a student nurse and a staff nurse – had been recognised for the purposes of her pension entitlement. The nine-year period she spent working as a midwife at two other London hospitals had apparently been overlooked. The couple queried this with NHS Pensions, the organisation that administers the scheme. It replied that its staff had carried out “a thorough search” of its records but there was no record of contributions being paid to the NHS scheme during the period in question. Undaunted, Rozanski wrote back, enclosing more documents to back up her case and asking the organisation to “pay me the pension I am due”. It sent back a letter that was almost identical to the first. She then complained to the Pensions Ombudsman, saying that NHS Pensions’ “error” would cost her thousands of pounds a year, and that the whole affair had caused her “a considerable amount of stress and anxiety”. But the ombudsman said it could not help until she formally complained to NHS Pensions, which she did earlier this year. Two months later, to her “utter surprise”, Rozanski received a letter from NHS Pensions saying it had “revised” her retirement benefit entitlement “because of a change to your pensionable pay or membership”. No explanation was offered, nor an apology. Shortly afterwards she received the additional amounts. Rozanski, who lives in north London, says the volte-face followed “18 months of increasingly bizarre and frustrating correspondence”. She says: “I believe this may be happening to many other nurses and midwives who have changed jobs during their career. They probably don’t even realise they are being underpaid the pension they are legally entitled to, and if they do, may not be as dogged as we were in following it up. It could make a huge difference to a lot of former nurses, midwives and maybe other NHS workers who I think have been cheated out of money they are due.” Webb says he is “not stunned” to hear about Rozanski’s experience. With people moving around within the NHS and changes to the running of hospitals leading to staff records being sent to new places, “you can see how it happens”, he says. His advice to individuals when it comes to pension entitlements and paperwork is: “If it doesn’t look right, don’t just assume they must have got it right.” His other tip is to keep all paperwork, such as payslips, even long after you think you might need it, just in case there is a problem later. “Just stick them in a drawer – payslips, pension letters and so on. Don’t throw them away. You never know when they might come in useful.” Guardian Money asked NHS Pensions about Rozanski’s case and the claim that others may have been “cheated” out of what they were owed. It said: “While we’re unable to comment on individual cases, our NHS Pensions contact centre colleagues are on hand to assist with any queries members may have, and we’d encourage them to get in touch should they have any questions about their pension.”Charles “Chuck” F Sams III made history this week in becoming the first-ever Native American confirmed to lead the National Park Service. Sams, an enrolled tribal member of the Confederated Tribes of the Umatilla Indian Reservation, received unanimous consent by the US Senate on Thursday after being nominated by Joe Biden in August. Sam’s confirmation comes nearly 150 years after US leaders began the practice of establishing national parks upon ancestral lands that were often violently seized from Indigenous communities. Now, with the park service managing more than 400 areas across every state, along with the District of Columbia, American Samoa, Guam, Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands, some Indigenous leaders see Sams’ appointment as a potential path toward healing from old but deeply rooted wounds. “I see this as an opportunity to reconcile that past, to heal that past, and to recognize the deep knowledge and wisdom that a Native American brings to that post,” said Fawn Sharp, president of the National Congress of American Indians and vice-president of the Quinault Indian Nation. In 1872, President Ulysses S Grant signed the Yellowstone National Park Protection Act into law, creating the country’s first national park. The establishment of this site and many others in the ensuing years have been hailed as a triumph, but came at a cost. In an interview with the Guardian, Jeanette Wolfley, a former University of New Mexico School of Law professor, explained that members of the Shoshone-Bannock Tribes once inhabited the area now known as Yellowstone national park. She said the park’s establishment had had a “devastating” effect on the community as members were barred from returning. Today, some tribal reservations actually overlap with national park spaces. For example, the Canyon de Chelly national monument is located within the Navajo Nation. Recognizing the history of these parks, Jonathan Jarvis, the last Senate-approved National Park Service director (he left the post in 2017), said over the last 20 years, there had been an effort by park service leaders to establish stronger relationships with Indigenous residents. During his tenure, for example, the agency restored the rights of traditionally affiliated nations to collect plants within a park’s boundaries. Sams, who has over 25 years of experience working in state and Indigenous governments as well as the non-profit natural resource and conservation management fields, could expand on this work. Jarvis said Sams would be responsible for implementing Biden’s park service agenda and would probably need to address such key issues as the parks’ major maintenance backlog and infrastructure needs, the impact of the climate crisis on these spaces and the parks’ response to Covid. But he will also have the opportunity to set his own vision for the parks. He could further boost Indigenous nations’ ability to access key swaths of traditional vegetation by encouraging park officials to reach out to them directly to help establish collection agreements, explained Jarvis. And, although the park service already allows Indigenous people to access these spaces for ceremonies, he could issue a director’s order making this process easier. Jarvis said there was huge potential for Sams to “look where there are opportunities for true co-management, true stewardship in partnership with tribes” of these national park spaces. Last month, Sams said in a statement as part of his nomination hearing in front of the Senate energy and natural resources committee: “If confirmed, I will bring this spirit of consultation to my service as director. I look forward to consulting with neighboring communities, stakeholders, local, state and tribal governments, and members of Congress, even when the conversations and topics are challenging.” But for some Indigenous people, healing from historical injustice is not simply a matter of boosting consultations or access to national parks; it’s a matter of returning the lands. Sharp, president of the National Congress of American Indians, said she would like to see national parks returned to Indigenous people. But she cautioned that returning these spaces would need to be an individualized process. “Tribes are unique and distinct. And the national parks in some parts of the country may have tribal nations who are prepared and ready to assume management over those and others may not,” she said. Kat Brigham, chair of the Confederated Tribes of the Umatilla Indian Reservation board of trustees, said she was extremely happy at the prospect of Sams taking his new position. She said she expected him to lead from “the tribal perspective”, which she described as “taking care of the land, so the land can take care of you”. She said she hoped to see him help to spread awareness of the true history of these sites. She gave the example of Celilo Falls in Oregon, which was once a great gathering space for Indigenous people. “He knows, for decades, that the tribes have been trying to get the federal and state agencies to start looking at things from a tribal perspective,” she said. “I think he will be asking us a lot more questions. And they’ll be involved more.”My curry tree plant has finally decided it likes me. For several years, it sulked, refusing to put on growth and at its darkest moments dropping all its leaves if I dared look at it for too long. But this summer, it chose life and flourished, sending out so many zingy, vibrant green leaves that I might finally think of cooking liberally with it. Like so many things homegrown, the fresh leaves knock the socks off the dull, papery leaves in shops. To merely brush by a living plant is to fill the room with its extraordinary scent. It would make an excellent present for the cook in your life. Though I warn you, now waiting lists are standard for this one, though it’s worth looking on Etsy for young plants. The curry tree or curry leaf tree, Murraya koenigii, is a subtropical tree in the Rutaceae family, distant kin of the lemon and orange, and is native to Asia. The leaves are an indispensable part of south Asian cuisines and medicines. They are the start of many dishes, fried in oil to release their pungent aromas. In the heat of its home, it will grow to a tree about six metres tall. Not so here, where at best you may get it to about a metre. It has to live indoors and will need a bright, sunny position. In summer, kick it out for a little rewilding, some rain and some sun, but at the first hint of cold nights bring it back in, as it is not frost hardy. Below 4C it will drop its leaves, but indoors it will remain evergreen all year. It thrives on rich, free-draining conditions, but it will mope if it lives in a pot too big for its roots. That is, for sure, why my plant was in a funk: I overpotted it from its 9cm pot into one double the size and its roots hated it. For plants that are slow-growing or prefer to be slightly root bound, a huge pot of soil is a slump of cold earth to avoid. And because the new compost doesn’t have roots growing into it, it further compacts and if overwatered becomes like a cold bog around the little plant. Rectify this by potting down; pot on only when you see white roots poke out from the drainage holes. Other than not ovepotting, all you need to do is water regularly in summer and more sparingly in winter. It’s worth feeding during the summer, too. If your curry tree does exceptionally well and you find yourself with more growth than you have space for, they respond well to cutting back hard. The leaves can be dried or frozen. Home-dried leaves are much more pungent than shop-bought ones.Six Tailors, 2019 “They’re all trying quite hard not to be the most dominant man in the room. They’re making something together, working quite hard on the moment, perhaps creating their way out of trauma. I do like their cotton reels … The idea was to get that many men in a space and have them not planning, exactly, but being and thinking. There is a relationship with the painting of female architects; we have three architects and six tailors. I’m thinking about the similarity and difference between clothes and buildings, how we inhabit both of them.” Cover the Surface, 2019 “This work is part of a series loosely called Pastry Chefs, in which I imagine men who make perfect things in their working lives: beautiful things that no one will eat, that are really to be looked at and admired. They are experts at teasing sugar about, and building marvellous things from cake and jelly and sugar. And then what do you do at the end of the day? They’re in the back alley, outside the kitchen, just trying to make that kind of everyday decision: are we going to have a drink at yours? Are we going to go to that club? On those kind of tiny moments your whole life could turn.” The Operating Table, 2019 “This is about: what would happen if we three built a city? The woman with a dice in her hand is suggesting chance as a way of making decisions. I think the woman in the middle is hedging her bets between the recklessness of designing something with dice, as opposed to the woman in orange who has very particular ideas. Women in my paintings are always strategising and attempting to show that there are several ways of doing things. I think I’ve always thought, in conversations with real women: ‘Let’s see what your strategy is and what mine is. One of them’s going to work.’” Blue Grid Test, 2020 “This is a 25-metre long painting of 64 patterns across a number of objects, which range from a bed head and a mandolin, to maps and books and carrier bags – all kinds of objects that were just around in the studio, or in the house. Magda Stawarska-Beavan and I made this piece as a collaboration. Her part of it is a six-track audio of me talking in French, English and Flemish about the colour blue, interspersed with a friend of ours playing the instrumental part of Joni Mitchell’s Blue. This is about the conversation that we had around the subject of notes, codes patterns and repetition. There are 64 musical bars and 64 different patterns from all over the world.” Man in a Shirt Drawer, 2017-18 “I love that thought of opening a drawer and knowing that somebody else’s life is coming out of it. Lots of the furniture that we all have is not new from Ikea. If we’re living in rented accommodation it might easily be old from Ikea. Someone else has quite often used those drawers. So it’s about the lives that have gone before. You put your paper or your socks and knickers into somewhere that someone else had kept their diaries and phonebooks. An everyday encounter.” Ball on Shipboard, 2018 “This is a loose pastiche of a James Tissot painting [The Ball on Shipboard, c1874]. What’s gorgeous about that is that it shows an encounter between two young women wearing the same dress – bizarre, and surely coded. I took elements from it: there’s a kind of party going on, and a man emerging from below. What is his relationship to the men in the centre? Or is he, which I think is more likely, really wanting to be a part of the intimate conversation on the left? He’s wearing the same orange and blue as one of them.” Lubaina Himid is at Tate Modern, London, from Thur to 3 July 2022.Tensions in the Indian state of Kashmir remain on a knife edge after a shootout by the Indian authorities this week left four people dead, with families alleging the gunfight was staged and that police used innocent civilians as a “human shield”. Police initially described the incident, which took place on Monday when officers raided a shopping complex, as a counter-insurgency operation in which two militants and their associates had been killed in a shootout. The families of three of the men, however, have accused Indian forces of cold-blooded murder and the case has sent ripples of outrage across Kashmir, a region scarred by familiar allegations of extrajudicial killings. India’s top regional official has called an inquiry into the deaths and the region imposed a shutdown strike in protest on Friday. An armed insurgency with allegiance to Pakistan has been ongoing since the 1990s in Indian-administered Kashmir, a region claimed in its entirety by both countries. The Indian authorities have heavily militarised the state in response and aggressively pursued those it casts as Pakistan militants. Thousands of people, including civilians, have been killed in the violence. Human rights groups have accused Indian forces, which operate with legal impunity, of abuses including rape, torture and staging gunfights. Citizens and rights activists have also decried an increasing denial of civil liberties in Kashmir since the region was stripped of its semi-autonomous status in August 2019, taken under the full control of the central government and divided into federally controlled territories of India. The controversy this week began hours after Monday’s operation, when the niece of one of the men killed, Mohammad Altaf Bhat, challenged the allegations. She said a tweet that her businessman uncle had not been associated with any militancy and instead had been used as a “human shield” in a staged gunfight. Families of two of the other men killed subsequently made similar allegations. They rejected police claims that their kin had any connection with insurgents and alleged that police had killed civilians and passed them off as militants. The other two men killed were identified as Mudasir Gul, a dentist who was working as an estate agent, and his office assistant, Aamir Magray. Police said the fourth person killed in the raids was a Pakistani militant using the alias Haider. To the further anguish of the families, police clandestinely buried all four killed in the raid under the cover of darkness, in a forest more than 50 miles north of the capital, Srinagar, where the killings took place. As outrage grew over the course of the week, police made varying statements. They initially said Bhat and Gul were militant associates but later that they may have been civilians killed in indeterminate crossfire. Police maintain Magray was a militant, but his family say he was a local labourer. According to witnesses present during the raid, police had received a “tip-off” about a militant in the shopping complex. They had allegedly seized Gul, Bhat and Magray, who all worked in the vicinity, and made them search the building. Gunshots were later heard from the spot. Police said militants fired on them, resulting in a gun battle, but they families allege the officers murdered three innocent civilians. The families held a sit-in protest in Srinagar’s press enclave on Thursday to demand the bodies of their kin. They were later forcibly removed, but the bodies of Bhat and Gul were exhumed the next dau and handed over. Family members of Bhat and Gul told the Guardian there were torture marks on the bodies of the two men, and that it appeared they had been beaten first and then shot. Rubbishing the police claims that he was associated with militancy, Gul’s wife, Humaira Mudasir, said “forces killed him to fetch cash rewards”. Officers in Kashmir are often rewarded for killing militants with cash incentives or promotions. “He was doing well in his business, taking care of his parents, and living with his family. How is it possible that such a person is a militant?” Mudasir said while cradling their one-year-old daughter. A funeral for Bhat was finally held on Thursday night. His body was carried on the shoulders of angry and emotional mourners chanting “shuahada kai waris zinda hai” or “the heirs of martyrs are alive” as dozens of masked and armed police stood nearby. “The police had put conditions that we bury him without any delay with a limited gathering of people present,” said Bhat’s niece, Saima Bhat. “The police also threatened dire consequences if any protests take place or if journalists attend it.” The family of Magray, 32,continue to demand the return of his body. “They killed an innocent person and also stole his body,” said his cousin Nadeem. Indian forces have repeatedly been blamed for killing civilians and passing them off as militants. In an incident in December 2020, the bodies of men killed by Indian forces were exhumed and buried in family graveyards after an investigation found they had been Kashmiri labourers with no militant affiliation. Authorities have begun an investigation into the incident, but mistrust is rife and the families of the dead men are not hopeful of justice being served. “We want an independent investigation,” said Saima Bhat. “We will fight until the culprits are punished.”Boris Johnson has ordered a review into Channel small-boat crossings to find a way of cutting the number of people making such voyages from France. The prime minister is said to have grown exasperated that there are no policies in place to tackle the issue. More than 24,500 people have arrived on the south coast during 2021. The chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster, Stephen Barclay, has been asked to oversee attempts to resolve the situation, the Times has reported. It added that the prime minister had told MPs the issue was a priority. “If it looks bad now, it’s going to look much worse in spring when it’s warmer,” a senior government source told the newspaper. Priti Patel is considering strict new rules at detention centres for people who have crossed the Channel from France, which could could result in their asylum claims being rejected. The measure, which is similar to the approach Greece uses, is the latest the home secretary and officials have discussed. It would result in arrivals facing routine checks and curfews being put in place to stop them absconding. Greece employed the tactics after facing an influx of refugees fleeing the Middle East over the Aegean Sea in the last decade. It also digitised its asylum application process, a practice that Patel is keen to copy, according to the Daily Telegraph. More than 24,500 migrants have reached the UK this year, more than three times the total for 2020. More than 5,000 have crossed in November. Other possible measures have been raised in the last week, including processing centres being set up in Albania – something that the country’s minister for European and foreign affairs, Olta Xhaçka, called “fake news”. Speaking to the Today programme on BBC Radio 4 on Saturday morning, Tim Loughton MP, who represents East Worthing and Shoreham on the south coast, said: “We all know the only real solution is for the French to do what they are legally entitled and legally obliged to do and that is to intercept the boats when they are in the water and take the passengers back to French territory.” As well as looking at offshore centres, the new borders and nationalities bill currently going through parliament would give more power to the government, he said. “We have limited powers on this side of the channel, which is deeply frustrating and I share the exasperation of the home secretary in that we’re not able to do more about this. It’s absolutely within the power of the French to stop this miserable trade.” He said that UK Border Force had offered French authorities the use of drone technology overnight, when the boats tend to set off. Tensions have risen between London and Paris over the issue. The French president, Emmanuel Macron, said Britain had swung from “partnership to provocation” over the issue, the latest dispute between the countries since Brexit. Patel had signed a £54m deal with France in July to double police patrols of beaches. The French interior minister, Gérald Darmanin, said earlier in the the week that France would not be a “punchbag” for British politics, and blamed British-based people smugglers and lax labour laws. The Home Office has been approached for comment.Alan Cumming and Forbes Masson met at Glasgow’s Royal Scottish Academy of Music and Drama in 1982. Together, they created Victor &amp; Barry, a double act who became legends of the Scottish comedy scene. They went on to present several TV shows, and starred in the BBC sitcom The High Life, as two narcissistic air stewards. Appearing in series such as Catastrophe and EastEnders, Masson has since become a celebrated writer and performer for theatre and musicals, and is an associate artist with the Royal Shakespeare Company. Meanwhile, Cumming’s career skyrocketed in the late 90s, with his Tony award-winning performance in the musical Cabaret on Broadway, before he starred in Spice World, Eyes Wide Shut and GoldenEye, and on stage in Macbeth and Bent. Cumming’s new memoir, Baggage: Tales from a Fully Packed Life, is published by Canongate. Alan Cumming This shoot was a big deal for us. It was for the cover of the List, Scotland’s version of Time Out, and was taken in 1987, right before things exploded for Victor &amp; Barry. It was all very casual – but the photographer was really careful about the lighting. They wanted shadows on our faces, as the headline was A Little Light Relief. I liked that. Forbes and I met in drama school. He was quirky, talented and good on the piano. He was also a little older because he’d gone to college to study accounting before he switched to drama, and as a result seemed like more of a man of the world. The creative spark between us was immediate. Satire was big in both of our lives and we liked singing – but also thought it was ridiculous. At college, I was in a mode of lampooning West End Glasgow people – the city was reinventing itself and becoming gentrified – so we decided to develop these artsy characters that did just that. We performed Victor &amp; Barry for an end-of-year cabaret at college and something magical happened on stage. People really responded to it. The act was about authenticity and Scottishness. We were brought up being told, subliminally and literally, that our accent was potentially a problem. We’d have to lose it to succeed. If you’re from the south of England, Scottishness is slightly seen as less than, so much so that when Victor &amp; Barry first went to London, we made a documentary about their parochialism: how would they travel? We were outsiders for other reasons too. The late 80s was known for overt, ranting political comedy – Ben Elton, Alexei Sayle, “fuck Thatcher” sort of stuff. I don’t think you can be a performer in Scotland and not be political, but we were genteel – wearing cravats and singing songs called Duck’s Piss instead of Bucks Fizz. London people didn’t get the parody or the surrealism. Forbes and I became national treasures pretty quickly. I was scared by it. Our songs were made up when we were stoned and drunk, and all of a sudden we were being taken seriously. We could have done the act full-time, but I was the one who stopped it. I decided to say no to a Victor &amp; Barry opportunity and do a play in Bristol instead. It was the first time I’d chosen something else over us. We didn’t fall out about it, but it was difficult. If one person doesn’t do it then neither can the other. By the mid-90s we got the chance to work together again and transmogrify those characters for The High Life. We were up against a lot of wankers at the BBC who didn’t understand us, but Forbes and I remained very strong. There were things in the script that were so naughty and risque, but as we were using Scottish rude words nobody noticed. Still, it was not a happy process writing it. You get hired for being kooky and weird, and then they try to make you generic. We wrote one episode about finding the exact recipe for the perfect Scottish tablet and a 60s Batman spoof, but the head of comedy told us it was a “second series type of script”. We changed nothing, put “second draft” on the front and sent it back to them. They went: “Oh yeah, you really addressed everything! Thank you!” They hadn’t even read it. The series ended up being a huge hit. The BBC were all over us like a rash to do it again, but by that point in the mid-90s I had started doing films. As a result, Forbes and I had a little spell where we didn’t see each other, not until the early 2000s. Double acts are a tricky thing. People say it’s like marriage without the sex, and inevitably it is very intense. We went through an incredible experience together – something we made up connected with our homeland. The two of us on a piano being daft. And clever. I look back at it all with such fondness, and I found, in him, a dear, dear friend. Forbes Masson The first time I saw Alan I thought, God that guy is really interesting. There’s something special about him. We quickly realised we had an almost telepathic way of writing and performing together. The ideas were always equal and improvised, but he was the first person I ever knew with a Filofax, and was much more in control of getting us gigs. In 1984 we took the act to Edinburgh – we’d stand on the Royal Mile in our dressing gowns handing out flyers. One night our venue was empty apart from a cat, but we performed anyway. That year, Andrew Marr was working at the Scotsman and gave us a terrible review, so we decided to write a song about him, a parody of Dean Friedman’s Lucky Stars – with the lyrics: “We can thank you Andrew Marr, you’re not as smart as you like to think you are.” That was the kind of chutzpah of Victor &amp; Barry. Even if you got a bad review, you made something out of it. The pressure of fame never affected mine and Alan’s relationship, even after The High Life. We’d always been very supportive and would see each other’s shows. But we had to go our separate ways. When it’s a double act, there’s only so much you can do in the long run. You could re-emerge as sitcom characters, but then what? Do you become Ant and Dec? There was nowhere for us to go. The end of Victor &amp; Barry allowed us to do other things which we’d never have done as a unit. There was also a point in my life which was tricky because I lost both of my parents within a short time. I went into quite a dark place for a couple of years. That was around the time when Alan had gone to the US. We lost touch. He was always going to go to Hollywood, he had that aura from the beginning. But he’s never changed. Alan has stayed true to himself and I’m immensely proud of the work he has done. At the moment we are writing a book about Victor &amp; Barry, and I’m realising the beauty of our friendship is that things are just the same. That symbiosis. About a decade ago I was over in New York doing some shows. I hadn’t seen him for about eight years, and me and the kids went to visit him in his big place in the Catskill mountains. He got his record player out and put on a Victor &amp; Barry single. We were looking out at the sky, full of stars, listening to this music we made. I was thinking, this is crazy. Who would have thought that Alan and I would be standing here today? It’s amazing.When the world closed down in March 2020, most of us had to make do with pretending to enjoy video calls with friends or baking bread. Peter Jackson, meanwhile, was busy sifting through a mountain of unseen footage – 60 hours in total – of the Beatles, shot by the director Michael Lindsay-Hogg in 1969. His four-year project is now finished – “we finally completed it on Friday,” says a relieved-looking Jackson from his home in New Zealand – and the resulting series, The Beatles: Get Back, will be released on Disney+ from 25 November. Originally envisaged as a feature film, Covid uncertainty saw plans revised. It is now three two-hour episodes, using the mass of outtakes from Lindsay-Hogg’s work on what would become Let It Be, the band’s fourth feature film. It is striking just how much joy is contained within the vivid and eerily detailed footage. Contrary to almost all accounts over the past 52 years, John, Paul, George and Ringo are seemingly happy to be in the studio: laughing, joking, singing in the style of ventriloquists, talking about last night’s TV (Peter Cook and Zsa Zsa Gabor having a spat) and, of course, writing music. Taken at face value, it’s a unique insight into a band at work, restored to a modern, HD sheen. But, more than that, it’s a study of four of the most idolised and scrutinised individuals in the world in their prime. This is not just a music documentary, it’s a history book come to life. “I just can’t believe it exists,” says Jackson, in the manner of a man still yet to come to terms with what he was allowed to do. “But then I can’t believe any of it – that the Beatles let Michael shoot all that footage, that it sat in a vault all this time … “What other band in the 60s or 70s allowed themselves to be shot in such an intimate way? There isn’t another. And then I got to edit it. The whole thing boggles my mind.” Jackson’s involvement goes back to 2017, when he was contacted by Apple Corps – the company set up by the Beatles in 1968, and which handles all of the band’s affairs – not for help with a film or TV series, but due to his interest in virtual and augmented reality technology. Perhaps inspired by the successes of the David Bowie and Rolling Stones exhibitions, the company was hatching plans for a similar Beatles museum show. Those plans, Jackson believes, have since been abandoned, but the interaction with Apple Corps led him to enquire about using the mythic Let It Be footage, unseen for half a century. Eventually, Jackson received permission, although he had one condition: he didn’t want to make a miserable film so wanted to see all the footage first. Indeed, previous attempts at using it had ended in failure. Acknowledging its existence in the 00s, Apple Corps mooted plans to have the film restored and rereleased, but quickly shelved them. That is perhaps unsurprising, given the context of the album and the original film. Let It Be was, as the perceived wisdom goes, a miserable experience. John Lennon referred to the sessions as “six weeks of hell”, while George Harrison has called the whole period “the Beatles’ winter of discontent”. Even the usually glass-half-full McCartney has said that in attempting to offer a fly-on-the-wall view of a Beatles album being made, what they had really done was show the world what the breakup of a band looks like. Lindsay-Hogg’s film was finally released in May 1970, and was panned by critics and unloved by fans. With this in mind, the question of why anyone would want to sit through this footage now is a valid one. But Jackson was stunned by what he saw that first week, watching it from morning till night at Apple Corps’ London office and being brought a daily Big Mac. “I was amazed,” he says. “I was waiting for it to get really bad but it didn’t. It actually gets happier and happier as it goes.” Knowing what he now knows, it’s a mystery to Jackson why each Beatle, along with their producer George Martin, always viewed the Let It Be sessions with such hatred – but he has a theory. “I’m convinced they were all remembering May 1970 and their reaction to the movie upon release, rather than how they felt filming it,” he says. Indeed, there are conflicting accounts – Glyn Johns, who worked as a recording engineer on the Let It Be sessions, remembers it being a funny, happy time in his autobiography, Sound Man, while Lindsay-Hogg has said similar. “But maybe they can say that,” says Jackson. “They weren’t in a band that was breaking up.” After finishing They Shall Not Grow Old, his acclaimed first world war documentary released in 2018, Jackson got to work on Get Back. First, there was a forensic exploration of the period. He met McCartney, Starr, Sean Lennon and Harrison’s son, Dhani. He has been in regular contact with Lindsay-Hogg, went to the Savile Row rooftop where the Beatles performed their last ever gig, and even met the police officers who went up on to the roof to tell the most famous musicians in the world to stop playing. Then came the restoration work, a frame-by-frame process to sharpen the footage for modern TVs, which took 14 people almost four years. Editing – Jackson’s favourite part of film-making – was difficult, he says, simply because of the wealth of material. At one point, he says he was happy with an 18-hour Get Back cut, but managed to whittle it down to a third of that. The resultant six hours contain more than enough revelations, and no little sadness. That is not necessarily because of the breakup round the corner, but because it depicts four men, still in their 20s, who – having changed the world – just want to go back to being four lads from Liverpool. Tellingly, even at this point, they’re extremely nostalgic, regularly discussing their time in Hamburg in the early 60s, or playing at the Cavern in Liverpool. They reference a running joke from A Hard Day’s Night and cover early rock’n’roll classics such as Blue Suede Shoes and Shake, Rattle and Roll – anything to help them get back to where they once belonged. Perhaps none felt more frustrated than Harrison, who briefly left the band early on in the sessions only to return on the proviso that plans for a concert in Libya were scrapped. In Lindsay-Hogg’s original, the Beatles insisted that footage of Harrison’s departure stay off-limits. In Get Back, we see the whole incident. “Anyone thinking this is going to be a whitewash, think again,” says Jackson. “I didn’t want to hold back or sanitise anything, but there was a very positive reaction from everyone, even if some of them said parts of it were stressful to watch.” There are indeed tough moments. One tense episode is the barbed exchange between McCartney and Harrison, which was given huge prominence in Lindsay-Hogg’s film (“Whatever it is that would please you, I’ll do it,” says a weary Harrison). It features in Get Back, too, although Jackson believes editing made it more frosty in the original than it actually was. “The whole conversation was about 90 minutes, and we have eight or nine minutes of it, with that exchange in the middle,” he says. “It’s nowhere near as bad.” While Jackson was uninterested in helping the Beatles settle scores, he was pleased to put to bed the story that Harrison left the group due to a physical fight with Lennon. Thankfully, there’s filmed evidence of the pair reading the fanciful newspaper story responsible for sparking the myth and threatening to sue the journalist. Another moment that gave him particular delight involves McCartney discussing Lennon and the presence of his soon-to-be wife Yoko Ono in the studio (at one point we watch Lennon and Ono celebrate, mid-song, as they get the news that Ono’s divorce has been finalised). McCartney, as if gazing into a crystal ball, says: “It’s going to be such an incredible sort of comical thing, like, in 50 years’ time, you know: ‘They broke up because Yoko sat on an amp.’” “I was stunned when I first heard that,” says Jackson. “Of course, they didn’t break up because of Yoko, but Paul can do an interview today and say it wasn’t and people will take it with a grain of salt. You can’t do better than [having] a contemporary source.” Get Back will likely be the end of Jackson’s time working with the Beatles – mainly because there isn’t another vault full of material. But he says the hours spent on the film have only increased his respect for John, Paul, George and Ringo. “Now, they are our grandparents or great-grandparents,” he says. “But here, John and Ringo are 28, Paul is 26 and George is 25, and you never once feel this footage is 52 years old. I’ve always thought their music transcends generations, but this will make them seem young again.” Episode one of The Beatles: Get Back streams on Disney+ from 25 November, with subsequent episodes on 26 and 27 NovemberWhen she finally cut her hair, Antonella Bordon had trouble sleeping. At the age of 12, her first haircut meant more to her than a simple change of style. For most of her childhood, Bordon’s silky hair ran all the way down her back to her calves, such a deep brown it looked like a black mane. Her mother and sister would comb it every day, rubbing the locks with rosemary oil, and helping her style it in a way to keep her cool during the hot Argentinian summer. “The first night after I cut my hair I felt like I was missing something, almost like I’d lost something,” she says, her face now framed by a short bob. Though she’d always understood her hair to be key to her identity, the past two years have taught Bordon to see what is really important to her. When her school stayed shut through the pandemic, leaving her stuck in her family home just outside Buenos Aires, learning on Zoom via her mother’s mobile phone, she dreamed of the day it would all go back to normal; the day she would join her friends in the classroom and school corridors again. She made a promise to herself: when the day finally came, she would cut her nearly floor‑length locks right off. *** Buenos Aires-based photographer Irina Werning used to have very long hair as a child, too. She noticed this style was typically Latin American only after living abroad for years. “Sometimes you have to leave your country to understand your country,” she says. Werning has been documenting Argentina’s long-haired girls for 15 years, exploring why women and girls here keep their hair longer than in northern hemisphere countries. Most of her subjects respond with personal reasons: that it’s looked after by their mother, or that their grandmother wore her hair long. But Werning has come to understand that long hair also creates a connection to Latin America’s indigenous roots, and to communities who believe that hair is sacred, an extension of one’s self. “Traditions and culture rely on oral history, passing from generation to generation, sometimes without much explanation. Here, the mother braids the child’s hair, looks after her hair and it’s become a cultural thing,” Werning says. She began photographing Bordon’s long hair three years ago and continued documenting her after the pandemic reached Argentina. During this time, the photographs became not just about the hair itself, they told the story of Bordon’s experience: that of a young girl in a country during one of the longest government-enforced lockdowns in the world. “I always thought if I cut my hair something would be missing, but when school disappeared because of the lockdown, that’s exactly how I felt,” Bordon says. A huge part of her world was missing. Although this project began as a study of hair, when Bordon told Werning she was finally going to cut hers off, the photographer was pleased to hear the news – it meant there was progress. “I wanted her to be able to go back to school, so I actually wanted her to cut her hair, which was contradictory to my project,” Werning says. It had been 18 months. She photographed Bordon throughout lockdown and during her return to school. The subsequent series, La Promesa (the Promise), has transformed from a story about hair to one of the education crisis and the inequality gap exposed by the pandemic. Schools were forced to close across the world when the Covid-19 crisis hit, but across Latin America they remained shut for the longest period, as the region struggled to control the spread of the virus. Children in Latin America are said to have lost about three months’ more class time than their contemporaries elsewhere, and more than 3 million may never return to school. In Argentina, the issue of education throughout the pandemic became particularly politicised, exposing the country’s deepening inequalities. More than 40% of the population are estimated to be living in poverty, a figure exacerbated by the nationwide lockdowns. Children in low-income areas missed out on free meals at school, and many were left isolated by patchy internet or little or no access to technology. According to a Buenos Aires-based thinktank, one in four primary school students who live in Argentina’s poorer settlements abandoned their schooling in 2020. “Remote learning is not for everyone because some people don’t have a mobile phone, there are internet problems, and some schools just send the parents exercises through WhatsApp,” says Werning. Schools in Buenos Aires were able to open at least three months before the rest of the country when the city refused to abide by government orders to keep them shut as Covid numbers rose. This was particularly tough for Bordon: because she lives less than a kilometre outside the city’s border, her school remained shut. Werning captures an inquisitive girl constrained by lockdown and isolated from her friends. “I wanted to show her life in lockdown, which was very limited,” says Werning. “She lives in a very small house, 30 sq metres (322 sq ft) that she shares with her parents, who emigrated from Paraguay. They lost their jobs during lockdown, so they opened a shop in their home. “I showed her doing Zoom classes. I shot her in moments where she was very anxious for her future, I photographed her helping at the shop. I photographed her in very limited situations because she was not seeing her friends or doing anything; but her hair was the protagonist of everything.” In the end, Bordon missed 260 days of school. She was fortunate in the sense that she was living in a household where education was a priority – her mother always made her phone available so Bordon could study. But “sometimes Zoom didn’t work properly”, says Bordon, “so it was impossible to learn, and the truth is I didn’t understand many things, I didn’t feel a connection with the school subjects. When I’m in school I like it, I understand more, we can ask questions. “Lockdown was difficult, so when we started school after the quarantine, I wanted a change and I wanted to cut my hair. I felt like a different person as I had been out of school for a year and a half.” When Bordon’s school fully reopened in September, she had her hair cut at Werning’s home surrounded by her father, sister and mother, who cried while they took turns to snip at her daughter’s long hair. It now sits in a bag on Werning’s table, waiting to be donated to be made into a wig for cancer patients. “Her hair had life,” says Werning, “and for me her identity was the long hair.” “The truth is,” says Bordon, “I wasn’t sad when I cut it – I was happy. I’ve become a different person.” • This story was produced in partnership with the Pulitzer CenterThe UK cannot afford to be complacent and must be prepared to introduce tougher measures to control the spread of Covid-19 this winter if necessary, a government adviser and leading epidemiologist has said. As mainland Europe is gripped by a new wave, some countries have imposed strict measures to control the spread of the virus. Given Austria’s plans to introduce mandatory vaccinations from February and a new lockdown starting on Monday, and German ministers’ declaration of a national emergency, Prof Andrew Hayward, co-director of the UCL Institute of Epidemiology and Health Care, was asked whether the UK could be forced to take similar action in the coming weeks or months. He said the UK was “on a knife edge” and that much depended on the booster jab campaign and the speed of uptake. Hayward, a member of the New and Emerging Respiratory Virus Threats Advisory Group (Nervtag), which advises the government, told the BBC’s Today programme that the situation in Europe looked different. “I think there’s a number of differences, the main one being that we’ve been running at very high levels of infection for a long time, since July … when we opened up, and so we’ve really had a high plateau of cases, with associated hospitalisations and deaths.“Europe’s only really begun to increase since about the beginning of October and now that’s built up speed and is in some parts of Europe becoming an exponential increase,” he said. The UK recorded more than 46,000 cases of Covid over a period of 24 hours on Thursday, the highest daily number in almost a month. “We’re still higher than the European average,” Hayward said, adding that some countries in eastern Europe, as well as Austria, currently had higher infection levels than the UK, and that Germany was also “catching up with us”. Germany’s seven-day average of new daily confirmed infections had climbed to 46,648 cases by Friday. Asked whether the different approaches employed in Europe and the UK had played a crucial role in how the Covid winter season has panned out so far, Hayward said: “We’ve had a strategy really to rely on the vaccination and population immunity, which is in some ways at very high levels. If we measure antibodies across the adult population, about 98% of people have antibodies as a result of either vaccination or infection. “But in fact it’s not just whether you’ve got antibodies, it’s what level those antibodies are at, and we can see that after vaccination, antibodies wane quite considerably and that increases your risk of infection.” Hayward said there was a lot of uncertainty in models predicting how the pandemic might develop in certain places in the future. “But what I know is, every winter since records began respiratory infections have increased during the winter, and hospitalisations and deaths peak in the winter, and I don’t particularly see a reason why Covid would be different from that.” To what extent those extra infections will translate into hospital admissions and deaths “will depend very, very much on the speed of the booster campaign”, he said. “So, if we can get the most vulnerable people revaccinated with a booster, we can make a substantial impact on that.” When pressed on whether the UK could afford to be complacent in terms of its measures, he said: “Well, we can’t. We’ve got over 8,000 people in hospital with Covid, nearly a thousand of them on ventilators. We have, compared to Europe, far lower numbers of hospital beds available to put people in, so we are on a bit of a knife edge here with Covid. “But when you add in all the other respiratory infections that come in the winter when we’ve got high levels of population mixing, when you add in that huge [patient] backlog, the NHS is already in serious trouble. So I think we do need to be prepared to take action.”There was a moment, back in, oh, 2012, when I thought I’d be able to keep up with it all. And by “it all”, I meant all the good TV shows, all the good movies, all the good music. From my tiny studio apartment in Austin, Texas, I would read the Twitter feeds of the critics I loved, then consume what they told me to. I caught obscure documentaries at one of the local theatres. I BitTorrented the shows that fell under the ever-widening banner of “quality” television. Spotify meant that, for the first time, I really could listen to the Top 100 albums of the year, as advised by Pitchfork. I saw blockbusters on Friday nights in movie houses packed with teenagers. I listened to Top 40 radio. I read the latest Pulitzer winners and all four Twilight books. I was feasting, but not yet overfull. Or, to use a different metaphor: I was treading water in what I saw as a glorious and expanding sea of media, such a contrast to the options of my rural youth, when my choices were severely limited by the options at the video rental store, extended cable and the one CD a month I could afford on babysitting money. Of course, elements of my access were either illegal (BitTorrent) or paid the artist very little (Spotify). But I also felt, very much like the 27-year-old I was, that I had finally achieved a sort of comfortable fluency, the kind that allowed me to always answer “Yes” when someone inevitably asked: “Have you seen/read/heard this? Soon, the definition and number of television shows that felt essential – or “quality” or part of the larger conversation – began to grow. It wasn’t enough to have watched The Wire and The Sopranos and be caught up with Mad Men and Breaking Bad. There was The Americans and The Good Wife, Outlander and The Knick, Game of Thrones and Homeland, Broadchurch and Happy Valley, plus all the ongoing seasons of shows that previously felt very important (see: House of Cards) but increasingly felt like a slog. Maintaining my fluency was getting harder and harder: I was a media studies professor who was able to devote hours of my ostensible working day to the task of consuming media. I was still falling far behind, and more so every day. In discussing my struggle to metabolise what felt like a never-ending meal, I’m focusing on television. But television was just part of the larger, overwhelming feast. Around the time television options began to expand, so too did the supply (and our access) to so many other forms of culture, from YouTube to digital mixtapes. In 2009, for example, 7 million people worldwide were using Spotify, with its seemingly infinite musical access; by 2014, that number had ballooned to 60 million. Also in 2009, the teen YouTuber known as “Fred” became the first to have his channel hit one million subscribers. By 2014, a new YouTube channel was reaching that milestone every day. By 2012, 10 hours of music and audio were being uploaded every minute to SoundCloud, leapfrogging traditional production and distribution methods. In 2010, around 1,500 podcasts launched on iTunes every month. By 2015, it was nearly 6,000. But something about the way television consumption standards expanded made it seem more overwhelming. Maybe it had something to do with how hard it became to have a shared conversation about a show: with my friends, who all seemed to be embarking down different pathways; or with my students, who didn’t seem to be watching anything at all; or even online, where the cherished art of the episode recap seemed less and less useful. Part of this phenomenon could be blamed on Netflix, which in 2013 began its now standard practice of releasing the whole of a season at one time. Another factor was the continued, slow-motion decline of media monoculture, first set in motion with the spread of cable in the 1980s. Technology made it easier to make more television and, through on-demand, for people to watch more of it. Cue: 389 scripted television shows airing in the US alone in 2014 – compared with just 182 in 2002. It was around this time that critics started asking if we’d reached “peak TV”. From the Guardian, in 2015: “Four hundred shows and no time to watch them: is there too much TV on television?” From the New York Times: “Is there too much TV to choose from?” And from NPR: “Is there really too much TV?” A survey commissioned by Hub Entertainment Research found that 42% of viewers who watched at least five hours a week thought there was too much television in 2014. But that survey also found something fascinating: 81% of viewers reported that the time they did spend watching television, they spent watching shows they really liked. To anyone who grew up sharing a television with their family and choosing from anywhere between three to 15 good options, this is a real change. Instead of spending your Thursday night watching a rerun of a sitcom you never really liked in the first place just to have something on before Friends starts, you’re watching something you chose and, at least theoretically, continue to choose. There are limits, however, to the pleasures of choice. When Hub Entertainment Research asked the question again in 2017, only 73% responded that they were spending their time watching shows they really liked – while the percentage of people who felt that there was “too much television” went from 42% to 49%. The survey didn’t ask respondents to dig into their reasoning, but maybe they were feeling something similar to what I felt at that point: like half the things I was watching, I was watching out of some odd completist tendency; and the other half I was watching because it felt as if I “should”, particularly if I wanted to continue to be part of some imagined online cultural conversation. The result was a mix of resentment and paralysis. I would watch two episodes of a show and bail, simply because I didn’t want to commit to the entire season. Wading through the streaming menus felt akin to babysitting hundreds of small children, all of them clawing at me, desperate for my attention. Whenever I saw a poster in the subway for yet another new show that I’d somehow never heard of, I wanted to graffiti it. How dare these networks produce so many things, in so many forms, with so many seasons! How dare they produce so much content! Of course, that sentiment was wholly irrational and entirely wrong. “Peak TV” meant more television shows, but it also meant more shows directed at people who weren’t me, AKA people who weren’t middle-class, straight white ladies. The history of television is, in some ways, the history of executives figuring out that people other than white people can spend. Black people spend money, for example, and would you believe that gay people spend money, too? But the thing about Netflix is that – unlike, say, a network – it wasn’t trying to attract a type of viewer that it could then sell to an advertiser, because there were no advertisers. Instead, Netflix was just trying to have enough content, catering to enough interests, that it could convince as many people as possible that they should continue to pay for its services every month. To make itself ever more valuable to ever more people, Netflix began employing their massive datasets, gleaned from the watch histories of millions of customers, to give flailing consumers a way to stay afloat. When you logged on, instead of feeling overwhelmed, you were supposed to feel comforted by the fact that the screen showed you what was popular, and what other viewers like you were watching, and what you had been watching. It was supposed to feel organised yet abundant; contained but appealingly infinite. Maybe that’s how it felt to you. It’s certainly not how it felt to me. At the time, I was burning out hard at my job, working myself into the ground in an attempt to find the sort of stability I hadn’t really felt since that studio apartment in Austin. Back then, I would finish my day of writing with a movie, or a couple of hours of the latest show I’d torrented, or even live music. It felt like a bookend, like an exhale, like an actual break. By 2017, all that media felt like another item on my endless to-do list, as obligatory and joyless as picking up the dry-cleaning. So I did what I’ve done when it comes to so many of the causes fuelling a wider sense of burnout: I lowered the bar, then I lowered it again. I have stopped listening to most podcasts, save the ones that I really, really like. When I watch TV, it’s a mix of things I actually enjoy and give me comfort, regardless of coolness or quality (Law &amp; Order: Special Victims Unit), shows that reactivate the anticipation and glory of the weekly appointment watch (Succession), and shows I arrive at a week, a month or a year late. I detest the Spotify algorithm, but delight in music that comes to me the old-fashioned way: by people I know telling me about it. I crave the escape of a movie theatre, and will come back to it soon – but I’ve also stopped feeling guilty about a pandemic aversion to movies. That love and hunger will return. Feeling bad about it won’t make it happen faster. If someone were to give me that survey, today, asking whether or not there’s too much television, or even just too much media, I’d say no. I’m glad there’s so much out there to press other people’s buttons, to prompt them to watch and rewatch, to make them feel seen and celebrated. I hope there’s more weird and esoteric and experimental stuff that challenges our understanding of what art can do, and I hope there are more shows like Ted Lasso that remind us of our steady craving for tenderness. I hope, in other words, that there’s more, even if that more isn’t always for me.Beep beep, yeah Drive My Car, the new film from Japanese director Ryusuke Hamaguchi, was well received in Cannes (five stars!) and has just landed in UK cinemas. The “mysterious and beautiful” tale of a theatre director grappling with art and infidelity is based on a short story by Haruki Murakami, from his collection Men Without Women. Page to screen There have been numerous adaptations of the beloved Japanese author’s work. A recent standout is Burning, named one of the Guardian’s best films of 2019 (streaming options here). The unsettling thriller shifts the location from Murakami’s Japan to director Lee Chang-dong’s South Korea. Look out for a devilish performance from Steven Yeun (later seen in Minari). Sound, fury, etc … The film shortens the title of Murakami’s original short story Barn Burning – and both nod to a story of the same name by William Faulkner, published in 1939. Faulkner is no stranger to the cinema either, having turned to screenwriting for cash during Hollywood’s golden age (though he didn’t see it as quite so golden – the Coen brothers’ Barton Fink offers a dark take on Faulkner’s experiences). Getting the Humph Faulkner was one of three writers on the 1946 film adaptation of Raymond Chandler’s The Big Sleep, the gold standard for detective noir mysteries – on the page and on screen. The shadow Chandler casts is large: Robert Altman’s polarising/brilliant adaptation of The Long Goodbye (Rent/buy on Amazon) updates the Philip Marlowe character with a burned-out, ironic tilt – and a perfect dose of 1970s Elliott Gould. Following the gumshoes Murakami has said that Chandler is his favourite writer – and translated his work into Japanese. Meanwhile, Thomas Pynchon’s 2009 novel Inherent Vice riffed on LA detective fiction (and pretty much everything else) – Paul Thomas Anderson’s film version (streaming options here) came with a score by Radiohead’s Jonny Greenwood. The composer also wrote music for the 2010 adaptation of Norwegian Wood, the 1987 novel that turned Murakami into a literary superstar. Between them, Jonny and Haruki have this case sewn up. Pairing notes Read Murakami’s love of jazz, vinyl, the Beatles and jogging is well documented: lesser known is his vast collection of T-shirts, the subject of a new essay collection, Murakami T. Eat Murakami characters are often eating, making the reader want to eat, too: start imbibing with his early novel After Dark, opening in a Denny’s with an order of chicken salad and crispy toast.The news of Melanie Sykes and Christine McGuinness’s late autism diagnoses may have come as a surprise to many. After all, they are glamorous career women. They look nothing like the stereotype of autism we as a culture are used to. I, however, was not shocked, knowing only too well that you can’t tell anything about someone’s private reality from their public image. As I read their stories, I couldn’t help but imagine what they might be feeling. Were they elated? Confused? Excited? Terrified? Angry? Relieved? All of the above? The very fact that I felt such empathy defies stereotypes that likely contributed to Melanie and Christine missing out on diagnosis. That is because I too am autistic. When I was diagnosed as autistic at 30, my reaction was anything but straightforward. My entire life I had struggled with myriad things that most people found easy, from sensory input to socialising. Every area of life presented problems that I couldn’t explain to myself. I was an extreme “picky eater”, living off a diet of pizza, pizza and more pizza. I was unathletic and uncoordinated, more likely to curl up in a ball than catch one. I had no idea how to interact with the other kids at school and found myself ostracised. Without an explanation, I was inundated with unpleasant labels. People saw me as weak, pathetic, sensitive, lazy, spoiled, fussy, inappropriate, weird and dramatic. I believed them. I learned to mask my challenges to avoid judgment. I approached every new job, friendship or relationship with optimism – this fresh start would be different, and this time I would try harder and be able to blend in. This masking, extremely common among undiagnosed autistic people, worked for short periods of time but inevitably the pressure of hiding who I really was would become too much. There would be a catastrophe – usually a meltdown (an autistic reaction to overwhelm, which looks like a temper tantrum but is totally involuntary) – and I would be “found out”, fleeing the situation and burning bridges behind me. When my cousin Dominique suggested, seemingly out of the blue, that I might be autistic, I laughed it off. My understanding of autism at the time was, well, Rain Man. How could anyone think that I, a big bundle of emotions and empathy, could be autistic? Autistic people were robotic and unfeeling, weren’t they? I am someone who needs to physically count on their fingers to add two small numbers together – a far cry from the savant maths genius counting cards in Las Vegas. I am highly creative, not at all technical. That, and I bloody hate trains. I was also a little wounded. I had been working so hard to cover up my social difficulties and here was somebody suggesting I was “on the spectrum” – a term I had only ever heard used scathingly to mock people perceived as socially inept. Was it really that obvious? Luckily for me, Dominique gently persisted in explaining that what I was describing was Movie Autism – a wildly overdiagnosed condition written and acted by non-autistic people that bears only a fleeting resemblance to the real thing. Moreover, owing to misogynistic assumptions about unusual behaviours and the different societal expectations on girls and women, our autistic traits can present differently. The next day, scrolling through the links Dominique had sent me, everything fell into place. Reading clinical descriptions of autistic girls and women, I wondered if someone had been following me around with a notepad. The traits described were so wide and all-encompassing but so oddly specific. My whole life, I had believed I was so unique that there couldn’t possibly be anyone out there like me. Suddenly, a door had been opened to a previously hidden world of like-minded people. After my official diagnosis, I went through a whirlwind of emotions. Mostly I felt relief at finally having an answer, but I found it hard to process. My previous idea of myself had been obliterated. If my past identity was a mask, who was I and how could I build my authentic autistic self from scratch? How could society collectively have got autism so wrong that I missed out on years of vital self-knowledge? Most importantly, if I could be autistic my whole life and not realise, how could I ever trust myself again? Was I really autistic or was I imagining the whole thing? As the dust settled, I found strength, certainty and pride in connecting with other autistic people. Becoming part of this vibrant, thoughtful, socially conscious, kind, straight-talking, open-minded, wonderful community helped me to learn to love myself for the first time. If we were that similar and I thought they were brilliant, maybe I could apply that feeling to myself. I also found it so much easier to socialise with other autistic people, with whom there is no language barrier. It breaks my heart that there is still so much stigma associated with being autistic – society couldn’t have us more wrong. While being autistic isn’t always easy (I’m going to need to lie down in a dark room for the rest of the day after writing this), I don’t see being autistic in terms of deficits. We are not bad or broken – our brains simply work differently and the world isn’t designed for us. High-profile late diagnoses like Melanie and Christine are vital in educating people about the vastly misunderstood reality of being autistic. Sharing their stories is a gift to the community and will make life easier for all of us. I feel so much gratitude towards them and I hope they know their autistic family welcomes them with open arms. Sara Gibbs is a comedy writer and author of Drama Queen: One Autistic Woman and a Life of Unhelpful LabelsThe Home Office is covering up its own research into why refugees and asylum seekers travel to the UK because ministers “know their arguments don’t stand up,” charities claim. Officials are refusing to release its evidence on whether so-called “pull factors” play a part in asylum seekers making journeys to the UK. On Thursday deputy prime minister Dominic Raab talked about “reducing the pull factor” in an attempt to justify the government’s controversial plans for offshore asylum processing centres in Albania. Home Office minister Chris Philp has claimed that accepting asylum seekers who have travelled through Europe “creates a pull factor where migrants are incentivised to undertake dangerous and illegal journeys”. Yet when the Home Office was asked for evidence to support its claims, it refused. A freedom of information response dated 28 October says the material could not be disclosed because it was “likely to inhibit the free and frank provision of advice and the free and frank exchange of views for the purposes of deliberation”. Sophie McCann, advocacy officer at Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) UK accused ministers of knowing their arguments were ill-founded. McCann said: “Ministers are covering up evidence that is central to their case for the need to target refugees and asylum seekers with inhumane ‘deterrence’ measures. “Ministers are refusing to release the evidence they hold on whether or not such a pull factor even exists. McCann added: “ The reality is that ‘pull factors’ are a myth – people who are fleeing persecution or conflict don’t need any further incentive to look for safety. It is hard to see why the government would refuse to share evidence that supports its plans – the only conclusion to draw is that they know their arguments don’t stand up.” Previous Home Office research into asylum seekers’ decision-making appears to undermine the pull factor argument for harsher policies. It says: “They [asylum seekers] are guided more by agents, the presence or absence of family and friends, language, and perceived cultural affinities than by scrutiny of asylum policies or rational evaluation of the welfare benefits on offer.” It follows a Refugee Council report last week that highlighted misleading statements on asylum seekers by the home secretary, Priti Patel. Analysis, partly based on Home Office data, shows that nearly two-thirds of people who cross the Channel in small boats are judged to be genuine refugees and allowed to remain – contradicting claims by Patel that 70% of small boats arrivals “are not genuine asylum seekers”. More than 23,000 people have arrived in the UK this year in small boats, almost three times 2020’s total of about 8,500. But the overall number of arrivals is still relatively modest, certainly when compared with the number nearly 20 years ago, when UK asylum applications reached 84,132. Yet signs are the issue is becoming a political headache for Boris Johnson and Patel. The home secretary has staked her reputation on reducing boat arrivals, but also seems unwilling to accept that refugees will continue to travel to the UK. Experts also say boat arrivals have increased largely because the government has shut down other entry routes, such as ferries, because of increased security measures. Meanwhile, more than 100 leaders of human rights and anti-slavery groups will write to MPs this week urging them to scrap or amend parts of Patel’s borders bill to avert “catastrophic” consequences for victims of human trafficking. The bill, currently making its way through parliament, is designed to address concerns about asylum, but its provisions will also make sweeping changes to the way modern slavery is tackled. The letter argues that conflating the two will have “unintended negative consequences” on victims of trafficking and slavery and undermine the UK’s position as a world leader in dealing with the issue. Tamara Barnett of the Human Trafficking Foundation, which has coordinated the joint letter: “This bill will lead to fewer prosecutions of actual criminals, while those who genuinely need support, including children, will be failed by the new system. MPs need to urgently amend this bill before it’s too late.” A Home Office spokesperson said: “The nationality and borders bill will fix the broken asylum system so it is fair but firm, helping those in genuine need, while stopping those who abuse the system.”Through the floor-to-ceiling windows of his seventh-floor office at Chanel’s chic Parisian HQ, Olivier Polge can look out over the French capital. From here, in the western suburb of Neuilly-sur-Seine, much of the city’s iconic skyline is in full view: the Eiffel Tower, mansard roofs, and the greenery of Bois de Boulogne; the Sacré-Cœur atop Montmartre opposite. It’s a vista that has captivated some of Europe’s most celebrated visual minds, but from here Polge takes inspiration for another of his senses. He is, after all, the fashion house’s nose, Chanel’s perfumer-in-chief: the steward of its iconic scents past, and the man charged with creating their fragrances of the future. His desk is precisely as you’d expect – handwritten notes and branches of blotters jut out from short metal stands, surrounded by boxes brimming with collections of indecipherably labelled small glass bottles. In each, he explains, is an ongoing experiment; constantly evolving concoctions which, he hopes, will one day lead him to another perfect perfume. Since taking the helm in 2015, Polge has created 17 scents: Chance Eau Vive and Gabrielle Essence Eau de Parfum among them. And, there’s No 5 L’Eau: his take on Chanel No 5, the global bestseller. Each of his formulae is sent to the laboratory just next door, where a team of four technicians will carefully construct them. Ingredients sit inside their perfumer’s organ, the room’s centrepiece – a large, shelved glass cylinder in which raw materials are stored neatly in vials. There’s ylang-ylang, Rose de Mai and bergamot; citruses and at least 10 types of jasmine. The bottles are blue to protect them from potentially damaging sun rays, and each will quickly be returned to the temperature-controlled unit after use to stop any deterioration. “It’s only once I collect a creation,” he says, “that I begin to truly assess the compound’s composition. And that’s by no means simply just how the fragrance feels initially.” Each is sprayed on to a strip, on which the scent sits. As the liquid evaporates, Polge explains, the aroma is constantly evolving. He needs to sit with them. “Often,” he says, “I realise my conception isn’t quite right.” It takes repeated trials and testing. “The closer I get to the right formula, the longer I spend with the perfume. I need to understand its train, its scent signature; the wet and dry notes.” It might take him weeks to know whether a certain iteration is correct: “I must be sure I won’t become bored of it.” At Chanel, Polge tells me, the role of the nose is unique: elsewhere, his counterparts are primarily responsible for product development. Here, however, he also oversees all the house’s ongoing fragrance production. “All those perfumes have very specific raw materials which I have to gather year after year,” he says, “while ensuring we have each of these specific elements available and sustainable in the long term to keep going.” At the heart of this operation sits Chanel No 5, the world’s most popular perfume. This year marks its centenary, in that time faces of the scent have included Nicole Kidman, Catherine Deneuve and, more recently, actor and activist Marion Cotillard. Now, for the first time, a book dedicated to exploring the perfume’s history has been published, celebrating this milestone. The recipe itself is a closely guarded secret that has consistently remained unchanged, although more than 80 separate scents are said to be inside it. Many of the most precious elements are grown in-house by Chanel in Grasse, France’s historical perfume capital. “The perfume industry is organised completely differently to, for example, wine,” says Polge. “People often ask, does No 5 change? Is the annual crop different? But we know exactly what it needs to smell like, and my job is to ensure it remains the way it’s always been.” In early spring 1921, Gabrielle “Coco” Chanel approached perfumer Ernest Beaux – the house’s first nose – with her vision. She wanted him to create a fragrance like none that had come before it. She vowed to turn perfume into fashion. This was an era when smelling of something specific – gardenia, jasmine, rose – was en vogue. “Gabrielle didn’t want a perfume which simply smelled like a specific raw material,” says Polge, “she didn’t have the outlook of a traditional perfumer.” Instead, she asked for something abstract: “an artificial fragrance like a dress,something crafted.” It’s said that, after much hard work, something clicked when Chanel breathed in the scent of Beaux’s fifth sample. “Gabrielle Chanel had this idea that perfumes could be an expression of fashion,” says Polge, getting up from his desk to guide us towards the laboratory. “Before then, you had the world of perfumers and the world of designers – they weren’t connected. But Gabrielle thought no, this perfume – No 5 – will be the scent of Chanel. That’s why, before any other designers were doing the same, she put her name to it.” Decades have passed since the scent was first bottled, in which time countless designers have followed suit: scents are routinely given their fashion house’s moniker; few smell of a single natural ingredient. No 5’s longevity, therefore, must be as much down to its past as its ever-evolving present. “The success of a perfume is very much linked to the attention you put behind it,” Polge explains. “We know we make perfume today because of No 5, we always put it on a pedestal: we find a new character, a new story, a fresh face to embody the fragrance.” Of course, the multi-million pound marketing campaigns play their part, but its story could never have been scripted. In her lifetime, Marilyn Monroe never appeared in a Chanel campaign, yet her 1952 comments in an interview with Life magazine may have been the perfume’s greatest advertisement. When asked what she wore to bed, Monroe replied: five drops of Chanel No 5 and nothing else. In many ways, says Polge, it has written its own narrative. Standing in the centre of the light-filled lab, Polge picks out various containers, dunking dipsticks inside. Replaced regularly to ensure they’re at their best, each of the fragrances are pure and pungent. There’s sandalwood oil direct from New Caledonia in the South Pacific: deep, rich and earthy. There’s “jasmine-absolute” from Grasse itself: sweet and floral. Still, it’s not long before – with my untrained snout – they all start merging. Polge has no such problems. There have only been four noses at Chanel. After Beaux came Henri Robert, then Jacques Polge: Olivier’s father. He shows me to the small library in the corner of the lab, the books curated and beautifully bound by Jacques before his departure. “He joined when I was just four years old,” says Polge. “As far back as my conscious memory goes, scent was a constant presence.” In typical teenage fashion, young Olivier spent his adolescence determined to do anything but follow in his father’s footsteps. He loved music, design and crafting, and enrolled on an art history course; during his first summer break he asked his father if they could spend a month in the lab together. “If you knew my father, you’d know he doesn’t speak too much,” Polge says. “That all changed when I arrived for the first time in the lab and he started to teach me.” Polge returned to university the following September but soon turned up to the family home for dinner. “I told him I wanted to leave my studies and learn to become a perfumer,” recalls Polge. “At first he said it wasn’t a good idea, but within a few days he’d warmed to it.” Rather than taking his son under his wing, Jacques insisted Olivier learn his craft in the field. He spent time in the factories, coming to understand the way raw materials are extracted, how they interact with each other. It was only 20 years later that Olivier would return to Chanel. Polge senior was ready to retire andhad been asked to prepare a list of potential candidates to take over. Given his son’s talent and prowess, he believed it would’ve been a mistake not to include Olivier, who’d spent years grafting. Soon enough, Polge junior was hired. There’s nothing genetic, Polge says, that made him a suitable successor. A perfumer, he explains, shouldn’t smell things nobody else can, it’s not about possessing a palate that’s distinctly accurate: “We all have a huge memory of scent. The work is much more about activating the link between your nose and memory.” “When I came back,” he says, “it was the first time I really felt I worked with my father. By this time, I knew how to create a perfume. But dad was showing me something special – the Chanel way; his explanation of our style. To everyone here, that’s incredibly important.” Polge spent his first year not making a single perfume, instead he was told to watch how others worked around him. This meant spending time sitting in the lab, just as he’d done that first summer, while also coming to understand the design and development process inside Chanel’s ateliers. It was Gabrielle Chanel who famously said that while fashion fades, only style remains the same. When it comes to perfumes, Polge says that couldn’t be truer. Season by season, garments come and go. A scent, meanwhile, must be enduring. It’s this that Polge keeps at the heart of his work. Not only to ensure the legacy of Chanel lives on, but that of his father, too. Chanel No 5 by Pauline Dreyfus is published in the UK by Thames &amp; Hudson and in the US by AbramsOriginal sets from the children’s TV series Postman Pat that were to be destroyed are to go on display for the first time. The BBC first commissioned Postman Pat, set in the heart of the Lake District, in 1979. The stop-motion series featuring a postman and his black and white cat was written by John Cunliffe and voiced by Ken Barrie. The sets were in a storage facility but faced destruction unless a new home could be found. Pat’s cottage, the school, the lighthouse and Pencaster Square, complete with original props, will go on show at Waterside in Sale, Trafford,as part of the Cosgrove Hall Films Archive from Saturday. The Altrincham-based animation studio Mackinnon and Saunders, supported by Dreamworks and NBCUniversal, which were involved in the creation and development of the characters Pat, Jess and Mrs Goggins, asked Waterside to display and archive all of the remaining original sets. Peter Saunders, the joint CEO of Mackinnon and Saunders, said: “It is 40 years since Postman Pat appeared on the BBC. “After production was completed, the beautiful miniature sets and props were carefully packed and moved to a storage facility in Stalybridge, but the iconic village of Greendale was served notice this year – no longer required for filming, all the models were to be destroyed unless a new home could be found for them. “When Mackinnon and Saunders became aware of the perilous situation, I contacted the Cosgrove Hall Films Archive at Waterside to ask whether their animation archive could come to Greendale’s rescue. The teams at Waterside and Trafford council immediately offered to help and, thanks to their hard work and dedication, many of the models featured in this uniquely British piece of popular culture have been saved for future generations to enjoy.” The first 13 episodes aired on the BBC in 1981, brought to life by the prolific director of animation Ivor Wood and produced initially by Woodland Animation. Richard Evans, the creative industries Trafford coordinator, said they “jumped at the chance” to be the new custodians of the sets and props. “Knowing how much loved this television series was and still is, and how beautifully preserved many of these sets have been, we have created this exhibition especially to share these rarely seen sets, puppets and props with the shows’ fans – both big and small,” he said.A man who for 56 years guided walkers across the treacherous sands of Morecambe Bay has died aged 88. Cedric Robinson was the longest-serving Queen’s Guide to the Sands, a job created in 1548 during the dissolution of the monasteries, when the reigning monarch inherited an obligation to appoint guides for travellers over the sands of the bay. For a salary of £15 a year, he steered hundreds of thousands of people away from the quicksands and fast-filling channels of the ever-changing bay, including Prince Phillip and Victoria Wood. In a tribute, the Guide over Sands Trust said “now Cedric, it is time to rest your sandy feet”. Born into a cockle-fishing family in the village of Flookburgh, near Grange-over-Sands, Robinson knew the sands like no other. He would lead huge groups of walkers across the bay in bare feet, his jeans and shirt sleeves rolled up and a staff in his hand, making sure his guests crossed safely, usually from Arnside to Kents Bank. He was forced into a reluctant retirement in 2019 after struggling to recover from two hernia operations, guiding walkers in his tractor in his later years. “I thought I could go on for ever. My dad lived until he was 103,” Robinson told the Guardian then, clearly not quite at peace with the idea of hanging up the whistle he used to stop walkers going off course. “I always thought the day I retire would be the worst day of my life.” In 1963 Robinson and his wife, Olive, moved into Guides Farm, a ramshackle cottage right on the coast in Kents Bank which comes with the job. In the early years they had no electricity or running water and even in recent years an open fire was their main source of heating. They were allowed to stay after his retirement, and Olive died there in August, aged 96. Robinson loved the celebrity aspect of the job and never tired of regaling visitors with his more unusual crossings. Most traversed the bay on foot – though Prince Philip used a horse-drawn carriage. His voice would drop when he talked of the Bay’s darkest hour, when 23 Chinese cockle pickers died in 2004. If someone proposed an idea that tickled Robinson, he usually gave it a go. Once he crossed with 27 geese as a fundraising stunt for an arthritis sufferer. On another occasion he hid in the bay from Anneka Rice for an episode of Treasure Hunt (“I was wondering if the helicopter and crew were ever going to find us, but eventually they did,” he recalled in one of the many volumes of his memoirs). Once he took Rick Stein out fishing for flounder. The TV chef said the flounder were “equally as good as fresh halibut”, Robinson remembered proudly in 2019. Earlier this year he joined his successor, Michael Wilson, guiding a group of naturists across the bay. “When we asked if he was getting out of his tractor he simply replied, ‘no, I have the best view from up here!’” remembered Wilson on Saturday. A family spokesman said: “He pioneered fundraising cross-bay walks and was responsible for leading 6,000 charity walkers a year, avoiding the treacherous quicksands and dangerous areas.” In a statement, Wilson and other marshals from the Guide Over Sands Trust said: “It is with great sadness that we write this post. Last night at the grand age of 88 our beloved Cedric Robinson closed his eyes for the last time, Cedric is now at peace and is with his wife Olive who he missed so much. “Cedric had a huge following and we know that this news will make the community shed a tear upon reading this. “Cedric joined us this year out on the sand – even though he had retired he kept going all he could. Now Cedric it is time to rest your sandy feet and keep an eye on us from up there.”Practice made perfect for Petra Vlhova on Saturday, beating Mikaela Shiffrin in the first World Cup slalom of the season. The Slovakian overall champion had been training for three weeks in Finnish Lapland and skipped a parallel event in Austria last week to get ready for the first race in her strongest discipline. The tactics paid off. Vlhova posted the fastest time in both runs. She initially lost a few hundredths from her slim lead of .11 over Shiffrin but accelerated near the end of her final run to win by .31 as the pair continued their dominance in the annual event in Finnish Lapland. Lena Dürr finished .84 behind in third for the German skier’s second career podium result, nearly nine years after winning a city event in Moscow. No skier other than Vlhova or Shiffrin has won the traditional season-opening slalom since then-overall champion Tina Maze triumphed in 2014. Shiffrin and Vlhova have now each win it four times. “Here on this kind of slope I like to ski, it’s something special to me,” said Vlhova, who won two slaloms in one weekend here last year. It was Vlhova’s 21st career win and first since working with her Swiss coach Mauro Pini, who replaced Livio Magoni in the offseason. Magoni had coached Vlhova for five years and the Italian helped her become the first overall champion from Slovakia, but he was forced to leave following unflattering remarks on Vlhova’s style of skiing reportedly made by him in an interview with an Italian newspaper. “I feel more happy, more free. That’s it,” Vlhova said about working with Pini. Having dealt with a back issue that hampered her training over the last few weeks, Shiffrin was made to wait at least one more day in her bid to match the 32-year-old record for most World Cup victories in a single discipline. Currently on 45 slalom wins, the American is one short of Swedish great Ingemar Stenmark’s best mark in giant slalom. Another slalom is scheduled for Sunday. The American three-time overall champion was gracious in defeat. “I think it was clear that Petra had, all together, better skiing and better consistency,” said Shiffrin, who regained the lead in the overall standings. After three races, Shiffrin has 180 points and is followed by Andreja Slokar of Slovenia on 168 and Vlhova on 160. “It was a quite successful day, especially when I look at the last three or four weeks,” said Shiffrin, who in October joined the 70-win club by winning the season-opening World Cup giant slalom at Soelden. “I had some good skiing and I had some sections that certainly weren’t perfect but still quite good. It’s always really great to start the season with a podium, so that’s awesome.” Andreja Slokar of Slovenia, who won the parallel event last week, was 1.12 behind in fourth, followed by Anna Swenn Larsson, who was one-hundredth of a second further back in fifth. The Swede returned from a knee injury to compete in her first World Cup race in 21 months. Austria’s Katharina Liensberger was 1.28 behind in sixth. Liensberger edged Shiffrin and Vlhova to win the World Cup slalom title last season, a few weeks after also winning the world title in the discipline.Peng Shuai and the dangers of speaking up about powerful men Earlier this month the Chinese tennis star Peng Shuai posted a statement on the social media site Weibo accusing Zhang Gaoli, a former vice-premier, of sexual assault. Peng’s post acknowledged that she didn’t have evidence to back up her accusations against the powerful former politician, but she was determined not to stay silent. “Like an egg hitting a rock, or a moth to the flame, courting self-destruction, I’ll tell the truth about you,” Peng wrote. Less than half an hour after the post went up, it disappeared. Searches for Peng’s name seemed to have been blocked, as were searches related to “tennis”, and her Weibo account was hidden from searches. Then Peng herself disappeared. The former doubles world No 1 hasn’t been heard from in more than two weeks. While there has been growing international concern about Peng’s wellbeing, Chinese media have stayed silent on the matter. The only formal mention of the tennis star was a Twitter post by the state-run English language broadcaster, CGTN, screenshotting a supposed email from Peng in which she says she’s totally fine (just chilling at home!) and the allegation of sexual assault she’d made wasn’t true. Weirdly, people weren’t convinced. I don’t know what has happened to Peng, but she is clearly not just chilling at home. Peng’s circumstances may be extreme, but they are by no means unusual. When women speak up about sexual misconduct they tend to be punished for it. Speak up about sexual harassment at work and you may find your career suddenly starts to stall. You may find yourself being ostracized; being branded a troublemaker; threatened with the terms of draconian NDAs. Speak out about sexual misconduct at your university and you may find yourself being treated like you’re the one who did something wrong. You may get quizzed about how much you drank, what you were wearing, how many sexual partners you had. Speak out about the popular kid in your town? Your house might get burned down. That last example isn’t hypothetical – it’s what happened to Daisy Coleman. In 2012 14-year-old Coleman and her 13-year-old best friend Paige Parkhurst were assaulted at a party. After they accused the high school football star both girls were subjected to horrific bullying and harassment. The Colemans had their house burnt down, and mutilated dead rabbits were put in Parkhurst’s car. Daisy’s mother was fired from her job and the family ended up leaving town. Daisy died of suicide last year. Her mother took her own life four months later. Women who speak up about popular or powerful men will almost inevitably find their histories being scrutinized, their reputations sullied, and their lives torn apart. If you think I’m being dramatic here then just remember what happened to Harvey Weinstein’s accusers. Weinstein allegedly hired an “army of spies” to intimidate his accusers and stop women from going public with sexual misconduct claims. After the New Yorker published a report about Weinstein’s use of spies, the actor Asia Argento wrote on Twitter: “Why didn’t I, @rosemcgowan, @RoArquette [Rosanna Arquette] @AnnabellSciorra spoke [sic] up earlier? We were followed by ex-Mossad agents. Isn’t that terrifying? Very.” I could fill pages and pages with examples of women who have been subject to abuse and harassment after speaking out about sexual misconduct. And those examples, of course, are just the tip of the iceberg. Many victims don’t speak out because they know there is a very good chance they’ll be accused of lying; they know they risk their lives turned upside down. “Like … a moth to the flame, courting self-destruction, I’ll tell the truth about you,” Peng wrote. She knew what was going to happen to her and she spoke up anyway. Her story is a chilling reminder of how women still have to worry that speaking up about their abusers will cost them their lives or their livelihood. And yet you still find men complaining that “#MeToo has gone too far.” Tell that to Peng, why don’t you? Rachel Johnson reckons ‘it’s hard not to pity Ghislaine Maxwell’, who she ‘met briefly at Oxford’ Boris Johnson’s sister really should have kept this extremely weird thought to herself but she decided to publish it in the Spectator instead. One imagines the British prime minister wasn’t thrilled with this: Johnson outlines how she once saw “shiny glamazon” Maxwell resting her high-heeled boot “on my brother Boris’s thigh”. “Glamazon” is certainly one way to say “associate of a convicted sex offender who is on trial for sex trafficking children, perjury and the enticement of minors”. Growing awareness leads more women to autism diagnosis English TV presenter Melanie Sykes has announced that she’s been diagnosed as autistic at the age of 51. “Finally, so many things make sense,” Sykes said. Sykes is part of a wider trend of women being newly diagnosed with autism in adulthood as awareness grows that autism is not just a “male condition”. Inside the dangerous rise of dropshipped sex toys Turns out buying supercheap sex toys online is about as safe as you’d expect it to be. Baby girl found in drain in Mumbai discharged from hospital According to a 2020 report by the United Nations Population Fund “between 2013 and 2017, about 460,000 girls in India were ‘missing’ at birth each year”. US announces sex-trafficking charges against Philippine church leader Apollo Carreon Quiboloy, a pal of President Rodrigo Duterte, is accused of running a sex-trafficking operation that threatened girls as young as 12 with “eternal damnation” and physical abuse. The week in porktriarchy A Chinese food livestreamer known as Mr Kang claims to have been banned from an all-you-can-eat buffet for eating too much. Mr Kang apparently ate 1.5kg of pork trotters during his first visit and 3.5kg to 4kg of prawns on another visit. He is not pleased with his ban and has complained it is “discriminatory” against people who can eat a lot. My gut tells me Mr Kang’s bowels are the real victim here. Arwa Mahdawi’s new book, Strong Female Lead, is available for pre-order“Cry your heart out, it’ll clean your face,” Adele admonishes herself a third of the way through her fourth studio album – the first (after 19, 21 and 25) to feature an even number in the title. It’s a record in which Adele ugly-cries, then wipes off her streaked makeup, sloughing off layers of dead skin in the process: best experienced with a terrycloth flannel to hand and a goblet of something red as per track seven, I Drink Wine. As should be clear to anyone with an internet connection, 30 deals with the year in Adele’s life when her wedding happened and her marriage fell apart. The singer, now 33, has explained as much to British Vogue and Oprah Winfrey – how, having been denied a happily-ever-after nuclear family as a child, she wanted one for her son, a regret amplified by the guilt of breaking it apart. Adele has also spoken of a long battle with anxiety (ameliorated by a tough exercise regime) and how her intention on these 12 songs was to explain things to her son, Angelo, whose questions crop up on the record. “Mummy is having some really big feelings right now,” she blurts, inadequately, on one of a series of voice notes. We already knew Adele’s emotions are fathoms-deep and mountain-high; her vocal reach extends to the bits of stadiums only the pigeons and crane operators know. What’s new here is the extent of her self-flagellation, the rawness of her feelings and how plaintive Adele’s pleas become for mitigating factors to be taken into account. “I was still a child,” she mourns on Easy on Me; “no one knows what it’s like to be us,” she states on Strangers By Nature. She has opted for pianos, organs, jazz samples and old-time pop classicism to express her misery, resilience and – eventually – her openness to new love “in the highest count”. This is a classy album, if not quite a stone-cold classic. On Strangers By Nature, the opening track, Adele establishes a Judy Garland atmosphere alongside film-scoring Childish Gambino producer Ludwig Göransson. Wrapped in Disney-soundtrack strings and flutes, the song sets up a melancholic, retro LA headspace, not entirely dissimilar to Billie Eilish’s on her recent album, Happier Than Ever. Only a trio of tracks here makes any attempt to roll about in this deep. Cry Your Heart Out packs a little retro perkiness, echoing Amy Winehouse, while Oh My God details Adele’s shock at a new relationship, accompanied by more frisky production. Mostly, though, this is a record that makes a beeline for the piano stool and stays there, with the odd acoustic guitar motif and vintage organ sounds as a supporting cast. The only way you know you’re in the 21st century is the rich millefeuille of multitracked backing vocals, a wall of sound made possible by technology. But a new producer moves 30 on from previous Adele works. Joining the record’s big names – Greg Kurstin, Max Martin, Shellback and returnee Tobias Jesso Jr – is fellow Londoner Dean Josiah “Inflo” Cover, whose recent hot streak includes several odd-number-themed albums with his own terrific outfit, Sault, plus albums by Michael Kiwanuka and Little Simz. Adele has described her “six-hour therapy sessions” with Inflo, who steers most of the last third of this largely chronological record; he adds to the arsenal of Hammond B3s and Wurlitzers, piling the feelings ever skywards. The backing vocalists are often exponential in their heft. Better, though, are the occasions when there is a call-and-response of ad libs between Adele and the choir. “How unbelievable of me to fall for the lies I tell,” she sings on Love Is a Game – “lies I tell!” echo the backing vocals. But the defining characteristic of this album is its heft. The waterworks go all the way up to 11 on Hold On, whose hymnal qualities telegraph a faith that painful situations get better in time. Just when you think that Adele’s lungs can expand no wider, that every light on the recording console has fritzed out from the amplitude of this tune, along comes To Be Loved, in which she details her refusal “to live a lie”. “Let it be known that I tried,” sings Adele at gale force on what might be the Burj Khalifa of piano ballads. To Be Loved is the track that defines 30, but arguably the most grown-up tune on this very grown-up album is All Night Parking, a daydreamy bagatelle built on a sample of the late pianist Erroll Garner, author of the jazz standard Misty (according to the album credits, it seems to have arrived on 30 via a songwriter called Joey Pecoraro). Stymied by the notion that big emotions need inflation, 30 overreaches for the rafters a little too often. But the sophisticated interplay of Adele’s nuanced vocal and the Garner piano sample here lingers long in the mind.History beckons for the Red Roses. A win against the USA on Sunday and Simon Middleton’s England Women will equal the record for most consecutive Test wins – 18 – held by their country’s men’s team and that of New Zealand. One more after that and they will stand alone as a true dynastic force. “We’ve got a chance to do something really special and we want it,” says the head coach before the final fixture of the autumn series in which his side have racked up 151 points, conceding just 39, in three games – two against New Zealand and one against Canada. “This is the chance to make a statement that will resonate across our sport.” It is a remarkable position England Women find themselves in but one that is not wholly unexpected. In September 2018 the Rugby Football Union offered full-time contracts to 28 players. It was a landmark move that meant the Red Roses would be the only fully professional team on the women’s circuit competing against countries running on comparatively paltry budgets. “It was a gamechanger,” Middleton says, also crediting the formation of the 10-team Premier 15s league established in 2017. “But the challenge was explaining that we hadn’t flicked a switch. The process would take time. Managing expectations was key.” A commanding Six Nations title in 2019 pointed to a tangible return on the RFU’s investment but a 28-13 defeat to New Zealand, the same side who had beaten them 41-32 in the 2017 World Cup final, showed there was room for improvement. With a team now solely focused on their sport, Middleton had the valuable resource needed to find an extra gear. “It was time, both on and off the practice field,” he says. “We’d been outmuscled by New Zealand, so I needed a gameplan that would see us maintain a higher intensity for longer. We needed to be able to perform under pressure to the final whistle.” Under lockdown he devised a programme called field fatigue familiarisation (FFF), later rebranded physical pressure practice (PPP). Think Marcelo Bielsa’s murderball. “Except we thought of it first.” Middleton unleashed a training drill that dials up the intensity beyond that found in a game. “Hell is a good word to describe it,” says the loose forward Sarah Beckett who, now 22, had played only one of her 21 games for England before the change. “We hate doing it, but we love what we get out of it.” The results are telling. England now blow teams away in the second half. But none of it would be possible without the important rest and recovery period afforded to athletes with nothing else on their mind. “I now get paid to hang out on the couch,” jokes Sarah Hunter, the team’s captain and a veteran of 126 appearances. “I tell that to my mum and she just laughs. She knows that it wasn’t always like this.” Hunter never imagined international rugby would be her life. After studying maths and sports science at Loughborough University, she worked at a car dealership before taking up an RFU coaching position. The freedom to train and travel with the Red Roses was tempered by her paid responsibilities that included covering the south-west of England from Gloucester to Cornwall. “In retrospect I didn’t realise how tired I was most of the time,” the 2014 World Cup winner says. “Being able to switch off now, mentally and physically, means I can work harder in training. But I wouldn’t change anything. I’m glad I got some life experience before turning pro and I have a degree to fall back on. I try to encourage the younger girls to have an eye on the future.” A new generation of players will never understand this dual life although they are reminded of what has come before. Sue Day, England’s top try scorer, with 61 from 59 games between 1997 and 2009, and the RFU’s chief operating and financial officer, emphasises the need for a connection with the past. “A few of us old ladies shared our experiences with the team and they were very receptive,” she says. “There was Sue Dorrington and Carol Isherwood who helped organise the first World Cup themselves and would fetch players from the airport. It’s a proud legacy. We’ve come a long way.” But one team cannot carry the load. As Middleton points out, battering sides by 50-point margins will keep fans and sponsors interested for only so long. More unions must follow to maintain the product. “We like to believe that we’ve taken a leadership position,” says Day, pointing out that other unions, most recently Wales, have started offering some, but not all, of their national players full-time contracts. “We have shown the world what is possible when you invest in women’s rugby. We had nearly a million people watch our last game on the BBC. Newspapers are talking about us and our players are in demand. Hopefully other countries look at that and want to replicate our success.” This vision of a grander mission has permeated throughout the organisation. Two practice matches against South Africa took place this week. “It’s great to play a role and help other teams progress,” says Beckett. Middleton adds: “We have a responsibility as the No 1 nation in the world at the minute.” Egalitarianism can wait. Up next is an opportunity to go level with their male counterparts, who have had the luxury of professionalism for more than 25 years. After that, a shot at something no one else has achieved.Silvia Ceriani lives in Turin and works for the Slow Food movement on events such as Terra Madre, Slow Cheese and the Slow Wine Fair Food Nothing in Turin compares to the spectacle put on each Saturday at Porta Palazzo market. Out in the main square, outside the two covered markets, are raucous fishmongers and the cheapest fruit and vegetables stalls. My advice is to forget the modern Mercato Centrale – it’s more a trumped-up restaurant mall trying to look like Barcelona’s famous Boqueria – and head for the Antica Tettoia dell’Orologio, perfect for cheeses, salami and even white truffles. Then carry on out the back for the outdoor farmers’ market, where contadini sell incredible vegetables and wild herbs. Turin is terrific for discovering Piedmont cuisine. My two favourite restaurants are in the centre. Consorzio is for adventurous offal enthusiasts: veal sweetbreads and heart roasted with cherries and wild herbs, and ravioli filled with Turin’s classic finanziera – a sweet-and-sour stew which includes veal brain and rooster crests among other scary ingredients. Vegetarians needn’t despair though – at Antonio Chiodi Latini the chef cooks sublimely creative vegan fare: even the simplest dish, insalata mista, is a stupendous mix of ingredients, colours and aromas. Green space Turin has many green spaces, from huge parks to romantic squares. But during lockdowns I found a signposted walk from Isabella Bridge over the Po, following Corso Moncalieri on the right bank into Parco Leopardi, then winding up to the Faro della Vittoria – a bronze statue at the highest point. The views over Turin are wonderful. The statue is a first world war memorial and the path is lined with tributes to fallen soldiers. I found it quite emotional during the Covid period. Inspiration Far from the crowds that visit our most famous cultural spots – the Egyptian Museum and the avant garde OGR arts hub – my inspiring place is the Museo dell’Uomo on Corso Massimo d’Azeglio. It’s actually three 19th-century museums in an immense palazzo, dedicated to, respectively, the weird and wonderful worlds of human anatomy, criminal anthropology and exotic wax fruits. They immerse me in the ambience of 19th-century Turin – a dark, macabre city of fanatical collectors, and a perfect contrast with the outside world, where everyone is glued to their smartphones. Neighbourhood To get a feel for Turin’s unique industrial history – we were the Detroit of Italy – take the metro to Lingotto. It’s 10 minutes from the grandiose city centre, but feels like another world, created around early-20th-century factories. The former Fiat factory that gives the neighbourhood its name is forging a new identity, with the Agnelli collection art gallery, and its mythical rooftop – a colossal racetrack where cars were tested – is about to open to the public, filled with flowers, plants and herbs. The factory that used to make Carpano vermouth now houses Eataly, showcasing Slow Food produce, and next door is the newly opened Green Pea, a futuristic, 100%-sustainable mall. Lingotto is quiet at night, but don’t miss a cocktail at my favourite watering hole, the utterly kitsch Il Coguaro (Cougar) bar. Nightlife Turin is the home of the aperitvo. Unfortunately, this has mushroomed into the trend of apericena (formed by adding cena – dinner – to aperitivo), where the price of the drink rises to about €10, accompanied by a buffet of pasta, salads and pizza. It sounds great but I avoid it as the quality of the food is poor, and not even that cheap as you inevitably order a second drink. Much better is a genuine bar with great music like Lanificio San Salvatore, where they make their own vermouth – a big trend here – inspired by a recipe invented in India by an eccentric 19th-century Piedmontese entrepreneur. Stay Near the Porta Palazzo market, the hip rooms of the 1820 San Giors hotel (doubles from €84 room-only) are all decorated by local artists.The brilliant first two singles from 21-year-old tendai – Infinite Straight and Not Around – remind me of the Weeknd’s 2011 debut mixtape, House of Balloons. Not that the music sounds particularly similar; rather, it’s obvious that the east London singer-producer sees possibilities in an intoxicating melange of soul, R&amp;B, rock and pop that many of his peers don’t. Whereas the Weeknd used his mixtapes as a springboard into Michael Jackson’s vacant throne, tendai reckons he’ll make more interesting work. “I break away from musically heteronormative boy-meets-girl songs now,” he promises. “There’s other things to talk about! Things we think are mundane can be made cinematic.” Brought up by parents who were in a Ugandan a cappella gospel group, tendai learned to sing songs aged four, then write them aged seven. Playing piano and guitars, then making beats for himself, the precocious producer scoffed a grab bag of influences – anything from country music to indie pop. College, where classmates included fellow hot prospects Phoebe AXA and Chrissi, helped him work a strange and magical music from them. The Infinite Straight video, filmed in Manchester yet seeming desolate and mystical as a scene from the old west, is perfectly suited to him, feet firmly planted in England, mind always moving, roaming, thousands of miles from home. Infinite Straight is out now on 0207 Def JamIt’s fun to write MBE after your name occasionally. I got the honour in 2019 for services to drama. I have complex feelings about it and it hasn’t made any tangible difference to my career, but it solidified my sense of responsibility. I’m a big advocate for youth arts access and young people often ask me about the MBE, so it’s cool to show them what’s possible. It’s almost an ambassadorial role. Hopefully I’ll get invited to those ambassador’s parties where they serve pyramids of Ferrero Rocher. My mum taught me tenacity. I was raised by a Ugandan single mother in Essex. Immigrants want to succeed and find a stable life, of course, but it’s also quite easy in a foreign country to accept your position and settle for a perceived glass ceiling. Mum never did that. She was always striving and studying. She’s got degrees coming out of her ears. She showed me I didn’t have to place restrictions on myself. I would’ve been a funny doctor. I graduated in biomedical science. If I’d pursued a medical career, I would have tried to make my patients laugh. NHS hospitals are under-resourced and it’s tough. When doctors have a bit of levity, it helps. I definitely had a moment when I met Tom Hanks. One of my favourite childhood films was Big. I used to bawl my eyes out when he becomes a kid again. To be honest, I still do. I had “only child” existential angst aged six. My cousin used to laugh at me. I’m addicted to pole-dancing. It’s a brilliant mix of gymnastics and dance. Classes tend to be supportive, encouraging and attract a real cross-section of people. I shared a pole with an amazing 65-year-old woman recently. I do aerial silks, too. Anything that lets me spin around and go upside down. Six wings, chips and a drink. That’s my guilty pleasure. I’m going to call my memoirs Being the Tall One. I’m 5ft 11in and was always put in the middle of the back row on the school photo. Finding clothes was a struggle. Before Asos, there was nothing except Long Tall Sally. My mum shopped there. Progress doesn’t go in a straight line. Representation moves forward, then retreats. It’s a journey. I don’t know what the final destination looks like, or if there even is one. It’s just about pushing forward. People oftenthink I’m scary. Certain stereotypes come with how I look, which can be frustrating. I’m assertive, sure, but I’m also personable and open. Growing up, I had to have my own back. Being tall, black, skinny and angular with short hair wasn’t the easiest. I ran into Edward Enninful [editor-in-chief of British Vogue] at London Fashion Week and he said it’s funny, all the runway models look like me now. Back when I was modelling, that wasn’t the case. Halle Berry is a heroine of mine. She’s a trailblazer, she trod the path, so it’s poignant to be part of her directorial debut [the new MMA drama Bruised]. She is still the only black woman to have won the Oscar for best actress but the subsequent years didn’t go the way she deserved. She got branded as this Hollywood pin-up, rather than recognised as the artist she is. Caterpillars are my phobia. And butterflies by association. They might have pretty wings, but I know what they used to be. Bruised is out on 24 November on NetflixTheir creator is long gone, but Belkis Ayón’s figures live on in syncretic shadow and silhouette, forever slipping between realms and roles, borders and beliefs. Over the course of a short but brilliant life whose final years were profoundly marked by the chaos that the collapse of the Soviet Union visited on her native Cuba, Ayón established herself as an artist whose technical skills were matched only by the haunted and hallucinatory intensity of her imagination. Today, Ayón – hailed as one of the outstanding printmakers of the 20th century – is the subject of an overdue retrospective at the Reina Sofía museum in Madrid. The 90 or so works assembled for the show that started last week chronicle the obsessions and shifting phases of a career that ended when Ayón killed herself, for reasons that still remain a mystery to her friends and family, in Havana in 1999. She was 32. While many of her contemporaries were dabbling with installations, Ayón embraced the graphic technique of collography as a medium through which to explore her fascinations – not least with Abakuá, a secret, all-male society that was brought to Cuba by west African slaves in the early 19th century. Her collographs – made by sticking a collage of materials to backings such as cardboard, covering it with ink and then putting it through a printing press – return, time and time again, to Abakuá rites and beliefs. Recurrent in her work is the figure of Sikán, a princess and the only female character in Abakuá mythology. Sikán’s fate is sealed after she discovers Tanze, a sacred fish sent by the supreme god that will bring peace to an embattled region. She is ordered to remain silent about the discovery but shares her secret with her fiance, who is from an enemy land. Her perceived betrayal leads to her execution, but with her dies Tanze. In Sikán – whom Ayón saw as “the principal character, the mother of every Abakuá, the great sacrificed initiator” – the artist saw a reflection of herself and other marginalised yet pivotal women. Sikán becomes her alter-ego and the character appears repeatedly as Ayón moves from colour to black, white and grey, and begins to fuse Abakuá beliefs with Christian motifs such as the Last Supper, the Stations of the Cross, and the Resurrection. “These Abakuá legends were passed on orally and what Belkis does is give that oral tradition a visual form,” says Manuel Borja-Villel, the director of the Reina Sofía. “But what she does is also personal because although this is a secret male society, the central figure is Sikán, a female figure who ends up being sacrificed by the community. That idea of a masculine society where the key figure is a woman has a lot to do with Belkis Ayón’s position.” But as the show’s curator, Cristina Vives, points out, Ayón’s work must also be seen in the context of life in Cuba following the dissolution of the Soviet Union. As familiar certainties disappeared and shortages of food and petrol hit, Cuba was pitched into crisis overnight. “People usually talk about it as an economic crisis, but it went far beyond mere economic crisis,” says Vives. “It was a crisis of values in which the entire socio-economic structure and its accompanying ethical beliefs tumbled down before the eyes of every single Cuban.” According to Vives, Ayón and her fellow Cuban artists sought to “reflect, question and criticise their reality” in their work while also trying to make ends meet. The artist’s participation in the 1993 Venice Biennale got off to a less than auspicious start. She cycled the 30km from her home to the airport with her brother-in-law, Ernesto Leyva, carrying her bags on his bike, and her father following with her art on his. The artist and her bags made the flight, but her pieces did not because her father fell too far behind, meaning the precious cargo missed the plane. Fortunately, her exhibits finally arrived in Venice a few hours before the biennale began. Leyva laughs about the airport dash and smiles at the memory of his sister-in-law. “Belkis was always a daring girl and she was really funny,” he says. “But she was also headstrong and serious. She came to be well known in the artistic community of Havana – and the whole country – and she knew how to party. But when it was time to work, she always knuckled down.” Ayón could also be relied on to help her fellow artists, supporting them emotionally but also materially by bringing much-needed supplies back from her foreign trips. Her final works drifted away from Abakuá and focused instead on mixing the lyrics of Latin American popular songs with self-referential images and musings on the veil with which St Veronica wiped Jesus Christ’s face on the way to Calvary. Their titles talk of deep wounds, the agonies of love, assault, fear and abandonment – many of the pains endured by Ayón’s alter-ego, Sikán. Twenty-two years on, the artist’s death remains a puzzle to all those who knew her. “We’ve never known why she did it,” says Leyva. “We couldn’t believe it when we heard – and it still hurts now.” Vives, who was also a close friend of Ayón, hopes this first European retrospective will enable people to see an “ethical artist but also a very civic-minded woman” whose ferocious creativity transcended her life, circumstances and personal preoccupations. “Belkis Ayón built a universal discourse against marginalisation, frustration, fear, censorship, intolerance, violence, powerlessness and the lack of freedom,” says the curator. “Her work still serves to send out the message that her country – and humanity – needs to hear.” • Belkis Ayón: Collographs is at the Reina Sofía until 18 April 2022There was a disastrous anti-gravity cake in week one, but then a decent biscuit showstopper in week two. Then, suddenly, in week four, Chigs Parmar, the most inexperienced contestant on The Great British Bake Off, secured the accolade of star baker for his black forest gateau. Now, the contestant seen a few weeks ago as one of the most unlikely to win the show is in the final. “I ain’t got a clue what I’m doing here, how has that happened? I’m so shocked, I don’t know what to say,” said Chigs after he found out he had made it through to the final last week. “I’m now kacking it.” Chigs’s story has particular resonance for the thousands of Britons who took up baking when lockdown hit in 2020 and the shelves were stripped bare of flour. The 40-year-old only began baking last year, starting, like many others, with a sourdough loaf. “He’s obviously doing incredibly well to go from zero to the point he’s at now, where it will probably change his life,” said Rob Percy, who runs Cake Origin in Leicester with his wife, Tracey. Like many others in the Midlands city, he is rallying for Chigs ahead of Tuesday’s final. Aside from sharing the same home town, he has a couple of extra reasons to root for Chigs. He used to work at the same company as the Bake Off star (although they never met) and Percy himself took up baking during lockdown. “His story really resonates with me because I was never a baker, although I was involved with the business. It was only really in the initial lockdown of last year that I was able to practise my skills as well, and it’s benefited him in the same way,” he said. Alongside his baking, sales manager Chigs lives an active lifestyle and enjoys bouldering, skydiving and trekking – he visits the rock-climbing gym Social Climbing in Leicester several times a week. “He’s a pretty good climber actually,” said Joseph Helmore, manager at the centre. “All the staff know who he is, he’s really good at talking to folk, and people recognise him a lot now, which is nice.” He said staff and customers were hoping he might bring some of his bakes into the centre soon so they can taste for themselves what the judges have been raving about. Chigs came in for a spot of climbing just a few days earlier, Helmore said, and is apparently “really happy with everything that’s happened and all his results”. “He’s come from not expecting to have his talents, to this, which I think is quite impressive and probably quite an inspiration for many people,” he said. “I hope he’s helped a lot of people to look at things a bit differently, show that you can just pick up something and run with it.” For many people in Leicester, it’s the fact that Chigs started baking so recently – his Instagram username is “the late bloomer” – that is most impressive. “I think it would be nice for Chigs to win to show that anybody can start baking and get into it,” said Liberty Vinci, a 21-year-old English literature student at De Montfort university. “He’s lovely, and he’s grown a lot more than the other two. He was hit-and-miss, and then he’s come through as a dark horse.” “And he’s always smiling,” said her friend, Luke Bunn, 20. “He comes across like he’s quite surprised he’s managed to make it this far,” said Peter Wyeth, 50, out shopping with his partner, 48-year-old Mary Dye. “He’s been a bit of a wild card throughout and you wonder whether he’s going to be able to pull it off, and then he’s star baker.” He also said it was nice to see someone take something positive out of a tough year, particularly as Leicester was hit hard with Covid, enduring England’s longest lockdown. “It’s something everyone has been through so we can all relate, and it’s good for Leicester as well as we were in lockdown longer than everywhere else,” said Wyeth. “It’s always nice to see somebody from your home town doing well,” added Dye. They also liked the fact Chigs helped promote the area with his “Leicester pork pie” showstopper during pastry week, showcasing the area’s food heritage as the home of the classic British snack. “It’s great to see somebody locally do so well and we’ve obviously got our fingers crossed for the final,” said Percy. “But regardless of what happens, it’s great to see somebody follow their dreams and show what you can achieve.” The other contenders Giuseppe Dell’Anno The Italian engineer, who lives in Bristol with his wife and three young sons, has been strong throughout the competition and has been crowned star baker several times. Many of his bakes have been inspired by his Italian heritage, and his focaccia earned him the first Paul Hollywood handshake of the season. He was often battling against Jürgen Krauss, the other most consistent baker this series, for star baker each week, with many labelling the competition a two-horse race. But after Jurgen was controversially chosen to leave in the semi-finals, the Italian has become the frontrunner. The 45-year-old likes to use his engineering skills to create some impressive showstoppers – including a gravity-defying Jack-and-the-Beanstalk cake – so there is great anticipation to see what he will produce in the final. Crystelle Pereira Born in northwest London to Kenyan born, Portuguese-Goan parents, she is another baker who has excelled in the later weeks of the competition. She loves travelling, speaks an impressive four languages and has used her heritage and travels to bring a diverse range of flavours into the tent (many have noticed her penchant for using the Japanese seasoning miso). She has always been a keen baker and was “chief taster” in her household when she was growing up, although only started baking seriously about three years ago. Although she has had some shaky weeks, a strong show in the semi-final saw her land her second star baker, and her showstopper was described as “flawless” by the judges. “I went into this week with a lot of impostor syndrome,” she posted on Instagram, and said she was in “complete and utter shock” to make it to the final.Child abuse is an evil thing but it’s always worse when the perpetrator is the state. Twenty-two years ago this month, Sally Clark was convicted of murdering her two baby boys, Christopher and Harry, and blaming it on cot death. She was sentenced to life in prison. There was a secret sentence, crueller even than that. The murder charge meant that in the family court, behind closed doors, she lost the right to be a mother to her surviving son, and that extra cruelty broke her. The British state committed child abuse by depriving her third boy of his mother for no good reason. The question at the heart of Sally’s tragedy – and those of Angela Cannings and Donna Anthony – was not, “Who murdered this child?” but, “Was there a crime?”. And the truth was there had been no crime. In none of these cases was there any good evidence of child abuse, let alone child murder. There is a fourth case, that of Kathleen Folbigg, an Australian mother who lost four children. She is still in prison. These tragedies are examined in a major new series by Discovery +, released this weekend, on which I am interviewed. Back in 1999 Professor Sir Roy Meadow was a kind of child abuse god, author of The ABC of Child Abuse and star witness for the crown. He advanced “Meadow’s Law”, that “unless proven otherwise, one cot death is tragic, two is suspicious and three is murder” and told the jury at Sally Clark’s trial that the chances of someone like Sally, a middle-class, non-smoking mother, having two cot deaths was “73 million to one”. This was an arrow that shot though Sally’s defence and one, it seemed at the time, for which there was no answer. My interest in Sally’s case was all Martin Bell’s fault. Had my old journalist pal from Bosnia not stood for election in Tatton in 1997, he would not have made friends with the chaplain for the prison where Sally ended up. The Reverend Pauline Pullen pushed me up against a wall and jabbed me with her finger: “You’re the investigative reporter. Everybody in that prison, the cons, the screws, even the governor knows she’s innocent. Go on, Sweeney, do your job.” I had recently left the Observer for BBC Radio 5 documentaries and luckily my producer, Bill Law, was already on the case. The more Bill and I dug, the more the evidence against Sally crumbled to dust. The statistic “73 million-to-one” that Meadow used against Sally was, according to Peter Donnelly, professor of statistics at Oxford University, “just plain wrong”. The odds of a middle-class non-smoking mother having a cot death were 8,543-to-one. Sally lost two boys so 8,543 times 8,543 equals, roughly, “73 million-to-one”. It’s a schoolboy error to multiply odds in this way. By way of analogy, the moment a rank outsider wins the Grand National, the odds of it doing it again the following year drop massively. The true number the murder trial should have heard is that once you have suffered one cot death, the chances of a second are 60-1. The statistic Meadow gave the court was poisonously untrue. Meadow’s claims to be a scientist of standing fell apart when we learned that his database was not founded on laboratory science but on 81 court cases.that he had, in the words ofProfessor Jean Golding, “cherry-picked”. To save space, Meadow had shredded his research database so it was impossible to go through his workings. Jean Golding, professor of epidemiology at Bristol, compared his scientific rigour to “stamp-collecting” and said that he was not a reliable witness. But it was Meadow’s Law that really took the biscuit. More boys than girls die from cot death which means that it is in some way genetic, though we don’t understand the exact mechanism. Our Radio 5 Live documentary on Sally Clark in 2001 ended like this: “Unless proven otherwise, one cot death is a tragedy and two cot deaths are a tragedy and three cot deaths are a tragedy.” Mothers found guilty of killing their children are the lowest of the low in the British prison system. Word got back to us that, after our documentary was broadcast, the other prisoners were less cruel to Sally. Meanwhile Steve Clark, Sally’s husband, went through the mass of medical evidence not heard by the court. He found bacteria test results showing that baby Harry had Staphylococcus aureus in his spinal fluid, indicating he could have died from natural causes. Angela Cannings suffered three cot deaths so, according to Meadow’s Law, she had to be a murderer. He gave evidence against her at her trial and she was duly convicted in 2002. For BBC Real Story we investigated Angela’s family tree. The court had heard that there had been two cot deaths in Angela’s family but that was not thought to be a gamechanger. I had a hunch that there might be more in Angela’s Irish family. Assistant producer Sarah Mole went to the Dublin records office and discovered that Angela’s grandmother had had a cot death and her great-grandmother two. After our programme went out Angela Cannings’s solicitor, the late Bill Bache called me. To my dying day I will remember the wonderment in his voice. “John, your programme…” “What is it, Bill?” He went on to explain that Angela’s half-sister, a woman Angela did not know existed, had got in touch to say that her two babies had both suffered life-threatening events. They were rushed to hospital and lived but the genetic pattern was crystal-clear. Donna Anthony suffered two cot deaths and she, too, had been convicted on the evidence of Meadow. Once again, there was no credible evidence that she had committed any child abuse, let alone child murder. In 2003 Meadow gave evidence against Trupti Patel, who had lost three babies and therefore, according to Meadow’s Law, was a murderer. But this time the jury got it, understanding that there is some kind of genetic factor at play, and she was cleared. That same year, Sally Clark and then Angela Cannings were freed. Two years later, Donna Anthony was freed. George Hawks, her solicitor, explained: “She was convicted of the worst crime any mother can be convicted of – the murder of her own babies – but there was no direct evidence that she had done any such thing. She was condemned by theory based on suspicion which was masquerading as medical opinion, and it was completely wrong. The case against Donna was completely flawed and she is absolutely shattered about what has happened to her over the last seven years.” Meadow’s work was not done. In 2005 Angela and Ian Gay were found guilty of manslaughter, following the death of their adopted son, Christian. The prosecution built their case on Meadow’s 1993 paper “Non-accidental salt poisoning”. The trial judge cited Meadow’s paper five times during his summing up. For Radio 4’s File on 4, I spoke to both Professor Golding and Professor Ashley Grossman who questioned the science behind Meadow’s paper. Once again, nature – in this case diabetes insipidus which can raise salt level to a lethal state – was to blame rather than deliberate salt poisoning by two people. They, too, were freed. Meadow was struck off by the GMC. He appealed and won, with one judge dissenting, and to this day his supporters defend him. Discovery + approached him for a comment but he did not reply. In 2004 Meadow’s ex-wife, Gillian Paterson, suggested that he was a misogynist. She said: “I don’t think he likes women… although I can’t go into details, I’m sure he has a serious problem with women.” Poor Sally never got over her enforced separation from her surviving child. I was doing battle against the Church of Scientology in Florida in 2007 when the news broke that Sally had died. I had to apologise to two ex-members of the church I was interviewing and walked away and burst into tears. I remain haunted by her case and the others, and the fact that in the 21st century a witch-hunt, powered by ignorance and prejudice, had the power to destroy wholly innocent women. I fear that the same thing is happening in Australia, that Kathleen Folbigg, too, is a victim of a monstrous injustice. The Baby Killer Conspiracy is available to stream now on Discovery+Gareth Taylor praised the bravery of his players after five second-half goals against Aston Villa saw Manchester City climb to sixth in the Women’s Super League. Two goals and an assist from the substitute Hayley Raso helped lift the pressure on the under-fire manager after Caroline Weir had opened the scoring and Georgia Stanway added a second in quick succession. “The brief at half-time was just not letting them off around the final third,” Taylor said, who watched his team dominate play with 83.9% possession in the first half. “I have to take my hat off to the players because I thought they showed real bravery. The subs made a difference and gave us some real energy when Villa were starting to flag at the end.” Despite their superiority on the ball, City had only three shots on target before half-time with the organised away side set up by their manager, Carla Ward, to absorb pressure. “We came in at half-time happy with the performance, we kept to the game plan,” Ward said. Villa’s turnaround under Ward has been impressive. By half-time at the Academy Stadium last season they were six goals down on their way to a heaviest ever WSL defeat, with the game ending 7-0. It has, perhaps, been the lack of goals that has been more worrying than City’s defensive issues given the strength of players available in attack, while the defensive injury crisis provides answers for the failings at the back. So there was some significant relief when the deadlock was broken in the style expected from the home team. A wonderful run and cutback from Lauren Hemp at the byline found Weir and the Scottish forward sent the ball looping into the far corner. Three minutes later and, with the pressure lifted, City doubled their lead. After a scramble from a corner Stanway clipped the ball backwards around the centre-back Elisha N’Dow and into the net. Having impressed in the first half the Villa goalkeeper, Hannah Hampton, was at fault for City’s third. Racing out to cut out a corner she played the ball straight to the feet of the City substitute Raso who lashed it back past her into the far corner via a deflection. Raso was then in action once more, going on a mazy run into the box before cutting the ball across the face of goal for Hemp to power in at the far post. It was Raso again for the fifth. The ball pinged around the Villa box before Hemp smashed a shot off the bar and Raso was on hand to power in the rebound. “When we went 2-0 down we went to try and put pressure on them so we changed the formation,” Ward said. “I thought we could step on to them a bit and cause them problems and we probably should have kept our shape. It’s probably the worst feeling I’ve had since I’ve been a manager.”Chelsea’s superiority was so clear it almost seemed unfair. The Premier League leaders extended their imperious away form under Thomas Tuchel with a fourth successive win on the road without conceding as Leicester City were offered a smarting reminder of what they are missing. It was 2008 that Chelsea last managed such a run as goals from Antonio Rüdiger, N’Golo Kanté and Christian Pulisic were the least they deserved but Leicester, missing the injured Youri Tielemans, seem to have lost their way. No team have suffered as many as their 12 home defeats since the start of last season. They have had some great times since winning the Premier League in 2016, of course, not least in winning the FA Cup against these opponents at Wembley six months ago, but the fact that two of their best players from five years ago were starring for Chelsea here only underlined the perspective of where these teams lie in the grand scheme of things. If their fans thought it was a good idea to boo Ben Chilwell for the manner of his departure 18 months ago, then the England left-back soon disabused them of the notion by making the first goal and helping run the show. Chelsea also had three goals disallowed, as did Ademola Lookman for the home side, and a 6-1 scoreline would not have been out of keeping with the match. Tuchel praised his team’s “huge effort” in a “mature performance” and acknowledged that the wing-back system is once again bringing the best out of Chelsea’s attacking versatility. Chilwell seemed to be playing inside-left for some of the second half, while Reece James frequently patrolled the centre circle. “We understand better the whole team where we can take risks and change our positions, while not taking crazy decisions” the Chelsea manager said. “We have some wide momentum with our wing-backs, who know when to support our attackers.” Brendan Rodgers may have attempted to match up Chelsea’s 3-4-3 shape but, two goals to the good by half-time, Tuchel’s table-toppers dominated possession, with 70% in the opening 45 minutes. Leicester did not muster a shot until Daniel Amartey’s blasted effort in the 63rd minute was superbly tipped over by Édouard Mendy in the visiting goal. Chilwell had already shot against the crossbar before he delivered the corner from which Rüdiger flicked home a header in the 14th minute. The Chelsea fans reminded the home contingent: “Ben Chilwell’s won the European Cup.” Boubakary Soumaré’s role was presumably to keep Kante quiet but the other former Leicester man ran off the back of him from a throw-in, proceeded goalwards without anyone coming out and then let fly a left-footed shot from the edge of the penalty area right into the corner of Kasper Schmeichel’s goal. Leicester were better for the third quarter of the game, after James Maddison and Kelechi Iheanacho came on at the break and played slightly narrower, but when Tuchel introduced a pair of substitutes, they promptly combined for the goal that killed the game. Hakim Ziyech checked back inside Caglar Soyuncu and passed just behind Jonny Evans for Pulisic to show neat control and score from close range. Rodgers criticised the Leicester supporters for jeering his side off at half-time. “It was very disappointing,” he said. “I think I have a sense of perspective of where this team has come from over the last couple of years. “We have totally overachieved, not just arriving in the top six but challenging teams which are way above us in terms of budget. “That is something so important for a player because they need that shot in the arm. We always respect the supporters’ feelings, but I also have a sense of perspective.” He also denied that suggestions he could become Manchester United’s next manager if Ole Gunnar Solskjær leaves contributed to the performance. “I said in the week that it is nothing that is real,” he said.” I spoke to the players on that. It is nothing to do with that.”Peter Lansley was at the King Power, and his report has landed. Click through for that. Thanks for reading this MBM, hope to see you for Liverpool-Arsenal in a couple of hours, and don’t forget that Rob Smyth is on Clocko for all the hot 3pm action. Brendan Rodgers speaks frankly to BT. “We conceded a disappointing goal from the corner. That gives them confidence. You can see why they are European champions. We lacked that little bit of belief. We had to resurrect that at half-time, and the players’ attitude was better in the second half. We forced a couple of saves from Mendy. Maddison and Kelechi gave us more physicality and better technique. The players have an amazing attitude, but confidence is not quite where it’s been, so it’s my job to bring the players back to that level. We need to attack better and defend better as a team, and the responsibility for that starts with me. I need to find a solution.” Thomas Tuchel speaks to BT. “We played a good away game. It was an excellent result. We created a lot of chances and half-chances, and were a bit unlucky with offside decisions. But we never stopped creating. I am happy with the effort and the quality. If we were on the highest level, we might have scored the third one earlier. If there’s two goals, anything can happen, momentum can change. But we didn’t allow, and the third one finished it off.” As for the future of Antonio Rudiger, who wants a pay rise? “Everybody wants him to stay, it’s pretty clear. There’s obviously a delay, but we have a bit of patience, and hopefully there will be a happy ending!” While Chelsea extend their lead at the top, Leicester remain in the bottom half. Southampton and Brentford could both leapfrog them in a couple of hours. Chelsea go six points clear at the top of the Premier League table, for a couple of hours at the very least. They were magnificent. Leicester were not. 90 min +2: On BT Sport, Robbie Savage names imperious veteran Thiago Silva as man of the match. Silva then cops a whack upside the head from Vardy. Everybody’s a critic. 90 min: There will be three added minutes. 88 min: Chalobah Beckenbauers his way down the middle. He considers a shot, but lays off to Pulisic, who tees up Chilwell. He blazes over the bar, to a smattering of the old abuse, but nobody’s heart is really in it any more. 86 min: Hudson-Odoi barges his way down the inside right and sends a shot across the face of goal and inches wide. The offside flag goes up yet again, but make no mistake, Leicester are a complete shambles at the back. 84 min: Chilwell bombs down the left and pulls back for James, who runs across the face of the box, left to right, one-twos with Ziyech down the channel, and tickles a beautiful finish across Schmeichel and into the bottom right. A third disallowed goal in short order. This could so easily have been a rout. The small margins. 83 min: One corner leads to another, and that one leads to a goal kick. It’s a job of work breaching this Chelsea back line, that’s for sure. 82 min: Maddison looks for the top right from distance. Mendy denies him a consolation with another full-stretch tip around the post. 81 min: Loftus-Cheek releases Chilwell down the left. Chilwell pulls back for Pulisic, who opens his body and slams home. Chilwell had gone too early, and the flag goes up for offside, so that’s one goal and two disallowed goals in the last ten minutes. Leicester would really love to hear the full-time whistle now. 80 min: Hudson-Odoi nearly finds Ziyech in the Leicester box with a raking cross from a deep position on the left. Schmeichel reads the danger and gathers. 79 min: Ndidi tries to send Vardy clear down the inside-left channel, but Chalobah slides in to make a glorious last-ditch interception. 77 min: Chelsea are taking no chances, and replace Jorginho with Loftus-Cheek. 76 min: Jorginho is down, feeling his hamstring. 75 min: Dewsbury-Hall comes on for Soumare. “Would this be the performance that persuades Brendan Rodgers that the grass at Old Trafford might be greener than the King Power?” wonders Lee Smith. 73 min: Hudson-Odoi lashes into an empty, unguarded net, Pulisic having teed him up at the end of a hectic game of pinball in the Leicester box. But the flag goes up for offside. Leicester, who had been enjoying their best spell just before the third goal, are in danger of falling apart completely. This is too easy for Chelsea. Ziyech romps down the right, the recipient of a lovely Chalobah pass. He enters the box, sends Soyuncu off for a copy of the Mercury, and rolls towards Pulisic, who slots into the bottom right. 70 min: Space for Soumare down the inside-left channel. He made it himself with a tricky shake of the hips, but wastes his good work by slapping a pass, meant for Vardy, straight at Silva. 68 min: So having said all that, Chelsea nearly score the killer third. Ziyech teases a lovely diagonal pass into the box from the right, Pulisic meeting it on the right-hand corner of the six-yard box. Hoping to steer home, he ends up clanking it wide right. Very close to a very clever goal. 67 min: It’s all a bit scrappy now. Possibly more to Leicester’s benefit than Chelsea’s. The home team have improved since the restart, though we refer you once again to that low bar. 65 min: Mendy takes an age over the goal kick, and is booked for wasting time. A clearly incensed Tuchel gives his keeper the what-for. 64 min: Nothing comes of the resulting corner, but Leicester come again, Maddison curling in from the right. Vardy meets the ball, six yards out, but can only shoulder it over the bar. A huge chance missed ... though Vardy looked a couple of inches offside when the ball came in, and any goal may have been chalked off by VAR anyway. 63 min: Pass, pass, pass, at slow speed. Suddenly the ball breaks to Amartey, who takes a snapshot from 25 yards. He sends a rising pearler towards the top right. Mendy fingertips around the post at full stretch. That came out of nothing, and speaks volumes of the keeper’s concentration. 62 min: Mount and Havertz are replaced by Pulisic and Ziyech. 61 min: Rudiger strides down the left and feeds Hudson-Odoi, who cuts infield, drops a shoulder to make some space in the box, and curls towards the top right. It’s just high, just wide. A fine effort. 60 min: Chilwell is nearly found alone in the Leicester box with a simple long ball down the middle. Albrighton reads the danger and arrives to toe-poke out for a corner. Chilwell takes it himself; Soumare clears. 59 min: Albrighton swings in from the right. Mendy comes out and uncharacteristically flaps. He misses the ball, which clanks off James ... but doesn’t drop to the lurking Vardy, falling into the arms of the relieved Mendy instead. Better from Leicester, though the bar this lunchtime has been set very low. 58 min: A very small pocket of space for Maddison, 25 yards out on the right. Maddison doesn’t need asking twice, and takes the opportunity for a shot on goal. He sends a bouncing bomb towards the bottom left; Mendy reads it well to gather without fuss. 56 min: Corner for Chelsea on the left. Havertz takes. Schmeichel punches clear. Chelsea are knocking at the door here. 55 min: Leicester try to play their way out from the back and fluff it. The ball breaks to Hudson-Odoi, who sends a pea-roller dribbling towards the bottom left. Easy for Schmeichel, though it shouldn’t have been. That’s Chelsea’s 11th attempt at goal this afternoon, and their sixth on target; Leicester have yet to make one. 53 min: Hudson-Odoi chases after Silva’s raking pass down the left. He reaches the byline and pulls back for Chilwell, who drives low and hard towards the goal. Schmeichel does extremely well to deflect the ball past the right-hand post, Chilwell’s shot having pinballed its way through a forest of legs. The corner comes to nought. 51 min: Maddison tries to step things up again, snapping into a couple of 50-50 challenges. Nothing of note happens, but the rise in tempo gets the crowd going. 49 min: Chelsea get back on the ball and slow things down a bit. Smart game management. 47 min: The substitutes nearly made an immediate impact there, and the crowd have responded accordingly. The home fans didn’t have too much to shout about during the first half, so they take what they can. Leicester get the second half underway. They’ve made a double change, hooking Barnes and Lookman and sending on Maddison and Iheanacho. Tuchel responds by calling Chilwell to the touchline and issuing some tactical orders. Maddison is immediately into the thick of it, sending Vardy off down the left. Vardy’s low cross is snaffled by Mendy, with Iheanacho lurking. Half-time postbag. “That late, nasty, behind-the-play challenge on Hudson-Odoi is the third or fourth of that sort from Leicester. There was another on Jorginho and, of course, several on Chilwell, who’s been targeted for rough treatment generally. They’re playing more like Stoke City than Leicester City today” - Nate Elliott. “Evans is not appreciated enough for his skills of fouling indiscriminately, abusing the referee, and never receiving that second yellow card” - Gary P. Half-time entertainment. This scoreline flatters Leicester, who have been thoroughly bossed by Chelsea. Adding insult to injury for the home fans, it’s their old heroes Ben Chilwell and N’Golo Kante who have done the damage, with an assist and a goal respectively. Leicester are booed off. 45 min +1: James blooters the free kick straight into the wall. 45 min: Havertz spins Evans with ludicrous ease in the centre circle. He then drives towards the Leicester box, and has his feet taken from under him by Evans on the edge of the D. Evans goes in the book, as does Schmeichel, yammering away at the ref. 43 min: James slips Havertz into space down the right. Castagne does well to stick to his man and eventually force him to turn tail. Leicester really need to hear the half-time whistle. 41 min: A free kick for Leicester, 40 yards out. Lookman shovels it towards Evans, racing down the inside-left channel. The ball loops over his head and straight out for a goal kick. Evans frowns and effs and jeffs. 39 min: Earlier in that move, Amartey had clumsily clattered Hudson-Odoi, so into the book he goes. 38 min: Kante bowls over Vardy, 40 yards from goal. Lookman hoicks the free kick into the box, but it’s easily cleared by Havertz, and Chelsea counter. Chilwell clips a cross from the byline on the left. Havertz, on the right-hand corner of the six-yard box, shapes for the bicycle kick, but only manages to clatter his own man Kante, who was rushing in with a view to steering a much simpler header into the top left. A lot of slapstick fun, and so close to that game-securing third. 37 min: Chelsea stroll about for a bit. They’ve earned the right. 35 min: No response from Leicester as of yet. In the technical area, Brendan Rodgers has the good grace to look extremely concerned. 33 min: A conspicuous absence of noise from the home fans at the minute. They’ve seen this story before this season. Here’s Rick Harris: “Interesting listening to the BT Sport commentary that despite the fact Leicester are being completely outplayed as much as United were against Liverpool and City, there doesn’t appear to be the same criticism of Rodgers that Solskjaer gets whenever United go behind. Leicester are in for an absolute thrashing here.” And there’s Rodgers in the frame for the Old Trafford gig, too. Strange times. 31 min: ... and it’s nearly three, as Schmeichel’s dismal pass out is intercepted by Hudson-Odoi, who tries to tee up Mount in the middle. Soyuncu and Schmeichel combine to clear up the mess, but dearie me, Leicester are all over the shop at the back. 30 min: That’s some response to Leicester coming close to equalising. Lookman just a yard offside; it’s a thin line between success and failure in the Premier League. Another former Leicester man steps up, and this is a sensational goal. James spins out of trouble on the right touchline and flicks infield for Kante, who turns on the jets to dribble 30 yards down the channel. Nobody comes to him. Evans eventually does, on the edge of the box, but it’s too late, Kante whipping a shot into the top right, leaving Schmeichel rooted. Wow! 26 min: That’ll give Leicester hope, though, after a troubled start. Proof that this parsimonious Chelsea defence can be teased out of shape. 24 min: Leicester have the ball in the net, but it won’t count. A lovely move, sparked by Lookman from deep, spinning out of a tight spot and releasing Vardy into space down the middle. Vardy turns Silva this way and that, but can’t beat his man. He lays off to Albrighton, who crosses deep. Lookman, bombing in from the left, sweeps home powerfully. But he was clearly a yard off. Up goes the flag, and no need for VAR. 22 min: Mount looks to loop the free kick into the top right, but the ball’s never coming back down. Goal kick. 21 min: Hudson-Odoi sashays in from the left and draws a clumsy foul from Amartey, just to the left of the D. A free kick in a very dangerous position. Mount’s eyes light up. 20 min: Albrighton drops deep and tries to launch an attack, whistling a pass down the right wing for Vardy. But he’s a yard offside. Leicester come again, Lookman snaffling a loose ball and looking to release Vardy; his poor pass is read by Silva and intercepted. The home side can’t get anything going. 18 min: Leicester are rocking and need to clear their heads. Another Chilwell corner from the right is nearly met six yards out by Silva. Soyuncu buys a cheap foul and the pressure is off, for a few seconds at least. 17 min: Another quick ball down the middle nearly catches Leicester out. Kante gets in ahead and flicks goalwards. Schmeichel spreads himself to parry. So close to number two. 16 min: Leicester have now conceded 19 goals this season. Only Villa, Newcastle and Norwich have worse records. They’re really missing Wesley Fofana. Chilwell, boos ringing in his lugs, floats the corner to the near post. Rudiger rises highest, the ball skimming off the top of his head, glanced across Schmeichel and into the top left. Easy as that. Chilwell is at the centre of the celebrations, hoisted into the air by his team-mates. The perfect response. 13 min: James wins the first corner of the game down the right. The visitors load the box. Chilwell comes across to take, copping more pantomime abuse as he does so. 12 min: Chelsea paint some pretty triangles, then suddenly Mount spins and very nearly breaks his way through the middle of the Leicester defence. The door slams just in time, but this is all Chelsea at the moment. 10 min: ... and as they continue to ping it around in the background, let’s hear from Mac Millings. “Brendan Rodgers’s insight that ‘they’ve got to be able to run forward, and run back, that’s the nature of the game at this level’ is a painful reminder of why I never made it as a pro - I was only ever able to run in one direction. I tried everything, Scott. I even had a little turntable made so that, when I ran out of touch, I could be rotated back onto the pitch. It was too late by then, of course, so I ended up retiring, although I did make a bit of money by selling the turntable to Jan Molby.” Isn’t it a bit early to be on the pipe, Millings? 8 min: Chelsea have enjoyed 77 percent of possession so far. 6 min: Hudson-Odoi and James combine well down the right. The resulting cross, meant for Chilwell, who appears well up for this today, is deflected away by Schmeichel. It’s a promising opening to this match all right. Delightfully open. 5 min: Leicester go up the other end and nearly score themselves, Vardy making great ground down the left and whipping in low for Lookman, who was waiting to tap home from six yards. But Rudiger hooks clear, just in time. 4 min: Former Leicester full back Chilwell has been getting the bird from the get-go. He nearly delivers the ultimate retort, sent free down the inside left by Jorginho’s quick free kick. He’s got the beating of Albrighton, enters the box ... and pings a rising shot off the top of the crossbar. He probably should have scored. The home fans give him some more abuse. 2 min: Leicester have started with a notice of intent, Vardy closing down Chalobah, then pressuring Mendy as he receives a panicked backpass. Then Evans clatters into Havertz, a calling card right there. A free kick, nothing more. Chelsea get the ball rolling ... but only after the players take the knee. The gesture met with a warm round of clapping and clacking. There’s no room for racism. The teams are out! Leicester are in first-choice royal blue, forcing Chelsea into their yellow pastiche of the Dixon-Speedie-Nevin years. We’ll be off in a minute! Thomas Tuchel has a chat with BT. “It is always a bit tricky because you have the team back on Thursday. If you have 12.30 away game, it is new for us. But you learn and have developed a schedule that gives us a chance to get the three points. I am happy when we create chances, it sometimes gives you a better feeling than scoring a goal out of nothing. Sometimes you do not take them, it happens.” Leicester boss Brendan Rodgers talks to BT Sport. “You can always be better. We had a nice break. We’re pretty flexible on how we can play. Marc Albrighton is a great guy to come in, and Daniel Amartey has played really well in that structure. Chelsea have everything, you only have to look at the bench. In these types of games, the big thing is concentration. And physicality. We know we have talent, so we can cause them a problem as well. We’ve shown them that in previous games. Everyone has to do their job, they’ve got to be able to run forward, and run back, that’s the nature of the game at this level.” A reminder of what happened when these teams met at Wembley in May ... ... and how Chelsea got a little revenge at the Bridge three days later. Two changes made by both sides. Daniel Amartey and Marc Albrighton are in for the hosts. Youri Tielemans and Ricardo Pereira are both injured. Chelsea welcome back Mason Mount and Trevoh Chalobah; Andreas Christensen and Ross Barkley drop to the bench. Leicester City: Schmeichel, Amartey, Evans, Soyuncu, Castagne, Soumare, Ndidi, Albrighton, Lookman, Vardy, Barnes. Subs: Bertrand, Maddison, Ward, Iheanacho, Perez, Choudhury, Dewsbury-Hall, Vestergaard, Daka. Chelsea: Mendy, Chalobah, Thiago Silva, Rudiger, James, Kante, Jorginho, Chilwell, Mount, Hudson-Odoi, Havertz. Subs: Arrizabalaga, Alonso, Christensen, Pulisic, Werner, Loftus-Cheek, Barkley, Ziyech, Azpilicueta. Referee: Paul Tierney (Lancashire). Leicester’s season has been a mixed bag so far. A first Community Shield in the bag, a statement victory over Manchester United, a European campaign that’s uneven at best, comprehensive losses to West Ham and Arsenal. Good luck guessing which Foxes turn up this lunchtime. Chelsea are a tad more predictable. The European champions are three clear at the top of the league, a ruthless machine these days under the tutelage of Thomas Tuchel. But they somehow only drew with Burnley before the international break, and their recent history against Leicester may have left some scar tissue: last season’s FA Cup final, of course, but also the recent league head-to-head, Chelsea only winning one of the last seven. Thomas Tuchel will be hopeful of a return to winning ways that would extend Chelsea’s lead at the top to six points, for a couple of hours at the very least. Brendan Rodgers meanwhile would love to see his side catapult themselves from unfamiliar mid-table territory to sixth place, if only until 5pm or so. Kick off is at 12.30pm GMT. It’s on!When I was growing up, charity efforts always seemed to involve slop of some kind. People got dunked with gunge or they sat in baths full of baked beans. And then it shifted. You could no longer expect to be slipped a tenner for getting mucky and looking a bit daft. Serious feats of endurance are now required for the dedicated fundraiser: mammoth bike rides up and down the country, hoisting yourself up the sorts of mountains that tax professional climbers. Now it is the era of my favourite new charitable endeavour, the 24-hour danceathon. Last week, Sophie Ellis-Bextor raised more than £1m (and counting) for Children in Need after dancing on air for 24 hours. Hold your Murder on the Dancefloor jokes: “I don’t like the idea of the headline writing itself,” she quipped at the outset. It proved to be a common-sense-defying act of physical fortitude, many costume changes and sleep deprivation – and it was beautiful. Dermot O’Leary had done it for Comic Relief in 2015; he popped along to offer some advice as she shuffled her way through various BBC shows. She danced to the travel news, which was basically performance art, and she danced behind Tony Blackburn and Gemma Collins as the GC murdered Cliff Richard’s Summer Holiday, which actually was performance art. There is something so specific about dancing as a mood-enhancer. Whatever you think of the rule-breaking and the recklessness, it was no surprise that lockdown raves sprang up when we were supposed to be at home. For the people who went to them, it can’t just have been about socialising – it was moving to music and feeling it. I went to a party last weekend, legal now, but still quite bracing, even with those considerate on-the-day lateral flows. There was dancing all night and even when the party was about to be over, the music stayed loud, a few stragglers still determined to get through as many Janet Jackson classics as they possibly could before the lights came up. I love dancing, though I’ve always been shy about it, to my great regret; now, after everything, I don’t feel so shy about it any more. Ellis-Bextor did the nation a favour with her lockdown Kitchen Discos, which made me want to invest in a karaoke machine and flashing lights, and now she has upped the benevolence once again. It was so much better than a baked bean bath, so beautifully good-natured and free, and half-mad, and just right for right now. That million quid figure deserves to keep rising. Tina Turner’s lookalike is a tribute too far In Germany, Tina Turner is suing representatives of a Tina Turner impersonator named Dorothea “Coco” Fletcher, who performs in a tribute show called Simply the Best. Turner’s lawyers are arguing that Fletcher looks too much like her and that may be misleading. On Good Morning Britain last week, Fletcher appeared to discuss the case and the idea of “image appropriation”, leading to presenter Ben Shepherd noting that “you sound very like her, [you’re] performing very like her”, which is surely good news for an impersonator who makes a living from trying to make audiences agree with that. And she does very much look like Turner, especially when decked out in the full gear, performing her songs. Maybe it’s the level of tribute act that I’ve witnessed – and there are whole festivals dedicated to reliving Britpop via impressions of its least vital bands – but I would argue that one problem they don’t have is performers looking too much like who they’re supposed to be. Most make those seaside waxwork museums look like photographic reproductions of celebrities, though if this case succeeds, perhaps they’ll be the ones who are laughing. Oprah Winfrey: never mind the lyrics, she put her heart into it I had a lot of sympathy for Oprah Winfrey, who went mildly viral last week after trying to sing along to Adele’s Hello while watching Tottenham’s finest belt it out live. While standing next to Lizzo, who knew every word and even added a “let’s go!”, Winfrey managed “hello from the other side”, but faltered during practically every other part of the song. In his book Musicophilia, the late, great neurologist Oliver Sacks explored the relationship between human beings and music, which takes up more of our brains than language, and observed that, even after a severe brain injury or illness, music is often the last thing to be lost. It explains why I know all the words to 2 Unlimited’s No Limit, while I can’t remember what I had for tea last night, but at some point, surely, our brains get filled up with songs, like an old iPod that cannot fit any more on it. So I feel for Winfrey. There should be a word for that moment of starting to sing along to something with utter commitment, passing the point of no return, followed by the realisation that you don’t know it well at all. I’ve come in at the wrong point on Talking Heads’ This Must Be the Place almost every time I’ve listened to it; I only ever do the “oh-oh-ohhhh” bit of Lady Gaga and Bradley Cooper’s Shallow, because it’s impossible to get right anyway, and therefore open to all. Winfrey may not have known every word to Hello. Nevertheless, she persisted. She sang something anyway and that is why Oprah Winfrey is where she is today. • Rebecca Nicholson is an Observer columnistJohn Kander peers over the top of his glasses and smiles broadly. “What are you most scared about? Was there any moment when your heart sank?” he asks, kindly. Rebecca Frecknall grins back. “We’re most scared about 600 people coming to see it,” she says. “There are just so many unknowns.” The pair are thousands of miles apart – one in upstate New York, the other in London - and they are talking via Zoom. But the tie that binds them overcomes distance and space. Composer Kander, with his late, long-time professional partner, the lyricist Fred Ebb, created Cabaret, the show that invented the concept musical. Frecknall is currently directing a starry new production (previews have just started) with Eddie Redmayne as the mysterious and sinister Emcee, Jessie Buckley as lost show girl Sally Bowles and Omari Douglas, so brilliant on TV this year in Russell T Davies’s It’s a Sin, as the bisexual writer Cliff Bradshaw. It was Redmayne’s star power and persistence that helped assemble the team that has now rebuilt and reshaped the Playhouse theatre in London’s West End into a version of the Kit Kat club, the setting in Weimar Berlin for Cabaret’s dark story of dreams and desire in the shadow of the Nazis’ rise to power. But it is Frecknall, who won such acclaim for her radical production of Tennessee Williams’s Summer and Smoke, who is now driving the piece on to the stage. She is only the second woman to direct a major production of Cabaret. On Zoom, she looks tired – it’s the day before the dress rehearsal – but her enthusiasm for the show and the staging is infectious. “There is something about a proscenium arch that is tricky because you can feel that you are looking through a view-finder. What’s interesting about working in this space in the round is that it is so immediate. The audience is very present with the actors and you are able to pull out more contemporary threads. There are so many colours in the work and people will interpret it in different ways. You’re not looking into a picture of a room from another time.” She pauses and laughs, as she considers the fact that she’s discussing her ideas for staging Cabaret in front of one of the people who created it. But Kander, now 94 and – talking from his home in Accord, New York, where he lives with his husband, Albert Stephenson – doing an impression of a sprightly 75-year-old, is leaning forward, nodding. “Whether or not to put the whole show in the Kit Kat club was something that was discussed when we wrote it,” he says (the original Cabaret has two areas of stage space, one for “real life”, one for the club). The truth is that when Cabaret premiered on Broadway in 1966, it was already bold enough. The idea of adapting Christopher Isherwood’s semi-autobiographical novel Goodbye to Berlin into a musical had been floating around for some time, when Joe Masteroff – as book writer – and Kander and Ebb came on board. It was Hal Prince, the original director, who came up with the breakthrough idea that the songs of the Emcee, played directly to the audience, would be a metaphor for the soul of Germany as the Nazis rose to power. “I have to say at the outset that Cabaret is Hal Prince,” Kander confirms. “All of us contributed our best work to it and it was a very healthy and close collaboration, but this piece was Hal. And I would say hats off to him, because he changed the face of musical theatre. He’s the one who did it. “I don’t walk to talk about him as a revolutionary, as it’s not how he would have thought of himself. But when I look back, his approach to theatre was physically and formally revolutionary. I remember to our surprise, when Cabaret opened, people talked about it as if they had never seen something like it before and we probably didn’t have the vaguest idea of what that meant, because when you work on something minute to minute, it doesn’t seem startling. We were just working on something we really liked.” Which isn’t to say that everything about the creation of Cabaret was sweetness and light. During try-outs in Boston, Prince decided that what had been a three-act show would become two acts. “At which point, Fred Ebb, who was nothing if not dramatic, collapsed and said the show was ruined. It would never work now,” Kander remembers. “In our hotel room, Fred was lying on the bed and Joel Grey [who played the Emcee] was lying on one side of him and I was on the other, holding his hands, saying it’s not over, it’s going to be fine.” He laughs again. To him, these stories are well worn and he keeps apologising for telling them. But the vividness of his memories is a tribute both to his own vitality and the ongoing power of the show. Although Kander and Ebb went on to write Chicago, Kiss of the Spider Woman and the song New York, New York, it is Cabaret that confirms their place among the immortals of musical theatre. “We all stand on the shoulders of people like John who have done it first and influenced people,” says Frecknall. “Cabaret is one of those works that change things and maybe there are pieces that have been written since that wouldn’t have been written without it.” Though they didn’t think they were writing anything revolutionary at the time, they knew that they were producing what Prince called “a parable of contemporary morality”, one that he saw as drawing parallels between the spiritual bankruptcy of Berlin in the 1920s and America in the 1960s. This ability to be continuously relevant, as much as its fabulous songs, keeps the show’s flame alive. “All of us were of an age where we had been part of the second world war and the whole Nazi story and what makes people behave in the way they do,” Kander says. “What all of us were a little naive about was that it was neither brand new, nor was it going to end. Every time there is a major production of Cabaret, there’s this horrible feeling of: why is it so pertinent now?” “It’s such a masterpiece,” adds Frecknall. “So sharp in the way you can take it incredibly specifically or see its ripples and refractions across every decade. Our production is not doing a historical recreation as far as design and aesthetic go, neither are we doing something that is set now. I’m always very interested in the space between – acknowledging that this is a piece about a specific time, which is being performed at a specific time. The conversation between those two spaces is important to me.” The production has deliberately cast an extremely diverse company of actors, “all of whom connect with some aspect of the politics of the piece. Because we have that complexity in the actors it’s really interesting to see how it’s connecting to people. Being able to have conversations about the piece with the Jewish members of the company, with the queer members of the company [resonates].”” For Frecknall, the key song in Cabaret is the desolate What Would You Do?, sung by Fräulein Schneider who rejects her Jewish lover in the interests of self-preservation. “There is a desperation and a necessity to survive, which for me is part of human nature.” In the original production, Fräulein Schneider was played by Lotte Lenya, the celebrated singer married to Kurt Weill, who had herself fled Nazi Germany. “She was our conscience, she really was,” says Kander. “We were kind of nervous about giving this song to a woman who got out of Berlin 24 hours before they would have killed her and had been through everything she had.” She reassured them. “Her phrase was ‘an entire population could not emigrate’. She wasn’t excusing Fräulein Schneider, she was explaining her.” Kander says he realised something long after he had written the piece. “In a way, all the principal characters are living in their own delusion; they all believe that something can happen which can’t. Sally believes she can become a great glamorous star when the fact is she’s a fairly untalented middle-class girl. Cliff believes he can be straight, that he can have a child. Schneider believes she can have a romantic life with a Jewish grocer. They are all living in their wishes. Maybe we all do that; maybe one of the things about the piece that continues to matter is that it reflects that.” Frecknall wholeheartedly agrees. “I think for me the wider political moment that the characters are living in exposes this element of human nature, which is that it is easier to live in delusion than in reality, so much easier that sometimes we don’t realise we are doing it. Cliff’s last lines are ‘I was dancing with Sally Bowles and we were both fast asleep’ and I think that’s super-contemporary.” Despite the fact that Cabaret became a major hit on Broadway, and is now constantly revived, its first steps in Britain were very uncertain. The initial production in the UK only lasted for 336 performances. “It was a flop,” says Kander gleefully. “It got terrible reviews. Judi Dench, who was probably the greatest Sally Bowles I’ve seen in my life, got bad reviews. I remember seeing a headline asking ‘What have they done to our Judi?’” He loved working with Dench. “She hadn’t sung a lot and we were working on the song of Cabaret together and at the end of it she has a big, long note to hold and she was having trouble with it. I was showing her ways to cheat and she stopped and turned to me and said, ‘What do you want? What do you really want?’ I said, ‘I’d like it the way I wrote it’ and she said – and I really want to put this up over my desk – ‘If that’s what you want, that’s what you’ll get’. I think about that fondly, whenever I work with another actress, just how game she was. She was quite wonderful.” Kander was also excited by the Sam Mendes production of Cabaret, starring Alan Cumming as the Emcee, which began at the Donmar in 1993 and was later amplified for its run on Broadway five years later. “It made me realise there are so many ways to do a piece. If the piece has any validity, it’s open to all kinds of not just reinterpretation but reimagining. When I see a production of Cabaret that’s a brand-new take on it and it works, it makes me really happy.” Oddly enough, in this context, seeing Bob Fosse’s 1972 movie version of the show, starring Liza Minnelli, who had been Kander and Ebb’s first choice to play Sally on stage, did not make him happy. “It’s hard to talk about, because we were pretty close to a lot of people involved with it,” he says, tentative for the first time. “They screened it to us, just Freddie and me in a room. I remember at the end of it, we looked at each other and we sort of shook our heads because it wasn’t Cabaret and it took a while to shake that expectation out of our heads. Then, when we went to see it in the cinema with an audience, we realised it wasn’t Cabaret, but it was an extraordinary film. Because of what our original intentions were, I still prefer the stage piece.” In approaching the piece afresh one area that Frecknall feels will be altered is what constitutes sexiness. “I don’t want to go down that Fosse-esque route,” she told me. “It has become a nostalgic, aesthetic terminology. I want to unlock the piece. It was done before Fosse got his hands on it and the world of the piece existed before there was a musical, so there is so much to draw on.” Of the original Cabaret team, Ebb died first, in 2004, though you wouldn’t know it was so long ago from the warmth with which Kander talks about him. But Kander continues to work on new shows, with different collaborators. “I am in the middle of a production that we will have a five-week workshop starting in January,” he says enthusiastically. “We had a reading all on Zoom and it blew my mind.” But it’s clear, too, how excited he is about the prospect of Frecknall’s work on Cabaret. As he says goodbye, he makes a little speech. “I love that this is happening and hope everything goes swimmingly,” he says. “I can only tell you that at the first performance of Cabaret in New York, the set was divided into two motorised halves. And only one half came on.” He smiles. “I’m sending that thought to you as a gesture of good luck.” • This article was amended on 25 November 2021 because an earlier version said Frecknall is “the first woman to direct a major production of Cabaret”. In fact Gillian Lynne directed and choreographed the 1986 London revival. • Cabaret is at the Playhouse theatre, London WC2, booking to 19 MarchBorn in London in 1968, Georgia Pritchett is a TV writer and producer. Her credits include Succession, Veep, Smack the Pony, Miranda and The Thick of It, and she has won five Emmys, five Writers’ Guild awards, a Golden Globe and a Bafta. She is showrunner, executive producer and writer of new Apple TV drama The Shrink Next Door, starring Will Ferrell and Paul Rudd. Since 2015 she has been writing children’s books about Wilf the Mighty Worrier, and earlier this year published her memoir, My Mess is a Bit of a Life (Faber). 1. Music Burna Boy My midlife crisis manifested in a sudden passion for rap music. I think the anger expressed by many rap artists really resonates with the inner rage of a menopausal woman. There’s a gap in the market here. There should be rap written specifically for and by menopausal women. It would be pretty powerful. My newfound obsession started with me driving round in my Nissan Leaf, with Eminem blaring out of the windows. Now I am into the Nigerian rapper Burna Boy. He writes such great lyrics. 2. Film Shin Godzilla (dir: Hideaki Anno and Shinji Higuchi) My younger son loves Godzilla and we have watched all the films. The Japanese ones from the 50s and 60s are extraordinary. Even though Godzilla is terrifying and destructive, you can’t help rooting for him. A bit like Logan in Succession. We just watched a more recent Japanese film, Shin Godzilla, which was a brilliant depiction of politicians trying and failing to deal with the appearance of Godzilla by playing down the threat. They consistently mishandle the crisis and their bungled attempts to stop the monster cause it to evolve and become more deadly. Boris should watch. 3. Book Let’s Pretend This Never Happened by Jenny Lawson If you like bad taxidermy (and who doesn’t?) you will love this. Jenny Lawson writes about her hilariously eccentric upbringing in a violently rural area of Texas. Her father was a hunter who wore deer’s urine like Old Spice (to disguise his scent) and often couldn’t drive her to school because “there was too much blood in the car”. She shared her house with dozens of animals – raccoons, armadillos, turkeys and also Stanley the magical squirrel, who could do maths (waving his paw to indicate the answer). It turned out Stanley wasn’t magical, it was just her dad sticking his hand up a dead squirrel and using it like a glove puppet. 4. TV This Way Up (Channel 4) Written by Aisling Bea and starring Aisling and Sharon Horgan, this is a brilliant, funny, humane and poignant show. Aisling and Sharon are utterly convincing as sisters and I could watch them bicker, tease and confide in each other for ever. Episode one starts with Aine coming out of a rehab facility after a “teeny little nervous breakdown” and the series follows her as she re-enters the world with the help of her sister. The writing is fantastic, the acting is sublime and the subject matter is important. I love it. 5. Comedy Maria Bamford Maria Bamford is an utterly fabulous comedian who writes really intelligent and interesting standup. Plus she does silly voices. Her standup special Ask Me About My New God is my favourite but they are all excellent. I have downloaded them all and I just play them on repeat. She has written so many brilliant lines. I would like to have them printed on pictures of crashing waves or beautiful sunsets. Lines like: “If you stay alive for no other reason, do it for spite.” 6. Food Sushi Park, West Hollywood There’s a very unprepossessing looking sushi restaurant in a strip mall in West Hollywood called Sushi Park. It is my very favourite restaurant in the whole world. It is tiny and shabby but it is a portal to paradise. If you’ve never had sea bass that tastes like waving your loved ones goodbye, or tuna that tastes like a small child running unsteadily towards you, or uni that tastes like the happy tears of a proud parent watching a school recital – you need to go here.There’s a rare sensual acuity in the film-making of Jane Campion. Hers is a body of work that can be mapped out in loaded touches: the tentative brush of skin against skin that sends a jolt through In the Cut; the caress of a piano key in The Piano. Even in a world like that of The Power of the Dog, populated by hard-baked ranchers, the softness long ago sandblasted from their manners, Campion takes a tactile approach to exploring her characters. But in this milieu, not given to gentleness and intimacy, a glimpse of hands working with strips of woven cowhide can take on a transgressive charge. The setting of the story, which is adapted by Campion from the novel by Thomas Savage, is Montana, 1925. Two wealthy landowners, brothers Phil (Benedict Cumberbatch) and George (Jesse Plemons), find themselves at odds when solid, decent George marries Rose (Kirsten Dunst), a widow and the mother of Peter (Kodi Smit-McPhee), a disconcertingly beautiful teenage boy. Pale-eyed and dangerous, his face whittled sharp from spite, Cumberbatch’s Phil is a chilling presence. He taunts Rose with a whistled song that reminds her of her failures; crudely mocks Peter for his effeminate bearing. But power can shift as rapidly as the light on the mountains. Beneath the derisive catcalls from the ranch hands who follow Phil’s lead is a ripple of palpable discomfort and confusion as Peter walks past. The weathered earth tones of Campion’s subdued colour scheme conceal a vivid and full-blooded emotional palette. In cinemas now and on Netflix from 1 December“Toxic cultural practices” and a lack of culturally sensitive services means many women who are victims of domestic and sexual abuse in the Sikh community are suffering in silence, according to the first comprehensive report into the issue. The report by Sikh Women’s Aid (SWA), the UK’s only frontline service for Sikh women, will be released later this week to coincide with the launch of the United Nations’ women’s annual 16 days of activism against gender-based violence. It creates a harrowing picture of the prevalence and effect of domestic abuse and child sexual abuse in the Sikh community. The research was carried out over a four-month period over the summer, during which time SWA distributed anonymous surveys within the community across the UK. Researchers received replies from almost 700 respondents, and, of those, 70% said they had experienced domestic abuse, nearly half had experienced incidents with more than one perpetrator, including female members of their family. Over a third of respondents said that they had experienced child sexual abuse, and of these incidents, one in seven involved more than one perpetrator. Most victims knew their abuser, and nearly half of the incidents of abuse took place at home. Gender equality is one of the core beliefs of the Sikh faith, but, says the SWA, patriarchal societal practices stemming from cultural traditions, such as concepts of honour, mean that many survivors are afraid to speak out. Awareness of these issues is growing, however, following several high-profile cases, including the murder of 43-year-old Ranjit Gill from Milton Keynes earlier this year. She was stabbed 18 times by her “dominating and bullying” husband Anil Gill in an alcohol and cocaine-fuelled attack. While domestic and sexual abuse affect all ethnicities, cultures and backgrounds, the founders of Sikh Women’s Aid and authors of the report, Sahdaish Pall and Sukhvinder Kaur, said that a lack of specialist support that met the needs of women in the Sikh community was creating “a generation of young women who are completely lost”. The findings of the report will be used by SWA to create services tailored to the specific needs and cultural nuances that victims of abuse within the Sikh Panjabi community face. “Out of all the South Asian communities, Sikh women are the least likely to come forward about abuse. We come across as a very affluent, educated and giving community, and that reputation makes it very difficult for Sikh women to come forward,” said Pall. “There are issues specific to our culture, like the link between alcohol and domestic and sexual violence. We have a huge drinking culture among men, and the amounts people consume exacerbate issues.” “There is also a lack of education around things like coercive control. The parental generation’s view is if you haven’t been beaten up, that’s not abuse. There’s often an intergenerational and toxic normalisation and acceptance of violence against women.” The taboo around discussing sexual abuse is particularly widespread, and issues such as victim-shaming and cultural concepts of honour and shame, which have no basis in religious teachings, are often weaponised against victims to ensure their silence. Nimrit*, 39, from London, who was abused by her uncle between the ages of eight and 13, said that her family’s fear of not finding a good husband for her meant she had to stay silent about her abuse. “From the outside, we looked like the perfect family, but behind closed doors was another story. My uncle was a pillar of the community who was active in the gurdwara [Sikh place of worship]. He would come and stay at our house and during those visits, he would abuse me,” she said. “Eventually, I told my cousin and made her promise not to tell anyone, but she told her mum who told my mum. My mum slapped my face and began sobbing and saying ‘who will marry you now?’ She said if I wasn’t a virgin, I would have to get married straight away, so I lied and said he only touched me. We had to keep it a secret from my dad because it was her brother, and to this day he hasn’t a clue. It kills me when I hear him saying nice things about my uncle. She continued: “I had to keep it a secret to protect the family but secrets like that eat you up inside. A guy from uni once tapped my shoulder to get my attention and I screamed in his face. “I had an arranged marriage and the physical side of the relationship was hard as I got flashbacks but I couldn’t tell my husband about my past so I just shut down. I’m just trying to live a normal life. “There is more awareness about these issues in the community now compared to when I was a kid but people need to speak out without being punished for it or the abuse won’t stop.” Sexual abuse in the Sikh community is “almost like the perfect crime” according to Sukhvinder Kaur because the likelihood of someone being prosecuted is so low. “Not only is there a lack of convictions but the community is geared towards protecting the reputation of perpetrators,” she said. One of the most sensitive issues the report tackles is grooming. The report found that the widely held perception within the community that the majority of victims of sexual abuse were exploited by non-Sikh grooming gangs is false. This finding in particular has led to a backlash against the report’s authors. “There is more abuse taking place where the perpetrator is known to the victim and the family. Our community is in denial about that,” said Kaur. Dame Vera Baird, the victims’ commissioner for England and Wales, who will be at the official launch of the report later this week, said that it highlighted the need for “culturally appropriate support organisations for black, Asian and other minority women who are neglected by the criminal justice system and in the provision of specialist support”. “I welcome this report although it is hard to [do that] when it shows that there is rampant hidden violence against women and girls in the Sikh community,” she said. Former chief prosecutor, Nazir Afzal added: “It’s a testament to the courage of SWA that we have this report at all, given the hostility they have faced. Nothing in this report should surprise anyone involved in safeguarding. “Any strategy that focuses on what men ‘should do’ rather than [on] male violence will always fail. Any successful response will involve addressing male power while simultaneously supporting victims.” * Not her real nameStuart Hogg cemented his status as an icon of Scottish rugby as he became the country’s all-time leading try-scorer in a tense victory over Japan. If the performance was some way short of convincing as Scotland struggled to generate sufficient attacking rhythm to shake off the Brave Blossoms, it was a historic day for their celebrated captain. Having drawn level with another man of Hawick, Tony Stanger, and the legendary Ian Smith with a brace against South Africa last Saturday, Hogg’s try in the 27th minute – his 25th in 88 caps – took him clear on his own at the top of the pile. “For me there is no better feeling than playing for Scotland,” said the 29-year-old full-back. “As a lad growing up, that is all I wanted to do and you could say I am still living the dream. Being part of this group is very special and I will never take that for granted.” After a beasting by South Africa which undid the feel-good factor generated by victories over Tonga and Australia, a third win from four matches in this Autumn Nations Series at least ensured the Scots will take winning momentum into next year’s Six Nations. Duhan van der Merwe’s early try put them in front before two penalties from fly-half Rikiya Matsuda briefly put the visitors ahead. Hogg’s record-breaking score and a try for Darcy Graham allowed Scotland to open up a 19-6 interval lead, but Japan twice brought themselves to within a converted score of victory before Finn Russell’s late penalty finally put the outcome beyond doubt. The last time these sides met was at the 2019 Rugby World Cup when the hosts rode a wave of emotion to eliminate Scotland with a thrilling 28-21 victory in Yokohama. If this encounter never reached the intensity of that thunderous occasion, it nevertheless provided plenty of entertainment on a bright autumn day in Edinburgh. This was only Japan’s sixth Test since the World Cup, having missed an entire year of rugby during the Covid-19 pandemic, but they started full of energy and intent. Scotland held firm though and when they turned down a kick at goal to go for the corner, Van der Merwe barged over from close range to plunder his ninth try in 13 Tests. But Scotland stuttered as their discipline faltered, conceding half a dozen largely needless penalties. Matsuda slotted his first attempt and when wing Kotaro Matsushima sliced through to force another, the fly-half’s kick briefly put Japan ahead. Appropriately it was Hogg who restored calm, the captain starting the move that led to his try by swerving between three would-be tacklers on halfway. When space opened up on the left, he surged onto a short pass from Russell to touch down. Russell’s conversion made it 12-6 and Hogg’s superb tackle stopped Japan counterpart Ryohei Yamanaka in his tracks as the visitors threatened just before the interval. Instead it was Scotland who extended their advantage when Japan wing Siosaia Fifita carelessly knocked on Russell’s grubber to hand Scotland a scrum inside the visitors’ 22. A wraparound move saw Russell’s floated pass release Graham, and the winger cut inside the cover to score his 10th try for Scotland, Russell again landing the extras. If the expectation among another capacity Murrayfield crowd was that Scotland would run away with it in the second half, Japan refused to lie down. A yellow card for prop Jamie Bhatti on the resumption didn’t help the Scots’ cause, Matsuda landing two shots at goal to bring Japan to within seven points. The Scots restored their advantage when Stuart McInally, just on as a replacement, finished off a lineout drive to equal the record for a Scottish forward - jointly held by John Jeffrey and Derek White – with his 11th Scotland try. But Yu Tamura’s superb 50:22 kick gave Japan a lineout in the right corner, and replacement Tevita Tatafu stretched over to make it 26-17. Matsuda was unable to convert, but his fifth penalty with eight minutes left ensured a nervous finale before Russell’s penalty brought relief.The World Health Organization has said another 500,000 people in Europe could die of Covid by March next year unless urgent action is taken. The WHO’s Europe director, Dr Hans Kluge, said he was very worried about a fresh wave of infections that had spread across the continent and led countries to announce new restrictions. Austria announced this week that it would become the first country to legally require people to have the vaccines from February. It has the lowest vaccination rate in western Europe, and recorded another 15,809 cases on Friday. The country will go into a full lockdown for the third time on Monday until at least 12 December. Tighter restrictions have also been announced in the Czech Republic and Slovakia. Kluge said factors such as the winter season, when there is normally an increase in viral infections, and low vaccine coverage were responsible for the increase in cases. He called for more people to get vaccinated, basic public health measures to be implemented and new treatments to be developed, but said mandatory vaccination should be the last resort. “Covid-19 has become once again the number one cause of mortality in our region,” he told the BBC. “We know what needs to be done” to fight the disease. Rioting erupted in the Netherlands on Friday in response to new Covidrestrictions. Police opened fire on protesters and seven people were injured during a demonstration in Rotterdam. The German health minister, Jens Spahn, said the situation in the country was a “national emergency” and would not rule out another national lockdown. Christmas markets were cancelled in the south-eastern state of Bavaria, which has some of the lowest vaccination rates in the country. The UK’s rolling seven-day average of daily new coronavirus cases is higher than EU countries, and has been since June. Other EU members, including Ireland, Hungary, Greece and the Baltic states have higher infection rates than the UK’s, but many with high vaccination rates and stricter social distancing rules do not.Kyle Rittenhouse, the teenager acquitted of murdering two men during anti-racism protests, is set to appear next week on Fox News’s Tucker Carlson show amid fears that the not guilty verdict in the Kenosha killings might encourage militia violence. Rittenhouse’s shooting of three people, including two he killed, during demonstrations in the Wisconsin city split the US. For some it made him a vigilante out to make trouble while for others he was a gun-toting hero defending property from a mob. Rittenhouse became a heroic figure for conservatives during his trial as many rightwing figures raised money for his legal defense. His coming interview by Carlson – one of Fox’s most controversial and extreme hosts – is likely to cement that popularity. The Monday night sit down is already being heavily promoted by the conservative channel. Carlson has risen to prominence as the most influential media figure for conservatives, even amid numerous controversies. Carlson has advocated for multiple baseless conspiracy theories on his show and been condemned for dog-whistling racism. The Fox News host is releasing a series that argues that the 6 January Capitol insurrection was orchestrated by leftist Antifa group. He has also bemoaned the Democratic party for trying to “replace the current electorate” with “voters from the third world” through immigration policies: what is known as the “great replacement theory” that has originated in the far right. The Fox News host appears to not only have interviewed Rittenhouse for the show, but has also filmed a short documentary on Rittenhouse during his trial. A clip of Rittenhouse in the backseat of a car, seemingly right after his not guilty verdict, was previewed on Carlson’s show Friday night. “The jury reached the correct verdict. Self defense is not illegal,” Rittenhouse says in the clip. Mark Richards, an attorney for Rittenhouse, told CNN’s Chris Cuomo that a Fox film crew was embedded with the defense team for the duration of the trial, which Richards did not approve of. “I threw them out of the room several times,” Richards said. “I don’t think a film crew is appropriate for something like this.” Richards told Cuomo that the people who fundraised for Rittenhouse’s defense were “trying to raise money” and that Rittenhouse’s family and his advisers approved of the film crew being there during the trial. In the aftermath of the Rittenhouse verdict and the success of his self-defense argument, some experts have raised concerns that Rittenhouse’s verdict will empower extremist movements and provoke violence in the name of vigilantism. “It has never taken more than a whisper of approval to fan the flames of militant right action, and the Kenosha acquittal is a shout,” wrote Kathleen Belew, a historian who studies the white power movement, on Twitter. Jeri Bonavia, executive director of the Wave Educational Fund, an organization in Wisconsin that aims to prevent gun violence, told NBC News that the trial is “feeding this idea that individual citizens need to be out there, not as part of a functioning society, but as these rogue dispensers of justice”. Hours after Rittenhouse’s not guilty verdict was delivered, US attorney general Merrick Garland spoke at the swearing in of Manhattan’s new US attorney and emphasized the role the justice department plays in protecting civil rights, noting the department’s history in combating the Ku Klux Klan and protecting voting rights. At the ceremony, Damian Williams, who is the first Black top federal law enforcement official overseeing the southern district of New York, one of the country’s most powerful federal courts, said that he’s establishing a civil rights unit in his office’s criminal division to concentrate greater resources on problems worsening in “troubled times”. “White supremacist groups are on the march. Antisemitism is on the march. Anti-Asian violence is on the march. Abuse of the most vulnerable in our society is on the march, and that includes, by the way, abuse of incarcerated women and men who lose their liberty but not their right to be kept safe,” Williams said. Patches of protests were seen in cities across the country on Friday in response to the Rittenhouse verdict. The protests, including one outside of the courthouse in Kenosha, were largely peaceful. Protests in Portland, where far-right groups have clashed with leftwing activists, were declared a riot last night after demonstrators started to break windows and throw objects at police.Lewis Hamilton has been struggling with a stomach bug but in claiming pole for the Qatar Grand Prix the world champion proved he is very much fighting fit. Moreover, having comprehensively beaten his title rival, Max Verstappen, into second, the world champion made no bones that he would display this combative spirit again if required in Sunday’s race. Hamilton took pole for this first Qatar Grand Prix after a dominant display under the floodlights of the Losail circuit. On top throughout, the Mercedes driver left Verstappen languishing four-tenths back despite revealing he had been suffering with a stomach ache earlier in the week. Verstappen however may yet face further difficulties. Several hours after qualifying he was summoned to the stewards for allegedly failing to slow under double-waved yellow flags on his final run in Q3. Pierre Gasly’s AlphaTauri had suffered a puncture so he had slowed on the start-finish straight as Verstappen finished his lap. The flags were briefly waved but Verstappen went through and improved his time. If he is found to have breached the rules he will face a grid penalty for the race. He will see the stewards on Sunday morning. Hamilton holds the advantage but, after the politicking of the previous days, he was explicit that he would show no quarter if wheel to wheel with Verstappen. On Friday the stewards rejected Mercedes’ request for a review of the incident in Brazil where the Dutchman squeezed Hamilton off track as he attempted to overtake. Hamilton noted that he had learned a specific lesson from that decision when asked if it meant he felt he could be more aggressive when overtaking. “I would assume so, yes,” he said. “[The mindset] in this race is what happened in the last race is OK.” His opinion was backed by his teammate, Valtteri Bottas, who finished third. Hamilton then emphasised that even a long drivers’ briefing on Friday had not made the rules around overtaking any more coherent and consequently they would use Verstappen’s driving as a precedent. “It’s not clear, every driver except for Max was asking for clarity,” he said. “It’s still not clear what the limits of the track are, it’s clearly not the white line any more when overtaking, so we just go for it. We just ask for consistency so, if it’s the same as the last race, then it should be the same for all of us.” This was Hamilton laying down a clear marker. He is 14 points behind Verstappen with meetings in Saudi Arabia and Abu Dhabi to come after Qatar and 78 points still available. The world champion will hope that after a masterful qualifying he can leave his rival behind on Sunday and avoid potential clashes. The Losail circuit is a physically demanding track with a series of testing high-speed corners but on its first Formula One competitive outing Hamilton more than had its measure. He led through Q1 and Q2 and then continued with a clear statement of intent in Q3. On the opening hot lap he set a time of 1minute 21.262sec. It was a mighty run, with Hamilton pushing to the limit on a circuit where using the full width of the track and going to the very edge of the kerbs is key. He also had real pace and was particularly strong through the very quick final sector. Verstappen was fast in the tighter first sector but lost time through those final corners and was a tenth back. With the track evolving, the final laps were key but Hamilton was eager to finish the job and, rather than waiting, went out first. He was immense, foundfinding time in the first and second sectors and going four-tenths quicker with a time of 1min 20.827sec. Verstappen went out last but could not improve and finished with a deficit with the foreboding air of a chasm. This is Hamilton’s 102nd career pole but is only his fourth this year. T and his first since the Hungarian GP in August. It will be hugely welcome and may prove to be vital. Following closely is difficult at Losail and, with overtaking likely to be very tricky and a one-stop strategy expected, track position will play a key part. Hamilton holds it now and, if he can maintain it through the 180-degree right-hander of turn one, he will go into this fight very much on the front foot. AlphaTauri’s Pierre Gasly was fourth with Alpine’s Fernando Alonso in fifth. Red Bull’s hopes of having two cars in the mix at the front suffered a major setback however with Sergio Pérez failing to make it into Q3, finishing in 11th place. Lando Norris was in sixth for McLaren and Carlos Sainz in seventh for Ferrari. Yuki Tsunoda was eighth for AlphaTauri, Esteban Ocon ninth for Alpine and Sebastian Vettel was 10th for Aston Martin. Lance Stroll was 12th for Aston Martin and Charles Leclerc 13th for Ferrari. Daniel Ricciardo was 14th for McLaren with George Russell 15th for Williams. Kimi Räikkönen and Antonio Giovinazzi were in 16th and 18th for Alfa Romeo. Nicholas Latifi was in 17th for Williams with Mick Schumacher and Nikita Mazepin in 19th and 20th for Haas.The world’s biggest polluters have amassed trillions of pounds in profits over recent decades amid the steepest rises in carbon emissions and global temperatures on record. Yet despite this surge, and the well-understood economic consequences of the climate crisis, there have been only incremental moves to put a price on polluting. This could be about to change, however, after a breakthrough at the Cop26 climate summit in Glasgow this month which set out the principles that could finally force polluters to pay. Carbon markets typically take one of two forms: mandatory, government-led emissions-trading schemes that force major polluters to match their annual emissions with “allowances” that must be bought and sold within a market, like commodities; or a voluntary scheme in which polluters offset their emissions by paying to support projects – such as tree planting – that can cut carbon at the rate they produce it. After almost six years of negotiations over the tangle of convoluted rules required to integrate the world’s burgeoning carbon markets – which were first put forward in article 6 of the 2015 Paris climate agreement – negotiators announced they had agreed a common set of tools. These would allow carbon markets to operate globally, and unleash trillions of dollars of green investments through so-called carbon offset programmes. “It creates a framework for international cooperation,” said Hæge Fjellheim, the head of carbon research at financial data provider Refinitiv. “And a solid one that ensures integrity by preventing double counting of emission reductions when credits are transferred across borders.” Emissions-trading schemes have had a chequered past. They are designed with a declining cap on the number of allowances available to buy, to ensure a rising carbon price and give a clear market signal that emitting CO2 doesn’t pay. Through the market, those companies that cut emissions can sell the permits they no longer need for a profit, while those that continue to pollute must pay a steadily rising price. In the past, major polluters including big oil companies have publicly favoured carbon markets – which are notoriously difficult to set up – while privately lobbying policymakers to stall progress on such schemes. But in recent months they have begun to show signs of a real impact on polluters. Last week the EU’s emissions trading scheme, one of the first in the world, reached a record carbon price of almost €67 a tonne in the first day of trading following the Glasgow summit, as factories and power station owners scrambled to buy enough permits to match rising post-pandemic emissions. The UK’s scheme, set up in the wake of Brexit, is expected to follow suit. Similar programmes worth a total of $272bn are up and running or in development across the globe – including in Canada, China, Japan, New Zealand, South Korea, Switzerland and the US. The Glasgow agreement lays the foundation for these markets to link up without the risk of double counting emissions savings – potentially enlarging the money-making opportunity for those able to reduce carbon emissions at speed and scale to a global level. For example, if China’s coal plant owners cut their emissions they could one day – in theory – sell their allowances to British steelmakers at a profit. But the scale and speed of climate action required this decade means many would still prefer for governments to direct efforts towards domestic carbon taxes, combined with carbon border taxes, to create direct financial consequences for the world’s most polluting countries. Molly Scott Cato, the Green party’s economics spokesperson, said: “I’m sceptical of carbon markets because we know that there is an army of lobbyists from the fossil fuel industry looking to game the system and pushing the government to distort these markets in their favour.” Scott Cato was “a strong supporter of putting a price on carbon” but would prefer it in the form of a tax. “It’s a Green party policy which we have found would help the UK government raise around £80bn of revenue a year … and it would create a clear market signal,” she said. In the past decade, the UK’s carbon price floor – a carbon tax used on top of the price of carbon allowances – effectively wiped out coal-fired power by making it too expensive compared with other electricity generation options. The catch? It has also disadvantaged UK heavy industry and nudged buyers of steel and cement towards higher imports of Chinese-made products, which do not face the same climate regulation. This “carbon leakage”, as it is known, is a large part of the reason why global emissions have continued to rise even as the UK and EU have reduced CO2 output. The answer may be a carbon border tax, which would require importers to pay a price for the carbon impact of energy-intensive goods, regardless of where they were produced. This could cut emissions and level the playing field for local manufacturers. But the idea is not without its detractors. The European Council on Foreign Relations thinktank warned this month that the EU’s efforts to set up a carbon border tax could inadvertently “sabotage efforts” to meet global climate targets. It might incentivise countries such as China and Russia to invest in cleaner manufacturing, but producers in Africa, for example, which cannot afford to invest in green innovation, would simply sell their products to countries with lower environmental standards. This tangle of unintended consequences may be part of the reason why emissions-trading schemes have held an enduring appeal for governments, and underlines the importance of the Glasgow breakthrough. “A global carbon market or a uniform global price or tax will not be on the cards any time soon,” Fjellheim said. “But the clear trend is that the cost of polluting is rising in carbon markets worldwide.” Carbon and countries The recent wave of climate pledges from companies including oil majors and airlines has already led to a boom in green schemes that promise to reduce emissions. However, the new rules agreed at Cop26 this month promise to turbocharge the sector by putting in place a market-based mechanism that would allow whole countries to use the schemes to meet national goals. For example, a country struggling to hit its UN target could invest in a tree-planting scheme in Brazil or a renewable energy project in Nigeria to help meet its own goals. Under the rules, a central mechanism lets countries trade credits generated by projects that claim to reduce emissions, while removing the risk of double counting or “phantom credits”. Proponents point out that this could help direct trillions of dollars into developing countries that could otherwise not afford to invest in reforestation or low-carbon energy. But there are detractors too, including the Green party’s Molly Scott Cato. She said there remained “a question of accountability” regarding work on the projects in developing economies over “who is going to be on the ground” to monitor them and “who will really benefit financially”.His overriding preoccupation is the trains under London, but Andy Byford’s passion could have led him on a quite different journey. “I thought long and hard about going in the navy when I was younger,” says London’s transport commissioner. “I like being at sea.” Instead, the young Byford pulled on the uniform of London Underground, eventually coming full circle, via Australia, Canada and the US, to the top job at Transport for London – where a huge Royal Navy and Plymouth flag now adorns the wall of his Southwark office. Few of his staff have seen it in real life, as Byford was installed last June with the pandemic in full cry. “It’s been surreal. I only met one of my execs in person, and my board members for the first time the other day. I’ve been running London’s transport system on Teams.” While life for many is looking more normal, Byford’s outlook is not rosy. Unless investment is agreed with government, he warns, London is “staring into the abyss”, after the calamitous impact of Covid on fare revenue and finances. “Without wanting to be too grandiose, we are at a crossroads,” he says. “We can go one of two ways: an infrastructure-led recovery that creates jobs and decarbonises transport.” Or, he says: “The negative route, the danger we face, is a managed decline. A sustained bleak future for London’s transport system, in which you can look forward to roads full of potholes, much wider gaps in train and bus services, and a complete grinding to a halt of the clean-air agenda.” Maintenance will suffer; plans to electrify buses will go, as will cycling routes. Without backing, London will see “a complete regression to the bad old days”. Byford knows what that looks like: he started out as a station foreman, working shifts as a graduate trainee in the late 1980s, when the capital’s transport system was still at a nadir, its dirt and danger underscored by the King’s Cross fire that killed 37 people. He recently experienced again where underinvestment leads: “Having lived in New York and been president of New York transit, I don’t want to go there.” He ran the city’s transport authority from 2017 before resigning last year after clashes with governor Andrew Cuomo. Byford was apparently a recognisable, popular figure in New York, dubbed “Train Daddy”, out and about on the system he was trying to overhaul. He rarely used the private driver that came with his job and took the subway instead, wearing his name badge. London colleagues say he rarely walks past an employee, from cleaners to gate staff, without an introduction and question about what could work better – that he is affable but intensely focused. In New York, his goal was modernising the subway, whose track, signalling and stations were in a “dreadful state of repair”, he says: “That’s what London has ahead of it. It’s very easy to stop investing and slash services – it’s a long road back to rectify it.” Rishi Sunak’s spending review was “crushingly disappointing” for Transport for London, he says. “We have a looming, major hole in our capital budget.” Funding from central government expires on 11 December; the last emergency deal was agreed, he says, literally “at 14 minutes to midnight”. New discussions are yet to start but signs are there will be very limited support. The government’s standoff with London appears to owe much to antipathy to the mayor, Sadiq Khan, with ministers questioning his financial management. Byford asserts: “I don’t get involved with the politics. I stick to stark facts. TfL was in a very strong position financially before the pandemic – that cash reserve kept us going.” For someone who eschews politics, Byford has a slick, but earnest, pitch: “Don’t see us as a cost problem but a solution.” He stresses he is “very grateful” for government support and backs “levelling up”, but adds: “London is the economic engine of the UK – it can only fire up and continue providing £38bn net to the exchequer by having a viable transport system.” Investment would allow London to buy electric buses from Ballymena, Piccadilly line trains made in Goole: “Let us partner and we can help.” With Tube ridership plateauing at 60-70% of pre-pandemic levels, TfL wants another £1.7bn to help cover lost revenue and operating costs until March 2023, from when, “with very onerous cost-cutting, we will get back to financial sustainability – a massive task”. Beyond the finances, Byford’s focus is Crossrail. Perception of the £19bn project turned swiftly in 2018, when its former executives’ proud boasts of delivering on time and on budget proved hollow. Byford, though, has attuned himself unsparingly to the present reality, committing to not letting costs or the mid-2022 opening date slide further. He schedules an 8am meeting with the Crossrail chief executive, Mark Wild, and other top staff daily. “I literally have a call every single day, including weekends, bank holidays, when I’m on leave. The second face I see after my wife’s every morning is Mark Wild’s.” Right now, Crossrail’s stations are almost all done, with trial running of trains under way and trial operations - “playing trains, practising scenarios such as mass evacuations, escalator failures, fires” - imminent. He is pushing his team and suppliers to beat the schedule, but won’t specify a date yet. Above all, he says, “it’s got to be reliable. I do not want a Heathrow T5 scenario”, where the airport terminal’s systems failed on day one. “When it opens, it will be the envy of the world. People will be blown away. It’s quiet, smooth, fully accessible. It’s spectacular.” London will owe him thanks if it opens soon – although Byford, who failed his driving test twice and has never owned a car, will want to ride regardless: “I like using public transport. It’s a badge of honour for me.”The exterior of Jane Risby-Rose’s house – a large Victorian semi-detached in Margate, Kent – is plain and unassuming. “I wanted it to be like a brown paper package,” Risby-Rose explains. “You shouldn’t really know what’s inside.” Rendered and painted a muted shade of mushroom, it gives very little away. But behind the front door, beyond the mauve, panelled entryway, is a huge, asymmetric room with three different ceiling heights and vast glass doors pivoting out to the courtyard. It is clad in narrow strips of plywood and painted in blocks of burgundy and canary yellow. Contemporary art, sculptural lighting and reclaimed Danish furniture fill the room – as does the sound of classical piano and the chirrup of starlings, which dart around the paved garden outside. The effect is exhilarating. Risby-Rose is an “accidentally retired” PR events professional. As such, she knows a thing or two about creating experiences: “Really, that was my expertise.” Five years ago, she was made redundant and put on gardening leave for a year. Creatively frustrated, she poured her energy into building herself a new home beside the sea. “For once, I had the time and the luxury of being able to put myself in creative torment,” she says. “I came from London to Margate, thinking I was going to buy a two-bedroom flat with a view of the sea. I thought I’d be working for another 10 years and that all I needed was a weekend bolthole. That was my brief,” she recalls. “Then I took one step through the basement here and I had that feeling you have. I knew I was going to buy it. All the things on my list turned out to be rubbish! I realised what I wanted was simply light and space.” Risby-Rose spent a year renovating and selling her London home while overhauling the tired, disjointed, four-storey house she had just purchased. Determined to spend her money locally, Risby-Rose enlisted the services of Tam Landells, co-founder of local architecture practice Ratliff Landells. “I wrote them a note that said: ‘I’m living in a Quasimodo house, but I think it might have a heart of gold – can you help?’ They came and that was it.” What ensued was a year-long collaboration. “Tam just did what you want an architect to do, which is ask a million questions, disagree with me if I was being a twat and give in if I was being really insistent,” Risby-Rose explains. “Plus, I got to be good cop with the builders. If there was ever anything wrong, Tam was the terrier. It was just a really good, positive experience.” Refreshingly, Risby-Rose didn’t come to the project with an orderly set of Pinterest boards. Her inspiration for the interiors came from an amalgamation of unlikely sources: Tom Ford’s film A Single Man; the set of a 1960s police station in the TV series Endeavour; a photograph of a row of houses in Spain. “My eldest son summed it up when he said: ‘It’s like taking a walk through my mum’s brain,’” she says. For the main room – now known as “the arc” – Landells combined a garage, a section of the garden, a dilapidated conservatory and a purposeless room. From here, a set of stairs leads down into the basement, where there is a small but perfectly formed kitchen, a dining area and a capacious snug painted in green, terracotta, pink and yellow (that Spanish street scene). A second staircase leads up towards a formal drawing room. “This is me trying to honour the age of the house by completely overstuffing the room,” Risby-Rose explains. It takes a good few minutes to absorb everything that’s going on. There are two types of wallpaper, a cerise sofa, pink ostrich plumes and strange objects on every surface. “It’s sort of taken on a bit of an LGBTQ+ flavour,” says Risby-Rose. Alexander McQueen and Oscar Wilde are honoured; a framed Grayson Perry scarf hangs above a velvet green sofa on a yellow wall. On a console table under a gilt mirror are two glass domes: George Michael’s belt is under one; Boy George’s hat is under the other. Carrying on up the carpeted stairs and further into the mind of the owner, are four bedrooms. The first has been decorated “in the style of a gentleman’s club” (Risby-Rose has two grown-up sons). The second is a gothic guest bedroom that many visitors are too spooked to use (there are several stern Victorian portraits on the wall). The third room – known as Narnia – is positioned above what was a flat-roofed garage. It is reached via a three-quarter size door that has been papered over so that it is practically indistinguishable from the surrounding corridor walls. As you approach, a small wrought-iron lantern above the door flickers on. On the top floor landing, a spectacular textile pendant hangs from the highest point of the house. (“I’d always, always coveted it, so I just closed my eyes and bought it,” Risby-Rose admits.) It illuminates a faux-rococo dressing table that displays a wide selection of perfumes – a suggestion of what is to come behind the next door… Risby-Rose describes her gloriously over-the-top master bedroom as “Marie Antoinette’s Versailles when it was all starting to go a bit tits up”. Statement wallpaper creates the effect of distressed plasterwork and powder-pink and baby-blue textiles give the space its distinctly feminine feel. This is all thrown characteristically off-kilter by Risby-Rose’s collection of original photography, collage and vintage posters. “I’m a natural disrupter,” Risby-Rose admits. “If anything looks too matchy-matchy or symmetrical, I always try to put a spanner in the works. I just can’t bear anything to look too sorted, you know? Chaos is probably my order.” rl-a.co.ukThere is no better narrator in popular music than Christy Moore. On this latest album the veteran Irish troubadour turns in a vintage performance on a dozen songs gathered from fellow travellers and from history, alongside a handful of his own. There is instrumental accompaniment, although not much, this being a lockdown album made in an improvised studio, but Moore’s lilting brogue remains, as ever, commanding. The headline number (and single) is The Clock Winds Down, a tart comment on global warming from Jim Page – “Hey old man what did you do? We were depending on you” – but Moore can roam effortlessly across history and moods. The traditional Van Diemen’s Land still shocks with its account of the horrors of transportation to Australia for the crime of poaching, while Mick Hanley’s All I Remember, recorded in 1981 and reprised here, evokes growing up in a repressive 1950s Ireland. Moore’s own Bord Na Móna Man is likewise a comic reminiscence of an era when turf-cutting was a feature of national life. Zozimus and Zimmerman is closer to home, a tribute to Bob Dylan topped by a version of I Pity the Poor Immigrant, with its enigmatic mix of empathy and judgment. A masterclass from a unique talent.I came into the kitchen recently to find my husband cradling our electricity smart meter with the kind of tender attention more usually directed to a new-born, his phone clutched in his free hand. “You didn’t turn your office heater off last night,” he said. I didn’t like his tone. “I did! I went in this morning to turn it on again!” “You can’t have. Look.” He waved his phone. “Last night we used 10…” (here he added a unit, presumably of electricity, but all that stuff is Martian to me. Ten zaps? Ten whizzes?). “It shouldn’t be that high.” “But I turned it off!” But our smart home had spoken and it is far more reliable than me, his life partner of 26 years. Our house now has app-enabled devices to control the heating and the boiler remotely, to check temperature, CO2 and noise levels and to see who is at the door. There are motion-detector cameras in the garden that send us videos of foxes threatening my hens, or his tortoises escaping. Since we installed a few solar panels, my husband’s smart-home management has become more urgent and more granular. An app tells him how much we are consuming, but also how much we are producing, in real time. Now he bursts in when it’s sunny, shouting “We’re giving electricity to the grid! Use more!” In the evenings, I watch Succession; he studies our energy statistics. Technology has transformed him into a one-man home hub. “I used to think home smart technology was pointless,” he tells me. “But it really makes sense.” I hate it. I don’t want my home to see me when I’m sleeping and know when I’m awake. It makes me feel bamboozled and disenfranchised: how do I make it warmer when I can’t just press a button on the wall? Why do I need an app to answer the door? I also get defensive: the climate emergency means my husband is absolutely right to try to limit our energy consumption, but we end up arguing about how long the heated clothes airer can run (“It’s 6p an hour!” I protest. “That’s not nothing if you leave it on all night,” he counters.) “Aren’t you worried,” I ask him, “You’ll end up like Facebook? The robots will malfunction and you’ll need an angle grinder to boil the kettle?” But he’s an engineer: no angle-grinder scenario could faze him. I am the one who is out of step: our homes are smarter than ever. Tools with cosy, nature-inspired names (Nest, Hive) allow us to monitor and control homes even when we aren’t in them; other one-word devices (Blink, Ring) keep them safe. A 2019 survey found 57% of British homes have at least one kind of smart device; back in 2018 YouGov found 8% of homes have two or more. It’s too early for definitive research, but it seems Covid #stayathome living, perhaps combined with feeling life was out of control in other ways, increased our desire to micro- manage our environments. A government report found almost half of UK residents purchased at least one smart device during the pandemic and more than half said their smart device usage had increased. But what does this mean for the home-environment variable you can’t control with an app: human relationships? “It’s almost inevitable that you wouldn’t both be equally keen on it,” says technology writer Charles Arthur. “You almost have a new way of living in your house, which you thought you knew, but now it’s: ‘Don’t touch that!’” For Hilda Burke, psychotherapist, couples counsellor and author of The Phone Addiction Workbook, smart tech has facilitated a perennial source of relationship conflict: temperature and energy usage. “It’s something that has been around for ages, but (now) it’s more data-driven and quantifiable. Before, you might not have evidence, but now there is.” Burke wonders if the urge to control and manage our homes is some kind of evolutionary throwback expressed through technology. “It is probably down to something quite basic and primal, like keeping a balance between being safe and warm and not depleting resources.” Plenty of others feel there are three people in their relationship and one of them plugs in. I asked around and gathered their tales of domestic techno-woe. Joel and Anna live in Sydney with two young children and a house full of smart tech: a voice-controlled home pod that uses Siri, Google Home for shopping lists and a raft of programmed, motion-activated lights. Joel is the enthusiast: “I have always been into computers and gadgets,” he says. “I tolerate it because a man must have his hobbies,” says Anna. Some elements, however, she finds challenging. “I have been driven to minor furies with settings not working the way I think they have been set up. Joel’s not here and I’m bustling around trying to turn things on and off and it simply won’t respond to me.” She’s also wary of the home pod: “It does a little ‘boop’ noise, like ‘I’m listening to you,’ which is creepy.” Anna likes the smart lights, which dim in the evening, go red for nocturnal loo trips and switch on automatically when they return home. But even these cause problems, leaving babysitters plunged in darkness, or turning on unexpectedly: Joel set the lights to notify him when an Uber arrived, then went out to find it, leaving Anna and her mother in an inexplicably flashing house. “It was terrifying,” says Anna; “I can see that was a mistake,” concedes Joel. Things get weirder when we invite Alexa, Siri and friends into our relationships. One recurrent complaint about virtual home assistants is their tendency to only obey one half of a couple. “Our Alexa refuses to respond to me,” says Robert. “She’s linked to our lights, only answers to my husband, who has to rescue me when it gets dark. This morning she inexplicably put every light on. Point blank refused to turn them off when I asked.” When Robert’s husband gets involved, Alexa is “entirely compliant”. My friend Rhian feels similarly snubbed. “Alexa is a soldier of the patriarchy,” she says. “Fully ignores me, while responding immediately to Paul. She refuses to listen to women.” Joel and Anna have experienced this too, though Joel believes his tech is not inherently misogynistic. “Because I set it up, I know exactly the phrase that needs to be used and Anna doesn’t,” he explains. “She’ll say it slightly wrong, then I say it and to her ear it sounds like I’m saying exactly the same thing in a calmer voice.” “It’s very annoying,” says Anna. They have both also struggled with shopping items that the Google Home mangled (‘Mississippi’ for miso soup; ‘shut up little Caesars’ for sharp little scissors’). Some have it even worse: “My Alexa interpreted ‘maple syrup’ as ‘nipple rings’, says Leona. “It was an unpleasant episode.” Rebecca’s Alexa told her son “Every Christmas present that was being delivered to him.” It’s not all relationship doom. There are happy robot-human thruples out there. Some households have seamlessly integrated virtual assistants, viewing them as a drawback-free life enhancement. They include my friend Lydia’s. “Siri is a valued member of our family,” she says. “She tells us stories and jokes and how to spell things.” Sara’s family uses Siri to resolve arguments – “So much so that I feel we need Siri on retainer as our therapist,” she says. Smart tech can also be a godsend for people living with a disability or health condition. Lisa-Marie has limited mobility and fine motor skills following a spinal injury; she loves the Google Home installed by her partner: “I find it genuinely useful, particularly on bad health days. My best bit is being able to switch the lights on and off from the sofa or bed.” Grudgingly, I see the benefits, but resent living in a house full of gadgetry I don’t understand, digitally highlighting my failings (yes, maybe I did leave that heater on). Hilda Burke urges those of us feeling left behind or irritated by a partner’s smart home tech to analyse whether it’s their behaviour, or our reactions, that are the problem. “We can get quite meddlesome, when it’s their time and their choice,” she cautions. For those, like me, occasionally feeling judged and found wanting by a coalition of robot-harvested data plus partner, Burke says: “There are parent, adult, or child ways we can respond. It’s not easy to be an adult: that parental voice – when someone says, ‘Did you put the radiator on?’ – brings us back to childhood.” The key to avoiding conflict is to respond calmly, as an adult: “Yes, I was feeling cold,” rather than expletive-laden bluster. Perhaps we hold-outs will grow to love the cosy glow of a warm, bright home greeting us as we come in from the cold; a playlist starting up as the smart lock lets us in. But that might not be the end of our problems: what if we’re not smart enough for our smart homes? My husband is happy with all the circuitry he learned in his engineering studies, because some smart tech is genuinely tricky to install and maintain. “I hope I die first,” is a common sentiment among tech-averse householders. “I live in fear of my husband dying before me, because I have no idea how any of it works and will be facing a dirty, cold, housebound life,” says Candida. Tom, who is responsible for the smart tech invasion in his home, worries that if he died, his family would be unable to function and would “grieve in cold darkness, soundtracked by the noise of the burglar alarm.” Spurred by this, and my husband’s imminent two-week trip to the States, I delicately raise the question of what happens if he falls out of the sky. “You need to find and remove the circuit breakers,” he says, instantly losing me. “But it won’t be easy.” I’m urging him to update his will accordingly. The robot takeover may be imminent (I hope you’ve said please and thank you to Alexa and Siri), but who inherits them before it happens?A half-century American fixation on the whereabouts of the remains of International Brotherhood of Teamsters boss Jimmy Hoffa has finally led investigators to a landfill in New Jersey. The area of suspicion is on a Little League diamond on the landfill beneath the General Pulaski Skyway, a three-mile bridge that arches over a cinematically criminal evocative expanse of industrial wasteland and marshes west of Manhattan – one that once featured in marketing for the Sopranos TV show. The FBI confirmed that its search for the Teamster boss, who disappeared in July 1975 after he showed up for a meeting with two mob bosses in Michigan, had begun anew after a March 2020 deathbed tip from landfill worker Frank Cappola, who had told a friend that his father confessed he’ had been ordered by unidentified men to bury Hoffa’s body in a steel drum. A spokesperson for the FBI told the New York Times that agents from the bureau’s Detroit and Newark offices had carried out a site visit on the Jersey City side of the bridge late last month. The location of the search is freighted with cinematic references: the opening sequences of The Sopranos depicts a car ride through the area, including shots of the Pulaski; in 2019, Martin Scorsese’s The Irishman, starring Robert De Niro and Al Pacino, offered a fictionalized account of Hoffa’s disappearance from the perspective of Mafia hitman Frank Sheeran. While the FBI did not explicitly name Hoffa in its statement, saying only that it was “unable to provide any additional information”, sources at the bureau confirmed to NBC that the effort at the site was tied to Hoffa’s disappearance. The search comes as the authorities attempt to address some of the nation’s most enduring crime mysteries and miscarriages of justice. Last week, the Manhattan district attorney, Cyrus Vance, said that decisions made by the FBI and its long-serving director J Edgar Hoover had led to the false convictions of two men for the assassination of civil rights leader Malcolm X. The search for Hoffa’s remains has been long and circuitous. The FBI interrogated union leaders and Mob bosses and henchmen and began receiving tips that his body was buried in New Jersey landfill hundreds of miles from where he was abducted, found nothing, and filed the tips. Years later, agents searched various locations in Michigan, including a farm, a driveway and beneath a swimming pool. Back in New Jersey, where by reputation Italian-American Mafiosi still hold sway over carting and trucking, criminal folklore has focused on the nearby Giants Stadium, which was under construction at the time of Hoffa’s disappearance. But the theory advanced by The Irishman – that Hoffa had been murdered and incinerated – has largely been rejected by Hoffa experts. Dan Moldea, author of several books on Hoffa’s disappearance, told the Times that the New Jersey site is “100%” credible. In July, Moldea published an article in Detroit Deadline placing Hoffa’s unmarked grave at a 53-acre landfill in Jersey City, New Jersey. He pointed to an FBI report four months after Hoffa disappeared that cited a visit Teamster boss, convicted murderer and FBI informant Ralph Picardo had received from Steve Andretta, an alleged Hoffa murder co-conspirator. The tip described Hoffa being stuffed into a 55-gallon drum, loaded onto a truck and shipped to New Jersey.Hand-painted pottery, hand-woven chequered wool rugs and artisan basketware are officially the new must-haves following the launch of designer and TV presenter Laura Jackson’s new homewares hub, Glassette. The London fashion designer, followed as much for her interiors advice and tablescapes as for her clothes and brand collaborations, launched the site last week to immediate acclaim from British Vogue. Jackson founded the online shop to showcase small independent shops and makers around the world. “We want to make a change with homeware,” Jackson tells the Observer. “Glassette is all about thoughtful consumerism – not just the product, but giving a voice and a platform to the artisan who made it.” Jackson isn’t the only high-profile fashion figure to turn her attention to homewares. Increasing numbers of fashion houses now also offer homewares, and designers who made their names on the catwalk are indulging their love of crafts. Matthew Williamson and Jonathan Saunders, two highlights of London Fashion Week in the 2000s and 2010s, have recently launched fully fledged interiors and furniture businesses respectively. Henry Holland parted ways with his eponymous fashion house in April 2020 to pursue a career in ceramics. It’s a move that has he says, reconnected him with his creativity. “The fashion industry can be relentless and I think until you take a break you don’t realise how much burnout there is,” says Holland. “Working in ceramics is really fulfilling because you’re building something in solitude and don’t need a huge team. That has been really therapeutic.” Holland estimates that the output in tableware from his Hackney studio, founded in April, is now 300 pieces a week, such is the demand. “This was supposed to be my quieter life, but that doesn’t seem to have happened,” he says. Fashion and homewares are similar, he adds. “You still have to find something interesting and unique to say, and create something covetable that fits into people’s lives.” Retailers haven’t missed the opportunity to benefit from increasing appetites for homewares. Net-a-Porter’s Libby Page says the luxury fashion retailer’s homewares offering has increased by 3,000% in the past year since it decided to add almost 1,000 pieces by 37 brands. “It’s more important than ever for designers to do something different to captivate an audience, and launching a category like home allows them to make some noise,” says Page, who points to the homeware arms of fashion houses such as Loewe – designed by the renowned JW Anderson – and Brunello Cucinelli as “super popular”. Holland also notes that all his previous clothing retailers now have homewares departments. “The [fashion] industry is really struggling with a huge explosion of brands and a complete lack of brand loyalty so it’s tough to build a brand and sustain it. But homewares is a huge and growing market.” The new appetite for interiors is a millennial-driven trend, according to Lucie Greene, founder of brand strategy practice Light Years. “The oldest millennials are turning 40, becoming parents and buying houses and they’re shifting their connoisseurship around vintage fashion, beauty and new labels to upholstery providers and wallpapers,” she says. “Thanks to the 2008 global economic crisis, student debt and other structural changes, millennials in many ways have had to delay growing up. They’ve had babies later, bought properties later – if at all – and that in turn has made ‘growing up’ more aspirational.” Most millennials, she continues, “want nothing more than the spoils of middle age so it puts a chic curated home in the sweet spot”. It is no surprise that social media has propelled the popularity of interiors. “Social media made people think about what they were wearing; now it’s making them think about where they live,” says Holland. “People are starting to curate their environments in the way they did with their wardrobes.” Greene says it’s all to do with Instagram. “If TikTok has driven long-form consumption of comedic memes, creative videos and viral dances, Instagram has become the ultimate fishbowl for shoppable lifestyle porn,” says Greene, noting that general consumption of content “skyrocketed” throughout the pandemic. “We are acutely aware of our home environments since we have had to work, live, socialise and relax in them all the time,” she says. “From gardens to home renovations and buying new ergonomic office furniture, increased exposure to our homes has made us want to invest more in them.” This concept of purpose is what propelled Jackson to launch Glassette. “Purpose is an important word that means so much to everybody after Covid. It’s like, ‘What are we doing and why are we doing it and what does it mean?’,” she says. “That goes down to what are we buying as well as who are we buying it from. If it has a place in our home, it has to have purpose and meaning in our home, and I think that is something people resonate with after the past 18 months.”Few travellers would disagree that the Transpennine Express makes for a splendid journey across the rugged spine of northern England, snaking through beautiful green valleys and picturesque stone villages, from Manchester Piccadilly to Leeds railway station. But perhaps many would quibble with the use of the word “express”. It took just over an hour to traverse the 35 miles between the two cities on the 08.30 from Manchester on Friday – less an intercity bullet train than a rural heritage experience. The long-promised high-speed link was intended to cut the time to 25 minutes, but last week the government announced that it had abandoned those plans, along with the HS2 eastern section to Leeds. On the quarter-full 8.30, the news inspired no great surprise and a certain amount of head-shaking frustration. “It’s typical,” said Maggie, a legal worker. “It’s the southern establishment deciding against the north again.” Two distinct but related ideas about the north have featured in the various Conservative administrations since 2010. The first was the much-heralded”northern powerhouse”, which George Osborne promoted when he was chancellor. That initiative envisioned the north’s main cities rivalling the south-east by banding together to maximise their strength. And then in 2019, Boris Johnson made inroads into Labour’s northern strongholds, partly by committing to “level up” by redistributing power and wealth towards a region that has suffered a shortage of both. Neither policy appeared to be advanced by last week’s announcement. “It’s certainly a counter-productive move in terms of levelling up,” said Andy Whiting, an operations manager, who, like Maggie, was taking the opportunity to work on his laptop as the train stopped at the old mill town of Stalybridge on its leisurely progress eastwards. The decision to backtrack on rail modernisation comes on the back of a difficult period for the government, following the ill-fated move to save Owen Paterson and the ensuing allegations of sleaze. Both events could affect Conservative backing in the north. “I was beginning to wonder what it would take for this government to lose the electorate’s support,” said Maggie. But neither Whiting nor Phil Weaver, a motoring executive, thought that the stories of Tory former ministers and MPs earning large sums in second jobs would change voting intentions. “It’s just politics,” said Weaver, while Whiting believed that if Keir Starmer were elected, his government would be facing a similar crisis within 18 months. At Leeds station, passengers appeared to be less forgiving. Although the city has been promised a new transit system, it has been somewhat removed from the high-speed map. Not only has the HS2 leg north of the East Midlands been scrapped, but the Leeds-Manchester link had been due to go through Bradford, a city even less well served by transport. “It’s pretty appalling really,” said Heather Heath, a music educator from Huddersfield. Originally from Essex, she had witnessed a steady decline in services and cultural life in the 30 years she’d been living in the north. “The gap between north and south is getting wider and wider, and this decision will only increase it,” she said. The phrase “northern powerhouse” was guaranteed to prompt cynical laughter, rather as if a visitor had gone to the Scottish Highlands and inquired about the Loch Ness monster. “If you believe in that,” said Peter, a septuagenarian who disembarked with a bicycle, “you’re a bigger fool than I took you for.” Graham, who works for the NHS, took a solid Yorkshire line that could probably be traced back to the Wars of the Roses. “The Northern Powerhouse?” he asked rhetorically. “That means Manchester. Leeds and Yorkshire in general are always left out of everything.” He said that Leeds often felt cut off and neglected, and complained that getting to Manchester was invariably a trial, with either snarled-up motorways or delayed or cancelled trains. “But maybe that’s just me being bitter about their success in football,” he said. Both Peter and his friend John had decided not to concern themselves with rail policy on the grounds, they explained with faultless logic, that they’d be dead before any of the plans were completed. “And in the meantime, we’d have to put up with all the disruption,” said John. Levelling up was, he concluded, “just Boris Johnson again telling people what they want to hear”. With that they both cycled off, clearly happy to be free of the train. Only half of one per cent of Leeds inhabitants visit Manchester in a year. And the same the other way round. What is striking was how many people stated that a) they didn’t use rail travel very much, finding it expensive, unreliable and time-consuming and b) didn’t think that the Conservatives would suffer too badly from breaking a firmly established promise – two years ago Johnson pledged to fund the Leeds to Manchester route. Whether or not the gathering cracks in the futuristic vision of a northern powerhouse will reverse the damage inflicted on the “red wall” remains to be seen. “To be honest,” said a despairing Adele Syrat in Leeds station, “Johnson seems able to do anything and get away with it.” That may have been true up until the Paterson affair. But the prime minister has now learned that he can go too far. He may yet discover that in ditching a high-speed rail line to Leeds, it’s also possible to not go far enough.The surge in coronavirus infections across Europe shows the “critical” need for people in the UK to get vaccinated, a government scientific adviser has said. Prof John Edmunds, of the London School of Hygiene &amp; Tropical Medicine, told Sky News that the rise in cases on the continent underlined “how quickly things can go wrong”. He pointed out that there were still “many millions” across the UK who were still not fully vaccinated, while some have not had any Covid shots at all. Whitehall sources this weekend played down the immediate need for “plan B” restrictions, pointing to data published this week showing the protection offered by a booster shot. Alongside maximising the uptake of third doses, officials hope the lifting of restrictions earlier in the year will mean that Britain avoids the winter surges currently being experienced in many European countries. However, Edmunds, who is a member of the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies, said: “There are still many millions of people here in the UK who have not been fully vaccinated – it’s essential now. “What you see now, particularly in central Europe, with this very rapid increase in cases, [is] the importance of vaccination, how critical it is that people who need their boosters should come forward as rapidly as possible and get vaccinated. “Those who are still unvaccinated – and there are many unfortunately out there – should come forward and be vaccinated as rapidly as possible.” He added: “[The current surge in Europe] shows how quickly things can go wrong. I am concerned about waning immunity. The booster doses, it is pretty clear, do give a clear boost to your immune system, which may last some considerable time, so I think it’s really essential that the booster doses are rolled out as fast as possible.” His comments came as the World Health Organization said it was “very worried” about the new wave of infections that has spread across Europe and led countries to announce new restrictions. The WHO’s Europe director, Dr Hans Kluge, told the BBC: “Covid-19 has become once again the number one cause of mortality in our region. We know what needs to be done.” He called for more people to get vaccinated, basic public health measures to be implemented and new treatments to be developed, but said mandatory vaccination should be the last resort.Privately educated white British players are 34 times more likely to become professional cricketers than state-educated British South Asians, according to academic research that is likely to invite further investigation of the game’s treatment of ethnic minorities. The report highlights how both class and ethnic disparities are major determining factors in progression from the England and Wales Cricket Board’s (ECB) talent development pathways into the professional game. The research, by Tom Brown of Birmingham City University, found that white British players are three times more likely to become professionals compared with their British South Asian counterparts, regardless of schooling. English cricket has been thrown into turmoil after a series of allegations of racism at every level of the game, particularly following Azeem Rafiq’s testimony before a parliamentary select committee last week. The allegations of racism levelled by Rafiq, a former Yorkshire cricketer, include him repeatedly being called a “paki”, and referred to by the name “Kevin”, a dehumanising moniker for black and Asian players. The chairman of Yorkshire country cricket club has resigned, the head coach has been suspended and the former England captain, Michael Vaughan, has been temporarily dropped by the BBC after Rafiq accused him of making a racist comment to British Asian cricketers. Vaughan has denied this. Brown said the continuing fallout from Yorkshire’s handling of Rafiq’s case reflects a wider problem around the lack of diversity in the upper echelons of the sport. Another paper published by the academic earlier this week found that the disparity in progression into the professional game for white and Asian players could not be explained in terms of performance. “Results indicate that current talent pathways are failing to provide an environment that can maximise the potential of its players from minority backgrounds,” said Brown. “As most selection decisions in pathway cricket rely on the subjective views of coaches, a lack of understanding around cultural norms leaves the system prone to biases.” Brown, who is a performance cricket coach at Warwickshire CCC, as well as an academic, added: “We have to be prepared to adapt our current structures and realise that harnessing talent from players of minority backgrounds will enhance the standard and appeal of cricket in this country.” Very few professional cricketers in England are British South Asians. On a conservative estimate, 30% of recreational players are of South Asian heritage, while only 4% of professional players are British South Asian. Laura Cordingley, chief executive of national cricket charity Chance to Shine, said: “Over the years we’ve seen incredible examples of how our programmes can positively impact young lives, including those from minority ethnic backgrounds; to think that many people may now feel that the sport we love does not welcome them is quite frankly devastating.” In 2018 the ECB published an action plan entitled “Engaging South Asian communities”. Coaches and researchers, including individuals from a South Asian background, expressed concern that aspects of the governing body’s short-term plan (2018-19) had still to be delivered. The most notable of these was the ECB’s plan to “establish a mentoring programme for young South Asian players on the talent pathway and provide support for all South Asian players and their parents”. Sajid Patel, co-founder of the National Cricket League (NCL), said he had been involved as an “activist” in cricket since 1998. “This isn’t just about Azeem Rafiq,” said Patel. “He has spoken up and brought these issues to the surface, but I have been hearing reports of racism against Asian players for decades. How can you expect people to perform when the environment is toxic or they’re subject to racist abuse?” The NCL launched in Waltham Forest, north-east London, in 2012. Patel estimates that 95% of the league’s 1,200 players are British South Asian. “Organisations like ours are mostly self-funded and we’re outside the network of established traditional cricket clubs,” Patel said. “In east London, 60 to 65% of cricket is played by the South Asian community, but too many talented youngsters never get an opportunity. There is a blockage in the pathway.”Those MPs in the north and west of England who believed Boris Johnson when he promised to level up the regions will be drowning their sorrows this weekend. The prime minister’s flagship integrated rail plan was revealed to be not much more than reheated and piecemeal improvements to existing rail lines. Leeds will be allowed to move ahead with a tram system connecting the city and its nearest neighbours. A couple of electrification projects mothballed in 2017 have secured another lease of life. But otherwise the word “integrated” in the document’s title falls foul of the Trade Descriptions Act. Northern Powerhouse Rail and the high-speed link from Liverpool to Hull are on the back burner. In favour are much smaller projects that could, just possibly, be under way by the next election. Such was the panic inside No 10 about the need for clearly marked achievements by 2024 that the previous plan for a parallel high-speed network linking major cities with one another and London – better known as HS2 and HS3 – had to go. One aspect of this change, however, is likely to cheer those in the regions who pour scorn on south-east England, not least for spending much of the past three decades gobbling up the majority of infrastructure spending. And that is the severe punishment Johnson has meted out to the capital. The boss of Transport for London, Andy Byford, warns in an interview with the Observer this weekend, the capital is “staring into the abyss” as it struggles with the impact the pandemic has had on its finances. Ageing trains will break down, signalling upgrades will be delayed and bus networks will be cut unless next month’s funding review is more generous. Plans to support walking and cycling will evaporate. Tourists may not care that it takes longer to travel between attractions: superficially, London will look the same. Foreign businesses may not be so generous. To them the capital is the most attractive city in Europe and wins the war for foreign investment every year. They may think again when confronted by a policy programme that aims to level down. As a former mayor of London, Johnson will know that thousands of foreign businesses located in the south-east want to be part of its rich tapestry of export-oriented service industries. They enjoy high levels of productivity, supercharged profit margins and a large pool of skilled well-paid labour. These companies are not going to up sticks and move to Birmingham or Manchester because they have fallen out of love with London. They will relocate to cities – on the continent, or further afield – that are striving to match its economic and cultural power. Only Edinburgh comes close as a competitor inside the UK, and thanks to the Scottish government’s obsession with exiting the union, that alternative looks more parochial by the day. Much as Britain does after exiting the EU. It makes economic sense, over the coming decades, to encourage businesses that start life in the regions by giving them better infrastructure. And to further this trend with subsidies for firms to move away from the capital. There is no doubt a more balanced economy would also support a strategy that aims to cut carbon emissions. But killing London to benefit the regions follows the same argument put forward by many Brexit supporters – that we need to cut off trade with the EU if we are to boost links with the rest of the world. When politicians pitch London against the rest, it only serves to perpetuate ingrained prejudices – prejudices evident in Deborah Mattinson’s book Beyond the Red Wall. Yet there cannot be a good economic outcome. West Midlands mayor Andy Street knows he will wave goodbye to Goldman Sachs and HSBC and their investments in Birmingham office space if these banks decide London is no longer for them. Street says openly that he needs a thriving capital to provide a platform for growth – and not just from relocated banks but from a broad range of businesses that could migrate north with better train links and stay put when public health, education and subsidised arts and culture come in the same package. Michael Gove knows that treating London like a bulging piñata, swollen with financial sweeties that will pour out if you whack it hard enough, is economic madness. He claims he will give us a definition of levelling up, possibly before the end of the year, hopefully one that recognises that the nation needs London to thrive. It pays the bills. Byford needs to win his battle for more cash as much as his transport counterparts in northern cities do.Life Sentence (Mags Creative) | apple.com A Mother Tongue (Radio 4) | BBC Sounds dot com: The Wikipedia Story (Crowd Network) | acast.com Supergreat Kids’ Stories (Wardour Studios) | apple.com Storybooth Daily (Parcast for Spotify Originals) | Spotify Sweet Bobby (Tortoise Media) Life Sentence is a new podcast that explores the climate crisis in a different way. It’s a drama, sort of, and a soundscape, sort of, and a call to action (as all climate crisis shows are). Written by the acclaimed young playwright Tabitha Mortiboy, it features characters, but they aren’t who you expect. In the first episode, Rainforest, we hear from Mo (Jordan Stephens), a benevolent, exasperated god/creator of the universe, who teases us humans about our general idiocy: “You are less than halfway to understanding the true frenetic beauty of foundational creation.” After a while, the Amazonian rainforest, played by Jade Anouka, speaks too. You won’t be surprised to hear that she’s feeling upset at her current treatment. Later on there’s a human couple, Will Mellor and Stacy Abalogun, who use their Alexa-like device to switch on rainforest sounds so they can sleep (their stagey banter is this episode’s least successful element). Does this read like a tricky listen? It’s absolutely not. It’s beautifully produced, a rich headphone experience, with sounds, music and words playing off and interweaving around each other. In fact, its production reminds me of Have You Heard George’s Podcast?, especially because Stephens’s words keep threatening to turn into rhyme, a la George. The episode is 78 minutes long, representing the 78 years the Amazon rainforest will survive, if we continue to raze it to make space to farm cattle and grow palms for palm oil. The drama is over in 20 minutes and the rest of the programme is given over to an amazing rainforest soundscape. Later instalments also use this technique, each show’s length reflecting how long the subject will last before extinction, using minutes rather than years. So, Ocean is just 29 minutes long – it will take 29 years at today’s rate of overfishing and extinction for the world’s oceans to be entirely empty of fish. I could make a joke about my kids not having left home by then, but I’m too depressed to do so. Life Sentence is an admirable attempt to drive home specific climate crisis points in an artistic, memorable manner. Equally lovely on the ears was A Mother Tongue on Radio 4. Made by the brilliant audio producer (and creative director of sound for Guardian podcasts) Axel Kacoutié, it used interviews and atmospherics to explore the idea of how talking in different languages affects the speaker. (The same topic was explored, more prosaically, in The Flipside With Paris Lees.) A Swedish and English speaker describes how her queer identity is more easily expressed in English; a Spanish and English speaker says his playfulness comes out far more when he speaks Spanish. Some of the most interesting contributions come from a man who uses sign language. Kacoutié himself speaks both French and English: “You know English because your parents pointed at a map and said, ‘Here we will settle…’ You know French because you and your family were born in a land where the French pointed on a map and said, ‘Here we will settle.’” He uses sound in a textual and textural way – weaving recorded chatter from his infant son or his granny’s attempt to teach him Anyi – to express the emotional gap between identity and language. Wonderful. Some of that texture and nuance would have been useful in dot com: The Wikipedia Story. Dot Com is a new podcast series “about the people of the web”, and this is a deep dive (five episodes already!) into Wikipedia, the search engine that’s among the most visited websites in the world. Host Katie Puckrik is excellent as always: wry, insightful and a great interviewer. But the production needs more vim. Many of her interviewees are nerds (the natural character of the Wikipedia editor) and they speak well, but not always dynamically. Though Puckrik does her witty best, the show needs more varied sound dynamics – a sense of location and time. When, in last week’s episode, she visited Wikimania, a festival for all things Wiki, it would have been nice if she’d delivered lines such as “It’s big and it’s bananas!” on the spot, rather than them being slotted in later. This is a dense, interesting show, given levity, if not purpose, by its presenter. A few short shows to end: Supergreat Kids’ Stories is a sweet, old-fashioned storytelling podcast aimed at younger children (“from five to 105” apparently. Argh!). It tells traditional tales from around the world, so we get not only The Three Little Pigs (a sanitised version where the wolf doesn’t come down the chimney to land in a cooking pot and the first two little pigs survive), but also The Magic Orange Tree from Haiti and a Norse tale of Loki. It’s a nice 20-minute bedtime listen for little ’uns. For older children, Spotify Originals has just launched Storybooth Daily, a spin-off from those weird animated, real-life stories on YouTube beloved by tweens and teens. Here, unidentified young people describe particular crises they’ve been through, from toxic friends to smoking weed. The tone is too American for me, and some stories upsetting, but this has the potential to help many young people feel less alone. Finally, like many, I’ve been hoovering up Tortoise’s catfishing doc Sweet Bobby, but I fear we’ve hit the fade-out part of the tale. True crime podcasts tend to sustain momentum for just a few episodes, and unless the fraudulent villain talks (which I am sure it won’t), then I’m afraid we may well be doomed to a couple of episodes of expert opinion before this fascinating firework of a story fizzles and dies.The last time that the UK parliament tried to define the word “profiteering” was in 1919, as the country emerged from war and unscrupulous traders made fortunes by criminally inflating prices on everything from shoes to building materials. David Lloyd George’s government was moved to attempt to outlaw those practices that fed on national scarcity and that signalled corruption to the wider world. For the purposes of that debate. his trade minister, Auckland Geddes, argued that “‘to profiteer’ is to make unreasonably large profit by the sale to one’s fellow-citizens of an article which is of common use by or for the majority of the population”. There was universal agreement about the immorality of the trade, but plenty of scepticism about the chances of the legislation, not least from Colonel Josiah Wedgwood, great-great-grandson of the potter. “So long as human nature remains what it is every man is going to get as big a profit as he can,” Wedgwood argued. “From my knowledge of human nature that is likely to continue in spite of any Act of Parliament…” The bill passed, but Wedgwood’s prediction was sound. The word “profiteering” has only persistently recurred in Hansard twice: in 1939, at the outbreak of the Second World War, and in the last 18 months when it emerged, for example, that during the pandemic, Somerset Capital, the investment firm established by Jacob Rees-Mogg, was alerting its clients to the prospect of “once in a generation” opportunities to make “super normal returns” by buying stock in crippled companies. So far, the scandal of PPE procurement in the first weeks of the Covid crisis has mostly focused on government law-breaking. But reading further revelations last week about some of the 47 firms that were fast-tracked into the ministerial “VIP channel” to supply gowns and masks to the NHS frontline, with profits in one case soaring 4,700%, surely Lloyd George’s profiteering bill is overdue another look. Off the beaten track Forty years ago, the literary magazine Granta made its name with the new “travel writing”, a catch-all term to describe intrepid, in-depth reporting in far-off places, from the likes of Bruce Chatwin and Jan Morris and Redmond O’Hanlon. The current edition of the magazine is also devoted to travel, but contributors now invariably have to overcome potential derailment before they even get out of the door: do the tales they tell justify their carbon footprint or, as the issue is succinctly titled, “Should we have stayed at home?” Venus ascendant There has never been a sports coach to rival Richard Williams, with his prenatal plans to produce two of the greatest female tennis players of all time. Will Smith captures all the drive and insanity of that mission in the new biopic King Richard. Watching it, I was reminded of interviewing Venus, just as she became world number one, and just how infectious her father’s myth-making was. Inevitably, I asked her how it all began and she patiently told me how, when she was three and a half years old, her daddy took her down to the nearest exclusive club in Los Angeles and organised a game for her against the pro. “How did you do?” I wondered. Well, she said, she was shy at first. “But soon I was serving aces… I was used to beating guys by then, so I beat this guy, too...” “Really?” I said, wide-eyed. “You beat him? When you were three and a half?” She paused a beat, stared at me, laughing hugely at my credulity. “Nah. Of course not!” • Tim Adams in an Observer columnistDr Sarah Ogilvie is a linguist, lexicographer and computer scientist at the Faculty of Linguistics, Oxford, who works at the intersection of technology and the humanities. With Roberta Katz, Jane Shaw and Linda Woodhead, she is the author of Gen Z, Explained: The Art of Living in a Digital Age, which paints an optimistic portrait of a much misunderstood generation that has never known a world without the internet. Define Gen Zers. They are people born from the mid-1990s to around 2010. They’re followed by Generation Alpha, who are aged 10 and under, though there’s a bit of an overlap. What unites them? They’ve grown up in a fundamentally different environment than anyone before them – a digital world, which we’re all trying to negotiate for the first time. The rest of us have known what the world was like before the internet, whereas this generation doesn’t, which I think makes them special. And it means that the rest of us can learn from them. With the Covid lockdowns [which have forced us all to go more digital], it’s shown that the rest of us have only just begun to catch up with them. What did you and your co-authors hope to achieve? We wanted to listen to Gen Zers – to let them speak in their own words, to find out more about their view of the world, their mindset, their attitudes, their values – and then try to describe what we found. It wasn’t a cross-generational study, it was more of a snapshot of a moment in in time. Then we were then able to put that in a historical frame. People might raise their eyebrows at the thought of four older academics pronouncing about young people. How did you get around that? First of all, we didn’t want to rely on one data source, so not just interviews. And when we did the interviews, we didn’t actually conduct them, we trained their peers to do them. That was a really important way of avoiding the older lens. We then complemented the in-person interviews with large national surveys. And I constructed a 17m-word iGen Corpus – a big collection of language from this age group. What are the biggest misconceptions older people have about Gen Zers? They might judge them as narcissistic individualists. Which of course is false because they actually love to collaborate, and they really care about other people. It’s often claimed that Gen Zers are too relaxed about sharing intimate personal information online, and that they have shorter attention spans and reduced capacity for deep thinking owing to their immersion in the digital world. What do you make of that? It’s a lot more complex. We found that the Gen Zers were far more savvy about their privacy and their security online than their elders are. They are so much better at multitasking – they’ve always got just so many screens open, and they’re engaging across them all, simultaneously. They’re far better at merging their online and offline life. There’s a story in the book about students skipping in-person lectures and watching the recorded lectures at home on triple speed. What was the thinking behind that? When I was first told that story, I thought that it was a time-saving device, because the students explained how they timed how long it took them to cycle from their dorm to the lecture, to attend the lecture and then to cycle back – and so they calculated that it was far easier to just watch the video of the lecture instead. But they were watching it in triple speed because that forces them to concentrate, because it’s so hard to understand what the lecturer is saying, and they’re not tempted to go and look at their social media. That’s an example of just how savvy they are about the economy of the internet. Why are many Gen Zers averse to sending emails? Because emails are too formal, and not as instant as other forms of communication. So it takes too much time to compose the messages, and then it’s difficult to get the formal tone correct, which causes anxiety. But in other, quicker forms of messaging, tone is still a highly sensitive factor. Gen Zers devise social codes for expressing tone when they are texting. Full stops are seen as expressing hostility and caps can be shouty. Just communicating “OK” can be a minefield. There are at least five different ways of writing it – “okay”, “ok”, “K”, “kk” and “k” – and each signals a different tone of voice. “K” is neutral, because you’ve accepted that default capitalisation of the letter. But if you text “k.”, that means “you’re in trouble”, for two reasons: the first letter is lower case, indicating that you took the time to undo that default capitalisation, and then there’s a full stop. If you took that extra time to personalise the response in such a way, it conveys that you’re not happy. Whereas “kk” is a very positive, cheerful way of saying OK – it’s a low-effort way of softening the curtness of a single letter. With the iGen Corpus, you created a huge data bank of Gen Z language, drawing from various sources including social media exchanges. What did it help you understand? It enabled us to compare the salience of Gen Z language against general language: by finding out what’s known as a keyness measure, we could calculate how salient certain words and concepts are for this generation compared with the general population. A very obvious example would be “lol”: you would expect “lol” to occur far more frequently within this age group than outside it, and that was the case. But there were other examples: “collab”, “collaboration” and “collaborate” are far more frequent. “Relatable”, “friend”, and words to do with authenticity such as “real” and “true” and “honest”, and therefore “fake” as well, are far more salient. Also, the first person pronoun “I” was three times more frequent in iGen when compared with the general corpora. The prevalence of “I” could suggest that Gen Zers are more individualistic and self-obsessed. It could also be that they’re better at expressing their own opinions. You found that Gen Zers place particular value on collaboration. Why is that, and how does it manifest? I think that tech has really facilitated collaboration among them since they were young. It has helped them find people who are like them, it has facilitated community for them, it’s provided platforms for joint activities. It’s how they socialise and find hook-ups, it’s how they do activism, it is how they learn. We certainly find in the teaching environment that students prefer group projects to working solo. Why are matters of identity so charged for Gen Z? I think it’s probably because gender and sexuality is in flux currently and Gen Zers really recognise that. It’s just very interesting to them. With your linguistics class at Stanford, you compiled a dictionary of words relating to sex and gender that they considered unique or characteristic of Gen Z. Could you pick out a few that you’d never encountered before? I thought that a “unicorn” was a successful tech startup, not a bisexual woman who non-committally joins a straight couple for sex. I also wasn’t familiar with much to do with fan fiction, so expressions like “slash shipping”, and “femslash shipping”, which is when you advocate for romance between either two male or two female fictional characters or celebrities. What about “sapiosexual”? I loved that. That’s someone who’s attracted to intelligence. Do you find that Gen Zers are more inclusive and tolerant of difference than older generations? Or is that just a facet of youth? I think they definitely are more accepting. They are very sensitive and mindful of other people, and they care about them, and that can manifest itself in ways that older generations might find surprising. In 2019 the Oxford student union decided that, rather than clapping after someone speaks, they would do jazz hands, because that was more considerate to people who are neurodiverse, for whom the noise and the vibration of clapping might be disturbing. And I can remember being part of a conversation where an older person was saying that she found that ridiculous, but then a younger student said: “It’s no biggie for me to do jazz hands rather than clap. If it helps someone else, why not do it?” Gen Z are facing a confusing present and a terrifying future. Did you find a lot of resentment towards older generations? We didn’t encounter direct negativity, but they certainly see themselves as having inherited a lot of problems from previous generations, especially the environmental challenges, and what plays out is scepticism about institutions. What generation do you belong to, and do you find it’s a useful label? Interesting question. I’m a Gen X. And I’d probably find that label more helpful if someone had written a book like ours to explain it. But having said that, I think that there’s something very particular about Gen Z, purely for the fact that they are the first generation to never know a world without the internet, and that does make them special. Is there anything about Gen Z that you still find hard to understand? I guess if I still don’t get something, it’s memes – I don’t get the humour around some of the Gen Z memes. • Gen Z, Explained: The Art of Living in a Digital Age is published by the University of Chicago Press (£18). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply This article was amended on 22 November 2021. An earlier version wrongly stated that Ogilvie was at Harris Manchester College rather than the Oxford Faculty of LinguisticsThe Biden administration is considering new protections for the greater sage grouse, a bird known for the strutting and puffed-up courtship displays of males, that is losing grassland habitat across the western US to climate change and pressure from industrial development. The sage grouse, known also for a bubbling sound during courtship, is fast-becoming emblematic of Biden’s efforts to reverse Trump-era relaxations of environmental protections across vast swaths of public federal lands across the region. The bird has become a symbol, especially, of the clash between conservationists and energy companies eager to exploit resources lying below its range. The proposed tightening of regulations comes after decades of loosening protections as successive administrations have imposed and then reversed directives on permits relating to oil and gas drilling and grazing rights. According to Audubon’s Guide to North American Birds, the greater sage-grouse has disappeared from much of its former range. Habitat loss through clearing for farmland and overgrazing, as well as climate change, has let to population declines across a wide expanse across Utah, Wyoming and Montana where as much as 90% of its natural environment has been lost. In 2017, the Trump administration tried to scale back conservation efforts adopted when Biden was vice-president two years earlier that affected 10m acres of open land across the west of the US. But a federal court blocked Trump’s changes. But environmentalists argue that Biden’s 2015 conservation plans were in themselves insufficient to close loopholes allowing for grazing and drilling on public land. Resurgent disagreements over greater sage grouse protections are now likely to grow more intense, with Republican-run states clashing with wildlife advocates over how much space the birds need to survive. Greater sage grouse populations have dropped 65% since 1986, government scientists have concluded. The Montana Democratic senator Jon Tester has said he believes Biden’s new Bureau of Land Management (BLM) director, Tracy Stone-Manning, a former aide, would pursue a collaborative, balanced approach that would protect the grouse from becoming an endangered species. But western-state Republicans – including Montana’s governor, Greg Gianforte, and Wyoming’s governor, Mark Gordon, along with aligned senators, have said states should be given deference to wildlife management and federal lands kept open for energy exploration and grazing. According to the BLM, the agency will examine how climate change is adding to pressures on the grouse population. Culver pointed to data showing wildfires burned almost 10,700sq miles of the bird’s habitat since 2016. Earlier this year, federal officials said that they would consider bans on new mining to help the birds. But even reimposing Obama-Biden era protections may be insufficient to prevent disturbance of sage grouse habitat, environmentalists have warned. “The Obama administration did their best to please all the different ends of the political spectrum. But in the end they didn’t please anybody and they didn’t give the sage grouse the habitat they needed,” Erik Molvar of the Western Watersheds Project told the Associated Press.When Dean Smith took to the Carrow Road pitch and introduced himself to the supporters of his new team, a cry of “Deano!” immediately went up. He may have joined Norwich City less than a week ago, but there is something about Smith that has immediately endeared himself to this corner of East Anglia. Perhaps its the avuncular look or the informal style: while Ralph Hasenhuttl came to the field in a pinstripe suit and designer trainers, Smith had a cardie under a hooded jacket. Perhaps it’s also his positive messaging, stating clearly he believes Norwich have enough quality and time to avoid the drop. Or maybe it was just the sense that the guy knows what he’s doing, something he certainly reinforced here as Norwich seized control in the second half to claim victory over Southampton. “Southampton played to a very high level in the first half, but I thought we were the better team in the second,” Smith said. “We needed to go and be aggressive … but we know now that if we get these supporters onside this can be a really tough place to come.” When considering the prospect of taking the Carrow Road job, Smith said he had watched five Norwich games back to back on a plane while visiting his son in New York. The opening of this match would have been familiar to him then – a combination of weakness and bad luck that ended in the home side going behind. Just four minutes had passed when Kyle Walker-Peters cut inside to find Adam Armstrong who worked the ball into the Norwich box. Grant Hanley cleared, but only so far and play turned back in towards Che Adams, where the striker muscled off his Scotland teammate and placed a precise finish inside Tim Krul’s far post. So far, so painfully familiar for the Carrow Road crowd. What happened next was a pleasant surprise. Three minutes later Milot Rashica got close to Walker-Peters and was waved on by the referee, Martin Atkinson, after scruffily winning the ball. The Kosovan winger exchanged passes with Max Aarons, before finally releasing the full-back to the byline. Aarons was off balance as he dug out a cross but the delivery was spot on and Teemu Pukki darted in to divert a header powerfully inside the near post. Hasenhuttl believed the Rashica challenge should have been given as a foul. He also bemoaned his team’s inability to make pressure count as they went on to dominate the first half without scoring. “We had a fantastic first half but dominating is not enough,” the Austrian said. Southampton had Norwich penned back throughout the first 45 minutes, probing effectively down the left time and again. With Mohamed Elyounoussi coming inside into midfield, and Walker-Peters stationed high and wide, Southampton continually asked questions of Norwich’s marking. Rarely did the home side find the right combination, but last ditch blocks from Hanley and Ben Gibson kept Southampton at bay and, when that failed, a clawing hand from Krul denied a second for Adams. “We must score then,” Hasenhuttl said of Saints’ period of control. “It was clear the longer the game goes as an open game, and with the energy with a new manager, they could put us on the back foot.” Smith had named a starting XI which saw two of Norwich’s most talented players – Billy Gilmour and Todd Cantwell – recalled, but at half-time the lacklustre latter was withdrawn. On came Josh Sargent with Rashica switching left and Norwich immediately began to grow into the match. Just before the hour mark Hasenhuttl was forced into a double subsitution of his own. If the Saints manager had sensed a turning tide, he was right. Norwich continued to have the better of the second half, if like Southampton earlier, without creating too many clear opportunities: Mathias Normann saw a long range effort go just over in the 66th minute, an inspired Pukki forcing a reaction save from Alex McCarthy 10 minutes later. With 10 minutes remaining the decisive moment arrived. A long spell of Norwich possession ended with a Rashica cross being diverted over the bar. Gilmour stepped up for the corner, drifted it to the back post and there was the captain Hanley, on his 30th birthday, bouncing a downwards header past McCarthy. The crowd exploded then settled, singing for the first time a new chant: “Dean Smith’s Yellow army”.With six minutes to play, Ollie Watkins lashed a shot into the far corner to give Aston Villa lift-off and the touchline turned into Steven Gerrard’s runway. He jubilantly jumped into the arms of the technical coach, Tom Culshaw, part of his entourage from Rangers, raced clear of his technical area and swivelled towards the Trinity Road Stand before repeatedly punching the air with both fists. Gerrard’s last act in the Premier League had been scoring for Liverpool in a thrashing at Stoke six years ago but, for a moment, it was almost as if he had never been away. Things got even better too, Tyrone Mings firing in from close range to seal victory and end Villa’s five-match losing streak. Gerrard set off again following Mings’s 89th-minute strike, this time towards the Brighton technical area before, sensibly, halting his run. At that point, it was pure pandemonium in the home dugout and beyond. A synchronised Holte End made their joy known and before leaving the field Gerrard, together with his players, made a point of going over to thank them for their support. “They are the buzzes and the highs you certainly miss as a player,” Gerrard said of the late goals. “That is why I wanted to stay in the game. That is my medicine, if you like. I love seeing the players happy and smiling.” This victory over Brighton meant Gerrard became the first Villa manager since Gerard Houllier, his former manager at Liverpool, to win their first league game in charge. The pitchside cameras were trained on Gerrard’s every move and outside the ground, before a sellout crowd flooded through the turnstiles, his name was on the lips of supporters, his face plastered on to a sign on Trinity Road – the most explicit example of Gerrard fever. He did not take charge of his first training session until Monday and some players, such as the Argentina goalkeeper Emiliano Martinez, did not return home until later in the week but, regardless, Gerrard promised his team would be aggressive. His entrance was decidedly more low-key, striding out of the tunnel in a black trenchcoat and high-fiving a young fan before subtly applauding all corners. Then, hands in pockets, he allowed himself the briefest of moments to survey the scene after shaking hands with Graham Potter, taking charge of his 100th Brighton game. Gerrard said his stomach had been “doing somersaults” in anticipation of taking charge of his first game here and the mood among supporters was similar. Brighton did an impressive job of muting the atmosphere and Martinez saved well to deny Leandro Trossard. Villa teased patches of quality – Matty Cash and Jacob Ramsey both attacked with thrust – but were too often clumsy in possession. Brighton were anything but, a delicious cross by Marc Cucurella eluding Trossard at the end of a slick move that began 70 yards away with Shane Duffy, and into two minutes of first-half stoppage time, Tariq Lamptey saw an effort blocked by Martinez. Danny Ings was guilty of failing to make the most of Villa’s best first-half opening but they finished strong. The same cannot be said for Brighton who, despite the clamour surrounding Potter, are winless in eight. “I didn’t feel we were really under any danger until they scored,” Potter said. “We gave ourselves a chance to win the game but ultimately we didn’t score.” Brighton appeared most likely to strike late but the Villa substitutes Ashley Young, with whom Gerrard played for England, Leon Bailey and Anwar El Ghazi provided some welcome impetus after Potter’s side had subdued the hosts. Bailey’s high cross troubled Jason Steele, the Brighton goalkeeper who unconvincingly punched clear to John McGinn but the Villa midfielder, seemingly caught in two minds, dawdled and allowed Webster to rake the ball away from danger. But six minutes from time Watkins got Gerrard’s Villa up and running, sending a rasping shot into the net and then Mings, in the right place at the right time after Adam Webster’s clearance, wrapped up victory Off Gerrard went again, bundling down the sidelines in his brogues. “You should see me in staff games, five v five or six v six,” he smiled. “I want to win. I’m a competitor. I want to at times show emotion and I’ll always be as authentic as I can. If anyone doubted what it meant to me to be in this position, just watch me after those goals. Inside me is what was inside me as a player, that will to win, that drive and energy. I will always be authentic.”This time there was to be no rescue act, no papering over of the cracks. Deploy any pejorative you wish and it would probably fit: Manchester United were dire, derelict, dreadful and, by the end, thoroughly demeaned. That is hardly a novel outcome on recent evidence and it proved the final straw for the club’s board. A sizeable number of the away support made their own opinions clear at the end, booing Ole Gunnar Solskjær when he fronted up to applaud their backing; at the time it seemed an ominous shift in sentiment and, within hours, the manager’s fate would rest entirely on the say-so of co-chairman Joel Glazer. In an increasingly crowded field, this was a brand new low for modern-day United. They were fortunate to only concede four: Watford, whose fine performance must not be airbrushed, met their endemic sloppiness head on and exposed them repeatedly, particularly in a first half in which the one-sidedness beggared belief. “Nightmare after nightmare after nightmare,” David de Gea called it: his meaning was clear but this was yet another vividly lived experience and no trick of the imagination. It had been tempting to predict a different kind of repeat display when Donny van de Beek, for whom United’s fans had loudly called during the opening period, scored his first club goal in 16 months within minutes of being introduced at half-time. That halved the deficit and, for a while, the occasion seemed primed for another of the stirring but unsustainable comebacks that allow another week’s callbacks to the spirit of 99. Van de Beek, with the bit between his teeth, then played Cristiano Ronaldo through only for Ben Foster to deflect over with his shoulder. The high watermark had been reached: Foster’s save was bookended by an embarrassment of the highest order. Injury-time goals by João Pedro and Emmanuel Dennis ensured Watford had a margin of victory that was the least they deserved, but the seeds had been sown much earlier. Within six minutes of the start, Bruno Fernandes miscued an attempted crossfield volley so bizarrely that Josh King was sent through. King was brought down by Scott McTominay, who would be hauled off after an abysmal first half, and Jon Moss called play back for a penalty after Dennis failed to convert the loose ball. Ismaïla Sarr’s low, weak shot was parried by De Gea but Kiko Femenía blasted in the rebound from an angle. Femenia had, however, been suspiciously quick to the punch: VAR showed he had encroached by a yard when Sarr took aim and, despite Harry Maguire’s lengthy protestations, Watford were invited to retake the spot kick. The same taker brought a similar outcome, De Gea saving again with no yellow shirt waiting to gobble up. The entire chaotic sequence had seemed of a piece with United’s season. They could have wrested themselves off the hook from there but the rot had set in: Maguire bailed out teammates with two goal-saving challenges and, with Watford’s pace and energy several notches higher than United could tolerate, there was little surprise when King breached them before the half-hour. Nor were any eyebrows raised at the fact a defensive mistake lay at the opener’s heart. Aaron Wan-Bissaka should have dealt with a routine Femenía delivery to the far post but looped an inadequate header towards Dennis. The forward, a menace all afternoon, fizzed across a low centre that King swept under De Gea. In a rare moment of note at the other end Foster repelled a half-volley from Marcus Rashford, who joined McTominay in departing halfway through. But Watford, spurred by the surges of Moussa Sissoko and cleverly prompted by the young midfielder Imran Louza, could have scored at least once more before Sarr exploited acres of space on the right of the box to arrow a thrilling finish into the far corner. United had been all over the place, the spine of their team wading through treacle. Van de Beek enlivened them with his close-range header but the game was essentially up when, in the 69th minute, Maguire dwelt on the ball for too long and was robbed by Tom Cleverley. His flawed attempt at recovery brought a second yellow card in quick succession and an early shower; the torpor at United’s heart had reared up once again. Fernandes, another huge disappointment, skied a half-chance to equalise but Watford reasserted control in the final stages. De Gea will be vexed that Pedro, a substitute, shot through him but was beaten more comprehensively from an angle by the superb Dennis. Watford departed to cheers and a sense that, having lifted them four points clear of the relegation zone, Claudio Ranieri is capable of keeping them up. Any optimism that Solskjær could achieve his and United’s ends expired with this collapse. The discontent aimed towards one of their genuine heroes was unedifying but it seems likely he will be spared any more. Almost as troubling was the set-to between Fernandes and a section of the travelling contingent at full-time, his teammates ushering the playmaker away. Fernandes had been arguing that the players should take the rap; he may soon learn that, in practice, it rarely works out that way.That’s it for today’s clockwatch, and what an eventful one it was: six games, three new managers, 23 goals and one almighty shambles. Don’t forget to join Scott Murray for Liverpool v Arsenal. Night! Watford 4-1 Man Utd Aston Villa 2-0 Brighton Norwich 2-1 Southampton Here’s the updated Premier League table. Wolves have sneaked up to sixth after that victory over West Ham. Phew. After a frantic couple of hours, these are the final scores in the Premier League. Aston Villa 2-0 Brighton Burnley 3-3 Crystal Palace Newcastle 3-3 Brentford Norwich 2-1 Southampton Watford 4-1 Man Utd (yep) Wolves 1-0 West Ham That’s a really good win for Wolves, who are quietly having an excellent season. Raul Jimenez’s winning goal was superb, cracked into the corner from the edge of the area. Watford have thumped Manchester United, who had Harry Maguire sent off at 2-1 for a frankly hilarious piece of defending. It’s over now, surely. F-O-U-R. Two late goals, the first a peach from Ollie Watkins, gives Steven Gerrard victory in his first game as Aston Villa manager. A belting game at Turf Moor ends level. Norwich come from behind to win their first game under Dean Smith. Two games ago everyone assumed they were relegated; now they’re three points from safety. It’s all over! The substitute Joao Pedro completes a memorable win for Watford against an admittedly ludicrous Manchester United. It’s been a pretty good day for the new managers. Steven Gerrard and Dean Smith are winning, while Eddie Howe’s Newcastle have shared six goals with Brentford in a humdinger at St James’ Park. Villa are going to win their first game under Steven Gerrard! Tyrone Mings has doubled down on Ollie Watkins’ goal, and Brighton aren’t going to score twice in injury time. Premier League latest Aston Villa 1-0 Brighton Burnley 3-3 Crystal Palace Newcastle 3-3 Brentford Norwich 2-1 Southampton Watford 2-1 Man Utd (Maguire sent off) Wolves 1-0 West Ham The first Villa goal under Steven Gerrard! It’s a peach, too, curled extravagantly into the net by Ollie Watkins. (Apparently, I haven’t actually seen it so I’m paraphrasing Paul Merson on Sky Sports.) Newcastle 3-3 Brentford Joelinton has missed a great chance to give Newcastle the lead after an electric surge from Allan Saint-Maximin. Watford 2-1 Man Utd I wish somebody would invent technology that allows us to hear an internal monologue, specifically Roy Keane’s at the precise moment he saw Harry Maguire get sent off. Newcastle 3-3 Brentford The third Brentford goal, originally credited to Frank Onyeka, has now gone down as a Jamaal Lascelles own goal. Grant Hanley has headed Norwich into the lead at Carrow Road! Dean Smith is 10 minutes away from a victory in his first game as manager. More important, it would move Norwich to within three points of 17th-placed Leeds. Watford 2-1 Man Utd Cristiano Ronaldo has had a goal disallowed for offside. Meanwhile... Allan Saint-Maximin equalises for Newcastle! Liverpool v Arsenal is the late game, and the team news is in. Watford 2-1 Man Utd Since coming back from injury at Leicester a month ago, Harry Maguire has had a rare old stinker. The mistakes that he led to his red card today were alarmingly brainless. Premier League latest Aston Villa 0-0 Brighton Burnley 3-3 Crystal Palace Newcastle 2-3 Brentford Norwich 1-1 Southampton Watford 2-1 Man Utd (Maguire sent off) Wolves 1-0 West Ham Dundee United 0-0 Aberdeen “No goals yet but plenty drama at Tannadice, Rob, with both sides down to 10 men,” says Simon McMahon. “United’s Butcher was shown a straight red for schoolboy nonsense, and Aberdeen’s Ojo received a second yellow after a confrontation with a fan (not me). All good fun.” Watford 2-1 Man Utd Oh dear. Harry Maguire, who was booked earlier in the half, has been given a second yellow card. He faffed on the ball, was robbed by Tom Cleverley and then compounded his error with a desperate lunge. Watford 2-1 Man Utd I’ve just seen van de Beek’s goal, which was well made by Sancho and Ronaldo. Sancho hammered a cross to the far post, which Ronaldo headed back across the six-yard box to give van de Beek an open goal. Premier League latest Aston Villa 0-0 Brighton Burnley 3-3 Crystal Palace Newcastle 2-3 Brentford Norwich 1-1 Southampton Watford 2-1 Man Utd Wolves 1-0 West Ham The substitute Frank Onyeka puts Brentford back in front with a deflected shot! Watford 2-1 Man Utd Comebacks have been one of the biggest features of Ole Gunnar Solskjaer’s time as United manager, and all of a sudden his team look in the mood for another. Cristiano Ronaldo has just forced an excellent save from Ben Foster after a nice through ball from Donny van de Beek. It won’t be a shock if United win this game 3-2. Mind you, with the way they have defended recently it won’t be much of a shock if they lose 5-1. A deserved lead for Wolves. Nelson Semedo’s cutback is finished majestically by Raul Jimenez, who really is starting to get back to his best. “Surely one of the weirdest aspects of the drama at Old Trafford has been the strange reluctance of Solskjaer to give van de Beek a decent run in the side?” says Rick Harris. “I mean the lad came through the Ajax academy and United’s big and glaringly obvious lack of defensive ability in midfield and tendency to give the ball away cheaply surely can’t be any worse with Donny in there?” Rightly or wrongly I don’t think they see him as a central midfield, except in emergencies. A blistering hit from Maxwel Cornet brings Burnley level again in a pulsating match at Turf Moor. The substitute Donny van de Beek heads Manchester United back into the game at Vicarage Road! “I felt sure Mary Waltz was going to serve us up with Man Utd being lucky to have nil!” weeps Ian Copestake. “There’s always the second half, though, for Ronaldo to secure that for them.” Watford 2-0 Man Utd Ole Gunnar Solskjaer has made two half-time substitutions. Anthony Martial and Donny van de Beek are on Rashford and McTominay. Peep peep! The second halves are under way. “The United game is certainly a beezer: they’re 2-0 down and their keeper has already saved two penalties,” says Justin Kavanagh. When Ole Gunnar Solskjaer spoke about recapturing United’s history, I don’t think he had Ipswich 1980 in mind. “I have seen some pretty dreadful performances by this Manchester United team, but the level of ineptitude in the last 45 minutes is sad to watch,” says Nigel Njanina. “Solksjaer just sits and watches. I think he probably also realises this is beyond him now.” Yeah, he’s many things but he’s not an idiot. He’s waiting for a payoff, and you can’t blame him for that. Aston Villa 0-0 Brighton We didn’t hear much from Villa Park, partly because of all the excitement elsewhere. It sounds like a typical Brighton performance - lots of possession, not many chances for either side. Live scores You can keep abreast of all the other matches via our live scores page. A couple of Championship scores of note: Fulham lead Barnsley 2-0, and West Brom are 1-0 down at Huddersfield. And this was 25 minutes ago! Watford 2-0 Man Utd “I can testify that your assessment of United’s play is accurate,” says Mary Waltz. “They are lucky not to be trailing 4-0.” “Hiya Rob,” says Adam Kline-Schoder. “I am watching the aforementioned Watford vs Manchester United game and I can confirm that United have been pretty dreadful. That said, my rule of thumb for them has been that you must be at least 3-0 up by the half to really close them out of the game, else they’ll probably get reinvigorated at the half; see all the late comebacks over the last few months. Watford have missed a hatful of chances and United have had a few bits of dangerous quality injected from Fernandes and Rashford. Should at minimum be a fun second half with the score at 2-0. Good luck keeping up with all the goals!” “Is Ole Gunnar Solksjaer mad?” muses Adam Roberts. “It’s a well-known definition of madness to keep doing the same thing hoping for a different result. But Ole keeps picking the same back four seemingly in the hope that they can defend at a level better than the local pub team.” The thing is, that same back four defended really well for a long time. They’re a complete shambles now though, for whatever reason. “Rob, OGS is there until he starts losing them money,” says Colin Mackay. “A new manager will want to win things, and do so by not starting Ronaldo and buying better, more suitable players with lower shirt sale/commercial revenue potential. Ain’t going to happen any time soon.” I know what you mean but I think he’ll be sacked this week. It sounds like the players have given up. Peep peep! After a dramatic 45 minutes, these are the Premier League scores. Aston Villa 0-0 Brighton Burnley 2-3 Crystal Palace Newcastle 2-2 Brentford Norwich 1-1 Southampton Watford 2-0 Man Utd Wolves 0-0 West Ham Ismaili Sarr has doubled Watford’s lead with a cracking finish! It could be even worse for United, whose players have given up. Well I never! Marc Guehi has put Crystal Palace back in front at Turf Moor. Watford 1-0 Man Utd I’m not watching, as I’m a law-abiding citizen, but it sounds like Manchester United have been pretty hideous at Vicarage Road. It’s clearly over for Ole Gunnar Solskjaer, and he might be put out of his misery in the next 48 hours. Newcastle were ahead, then behind, and now they’re level - Joelinton has equalised at St James’ Park. “Exciting season across the table, with many a narrative still to be played out, obviously, but as to who is going to stay up?” muses Bill Hargreaves. “Brentford nailed-ons.” It sounds like a cracking game at Turf Moor. Christian Benteke, who opened the scoring, has now equalised for Palace. “You described Che Adams as ‘in form’ but, as a Scot, I hope what we’re seeing is a maturing player with more poise,” says Ed McGuigan. “He just struck me as a rambunctious toddler in the ballpit previously but of late he has calmed down and started to convert the fruits of his argy-bargy into actual goals. He just needs to work on his Scottish accent now.” Watford 1-0 Man Utd If it stays like this United will have lost five of their last seven Premier League games. It sounds like the scoreline flatters them - Watford have been much the better team. A fine goal from Brentford, created and finished by their wing-backs. Sergi Canos’s cross was headed in emphatically by Rico Henry, and Brentford have come from behind to lead at St James’ Park. Josh King gives Watford the lead against his old club! Wan-Bissaka’s poor defensive header went straight to Emmanuel Dennis, whose low cross was finished from close range by King. Burnley have come from behind to lead at Turf Moor. It was another set piece, finished off by Chris Wood. Premier League latest Aston Villa 0-0 Brighton Burnley 1-1 Crystal Palace Newcastle 1-1 Brentford Norwich 1-1 Southampton Watford 0-0 Man Utd Wolves 0-0 West Ham Newcastle 1-1 Brentford Ivan Toney has had a goal disallowed for offside. It was a tight but correct decision. The Burnley captain Ben Mee has equalised at Turf Moor, heading in from Ashley Westwood’s corner. So much was happening elsewhere that I missed a goal at Turf Moor: the rejuvenated Christian Benteke has put Crystal Palace ahead. After a frantic start to the 3pm games, these are the latest scores. Aston Villa 0-0 Brighton Burnley 0-0 Crystal Palace Newcastle 1-1 Brentford Norwich 1-1 Southampton Watford 0-0 Man Utd Wolves 0-0 West Ham Ivan Toney bites the hand that didn’t want to feed him. It sounds like a mistake from Karl Darlow, though Toney won’t give a stuff about that. Jamaal Lascelles gets the first goal of Eddie Howe’s reign at St James’ Park! Watford 0-0 Man Utd David de Gea didn’t save a penalty for about five years; now he can’t stop. Sarr drove the retake down the middle and de Gea saved with his legs, apparently. Sarr’s penalty is to be retaken - Femenia was encroaching but so were two United players. The Watford goal may be disallowed for encroachment by Femenia. It’s being checked by our friends at Stockley Park. It’s all happening! Teemu Pukki has headed Norwich level from Max Aarons’ cross. Ismaila Sarr’s penalty is saved by David de Gea, but Kiko Femenia follows up to score! Penalty to Watford! Scott McTominay has been penalised for fouling Josh King. A false start for Dean Smith. The in-form Che Adams has put Southampton ahead with a cool finish, shaped carefully into the far corner from 12 yards. Peep peep! The reigns of Steven Gerrard at Villa, Dean Smith at Norwich and Eddie Howe at Newcastle are officially under way. “Hi Rob,” says Simon McMahon. “Only three games in the SPL today due to League Cup semi-finals later, but there’s a beezer at Tannadice as Dundee United host Aberdeen. Both teams lost their last fixture before the international break, and United have not won in three, so will be looking for three points today against the inconsistent Dons. Calum Butcher returns to the United midfield. The other games are Hearts v Motherwell and St. Mirren v Livingston.” ‘Beezer’ is a tremendous word, new to me but one which I intend to shoehorn into as many conversations as possible from hereon in. Leicester 0-3 Chelsea Here’s Pete Lansley’s report from the King Power Stadium. And the early game in the Championship has finished Sheffield United 0-0 Coventry. That means Coventry stay fourth. In the WSL, Manchester City have trounced Aston Villa to alleviate a little bit of the pressure on their manager Gareth Taylor. Leicester 0-3 Chelsea Peep peep! Chelsea are six points clear, at least until this evening, after hammering Leicester. Chelsea are thrashing Leicester at the King Power. They lead 3-0, and have had at least three goals disallowed. “Ah, the fabled Champions League Second Group Stage,” says Matt Dony in reference to that Barcelona goal 20 years ago today. I remember that group had an incredibly tense last matchday. As I recall, all four clubs had their fate in their own hands, and could in theory have finished in any order. Ultimately, Barcelona and Liverpool went through, and for all the tiki-taka sanctimony, Barcelona only managed to go one round further than Liverpool. (And that was only because Ballack sold the world’s biggest dummy to Gerrard.) And in the end, we were treated to Zidane scoring the second-best volley in a final.” You might have been. I was watching The Distance from Here at the Almeida, getting all misty-eyed when they played out with Olsen Olsen by Sigur Ros. Wolves’ excellent wide player Daniel Podence starts for the first time since September. United are without Mason Greenwood, who has tested positive for Covid-19. That means a start for Jadon Sancho. Ole Gunnar Solskjaer has also broken up his McFred midfield. Dean Smith recalls Todd Cantwell, who last played against Watford in September, to the Norwich team. Eddie Howe prefers a back three/five for his first game as Newcastle manager. Jonjo Shelvey and Joe Willock are the central-midfield pair. No real surprises in Steven Gerrard’s team selection. It looks like a 4-3-3 with Ollie Watkins playing wide. Twenty years ago today, Barcelona brought tiki-taka to Liverpool. We’ll have team news for the six Premier League games at around 2pm. It’ll be fascinating to see the XIs that the three new managers have selected, not to mention how Ole Gunnar Solskjaer responds to that mess at Old Trafford a fortnight ago. This fillm looks really interesting. I was doing the live blog of that game and genuinely feared the worst. Yes, I am bored. The leaders Chelsea are on course to go six points clear of Manchester City and West Ham. You can follow their stroll at the King Power Stadium with Scott Murray. Smell that? It’s the fragrant aroma of fresh hope wafting round Carrow Road, Villa Park and St James’ Park. The arrival of a new manager stimulates a unique optimism/delusion (delete as appropriate) among football fans, so it’s a big day for supporters of Norwich, Aston Villa and Newcastle. All three teams have awkward but winnable home games. Steven Gerrard’s Villa take on Brighton; his predecessor Dean Smith, now at Norwich, faces Southampton; and Eddie Howe - who tested positive for Covid yesterday - will be watching from a hotel room as Newcastle meet Brentford. Those are three of the six Premier League games kicking off at 3pm. Watford play Manchester United, whose manager Ole Gunnar Solskjaer is hoping to start again, again, after the international break. In-form Wolves play in-form West Ham, and Burnley will try to administer a dose of harsh reality to Patrick Vieira’s exciting Crystal Palace side. Here’s the fixture list in full: Aston Villa v Brighton Burnley v Crystal Palace Newcastle v Brentford Norwich v Southampton Watford v Man Utd Wolves v West Ham There are a gazillion other games being played across Britain and Europe. You can keep abreast of those with our live scores page.Two British men formerly detained in United Arab Emirates are campaigning to prevent a senior Emirati official from becoming the next president of Interpol, accusing him of personal involvement in their arrests and torture. Academic Matthew Hedges, who was imprisoned in the UAE for seven months, and football fan Ali Issa Ahmad, detained while on holiday in Dubai for wearing a Qatar football shirt, accuse Major General Ahmed Naser Al-Raisi of overseeing their detention and physical abuse. “I have personally suffered torture and abuse under his command,” said Ahmad, adding that he still bears visible scars from the abuse he endured. Al-Raisi, one of just two candidates to declare their intention to become Interpol’s president, is the longstanding inspector general of the Emirati interior ministry. “He has a supervisory role over prisons, including those who have committed acts of torture, such as guards and interrogators. This all happened on his watch. Interpol can’t countenance this. They can’t say this is good enough – they must call it out,” said Rodney Dixon QC, who is representing Hedges and Ahmad. “He is absolutely responsible for torture. The message his candidacy sends is that not only can you do this and get away with it, but be rewarded,” said Hedges, who was eventually pardoned after accusations of espionage. The International Criminal Police Organization, or Interpol, is a supranational police force that provides investigational support to member states, including sharing information on suspects. While the position of president, to be decided at the annual general assembly in Istanbul this week, is unpaid, it still wields considerable influence. A band of international critics have expressed concern that Al-Raisi’s election could jeopardise Interpol’s neutrality, while providing international approval towards abuses committed within the Emirati justice system. Al-Raisi has taken a very public approach to his candidacy despite a normally opaque election process. He conducted an extensive global tour to lobby for the position, while a website set up to list his achievements boasts that he modernised the Emirates police force, and created the interior ministry’s “general directorate of happiness.” “He is an inappropriate candidate,” said Hedges. “[His election] would green-light and legitimise the behaviour of actors and states that abuse not only Interpol and its prestige, but international justice and policing.” Al-Raisi is the target of multiple lawsuits in the UK, Sweden, Norway and France, where Interpol is based. Hedges and Ahmad are expected to file a lawsuit against Al-Raisi in Turkey before the general assembly. Their human rights claims are accompanied in France by a lawsuit filed by the Gulf Centre for Human Rights, who accuse him of “acts of inhumanity and torture”, regarding human rights activist Ahmed Mansoor, held in solitary confinement in the UAE for four years. The lawsuits could hinder Al-Raisi’s ability to move freely if elected, because Interpol is headquartered in Lyon. “If he sets foot on French territory, he could be arrested and investigated for torture under the principle of universal jurisdiction,” said Dixon. The report also pointed to a €50 million donation from the UAE to Interpol’s Foundation for a Safer World, the single largest donation to Interpol or its sister foundation in recent years. It expressed concern that a donation of this magnitude could prejudice the institution in the Emirates’ favour. An Interpol spokesperson dismissed the report’s findings. “Any claim that the UAE, or indeed any country or organisation has undue influence in relation to any policy, budget or operational decisions by the InterpolNTERPOL General Secretariat headquarters due to financial considerations is categorically false,” they said. Interpol also declined to comment on Al-Raisi’s bid for the presidency. “It is for each member country to ensure it is informed about each candidate, ... to assess and elect the individual it believes can best meet the responsibilities of the president,” they said.president,” they added. A spokesperson for the UAE embassy in London said: “Major General Al-Raisi is a distinguished professional with a 40-year track record in community and national policing. As the President of Interpol, he will remain committed to protecting people, making communities safer and providing global law enforcement the latest tools in the fight against sophisticated criminal networks.”As the final whistle blew Eddie Howe may well have felt more than a little claustrophobic. It was not merely that Newcastle’s new manager was trapped in his hotel room at the start of a 10-day quarantine after his positive Covid-19 test on Friday, but that his team seem stuck in an unpleasantly tight spot. At the end of an at times ridiculously open game replete with attacking thrills and kamikaze defending, Newcastle were left bottom of the Premier League, still awaiting their first win of the season. Even worse, they had offered Thomas Frank’s Brentford renewed hope by generously helping the visitors stem a run of four straight League defeats. Howe had promised excitement and front-foot football and his team duly delivered it but, as he watched the first game of his tenure relayed on a screen in his hotel across the city, Steve Bruce’s successor surely wondered if “finding a way to win” might have been a better manifesto pledge. Howe’s eloquent talk of “philosophy” and “principles” is important and admirable but, right now, Newcastle are in real peril of relegation and, no matter how scrappily, could desperately do with somehow securing six points from forthcoming home games against Norwich and Burnley. Not that Jason Tindall was too downhearted. “We have a squad of exciting, attacking players and, on another day, we’d have won,” said Howe’s assistant and stand-in. “It was a step in the right direction.” The events of the 10th and 11th minutes offered the absent guest of honour a foretaste of contradictions to come. First Jamaal Lascelles gave Newcastle the briefest of leads, rising above all comers to head Matt Ritchie’s corner beyond Álvaro Fernández. The celebrations had barely subsided before his side self destructed. Sergi Canós slipped the ball to Ivan Toney and a striker sold to Peterborough by Newcastle in 2018 revelled in taking a stellar steadying touch, swivelling imperiously and squeezing a shot beneath Karl Darlow’s body. Darlow should have done better but was let down by some all too typically slapdash defending, while Toney deserves considerable credit for that adhesive initial touch. Indeed on a day when Saint-Maximin, Joelinton and Jonjo Shelvey all impressed for Newcastle, Toney stole the show. Already on an evident adrenaline high, Brentford’s centre-forward was being afforded far too much space and he soon had the ball in the back of the net again. On that occasion Howe’s defence were rescued by an offside flag but they fell behind when Canós lost Ritchie and delivered a deep cross. It was met by the on-rushing Rico Henry whose late dash into the box went untracked by the home rearguard, enabling his header to defy Darlow. Bruce claimed Joelinton wasn’t overly interested in goalscoring but the £40m Brazilian striker appeared to contest that assertion as Allan Saint-Maximin’s blocked shot was deflected into his path. After expertly manoeuvring the ball on to his left foot, Joelinton, alternating flanks with Saint-Maximin at the front of Howe’s 3-4-3 formation, lashed an exquisite finish past Fernández. Maybe he isn’t “a very poor man’s Ivan Toney” after all. Toney, though, remained on a mission to destabilise a former employer worryingly susceptible to counterattacks and delighted in causing chaos during the preamble to Frank Onyeka’s shot taking a hefty deflection off Lascelles before flashing beyond a wrong-footed Darlow. With Saint-Maximin provoking similar panic among Frank’s defence things oscillated wildly from end to end but Tindall, had seen enough. In a highly inspired tactical re-vamp, Howe’s assistant – in “constant telephone dialogue” with his boss – duly replaced the underwhelming Joe Willock and immensely disappointing Fabian Schär with Ryan Fraser and Sean Longstaff as he switched to a back four. When Fraser met Saint-Maximin’s pass and swung in a deceptively curving cross it was met by the accelerating Frenchman whose sublime first-time volley proved far too good for Fernández. As Saint-Maximin performed a series of acrobatic back flips Frank was torn between pride and disappointment. “We were at a big party we weren’t invited to and showed great mentality,” said Brentford’s manager. “But we didn’t defend well enough – we gave far too much away.” Howe surely sympathises.Dozens of care homes are still denying people access to their elderly relatives 20 months after the pandemic began, according to support groups. Although ministers have urged care homes to allow relatives to visit, groups including the Relatives &amp; Residents Association and Unlock Care Homes say that many are still unable to see elderly residents. Since March, families have been able to nominate an “essential caregiver” (ECG) who can provide regular close support to a relative in a care home. About 70% of older care home residents have dementia, and research from John’s Campaign shows that relatives are often able to better interpret their behaviour and provide comfort. Yet care providers are able to reject applications for ECG status. Diane Pickup of the Unlock Care Homes group, who has had a series of disputes with her mother’s care home, said she had been “turned down flat”. In September, the Rights for Residents group, led by the West End actress Ruthie Henshall, delivered a petition signed by 250,000 people to Downing Street, calling for everyone living in care to have a legal right to an essential caregiver, but so far ministers have not acted. A survey of Rights for Residents members showed that nearly a quarter had been denied ECG status. Figures from the Department of Health and Social Care show that 7.4% of care homes – more than 1,000 – are not allowing visits, although in most of these cases that is a temporary restriction due to a suspected Covid outbreak, according to the Care Quality Commission. Helen Wildbore, the director of the Relatives &amp; Residents Association, said the figures on care home visits were concerning because too many things were still unmeasured. “The government’s statistics say around 92% of care homes are allowing visits. But the question asked is so broad that a care home could tick yes, even though they could be refusing access to essential caregivers, or only allowing families in half an hour a week. We’re really concerned that no one is monitoring this. We don’t know how many people have been refused essential caregiver status. We don’t know how many people are still only having 30 minutes a week. “This is an attack on older people’s human rights, and it’s devastating for them and their families. “Calls to our helpline show that everybody else in the rest of the country has moved on and people in care have been left behind – it’s discrimination. They are still living with restrictions on who they can see, while everybody else can travel the world and go nightclubbing. “People who call us for help are in despair at the injustice of it. They feel there is no hope being offered. They ask us how long is this going to go on?” Amanda Hunter of Unlock Care Homes said: “There is plenty of evidence that people are not getting any visits at all. They’re being told that, yes, they can have a 30-minute slot. But if that’s booked up by somebody else, good luck. Often, it’s one family member per week. “The whole idea that you have to book a slot to see your own family member, I just think it’s abhorrent. This should not be going on any more.” Jane Smith used to visit her mother, Rita Hookway, for three hours a day before the lockdowns began. But during the pandemic restrictions, relations with the home deteriorated. “Mum was served notice to leave just before Christmas,” she said. Smith was refused ECG status, and since her mother’s death, in May, she has made complaints about the care her mother was given. Last month, the parliamentary joint committee on human rights wrote to the Care Quality Commission asking why it had not acted on several recommendations made in May to monitor how care providers were enabling residents to receive visitors. Harriet Harman, the committee’s chair, said in the letter: “It is clear that many care homes are implementing highly restrictive visiting rules, potentially contrary to the government’s guidance … there is a widespread concern among relatives and patients that restrictions are still being applied indiscriminately, and that family members are being barred from seeing their loved ones without proper individualised risk assessments being carried out.” On Friday, the CQC responded that it had followed up on 51 suspected cases of blanket bans on visiting but it needed to take action against just two care providers. Peter Wyman, the CQC chair, wrote: “We do not have the power, under the legislation given to us by parliament, to compel care homes to inform us of any changes to their visiting status. Similarly, under our legislation we do not have the power to require care homes to report their ‘live data on levels of visiting’, neither do we have the power to take action against those care homes that are not reporting changes to their visiting status to us.”Nothing can entirely erase England’s disappointment at losing the 2019 World Cup final but their future is looking ever rosier. Turning over the world champions in the final seconds of a stirring contest in front of a roaring home crowd is never an everyday occurrence and the 80th-minute penalty from Marcus Smith which belatedly settled this extraordinary game was no more than his gallant, persevering side deserved. Few, if any, teams in international rugby end up on the winning side having conceded 18 penalties to their opponents’ eight but the try count of three to one against the planet’s meanest defence was ultimately the more pertinent statistic. It summed up the see-sawing nature of a contest which both sides appeared to have won and lost on at least a couple of occasions before the wildly dramatic late denouement. The Springboks, 14-3 down early on, looked to have edged it before the visiting replacement François Steyn was penalised in front of his own posts for catching Smith with a knee on the floor. Having losing Manu Tuilagi to injury after just eight minutes England knew precisely how the vastly experienced Steyn felt: they had just watched him kick a long-range penalty with six minutes left which felt, at the time, as if it might seal the deal. A storming breakaway try from the England replacement Raffi Quirke with 15 minutes left was another key moment, as was the 76th minute sin-binning of the South Africa skipper, Siya Kolisi, for taking out Joe Marchant in the air. Without him the 14-man Springboks began to fray at the edges, with England’s substituted captain, Courtney Lawes, even running on to the field late on as passions threatened to overflow. It made for a fabulous sporting ding-dong right from the outset. The game was barely six minutes old when England, looking aggressive and positive, made their early possession and territory count. Once the ball had been moved left and a miss-pass from Henry Slade had fetched up in Tuilagi’s hands there was never going to be any stopping the big man. With Jesse Kriel overcommitting in defence, Tuilagi rampaged over past Handré Pollard’s despairing last-gasp tackle. Sadly for England it was to be Tuilagi’s last contribution, the centre walking disconsolately away after injuring himself in the process. England, though, were in no mood to retreat back into their shells. Again they stretched the visiting defence out wide and from a ruck less than 10 metres out Ben Youngs fed his fast-rising Leicester teammate and fellow son of Norfolk, Freddie Steward, who crashed over past Cobus Reinach and Kolisi. Smith again coolly slotted the tricky conversion and at 14-3 up England were flying. They were also enjoying some joy at the scrums where the referee, Andrew Brace, had clearly not been reading all the pre-game column inches about South Africa’s respected set piece. Gradually, though, the visitors began to compose themselves and work their way back into the contest. Pollard, who scored 22 points in the Springboks’ World Cup final triumph in Japan, slotted four well-struck penalties from a range of angles and distances to remind England of the importance of keeping their discipline. With Brace also keeping a close eye on the breakdown some of the defensive hits on both sides were huge, not least a full-frontal tackle by Ox Nché on his opposite number, Bevan Rodd. England’s clutch of inexperienced forwards, though, could be proud of their efforts and the hosts fully deserved their 17-12 half-time advantage. But South Africa have made an artform of not panicking and finishing games strongly. The first-half stats may not have been pretty – when was the last time South Africa failed to win a single first-half scrum or collectively beat just four defenders? – but with their “bomb squad” limbering up on the touchline there was no sense of premature English triumphalism in the air. The hosts were lucky to escape when Kolisi, crucially as it turned out, failed to put Kriel away after brilliant approach work from Damian de Allende and Pollard, having previously nailed everything, suddenly contrived to miss two kickable penalties. There was another huge roar to greet the arrival of Joe Marler in place of Rodd while Steward at full-back was having another outstanding afternoon. South Africa, though, appeared to have found their second wind as the game entered its decisive phase. A fifth Pollard penalty brought them back to within two points and only a late smother tackle from the replacement Max Malins prevented Kwagga Smith from putting the Boks ahead for the first time. With the pressure and penalty count both rising, however, Alex Dombrandt was adjudged offside at a ruck in front of the posts and Elton Jantjies, Pollard’s replacement, slotted the easy kick to make it 18-17. Could England respond? The answer was an emphatic “yes” as Slade slid Marchant through a midfield gap from a first-phase lineout ball and the speedy Quirke raced 30 metres for a dream first Test try. Still the intrigue was not over as South Africa, with advantage being played close to the line, swung the ball left and the prolific Makazole Mapimpi touched down his 20th try in 25 Tests. Jantjes could not land the conversion but with six minutes left up stepped the vastly experienced Steyn for what he must have thought was the decisive act. Little did he know what the fates still had in store.Concerns have been raised about a planned statue of Virginia Woolf overlooking the Thames, which has been called insensitive because of the way she killed herself. The memorial the author, designed by Laury Dizengremel, would be positioned on a park bench overlooking the river on Richmond riverside in south-west London, where she lived for about a decade from 1914. Woolf killed herself by drowning in the River Ouse near Lewes in East Sussex in March 1941 aged 59. Richmond council’s environment, sustainability, culture and sports committee approved plans for the statue on Thursday, but a local conservation group said it feared its positioning was in poor taste given the nature of her death. Barry May, the chair of the Richmond Society, said the group had suggested three alternative locations in Richmond where she lived until 1924, when she moved to Tavistock Square in central London. Woolf was part of the influential Bloomsbury Group and is considered one of the 20th century’s most important authors, pioneering a non-linear approach to narrative. She and her husband, Leonard Woolf, founded Hogarth Press in 1917. She had problems with mental illness throughout her life. “Given the manner of her illness and eventually the way that she died … it struck us as a little bit insensitive to have this statue and figure of Virginia Woolf seated on a bench gazing over the water,” May said. “We support proposals for a statue for her somewhere, we thought she should be commemorated somewhere, nothing wrong with that. It’s just when it overlooks the river.” The only current memorial to Woolf in Richmond is an English Heritage blue plaque on Hogarth House where she and Leonard founded their publishing house. Aurora Metro, the south-west London publishing house campaigning and fundraising for the statue, received a slew of donations after the controversial unveiling of a statue honouring Mary Wollstonecraft in Newington Green, north London in 2020. It has raised £35,000 of the £50,000 needed for the bronze since 2017. An audit of statues in London in October found there were more depictions of animals than named women on the capital’s streets. Only 4% of the 1,500 monuments are dedicated to women. Charlotte Banks, from Aurora Metro, told the meeting at Richmond council: “Efforts by the Richmond Society to change the location of the statue which has been chosen for many practical reasons … comes across as an attempt to push people like her out of sight. “The statue’s intent is to celebrate diverse lives and encourage conversations around mental health, feminism, sexuality and gender. This cannot be done if the statue is tucked away on a residential street.” Councillors spoke in support of the plans, saying it could encourage discussion of mental health issues. In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or by emailing jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at befrienders.org.A fresh inquiry has opened into Boris Johnson’s relationship with Jennifer Arcuri after the US businesswoman dramatically agreed to assist officials, paving the way for the prime minister to face possible criminal investigation. Arcuri has formally offered to help the Greater London Authority (GLA) ethics watchdog by allowing it to inspect extracts of her diary entries chronicling her affair with Johnson and agreeing to be questioned for the first time by investigators over the relationship. The contemporaneous diary excerpts, disclosed in the Observer last week by the journalist John Ware, reveal how Johnson allegedly overruled the advice of staff to promote the business interests of Arcuri and win her affections. Arcuri’s decision to cooperate with the GLA monitoring officer reopens the prospect of Johnson facing an investigation for a potential criminal offence of misconduct in public office. In a previous investigation into Johnson’s business relationship with the then 27-year-old Arcuri, the Independent Office for Police Conduct (IOPC) did not have access to Arcuri’s handwritten diary entries in which she made “verbatim” notes of the highlights of his telephone calls and their conversations. The police watchdog eventually concluded it would not be launching a criminal inquiry into whether Johnson abused his position as London mayor to “benefit and reward” Arcuri. Investigators also never interviewed Arcuri or received testimony from the tech entrepreneur. Her evidence is potentially even more critical because the original IOPC inquiry was also hampered by the deletion of key email and phone records at City Hall that prevented the watchdog from “reviewing relevant evidence”. The latest developments into allegations that Johnson offered to help Arcuri launch her tech business while simultaneously pursuing her for sex will pile more pressure on the prime minister, raising fresh questions over his integrity and lax approach to probity in public life after weeks of sleaze allegations have engulfed his party. After the Observer last week revealed some of the explosive entries in Arcuri’s diaries, Labour’s deputy leader, Angela Rayner, wrote to the GLA’s monitoring officer, Emma Strain, asking that she urgently refer the new evidence to the IOPC to “look again” at its decision to rule out a criminal investigation. Strain, in turn, contacted the Observer for assistance in obtaining Arcuri’s diaries so she could assess whether the issue was a “serious complaint” that appeared to constitute or involve a criminal offence being committed. If Strain judges that the issue is serious, she will formally refer the matter back to the IOPC to decide if it will investigate Johnson over the criminal offence of misconduct in public office. After several days of weighing up whether she wanted to assist the GLA, Arcuri finally agreed and at 7pm on Friday sent an email to Strain, head of its ethics watchdog. “I am prepared to show you or your investigators copies of the relevant pages,” Arcuri wrote. “However, I currently reside in the United States, so it would mean you or they [the IOPC] travelling here for that purpose. In that event, I would also be prepared to be interviewed, if that assists.” If that is not possible, Arcuri has authorised veteran journalist Ware, with whom she has “entrusted” her diaries, to show investigators relevant pages detailing her business dealings with Johnson. Arcuri handed the first tranche of her diaries to Ware after the 2019 general election and following his ITV documentary in which he accused the prime minister of having a “tenuous relationship to the truth” after Johnson’s repeated insistence that “absolutely everything was done with full propriety” regarding his relationship with Arcuri. Ware was sent a second tranche of material from Arcuri in May 2020.Ware approached Arcuri after recent comments by Johnson about public probity and she consented to allow publication of some of her diary extracts. One Arcuri diary entry reveals how Johnson offered to be her “throttle” in an attempt to accelerate her business career, claims that may reopen the possibility of Johnson facing a potential criminal investigation into misconduct allegations. It recalled how Johnson told her: “How can I be the thrust – the throttle – your mere footstep as you make your career? Tell me: how I can help you?” The diary entries also suggest that Johnson broke the rules governing ethical conduct in public office in his dealings with Arcuri. Responding to the Arcuri revelations last week, a government spokesperson said: “As mayor, Boris Johnson followed all the legal requirements in the Greater London Assembly’s [sic] code of conduct at the time.”The FBI is investigating an attempted breach of a local election network in the state of Ohio that occurred last spring. A private laptop was plugged into the election network in the office of John Hamercheck, the chairman of the Lake county board of commissioners, on 4 May – the day of Ohio’s spring primary election – according to the Washington Post. State and county officials say that no private information or sensitive data was taken in the breach. The news comes at a time when Republicans across the country are claiming – almost always without evidence – that America’s electoral system is fraudulent. Many such figures are also seeking to win election to offices to roles that oversee voting. Routine network traffic that was captured during the Ohio breach was circulated at an event organized by Mike Lindell, the CEO of MyPillow. Over the last year, Lindell has actively promoted the baseless conspiracy theory that the 2020 election was rigged against Donald Trump. Lindell is a close ally and friend of Trump, even interviewing him recently in a video where the two men promoted the false idea that Biden’s election win was somehow part of a fraud. At the Ohio event in August, copies of the software from voting equipment in Colorado and Michigan were distributed to attendees, alerting officials of the breaches. The breach in Ohio is a part of a series of attacks on voting systems that have taken place across the country as vigilante hackers embrace the conspiracy theory despite there being no evidence of election fraud during the 2020 election. A similar breach took place in Mesa county, Colorado, in late May. Local election officials have since been accused of allowing outsiders into the county election offices to copy the hard drives of election equipment. Earlier this week, the FBI raided the home of Tina Peters, the county clerk, after she was accused of facilitating the breach. Officials in the Ohio secretary of state’s office say they believe a government employee likely assisted with the breach. “It’s concerning that somebody would – especially somebody in a government office, somebody who is an elected official, or somebody who’s part of county government – would … try to engage in some sort of vigilante investigation,” Frank LaRose, Ohio secretary of state, told the Washington Post. According to the Post, county officials in both Ohio and Colorado discussed election fraud claims with Douglass Frank, a close associate of Lindell who has propagated claims of election fraud, before the breaches occurred. Frank has told the Post that he has been traveling around the country and has met with about 100 election administrators in attempts to convince them election fraud took place. Hamercheck, whose office was the site of the breach in Ohio, told the Post that he is “aware of no criminal activity”. “I have absolute confidence in our board of elections and our IT people,” he said. Public records obtained by the Post show that Hamercheck used his security badge to access the fifth floor offices, where the breaches occurred, multiple times during the six-hour period when the private laptop was connecting to the election network.Janice Hallett, 52, is the author of The Appeal, an ingenious whodunnit and a new take on the epistolary novel, composed of emails and texts. She studied English at UCL, screenwriting at Royal Holloway and co-wrote the film Retreat in 2011. She has worked as a journalist and in government communications for the Cabinet Office, Home Office and Department for International Development. The Appeal, which centres on an amateur drama group, is a runaway bestseller and has been shortlisted for Waterstones book of the year You must have felt like a detective yourself when planning the plot – your book is so meticulously detailed… I never plan a thing in advance – it takes the joy out of it. I drew up a blank page and wrote for about a year and then there was a lot of reverse engineering. I’d been working on an idea for a TV series but wasn’t getting anywhere. So when Cameron Roach, head of drama at Sky, who’d been mentoring me, suggested I write a novel, I wondered if I could focus on minor characters from the TV series and the emails between them. Have you been surprised by how well The Appeal has done? I’ve been blown out of the water. I’ve had brilliant direct reactions from readers on Instagram. There was one young girl who said she was now considering a career as a lawyer – I thought that was wonderful. Tell me about the Raglan Players and your involvement in amateur theatre… My involvement has been lifelong. I joined the Raglan Players – based in Northolt in west London where I still live – when I was 14. I met my partner there. I’ve done everything from prompting to props to wardrobe. I’ve directed, written plays for them, been in plays. I’ve served behind the bar, cleaned up after… it’s an all-encompassing hobby. But we’ve found, like a lot of amateur drama groups, that we can’t generate new members. In the 21st century, people don’t want to go out to take part in that kind of hobby. The Raglan Players, sadly, folded in 2013. The novel is my love letter to them – though some people might say it’s a strange love letter. How much of a person’s character can you deduce from an email? More than you might think. Even the one-line emails people think give nothing away can be revealing. Where did you grow up and what did your parents do? Dad worked in a video shop. It might sound archaic, but videos were like the mobile phones of the 80s and 90s. He considered himself a bit of a yuppy. Mum worked in an office for the gas board. You studied as a screenwriter and co-wrote, with Carl Tibbetts, Retreat, about a global pandemic. The film is astoundingly prescient: lockdown as horror movie… The day we went into lockdown the emails flew between me and Carl. We just couldn’t believe, nine years later, how right we’d got it. Are there any transferable skills from screenwriting to novel writing? Giving every character an arc is the most important thing – especially when writing a story with multiple characters. Have you any tips about creating suspense? Hold everything back as long as possible… although not too long. I like to be in suspense myself, which is why, during the first draft, I’m almost as much a reader as I am a writer. What magazines did you work for? I started off on Cosmetics International, an industry magazine, and then worked for magazines aimed at retailers of beauty products. Most people got fed up with writing about bubble bath after two years – it took me 15 before I moved on. And when you did, it was to government communications… When I stopped working for the beauty industry, I worked for an agency based on civil service lines. If the government was desperate and didn’t have anyone in-house to write something, they got us to produce something very quickly. It wasn’t party political. But it was a baptism of fire, after the bubble bath, to be – occasionally – at the cutting edge of what was happening in current affairs. What is the last great book you read? I’ve just read an advance copy of The Anomaly by Hervé Le Tellier, a bestseller in France, out next year. It sets you thinking: it’s about a plane that lands one March full of passengers and then lands again, full of the same passengers, three months later… an anomaly. You have a passion for intrepid “adventure travel” – what sort of adventures? I particularly loved trekking round Madagascar. I went there for the wild life – there are lemurs you can’t see anywhere else on earth and crazy-looking giraffe weevils – but it was the people that most enthralled me. I found it such an education. Where would you like to live most if not in the UK? South Korea – it is so open and arty. I could easily move there now. What book might people be surprised to see on your shelves? Hollywood Wives by Jackie Collins. I read it at the same time as reading Dickens’s Bleak House and was struck by how structurally similar they are. Which author do you always return to? Thomas Hardy, especially Far from the Madding Crowd. It’s so rural – like going on holiday to the West Country. What are you are writing next? The Twyford Code is out in January. It’s about a former prisoner who, at the behest of his probation officer and to occupy his time now he is going straight, looks into an episode from his childhood where his English teacher took his remedial English class out for the day and then disappeared. The Appeal is an ensemble piece; The Twyford Code is one character’s personal journey. And I’m working on a third book for 2023 and have a deal for another two novels. In your acknowledgments you modestly wonder whether The Appeal will be your one and only novel. It could hardly have turned out more differently… I know – it’s amazing, isn’t it? I couldn’t be happier or more surprised. • The Appeal by Janice Hallett is published by Profile (£8.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyAnd that’s the lot from us. Congratulations to England on a magnificent win, in a thrilling match, that could have gone either way. Thanks for reading and join Lee Calvert for Wales v Australia right here: Eddie Jones on Freddie Steward: “He’s a lock playing full-back, isn’t he? If he puts on a bit of weight, he might end up a lock. But he’s courageous in the air, he’s got some nice footwork. He’s going to be a good player.” Does Jones wish he started his ‘new England’ project sooner? “No, no, not at all mate ... the timing’s perfect. They’re right to play Test rugby [the young players]. You put them on before, and they’re not right to play, you put their career back. “The media want to see everyone early. It’s not about that. It’s about making sure they’re ready to play.” Robert Kitson, our rugby union correspondent, is on the scene at Twickenham. Here is his report: Eddie Jones speaks: “It was a good night, wasn’t it? It’s always good to win a close game. South Africa have had a tough old campaign, they’ve had 18 weeks on the road, for them to front up like that tonight I thought was a fantastic effort. We’ve got a young team, they probably didn’t realise how important the game was, they just went out there and kept playing and playing and playing and we’re really pleased with them. “I think maybe about 20 minutes into the second half, we were almost at breaking point. They were squeezing us in the scrum, squeezing us in the tackle, winning more than their 50-50 of high balls, and starting to get a bit of rhythm in their attack ... but we managed to pare that back a little bit ... the first-phase try [by Raffi Quirke] ... if you score a first-phase try in rugby, it puts you in the running, and we were able to do that.” How happy is he with England’s progress? “You never really know, mate ... we’ve got the Six Nations coming up, the Six Nations is a contact-feast isn’t it? All you do is bash bodies ... that’s why your body’s not good, isn’t it Dylan? [laughs with the pundit and ex-England captain Hartley who is standing next to him].” Mark Durden-Smith, the anchor for Amazon Prime, says Jones has been criticised for being risk-averse in the past, and asks him if this is a ‘new Eddie’. “I tell you what, when I coached Japan I wasn’t risk-averse. That’s a really silly thing to say. You play to the strengths of the players. We don’t coach because we want to play a certain style of rugby. If you’ve got Bryan Habana, you don’t want him just sitting on the wing, you want him touching the ball. If you’ve got the ‘Beast’ there [Amazon pundit Tendai Mtawarira] rolling up the side of the ruck, you want to use those people.” Is Marcus Smith Jones’s starting 10 going forward? “He’ll be good mate, as long as you blokes don’t put too much poison in his head, he’ll be good. “Look, we’ve never been bad mate. We had a bad Six Nations, but we’re not a bad team ... we had a tough period there, we didn’t play well, and probably got a little bit stale. And we’ve refreshed ourselves now and we’ll keep going forward now.” What’s it like being Marcus Smith, asks Sonia McLaughlan on Amazon Prime: “It’s everything I’ve wanted growing up as a young kid, from back when I grew up in Asia, it all comes down to my family, my mum and dad, my two younger brothers, my friendship group, my girlfriend,” says Smith. “All of those guys supporting me and keeping me grounded ... I am sure when I get back in there [to the changing room] the first messages will be from my brothers saying: ‘I should have done this, should have done that’ ... To have those people around me is special and I’ll keep working.” Marcus Smith speaks: “Can’t believe it ... we said four weeks ago, this is the game we wanted to target. The lads bought in, we’ve got extremely close as a group, and today was a massive, massive part of our journey as a young group of England players. To beat the world champions at home, in front of 82,000, was special and it’s a day I’ll never forget.” What were his emotions like before the winning penalty, asks McLaughlan: “Yeah it was mental ... having to wait so long as well, I think the referees were checking the TMO, and it made it more nerve-wracking, but the boys around me backed me, the boys around me put their arm around me and said: “Go for it mate, back yourself, believe in yourself.” So I tried to do that and ultimately I did my job, it was brilliant. “It was special. Once I hit the kick, and it was sailing through, it was like slow-motion for me and I saw it sailing through the posts ... but we still had to a job to do ... they came hard with Etzebeth in the air [after the restart]. To win the penalty at the end, and properly celebrate at the end, was amazing. This group will never forget that day. “Over the last four weeks I’ve loved working with Owen [Farrell]. It’s a shame he fell to injury last week, but we’ve been in contact this week, and he’s been helping me a lot, and I’ve learned loads from him ... but again the boys put their arm around me, the senior players – Maro, Courtney, Marler ... to have him back as well ... was special for me. And having those guys around makes it so much easier for me. “Jonny Wilkinson has been working hard with me ... all credit goes to those guys and I appreciate it big-time.” England’s captain, Courtney Lawes, speaks to Sonia McLaughlan: “Incredibly proud ... I said to the boys last night how proud I was to lead them out tomorrow, which is obviously today now ... I couldn’t be happier with the buy-in from the guys. The only reason we won that game is we were fighting for each other ... and I think that really showed out there on the pitch. We made it very hard for ourselves, we left a lot of points out there, but we can build on that, definitely.” How did Lawes feel when Smith was standing ready to take the winning penalty? “Jonny [Hill] said to me - ‘Imagine taking this kick.’ I was like, yeah, that’s why he gets paid the big bucks. He started it easy, didn’t he, no worries, like being back on the training pitch.” And how did he feel when it went over? “Obviously very happy ... yeah, I really thought we were going to win today, and I’m incredibly happy to put in a performance like that. “The first half, you see what happens when we put our game together. Second half, penalties, you know, little things that we don’t need to go just gives them that ‘in’ and let them play their game ... we had to stick in the fight, and we were able to seal it at the end with Marcus’s kick.” What are England going to do tonight? “Get together and have a damn good time.” Kwagga Smith and Kolisi are pictured discussing the yellow card incident. Kolisi is clearly demonstrating that he feels he was simply jumping and trying to catch the ball. It was a marginal call that could have gone either way, for sure. The South Africa captain, Siya Kolisi, speaks to Amazon Prime: “It’s tough, we’re very disappointed with the loss ... it was a great game ... it’s a pity we couldn’t finish the tour strong, but I’m proud of the way the boys pitched up ... They defended well, and we made a couple of mistakes. “We never make excuses, I’m really proud of what we did this year ... we’re very lucky to play the game of rugby ... it’s been a tough year for everyone, a lot of people have lost jobs ... playing in a stadium like this has been a huge honour ... I thought England played really well today but it’s tough that we couldn’t get the win.” Thanks Lee. Wow, that had a bit of everything, didn’t it? Freddie Steward, player of the match, reacts: “To be honest I was just thinking, Marcus, please don’t miss [for the final penalty]. We dug in, we fought ... they are so physical and you can’t shy away from that ... it was a huge squad effort ... when the final whistle goes it all [the emotion] comes to the forefront, I think you saw there with the boys, unbelievable.” On his composure under the high ball: “When the ball goes up, the focus is just there, you can’t think about who’s there, it’s just about getting the ball ... the last time we played these guys I was watching it in the Uni bar, if you’d said to me then I’d be on the pitch the next time we play them ... it’s unbelievable and I’m so glad we came away with a win.” I’m handing over to my colleague Luke McLaughlin to take you through the reaction. ENGLAND BEAT THE WORLD CHAMPIONS! 80 mins. Will Stuart secures the kick-off after Steward fumbles it backwards. At the breakdown there’s a penalty to England. Jonny May runs off, arms in the air is hysterical joy. 79 mins. Smith has slotted it, calm as you like! Very important restart coming up... Time is off as there’s some pushing and shoving. Marcus Smith went on a stepping run and when he was finally tackled Frans Steyn flew into him knee-first. I’m very surprised Steyn is still on the field. 79 mins. England have a penalty in front of the posts! 77 mins. Nic Dolly has his throw stolen by Etzebeth with an attacking platform on the SA 22 begging. On the next lineout, this time on the Bok 10m, it’s that man Etzebeth who gets into Itoje’s arms and disrupts again. Nailed on Player of the Match, Etzebeth, by the way. 75 mins. Marcus Smith chips over the Bok tackle line for Marchant to chase. The England centre is first to it and Kolisi, challenging for it, is late and tackles him in the air. The captain will watch the rest of the match from the bin. It’s 14-a-side for now, but Will Stuart is soon back on. 74 mins. Etzebeth cuts a beautiful line in midfield to break into open pasture running like a horse doing a cartwheel. He looks left and throws a terrible pass that misses his support then South Africa concede their first penalty of the half for sealing off. England Sub Courtney Lawes off, Sam Simmonds on. This means Tom Curry is the England on-field captain. 72 mins. The pattern of this game is now that England dont’ really secure possession then are penalised in the ruck. Repeat ad infinitum. Frans Steyn tees up the latest penalty (England’s tenth this half!) and cannons it through the posts. 69 mins. A regulation catch and drive from a line out on the right touchline leads to the ball fizzing left to Elton Jantjies. He flies a miss-one past Steyn and out to Mapimpi who scores in the left corner. Jantjies pushes the conversion left. England are still ahead, but it feels like a matter of time before that ends for good. 67 mins. The 17th England penalty is quite enough for the ref and Will Stuart, who didn’t do anything particularly heinous at the ruck, is off as the personification of his side’s inability to live with the SA physicality. 65 mins. That lead didn’t last long! Slade fixes De Allende and pops short to Marchant on a fabulous line who splits the defence in two. He carries to Steyn and passes left to Quirke to run in for his first England try. A lovely moment from a lovely move. Smith converts 64 mins. While all that was going on, there was another penalty waiting and Jantjies puts SA in front. Etzebeth is down after a tackle where Charlie Ewels catches him in the head with his arm. The Bok lock was heading quickly towards the floor under an previous tackle contact and the referee Brace says there’s no foul play by Ewels on the “there was little he could do” defence. 63 mins. Little Raffi Quirke looks even more miniscule as his kick is charged down by Eben Etzebeth, which much feel like trying to box kick over a real life Colossus of Rhodes. On the follow up England are penalised again. That’s 15 penalties for the home side, South Africa have four. OOF! An England player will go to the bin soon, you have to think. 61 mins. It’s another catch, drive and megamaul from South Africa, but as Kwagga Smith attempts to wrestle over Max Malins gets under him to hold the ball up. Slade drops the ball out from under his own sticks and Frans Steyn tries a 50 metre dop goal on the return. And why not? He misses. 59 mins. A South African maul drives 20 metres up the left touchline and England are offside in their desperation to do something. The Boks have another attack and Reinach just can’t find Kwagga Smith near the line; but it was on the advantage and they will go to the corner again. 57 mins. Slowly, surely South Africa and tightening the vice on this game. Kolisi and De Allende are carrying hugely and England have increasingly less capable answers to the Boks asking “how do you like these apples?” in every set piece. In the latest one, Vincent Koch absolutely marmalises Marler. Subs Handre Pollard makes way for Elton Jantjies. Sam Underhill’s infringement will be his last act as he’s off for Alex Dombrandt. Will Stuart replaces Kyle Sinckler 54 mins. Sam Underhill gives away an very silly penalty when he ignores Ref Brace screaming “no!” when the England flanker puts his hands on the ball in the ruck. Pollard slots this one with little issue. 51 mins. After Le Roux bounces a catch off his chest England have another scrum that once again folds. This time is was Kitshoff doing the damage. Raffi Quirke is on for Ben Youngs. That’s a big call at this stage of the game as that’s quite the swing in experience. Quirke is very nippy though and SA won’t like that. Frans Steyn replaces Willie Le Roux for South Africa England Sub. Joe Marler on for Bevan Rodd 48 mins. Second kick on the bounce that Pollard has shanked a bit. That’s a worry for them. 46 mins. So very nearly a try for SA. The ball is worked right to De Allende who sucks in three tacklers and offloads to Kolisi who is running free near the right touchline. As Malins stops the Boks captain his pop pass goes behind Kriel who had a free run to the line. Kriel overran that, for me. South Africa subs. As expected, it’s time for a new SA front row. Malcolm Marx, Steven Kitshoff and Vincent Koch replace Ox Nché, Bongi Mbonambi, Trevor Nyakane 44 mins. It was a chance the Bok eight are not minded to let England take as Nche atomises Sinckler with an almighty shove to win destroy the scrum and win a penalty. Pollard misses! 42 mins. Johnny Hill gets amongst the SA jumpers at a Bok lineout on halfway and forces a knock on from Etzebeth. Just like the first half England will have an early chance this half to assert themselves in the scrum. It’s Marcus Smith’s turn to get the game underway. “England seem to be trying to keep South Africa running and not giving them chance to rest,” observes Andy Bradshaw, “be interesting to see if the Saffers let them carry on dictating a high pace” It was certainly looking that way, Andy, but at the half wore on the Bok defence appears to have realigned to England’s new pattern of forwards at first receiver. A fascinating second half awaits That will be the last act of a decent half 40 mins. Marcus Smith has just tried a drop goal and his foot connected with the ball like a raw oyster. Pretty awful effort. 39 mins. Another England lineout in the Bok 22 is a short clever one back to Blamire, but it’s all bit clumsy. When the ball is worked to Curry to carry up into the tackle line he’s swarmed by De Jager and Kwagga Smith and doesn’t release. Pollard clears again. England need more from these attacks if they are to maintain their chance of a result. 35 mins. Ox Nche reads a Youngs pass to Rodd at first receiver in the vititors’ 22 and booms the England prop nearly back to St Margaret’s. Such is the shockwave from the hit that England’s defence forget how to ruck and are penalised for sealing off. Pollard clear the Bok lines. 33 mins. Some decent phases from England in the SA half, changing the point of attack regularly to try and outfox the Bok blitz defence. It works eventually as Malins is away down the right, but their defence can scramble as well and De Allende covers to smash the England wing into touch. 29 mins. South Africa have their first catch and drive from a lineout and as the power comes on England fold under the pressure. Penalty given and the first ominous sign that the Bok pack are mad as hell and they’re not going to take it any more. In other expected news, Pollard caresses the ball over the bar again. 26 mins. Youngs puts a box kick up after England recycle the restart. Vermeulen is hit by Underhill on the return and Tom Curry is this close to winning a penalty as he was on the ball, but Ref Brace is not happy that Sam Underhill didn’t roll away after the tackle. It’s out right on the England 10m line and Pollard hits a beauty from the tee. 23 mins. In a very not-South Africa moment, they give a penalty away on the restart for Eben Etzebeth sealing off the ball in the ruck. Marcus Smith calls for the tee and it’s another three points to his and England’s total. 21 mins. Handre Pollard adds another three after England infringe just outside the 22. What an opening quarter from England. South Africa are not playing badly and are at the home side when they have the ball, but a combination of England’s confidence in possession plus power and refusal to be intimidated in tight is causing lots of trouble for the visitors. 17 mins. From a scrum just inside the Bok half Youngs sends it long right to Slade who whips a long pass to Steward and he find Malins to carry the ball thirty metres. From first phase that is a bit of a humiliation for the SA defence. After a couple of carries in the 22 Youngs feeds Steward who runs powerfully from short and gets over despite the attention of two green tacklers. Smith adds the two. 14 mins. South Africa run a lovely set play left and are in behind the England tackle line. A grubber is angled towards the posts which Johnny May can’t tidy up cleanly and a bit of a pushy-pasty kicks off between the two sets of forwards. When all that is calmed down, Ref Brace takes us back for an SA penalty for England obstruction, which Pollard calmly kicks over. 12 mins. Johnny May knocks on a catch to give SA a scrum in a promising position, but Nyakane is forced to the ground by Bevan Rodd to win a penalty for the home side. There is vocal ecstasy from the pack, and understandably so as they are compounding expectations at the minute. 8 mins. England Sub. A brilliant opening attack from England is soured as Manu Tuilagi was injured while scoring and he’s forced from the field. Max Malins replaces him and moves to the wing which will bring Joe Marchant into the centre. 7 mins. England take on the SA scrim and win a penalty. That’s a great statement this early on from the home pack. The penalty is kicked to the corner, which is another statement. The ball is won cleanly and Smith works it right through hands, then all the way left via Smith once more to Tuilagi on touchline who is around the contracted Bok defence to score. Marcus Smith slots a huge conversion from way out left. 4 mins. A long kick deep into the Bok corner is gathered on the bounce by Marchant and England are on the attack in the opposition 22. The ball is worked left and an angled grubber is tickled towards the line by Youngs and Le Roux can do nothing but carry it over and give England a scrum five. 2 mins. Very much a smalltalk at the beginning of the dinner date stage in the opening minutes with plenty of small carries before possession kicked away by both teams. No-one really wanting to say too much about themselves in case it gets awkward Handre Pollard chips the ball into the England half and we’re underway. He’s not allowed any roles involved in rugby. Rumours he’s last been seen at Bath. HONK! The teams are on their way out at Twickenham. The Boks in green are first, followed by England in their usual white. Not long now. “The Springboks are reigning world champions, and EOY world number one, with good reason. With England’s injuries and a provisional front row — and in Farrell’s absence — perhaps even lacking a talisman, it’s difficult to see anything other than a South African victory and clean sweep for the Autumn Internationals.” Emails Timothy Palmer “Given the scale of the task standing before them, par for England is to keep the full-time score within two scores; anything better than that should see them go into the 6N with a degree of confidence about their prospects, especially given the relatively youth and inexperience of this side.” “Prediction: SA by 7-10 in game to make Testicules the Centurion proud of all the testosterone on show.” Pre-match reading Ugo Monye not only has thoughts on the Rassie Erasmus ban itself, but on the effect it may have on the Bok performance today. What chance an England win today? Where exactly is Rassie? Please send answers to these and any other questions, plus any of your own on the email or on twitter. Owen Farrell’s COVID and injury related tribulations this November continue as he misses out today due to an ankle injury. This means Courtney Lawes takes over as captain, Marcus Smith remains at stand-off, Manu Tuilagi is back in the centre and Harlequins’ Joe Marchant is on the wing. In the forwards, last week’s tryscoring sub Jamie Blamire starts in place of the crocked Jamie George. Nic Dolly is the hooker on the bench. South Africa bring back Handre Pollard to the ten shirt, partnering Cobus Reinach, and Lood De Jager starts at lock. England: Freddie Steward; Joe Marchant, Henry Slade, Manu Tuilagi, Jonny May; Marcus Smith, Ben Youngs; Bevan Rodd, Jamie Blamire, Kyle Sinckler, Maro Itoje, Jonny Hill, Courtney Lawes (captain), Sam Underhill, Tom Curry. Replacements: Nic Dolly, Joe Marler, Will Stuart, Charlie Ewels, Sam Simmonds, Alex Dombrandt, Raffi Quirke, Max Malins. South Africa: Willie le Roux; Jesse Kriel, Lukhanyo Am, Damian de Allende, Makazole Mapimpi; Handré Pollard, Cobus Reinach; Ox Nché, Bongi Mbonambi, Trevor Nyakane, Eben Etzebeth, Lood de Jager, Siya Kolisi (captain), Kwagga Smith, Duane Vermeulen. Replacements: Malcolm Marx, Steven Kitshoff, Vincent Koch, Franco Mostert, Jasper Wiese, Herschel Jantjies, Elton Jantjies, Frans Steyn. The last time the sides met there was much talk of an England win. This was before the reality of South Africa delivering brutal, eighty-minute lesson in power rugby with just right amount of sparkle to win the 2019 Rugby World Cup final. Some changes since then, of course. South Africa have a new head coach in Jacques Nienaber while former coach and world’s most overpaid and ineffectual waterboy, Rassie Erasmus, is banned from taking any part in this game. No such shenanigans in the top coach chair at Twickenham where Eddie Jones remains carved into it like an increasingly disgruntled gargoyle. The coaching staff underneath are all new, however, and the current squad has a mix of those who were there to suffer the pasting of two years ago and newer blood who the Aussie wil hope are not cowed by the trauma of that defeat. The Springboks remain what they have been since late 2018: a very good rugby team who know what they’re about and how to put it about. What they’ve added is some gamesmanship savvy which makes them all the more difficult to overcome. Given the relatively low quality of their opposition performances so far this Autumn it’s hard to know exactly what to expect from England, but an unexpected win will go some way to giving Jones’s latest World Cup cycle a real kick up the proverbial to get it going.England 15 Freddie Steward Another try to cap impressive autumn. Showed a bit of vulnerability under high ball but not at the end. 7 14 Joe Marchant Was shifted back to regular midfield position and made the telling break for Quirke’s try. An excellent all-round showing. 8 13 Henry Slade Lovely pass to Tuilagi for try and released Marchant for Quirke’s. Had the courage to take matters into his own hands late on. 9 12 Manu Tuilagi Was not going to be stopped for the opening try but injured himself in the process. Such a shame. 6 11 Jonny May Bit of a stinker all told. Beaten by Kriel early on before two knock-ons – the first of which will give him nightmares. 5 10 Marcus Smith Lives for moments like this and, when he is required to produce, he delivers. Ice running through his veins in final five minutes. 8 9 Ben Youngs Has had a solid campaign but Smith wants quick, accurate ball to thrive and he was not able to give it to him often enough. 6 1 Bevan Rodd Levelled by Nché but kept plugging away after a fearless start at scrum time. His emergence is a big plus. 7 2 Jamie Blamire Part of “Fight Club” in training this week and will be talking about this performance for a while. Rose to the challenge. 7 3 Kyle Sinckler Relished responsibility as England’s most experienced front-row early on but gave away four penalties. 5 4 Maro Itoje Produced another trademark rip on Am but South Africa’s second-row pairing did a good job keeping him under wraps. 8 5 Jonny Hill Another match with a few eye-catching moments but still has a bit to do before he entirely convinces at this level. 6 6 Courtney Lawes (capt) Led by example. Like most of his teammates his discipline was not flawless but credit him for keeping England in the fight. 7 7 Sam Underhill Caught the eye with dextrous scooped pass. One of several England forwards who struggled with referee’s breakdown interpretation. 6 8 Tom Curry A typically all-action display against South Africa with some big hits, some turnovers won and some penalties conceded. 8 REPLACEMENTS Nic Dolly (for Blamire 60) 6; Joe Marler (for Rodd 48) 7; Will Stuart (for Sinckler 56) Shown a yellow card 5; Charlie Ewels (for Hill 60) Lucky to escape yellow 6; Sam Simmonds (for Lawes 73) n/a; Alex Dombrandt (for Underhill 55) n/a; Raffi Quirke (for Youngs 49) 6; Max Malins (for Tuilagi 8) Underused this autumn 8. South Africa 15 Willie le Roux One or two aerial wobbles but joins the line when South Africa get on the front foot so well. Shocking pass when well placed on the right though. 7 14 Jesse Kriel A positive start, claiming the first high kick of the day, but was on the periphery for large parts. 5 13 Lukhanyo Am At times it was easy to see why South Africans feel he should have been nominated for world player of the year. 7 12 Damian de Allende Ran over Slade in first half and produced delightful offload after a break in the second. A classy operator. 8 11 Makazole Mapimpi South Africa looked to get him clear throughout and finally they managed it, the wing scoring their only try. 7 10 Handré Pollard His kicking kept South Africa in touch in first half but missed a couple early in the second. Brings a calming presence. 6 9 Cobus Reinach Could not produce the kind of fireworks Northampton fans had come to expect but was not really the type of match for it. 5 1 Ox Nché Found Sinckler difficult to deal with in the early stages but stuck to task and produced a colossal hit on Rodd. 6 2 Bongi Mbonambi Had problems at lineout and was part of a front-row who came off second best before the Bomb Squad was called for. 4 3 Trevor Nyakane Got in the way at one restart and found himself a worthy adversary in Rodd. Couldn’t make presence felt. 5 4 Eben Etzebeth Another monumental battle with Itoje – reprising their rival from last summer – and grew in influence as the match evolved. 7 5 Lood de Jager Kept toiling away in the engine room, putting in the hard yards before making way for Mostert. Must be horrible to play against. 6 6 Siya Kolisi (capt) Couldn’t get back to stop Steward, couldn’t find Kriel for certain try but kept believing. Deserved his yellow card late on. 6 7 Kwagga Smith Almost scored at a crucial time when South Africa were on top but Malins denied him. Will be disappointed about that. 6 8 Duane Vermeulen Quiet at times but thumped Curry backwards and had hand in a key turnover late on. So influential when it matters. 7 REPLACEMENTS Malcolm Marx (for Mbonambi 44) 8; Steven Kitshoff (for Nche 44) 7; Vincent Koch (for Nyakane 44) 7; Franco Mostert (for De Jager 64) 6; Jasper Wiese (for Smith 64) 6; Herschel Jantjies (for Reinach 67) n/a; Elton Jantjies (for Pollard 55) 6; Frans Steyn (for Le Roux 51) Nailed penalty but wasn’t to be 7.The New South Wales government announced this week it would move to ban dark roofs as part of environmental planning rules to help the state achieve net zero emissions by 2050. The planning minister, Rob Stokes, said on Wednesday that ditching dark roofing “would have an enormous impact on the urban heat island effect”, citing University of NSW research suggesting ambient temperatures in Sydney could drop by up to 2.4C as a result. The announcement has been welcomed by experts. Prof Andy Pitman, the director of the ARC Centre of Excellence for Climate Extremes at UNSW, said: “The recognition that this is a useful strategy for minimising vulnerability to climate change is terrific.” What are the effects of roofing on housing and city temperature? What is the urban heat island effect? “The urban heat island effect is a phenomenon that affects a lot of big cities around the world,” says Dr Gloria Pignatta of the UNSW’s City Futures Research Centre. The effect refers to urban centres being significantly warmer than rural areas – estimates vary between 1C and 13C on average. It occurs as a result of land modification; built-up areas have less green cover and more hard surfaces which absorb and radiate heat. The difference in temperature between cities and rural areas is often greater at night, and previous research has suggested the density and colour of building materials are significant contributors. Pitman says the effect doesn’t occur all year round, but depends on weather patterns. What colour of roof is best if you want a cooler house? In western Sydney, a light-coloured roof could reduce temperatures inside the home by 4C on average and up to 10C during a heatwave compared with darker roofing, according to research commissioned by the federal government. Materials that are able to reflect a high portion of incoming solar energy, rather than absorbing it, make for cooler roofs. This reflectance is a property known as albedo. Generally speaking, dark-coloured surfaces have a lower albedo, absorbing more solar radiation than brighter surfaces. “Every colour has a different behaviour in terms of reflection of light,” Pignatta says. Lighter shades within the same colour are preferable. “It is not coincidental that a lot of Mediterranean countries have white roofs,” Pitman says. But cooler roofing isn’t just a matter of black and white. “It doesn’t so much matter what the colour is – it matters what the reflectivity is,” Pitman says. There are “cool” roofing materials that don’t look visibly different from traditional options but result in significantly lower temperatures as a result of specific components incorporated into their surfaces. Pignatta cites terracotta tiles as an example. “You can have natural red clay tiles and ‘cool’ red clay tiles”, which appear to be the same hue. “Natural red clay tiles, for example, can reach up to 60 to 70C on a clear sunny day,” she says. The second option results in a temperature 10C or more cooler. “They don’t work in the visible spectrum … but they are able to reflect solar radiation in the infrared spectrum.” Cooler options exist for surfaces of most colours, Pignatta says, adding it is also useful for asphalt on roads, given the visual impracticality of driving on reflective white streets. Whether an area is built up is also a factor to consider. “If you have a mix of high-rise buildings and low-rise buildings and you have cool roofs on the low rises, you can create an impact on the buildings that are close to them because of the solar reflection,” Pignatta says. Does roofing material matter? When it comes to cooling, it’s not only how well the material reflects sunlight that matters, but also how well it radiates heat – a property known as thermal emissivity. “In summer, what you’re looking for is a surface that doesn’t absorb sunlight but radiates heat really well,” Pitman says. Metals have a low thermal emissivity, and hence do not readily release any heat they have absorbed. “They are not good materials to be used in the urban environment, especially if you consider large surfaces … even if they are white,” Pignatta says. Other materials such as clay tile, gravel or membrane roofing are preferable because they all have “generally quite high thermal emissivity”, she says. Green roofs are also an option to consider if light-coloured vegetation is chosen, as such plants have a higher albedo, Pignatta says. They can have an evaporative cooling effect if well watered, Pitman says. “Green roofs need to be sufficiently moist to cool themselves,” he says, warning this can be difficult to achieve during drought and extreme heat events. What effects do cool roofs have in winter? In the winter, solar energy absorbed by a roof can add warmth to a building. In some locations, houses with cool roofs may require more energy for heating – an effect known as the winter heating penalty. “In western Sydney, the balance has got to be [that] you don’t want to absorb the heat,” Pitman says. “But that’s not the case everywhere.” The effect is also complicated by how well a building is insulated. “Australian buildings are amongst the worst in the world,” Pitman says. “We are absolutely, unambiguously crap at building houses for optimal energy efficiency.” There are potential solutions in development, Pignatta says, such as thermochromic materials – those that change colour depending on temperature. “So in winter they become more dark, and they absorb more heat, and during summer they become more light.” What about black solar panels? Even though they are dark, one of the advantages of solar panels is that they are designed to convert solar energy into electricity, Pitman says. “The roof isn’t heating up, it’s using the energy to create electricity.” Excessively high temperatures can reduce the efficiency of solar panels, Pignatta says, and may be more efficient when installed on light roofs or those made of reflective materials.It was impossible not to be moved by the emotion in Azeem Rafiq’s testimony at the digital, culture, media and sport select committee and also not to feel angry about what he endured during his career in cricket; not only as a professional, but also as an ambitious junior representing his local town club. As he reeled off recollections of being targeted with abusive language, having his faith ignored and ridiculed, and he and other Asian players homogenised and dehumanised as either “Kevin” or “Steve”, I found myself nodding along. The stories were all too familiar, both as someone who played cricket in Yorkshire and as an academic who has researched race and racism in sport since 2007. With the exception of references to “Kevin” and “Steve” – Asian players where I come from tended to be called “George” – his testimony chimed with those of the many south Asian people I have worked with. Listening to Roger Hutton’s subsequent evidence session, outlining Yorkshire’s response to Azeem’s allegations, my ears pricked up further when there was a reference to a “Fletcher report”. My immediate reaction was to think: “I need to read that” before its year of publication, 2014, made me realise this was my work. The research began with my PhD, which examined the experiences of south Asian communities playing cricket in Yorkshire. Off the back of that came two further projects – one funded by the England and Wales Cricket Board (2014) and another jointly paid for by the ECB and Yorkshire Cricket (2015) which examined the experiences of south Asian coaches and south Asian communities in Leeds and Bradford, respectively. Both can be found here but, in summary, it was found that significant and powerful barriers exist that prevent the progression of south Asians into higher levels of the game – either as players or coaches. As a result of the existence of separate systems and pathways, ethnically diverse groups have little access to governance networks and so to knowledge of playing and coaching pathways, and qualifications. The low visibility of south Asian players and coaches as role models, coupled with a very strong sense that county coaching roles are protected by white gatekeepers for white coaches led to a view that the cricket “system” was exclusionary. The so-called Fletcher report therefore represents a conflation of three studies and various publications, but it would be unfair to claim all credit for the findings, given the amount of collaboration with other Leeds Beckett University colleagues. Still, I was quickly brought down to earth when both the YCCC and ECB delegations – despite funding the work – drew a blank when it was mentioned at the DCMS select committee. Since then I have been asked by a number of people how it felt to have done the work and have it ignored. Though frustrated to think it didn’t make an impression at the highest levels, the work has not been ignored. Quite the contrary. For example, findings from the work have been explicitly detailed in the ECB’s south Asian engagement action plan . Colleagues and I have written about these connections. More locally, I know from personal contact with its managing director that the Yorkshire Cricket Foundation has acted on the findings in a range of its influential community work. So it would be unfair to tar the entire cricket institution with the same brush. But the greatest achievement of this work has probably been its impact on Azeem and, specifically, how it gave him the confidence to come forward. In his original witness testimony, he writes how learning more about the history and culture of Yorkshire cricket “helped me understand the context of my own experience” and “reflect again on the patterns of language and behaviour that I observed”. Enlightening one person to the pernicious workings of racism has proved to be the spark for national impact. This is the greatest outcome for our academic work. I’m proud to be part of this conversation and of how my work may help to shape national strategy. Having played cricket to a relatively high standard for more than 25 years, starting my career at Barnsley Cricket Club (the same as Azeem) and navigating the county pathways to represent Yorkshire between the age of 15 and 19, I have been in many dressing rooms and played against thousands of others. And in all of these environments I have witnessed racism, misogyny, homophobia and other forms of discrimination. You would be hard-pressed to find a cricketer who has not. Anyone who claims otherwise is, frankly, in denial. This culture is normalised, even celebrated; laughed off as “banter”. Rarely is it challenged. Those of us who have are dismissed – “Where’s your sense of humour?” – or outed as different – “Careful, Fletch is listening.” As a white person racism is something I regularly encounter, though never experience. Other white people will say racist things about others to me, assuming I share their views. I don’t. I challenge racism because it is the right thing to do. And I’m in a privileged position to be able to do that because I know that my career will never be on the line and my right to belong will never be in jeopardy for calling it out. For others, such as Azeem, this clearly isn’t (or hasn’t been) the case. It’s why the responsibility for calling out racism and discrimination must not lie only with the victims. Surely, anyone who loves cricket, like I do, wants a game that is inclusive and welcoming to everyone who wants to play it, watch it or work within it. Responsibility for ensuring this is the case lies with everyone associated with the game. The ECB simply has to accept the basic principle that equality is everyone’s job and launch a national enquiry into the nature and extent of racism at all levels of the game. We need to seek the views of all who play, watch, oversee and administer the game. The term “institutional racism” has been bandied around a lot over the last few days. The very definition is that racism exists at all levels and in every facet of an organisation. As such, the Independent Commission for Equity in Cricket is a valuable asset for capturing self-reported testimonies. My fear though is that this will only capture the experiences of victims. If we are to truly understand the nature and extent of racism in cricket, we need to extend our focus to the experiences of witnesses and perpetrators. Only then can we claim to know how racism is manifest, normalised, and been allowed to hide in plain sight. The primary commitment must be in moving beyond identifying and defining problems to combating and eradicating them. Dr Thomas Fletcher is reader within the School of Events Tourism and Hospitality Management, Leeds Beckett UniversityFood banks in Australia were overwhelmed during the Covid-19 pandemic. Whole industries shut down, shedding jobs, and vulnerable people were suddenly more numerous and visible than ever. The demand for food relief exploded, and the charity sector went into overdrive. But the unique circumstances of the pandemic obscure a much more insidious problem. Guardian Australia has collated data from the past decade from the three major food relief providers nationally – Foodbank, OzHarvest and SecondBite – and spoken to organisations working in or connected to the food relief sector, as well as people directly using these services. The evidence is overwhelming: demand for food relief was rising before the pandemic hit, even before the black summer bushfires that preceded it. Food relief organisations all say the same thing: they are helping more people than ever before. But this is not a good news story. Something is terribly wrong. It’s a gloomy, overcast morning at Mission House, Fitzroy. At the back of the nondescript old terrace opposite the housing commission flats, commonly called the “high rise”, a team of people in fleecy-lined jackets unload vans, construct shelves and pack plastic shopping bags full of groceries – mainly food, but also sanitary items, nappies, toilet paper and hand sanitiser. Over the course of the morning, people trickle in through the back gate with various needs. Some pick up food parcels. Others arrange a subsidy for their medication. Run by Anglicare Victoria, Mission House is open a couple of times a week to anyone who needs its services. Sema Buyuksu, 52, is one of those who drops by on the day Guardian Australia visits. She lives in the high rise, sole-parenting her two youngest children, one of whom has Down’s syndrome. She has been coming to Mission House every month for 10 years. Buyuksu, who migrated from Turkey in 1989, receives a combination of Centrelink payments for looking after her two sons, and pays a portion of her income to the government for rent. She says she starts to feel the financial pinch when she has to fork out for school-related expenses or when winter comes and the heating bill hits. Her two youngest sons, who accompany her, are lively, cheerful kids who love AFL and soccer. They are on a waiting list for a house, but she doesn’t know if or when it will come through. The family has a lot of friends in the building, she says. “The neighbours look after each other all the time,” Buyuksu says. “But the government? No.” OzHarvest chief executive Ronni Kahn says the organisation’s mission is simple: “We’re not trying to fill a gap. We’re trying to put ourselves out of business.” When the bushfires hit in 2019, it was designated an official emergency relief provider and began receiving federal funding. “Emergency relief” is a catch-all term that refers not only to food relief but also other material aid such as financial grants and other goods. The federal government has provided $280m in base funding for emergency relief and food relief between 2018 and 2023, with a top-up package of $200m in response to the pandemic. Data obtained by Guardian Australia shows between 2016 and 2020, an average of 488,000 individual clients attended a federally funded emergency relief provider, overwhelmingly for food assistance. “As the figures demonstrate, the number of people reaching out for emergency relief has remained fairly consistent on a national basis over the past five years,” a department spokesperson says. Yet the dramatic growth of all the major food relief organisations over the past decade tells a different story. The increase in demand can be illustrated through the sheer weight of food distributed each year, as well as the logistical size of their operations. OzHarvest has expanded from nine vans distributing rescued food in 2011, to 70 in 2021. The 3m meals it handed out in 2011 pales in comparison to the 36m it reported in 2021. Each year, the scale of the charity’s work only increases. “We saw these stats rising pre-Covid,” says Kahn. “It’s not a problem that’s going away because Covid might come to an end. It’s not a problem that’s going away because the government can show that employment is rising. These are long-term, endemic challenges.” SecondBite was founded in 2005. By 2012, it was rescuing enough food to provide about 2.8m meals a year. This rose to 20m by 2016, and a whopping 35m by 2018-19. The charity’s most recent annual report, for 2019-20, includes the first few months of the pandemic. It delivered a record 41m meals to hungry Australians. “The reason for that increase is very simple,” says Steve Clifford, chief executive of SecondBite. “Increasing demand, increasing supply, and we increased our capacity to meet it. The numbers show our ability to increase our capacity, but the demand is going up outside that. We’re still not anywhere near meeting the increasing demand.” Not all food relief services are helped by federal funding. Clifford says they and other major distributors are hamstrung by stipulations that require them to use that money to provide food only to those organisations officially designated as emergency relief providers by the federal government. This cuts out a whole swathe of the social service sector, particularly smaller, community run co-ops. The story is similar over at Foodbank, which distributed 46m kilograms of food in the 2021 financial year, a 90% increase comparedwith the 23m kg handed out in 2011-12. The uptick is not due to the pandemic; distribution increased every year between 2011-12 and 2019-20. The charity’s recent annual hunger report estimated that 1.2 million children in Australia went hungry in the past year, while one in six adults also faced severe food insecurity. A 10-year analysis of these statistics is significant; in 2011 and 2012 the Gillard government implemented key changes to welfare policy, particularly around single parent payments and disability support pension eligibility, which bumped hundreds of thousands of people on to lower jobseeker payments. Howard government changes to the way the payments are indexed mean jobseeker payments have not kept pace with pension payments, or the general cost of living, even considering the government’s $50 a fortnight increase in March. The base rate of the dole is $45 a day. Depending on which measure you use, it’s either $20 or about $35 a day below the poverty line. Brianna Casey, chief executive of Foodbank, says the issues people were facing prior to the pandemic have only been exacerbated by it. “Those who were vulnerable going into the pandemic are going to be more vulnerable coming out of it,” Casey says. There’s considerable reluctance from many people who access food relief to talk openly about their experiences. People feel deep shame. Frontline workers and advocates consistently say that by the time someone turns up at an emergency relief centre, they are already at rock bottom. One man, a regular visitor to Mission House, is blunt about why he’s there: “The pension’s not enough,” he says. Kevin is 70, but he had to stop working his job in construction nearly two decades before retirement age after acquiring a disability. When asked his opinion about how pensioners are treated, he says: “You’re just a number on a piece of paper, waiting for a red line to be drawn through it.” He doesn’t understand why he paid his taxes if he ends up without enough to make ends meet. Rosanna Barbero, chief executive at Addison Road Community Organisation in Marrickville, Sydney, says the necessity of food relief services is a symptom of the government outsourcing its responsibilities to the charity sector. Arco has been providing services including food relief independently in the area for 43 years. “We need to be alarmed, not celebrate that we’re providing food to people.” Kristen O’Connell at the Anti-Poverty Centre is similarly forthright: “Food banks should not exist, because it’s the government’s responsibility to meet people’s needs and we have a right to have our needs met,” she says. “There’s a very simple solution to people not being able to afford to eat, and that’s giving people money. The government showed last year that it can do this overnight and they are making a political choice not to do it now.” Sam Horsburgh is the man behind the desk at Mission House, making everything run smoothly. Analysis of Anglicare Victoria’s available data shows that every year since 2016, between 56% and 72% of the people who needed to access their emergency relief services were on Centrelink payments. Horsburgh also says during the first year of the pandemic, when jobseeker payments were doubled, the regular clients at Mission House stopped coming. More people than ever were turning up seeking food relief, but those who had been doing it tough for years suddenly had enough to get by. Covid also forced a rethink in the way Mission House approached the people it helps. “We very much used to think about the sort of ‘entitled poor’, in that we didn’t want people to become too reliant on our services, without looking at the full picture – which is that they’re reliant on our services because there isn’t enough money in their lives. It’s not the other way around,” Horsburgh says. “We realised the equation was actually really simple: if you’re on Centrelink, you probably don’t have very much money,” he says. “And that’s long been the case.”A legal challenge has been launched against an earlier court ruling, reached in secret, that the contents of Prince Philip’s will should be concealed for 90 years. News to which the reflexive reaction, along with distaste for an uncontested intervention that protected royal privilege even in death, is inevitably, what’s in the will? Is it as promising as Lord Mountbatten’s diaries, whose censored passages, not necessarily involving his riding-boot fetish, are being demanded by a biographer? Philip’s bequests must surely be more than slightly awkward if they have to be hidden until long after the Queen is beyond embarrassment and, maybe no less pertinently, The Crown’s showrunners are likewise departed. The judge responsible, Sir Andrew McFarlane, must, if he wasn’t acting purely out of servility, have concluded that transparency would be riskier to royal wellbeing than the public appetite for disclosure he has, with a flair worthy of a 19th-century serial novelist, preferred to stimulate. If the will’s security comes at this price, the contents must, you imagine, be dramatic or at least mischievous. The eulogies dwelt on Philip’s pranks. Are we talking bequests to unappetising political groups, brotherhoods – republicans? Or does some retiring beauty stand to inherit, say, a curious Land Rover ornament of Philip’s own design which, if its existence is revealed, is certain to be claimed by another favourite? Though there’s no reason why Philip should not, inspired by long literary tradition, have been more ambitious. Along with unexpected bequests or strange conditions, there could be damning or reproachful comments, clauses designed for posthumous revenge. Has the prince seized this opportunity to advance the name he surrendered or to remind Charles, with obscure penalties, that he always thought he was mad to prefer Camilla to Diana? It is “clear”, McFarlane said in his ruling, that a will of a member of the royal family should not be subject to plebeian regulation. Secrecy serves, he says, “to protect the dignity and standing of the public role of the sovereign and other close members of her family”. Does he ever read the papers? Actually, perhaps not: McFarlane’s case for excluding reporters from the will hearing was that media interest could only be “commercial”, with the public interest better represented, even unknowingly, by the attorney general. So it may fall to friends or colleagues to break it to McFarlane that the dignity and standing of the royal family is not fully as it was when the precedent for royal will cover-ups was set, in 1910. Thanks to laxer censors than himself, McFarlane was probably aware that, following the abdication of the Nazi-sympathising Edward VIII, the royal family entered, largely thanks to the current Queen, one of its occasional phases of respectability, even taking into account unedifying contributions from the Queen’s mother, sister and children, also Princess Michael of Kent. Today, the Windsor reputation just about entitles the family’s sympathisers to argue, thankfully vainly, that it’s possible for the Netflix series The Crown to make it look worse. Increasingly, however, as the Queen retreats from public duties, it’s obvious that she, in terms of dignity-and-standing enhancement, has been an anomaly. Whatever the horrors in Philip’s last will and testament, they could hardly surpass the threat now posed to this dynasty by his descendants and their near associates. Will it, when unsealed, contain anything stupider than the ongoing public feud between the Cambridges and the Sussexes, all four of them self-styled authorities on mental health? What bequest could match, in terms of moral damage, Andrew’s connections with the late sex offender Jeffrey Epstein and with Ghislaine Maxwell? If updates on Virginia Giuffre’s lawsuit against Andrew seemed scarcer last week, it’s only because public interest (as measured, conventionally, in media rather than judicial coverage) moved to Andrew’s financial relationship with the Tory party donor and former Guernsey resident David Rowland. Rowland, a close enough friend to have sat in the front row at the wedding of a York daughter, Eugenie, reportedly paid off a loan to Andrew, by his own bank, of £1.5m. As ill luck would have it, Andrew’s older daughter, Beatrice, was also in the news, having at some point accepted a job as “head of partnerships” in a tech company whose founder is now accused of the sexual harassment and assault of a young woman. Beatrice seems to have resisted the suggestion that, like David Cameron, another prominent ornament to this company, she hurry up and quit. Possibly and correctly, she calculated that, left for a day or two, her difficulties would probably be overtaken by another royal scandal, like the mess involving Prince Charles, his donors and an ex-valet. Perhaps through his excessive kindness, the heir appears to have become popular with people who help paying foreigners wanting British honours, citizenship, royal pals. Michael Fawcett has just stepped down as head of the Prince’s Foundation, a charitable operation run from Dumfries House, one of the great environmentalist’s larger additions to a scattered house collection. Still, Charles could in turn be confident that if he waited a few hours the Sussexes would provide diversionary cover, such as the revelation that they had indeed assisted the authors of Finding Freedom with that dismal hagiography. As if that weren’t enough, the duchess was soon helping bury, with her regrettable chatshow appearance, news that the Charity Commission is to investigate how donations meant for the Prince’s Foundation somehow ended up at a different charity. Given these multiplying misfortunes, perhaps it’s understandable that any royal spouse able to put on a hat and look sad is now hailed, as three such achievers were last week, as the monarchy’s brightest hope. In fact, has the judge really done the right thing? In the post-Elizabethan age, a sensational royal will might soon look like a sweet reminder of better times. • Catherine Bennett is an Observer columnistWhen Sandy Green, the owner of Green Refectory, a popular cafe in Melbourne’s inner north, advertised a job before the Covid pandemic, she could expect a flood of applicants. Nowadays, as economies roar out of lockdown, the tables appear to have turned. “We’ll put up an ad on our website or in our window, and where we might have had 60 applicants, we’ll have one or two applicants,” Green says. “It’s a drastic change.” Similar tales are also playing out in Sydney, a city that had a headstart of a few weeks on the Victorian capital in easing restrictions. “We need four people – two on the floor and two in the kitchen,” said Alex Gomez, an assistant manager at the Canopy, a “rustic chic” restaurant beside Hyde Park in Sydney’s CBD. “It’s hard and complicated to find people.” A couple of blocks away, Japanese restaurant Inase has just reopened for dinner after renovations timed fortuitously for the lockdown. Staff would love to open a lunch shift but just can’t find the eight waiters and chefs they need. Similar tales are likely to constrain the hospitality industry for months, if not longer. One reason is the industry relied heavily on students – particularly international ones in the main cities – and other short-term visitors. The surge in labour demand extends across many sectors and regions, and had Reserve Bank governor Philip Lowe this week predicting the jobless rate looks to be headed to 4% by 2023 from 5.2% last month. That rate would be the lowest since the early 1970s, and a level the central bank has “little historical experience” of dealing with in terms of accompanying inflationary pressures if wages spike too. How the scramble for staff plays out has implications for interest rates, particularly for mortgage holders who have taken on extra debt during the past year’s 25% run-up in Australia’s house prices. It may also frame the federal election, with the Morrison government this week keen to talk up a “jobs boom”. Labor looks set to challenge that reading, with leader Anthony Albanese saying: “We need more jobs, but we also need more secure jobs.” Employer groups have demanded borders be reopened and for the migrant intake to be expanded. On the latter score, consultancy group EY recently estimated that by 2024 Australia’s population was projected to be smaller by about 800,000 because of the dent in migration caused by Covid. Labour shortages loom in a host of industries from software to construction because of the absence of those skilled immigrants. “We are seeing an increasing number of firms reporting the lack of suitable workers,” Jo Masters, EY’s Oceania chief economist, said. Many economists including Masters had expected the rebound from the extended shutdowns after the Delta strain arrived to be more muted than the first Covid wave. However, a host of data – from firms acting to secure staff before lockdowns lifted to increased credit-card spending on gyms, travel and other services – indicates the second revival may match the first. “We’ve seen what we saw last time, which is the economy coming back in a really jobs-rich recovery,” Masters said. Andrew McKellar, chief executive of the Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry, is among those seeking a return of migration. He estimates Australia needs as many as 200,000 skilled arrivals a year if “we want to realise our economic potential”. “The internet vacancy index released by the National Skills Commission earlier this week recorded more than 250,000 job vacancies, the highest level in 13 years,” McKellar said. “With job vacancies figures expected to rise to 280,000 by the end of the year, the tremendous pressure we’re seeing in the labour market is going to hinder businesses from operating at full capacity.” However, while the mood may be picking up, it’s far from universal. The shop windows in the central business districts of Melbourne and Sydney belie the boom, with many “for lease” signs their only display. “If you look all around the world, as restrictions ease, you are seeing quite similar patterns, and that is office occupancy gets back to about 75% but stalls around there,” Masters said. While workers wanted “the magic” of in-person collaboration, they have also enjoyed the convenience of working from home and wished to retain some of that. The drop in overall traffic matches what the experience of Elly Bruin, the manager of Patricia, a cafe in Melbourne’s CBD. While customer loyalty has bolstered her turnover, having fewer competitors helps too. “We’re actually kind of thriving,” she said. “But we have noticed some [new] people coming in saying a lot is closed around here, like new faces that we’ve never seen before. So I think they’re coming here because they know we’re still open.” For Waan Bransgrove, operator of the KnickKnack Cafe in central Sydney, revenue is barely meeting their $5,000 a month rental bill. “We just feel helpless,” she said, as she shut up for the day on a recent afternoon. “I’ve never felt so deflated in my life.” “The CBD worker is a dinosaur,” her husband, David, said, adding they planned to exit their shop by the end of the year. “I’m absolutely confident [business] is never coming back.” For Brad Chan, chief executive of the Banna Property Group and a leading advocate for Sydney’s Chinatown, there’s little talk of labour shortages as the outlook for many companies is dire. “You’re either struggling or you’ve lost a lot of money or you’ve lost the lot,” said Chan, a third-generation property owner in an area he described as “the opposite of vibrant”. The absence of Chinese tourists and students had only served to highlight a long-term neglect of the historic Haymarket region, he said. “Chinatown needs some attention now – or rather, yesterday.” That hospitality outlets can be in fierce competition for staff even as shopping centres are pockmarked by shop closures hints at underlying problems with the industry, according to a common refrain among those Guardian Australia spoke to. Gomez at the Canopy, for instance, worked in human relations in France before moving to Australia two-and-a-half years ago. Once his English is up to scratch, he would happily return to that profession. “It’s hard to have a personal life” with the long hours and weekend shifts, he said. “It’s good when you’re a student.” Kathryn Frances formerly worked in bars in Ascot Vale in Melbourne’s inner north-west, but found it hard to cover her living expenses even before the pandemic. “From bartenders, supervisors, assistant managers – they need people to fill them all,” Frances said. “But at the same time for the bar staff, they can’t really promise regular and consistent hours, so it’s really difficult for people who are trying to get a full-time wage. “Like the max I was really able to take home a week was about $500 to $600,” she said of her recent employment in the sector. “There is plenty of bar jobs available but the available hours are actually a joke. You can be hard-pressed to get more than 16 hours when you are hoping to work full-time.” Richard Denniss, chief economist of the Australia Institute, said the pandemic and its aftermath should prompt the public and policymakers to reconsider whose responsibility it was to train employees and how they should be rewarded. “You won’t see it in any [economic] textbook, but it’s not a labour shortage,” he said. “It’s a wage shortage.”There are bullet holes in Pam Saha’s laundry wall. There’s also a bullet mark in the floor and, nearby, what appears to be a bloodstain. There’s another reddish stain, with the pattern of a boot in it, visible in flaking paint on thefloor. None were there before NSW police arrived 10 days ago. The officers came to Saha’s house in north-western Sydney to arrest her nephew Stanley Russell, and ended up shooting him dead. The circumstances surrounding it are now the subject of an internal investigation. Inside the two-storey brick and weatherboard home large holes have been cut from the plasterboard walls, presumably by the forensic investigators who spent hours inside after the shooting, collecting evidence. Saha says on the morning of 9 November a police officer came to the front door of the Seven Hills home and ushered her outside. She saw four officers enter via the back door. Then she heard several gunshots. Saha lives in the small public housing townhouse with her children and grand-children. She’s been there for 17 years. The place is in need of repairs. On the day Guardian Australia visits, a contractor arrives to do a routine check on the smoke alarm in the kitchen. There’s a large hole in the kitchen roof caused by years of water damage from a leaking upstairs shower. A smoke alarm check seems the least of her concerns. She tells him to come back tomorrow. “I just need a fresh start,” Saha says. Her son Lesley adds: “She needs a proper house, three bedrooms. She just sits here all day thinking over what happened, it’s no good for anyone.” NSW police came to arrest 46-year-old Gomeroi man Stanley Russell on an outstanding warrant. A police spokesperson said there was a “physical confrontation” at the house. They said Russell had a knife and an axe and “confronted” the four officers, who “let out a number of shots”. Acting assistant police commissioner Julie Boon told reporters at the scene that Russell “collapsed” after being shot and could not be revived. Stanley’s parents, Ted and Helen Russell, said they found out about the shooting when they recognised Pam’s house on the news. “We have heard the police who went to Pam’s house say they had an arrest warrant for Stanley. There is a very big difference between an arrest warrant and shooting a man,” they said in a statement. “It is terribly painful for us to learn suddenly that we will never see Stanley’s smile again. His children will suffer from never seeing him again. “There are many questions about the killing of our son Stanley by police that we will seek to have answered through the coronial inquest. We will keep going in our struggle for justice, to ensure that deaths in custody must stop.” NSW police have been asked whether body-worn camera footage of the incident had been captured, whether all officers involved had activated those cameras, and whether the Russell family would be able to view it. They were also asked whether the officers involved had attempted to use other “non-lethal” options prior to shooting Russell, such as OC spray or Tasers. NSW police said they could not comment as the matter was subject to a critical incident review. On the night of the shooting, Pam and her friend Vivian Morgan spent the night at a stranger’s house nearby. The woman, they say, offered them a place to rest as they waited for investigators to bring Stanley’s body out of the house, at about 1am. Saha says she was offered a motel room for a few nights by the Department of Communities and Justice (DCJ) but she declined. “I don’t want to leave my nephew behind, that’s the problem,” she says. But she knows it will be better for everyone if they move now. “We need a fresh start, and a new house,” she says. “I dream about coppers coming to my house and everything. I see coppers in my house. Even last night, I got up at three o clock in the morning.” Is she frightened of the police? “Now I am, yeah.” Pam and Vivian say they keep going over the events of that day in their minds, trying to think of ways it could have been different. They both say they don’t like being alone with those thoughts, especially at night. “If the police would have come out and asked me: “come in here, and calm your nephew down”, I could have, but they never asked,” Pam says. Morgan adds: “We asked about Tasers and why they didn’t use Tasers, but they don’t wanna answer us. They won’t even answer me about the video-cam.” Meanwhile, Guardian Australia has asked NSW Police whether it is standard practice to leave bullet holes in walls in a shooting investigation and whether those caught up in police operations or shootings such as these were provided with repairs, offered an explanation of the process, or support afterwards. NSW Police said “the matter is subject to a Critical Incident investigation and as such we are unable to provide any further information.” NSW Police minister David Elliott also declined to respond to detailed questions about the incident or clarify what responsibility, if any, the NSW government has to assist the victims of a police shooting. A DCJ spokesperson says a local liaison officer contacted Pam shortly after the incident. The family would have to officially request a transfer, the spokesperson says, but concedes the family might need assistance with the process. “The Department of Communities and Justice has offered temporary accommodation and the Land and Housing Corporation (LAHC) offered to undertake repairs when the family is ready,” the spokesperson says. “DCJ will consider an application for a transfer to a different property if the family formally requests this.” For now, Saha and her family are waiting – for answers, for a new house, for the funeral, for the coroner’s report and for an inquest.In June last year, the New South Wales environment minister, Matt Kean, announced the acquisition of Narriearra station, a sweeping property on Karengappa country in the state’s north-west, for the national parks estate. Dotted with huge temporary wetlands that fill and attract waterbirds during inland floods, the 153,415 hectare outback cattle station was the single largest purchase of private land for a national park in the state’s history. This year, the government made further purchases in the far west, adding Langidoon and Metford stations and Avenel/Mount Westwood station near Broken Hill and Koonaburra station near Ivanhoe to land that will be protected for conservation. The acquisitions have marked the reversal of a trend that the head of the National Parks Association of NSW, Gary Dunnett, says saw the establishment and expansion of reserves come to an “abrupt end” after the Coalition won power in NSW. It’s a move that has seen Kean praised by the environment movement, though Dunnett adds it must come with adequate resources for environmental management. Legislation introduced by Kean to the NSW parliament this week proposing substantial changes to laws that govern national parks has also raised alarm bells from the NSW opposition, crossbench and the conservation movement. “Because we’ve had this long hiatus, we’ve got a national parks service that’s gone through efficiency dividends in that time. So from our perspective, they’re starting from a low point,” Dunnett says. “It’s really important that these new lands come with resourcing packages and it is notable that none of the press releases to date have actually talked about that component.” Iconic but vulnerable Since becoming environment minister, Kean has targeted national parks for much of the biodiversity work required of the portfolio. Conservation protections on other types of land tenure have been a source of division within the government, most notoriously with the “koala wars” that nearly split the Coalition in 2020. Kean initially set a target to add 200,000 hectares to the state’s conservation estate but doubled it to 400,000 by 2022 after reaching that figure almost a year early. The state has now added more than 500,000 hectares for protection since August 2019, which Dunnett says brings NSW closer to its historical average of about one million hectares a decade. Most of the new acquisitions have occurred in the state’s west, a region with unique ecosystems and species that are under-represented in the conservation network. About 9% of land in NSW sits inside protected areas. West of the Great Dividing Range the figure was closer to 3% before the new acquisitions. “They seem to have done a really good job of picking places that bring the best benefit from a biodiversity perspective,” Dunnett says. Pepe Clarke, the deputy director of conservation organisation the Pew Charitable Trusts, says the scale of the recent investments is welcome, and hopes it is a signal there will be greater investment in the management of parks in the years ahead. “Outback Australia is one of the last remaining intact natural places on earth, but much of our unique wildlife and iconic landscapes remain threatened or vulnerable,” he says. “In NSW, once you get west of the Great Dividing Range, wildlife habitat is woefully under-protected. Without greater active management and increased protection, many native species will continue to decline.” Clarke says to fulfil their potential, the properties will need to be managed with “boots on the ground” and, once livestock is removed, through work to address key threats, including noxious weeds and feral pests, particularly goats. Natural capital The NSW government has said little to date about how the new parks will be managed and resourced, with plans for each in development. When the Narriearra acquisition was announced last year, WWF-Australia called on the government to make sure the new park created jobs for traditional owners who should be able to use the site and be central to the conservation of cultural areas and artefacts. Rocky Robertson, the chief executive of the Tibooburra Local Aboriginal Land Council, told Guardian Australia that since that time the council and other Aboriginal people with ties to the land had had “a lot of involvement in the setting up of the new site”. In terms of resources, the government says the number of full-time equivalent staff across the entire national parks and wildlife service is 2,014, up from 1,633 in 2019. It says it is making the biggest investment – about $450m up to 2022-23 – in visitor infrastructure in NSW national park history and will under take the largest feral animal control program to occur across the reserve system. For the Narriearra Caryapundy Swamp national park and the Langidoon and Metford and Koonaburra sites, the government says there will be a total of six new positions added to existing parks teams. It says about $750,000 additional capital and operating expenditure has already occurred for these sites, on top of $1m spent on establishing a camp ground, roads and cultural heritage surveys and biodiversity surveys at Narriearra. Dunnett says the extra capital expenditure is welcome but there is “no information upon which to base any judgment of the adequacy of this allocation”. And he says the additional six staff roles represent just 0.3% of the total parks workforce, which falls short of a proportionate increase to staffing levels when the area of protected land in NSW has increased by 7.35%. A government proposal to use national parks to create credits to sell in the state’s biodiversity offset market also prompted major concern and accusations of “statewide greenwashing” last week when it was introduced as part of a bill presented to the NSW parliament without consultation. Labor and the crossbench have said they will oppose the legislation in its current form, despite welcoming aspects of the bill, including necessary changes to laws to expand the Gardens of Stone national park in the Blue Mountains. Bev Smiles, the vice-president of the Central West Environment Council, says the interest now will be in how the government deals with the environmental issues at each of the new parks and how it uses parks management to improve employment opportunities for local residents. “I’ve always advocated and there’s a real opportunity to have more local employment from natural resource management,” she says. “Our natural capital is something that needs to be invested in. “If that investment includes jobs through the local land service and national parks and wildlife service and employing rangers and local young people then it’s a really good outcome for everybody.” Smiles adds it would be possible to find threatened species on just about every piece of land out west. She says given the size of the new sites, once they are destocked and managed for conservation “there would actually be quite a bit of bounce-back”. ‘Green lungs next door’ Simon Molesworth is an environmental QC, pastoralist and the head of Landcare Broken Hill. He says the acquisition of the new sites has not been welcomed by the whole community, with some agricultural land owners concerned about what they see as growing competition for property. “What they’re saying is the government can outbid anyone and take these properties out of circulation,” Molesworth says. “But for the viability of rural Australia we need to have balance. If every property is producing, you then don’t have what I call the green lungs next door.” Molesworth himself has seen the degree of ecological bounce-back that can occur, having destocked his own properties three years ago to manage them for conservation. He says saltbushes, native grasses and low-lying shrubs have “come back magnificently”, even with minimal rain. “My view is you need to adopt the long-term perspective,” he says. “The climate is changing and it is responsible for governments to acquire large areas of land to become biodiversity and carbon sinks. “We do have to safeguard the biodiversity of the far west. I can observe that those that did destock, it’s extraordinary the degree of bounce-back.”As a teenager, Dylan Boag couldn’t wait to move to the city, but when he finally arrived, all he could think about was getting back home to the pristine waters of Jervis Bay, 200km south of Sydney. Today the 30-year-old runs an eco-tourism company in the 102sq km bay with his partner, Lara Hindmarsh. Their company offers lessons in free diving and tours for people to swim with seals, dolphins and whales. “It’s been paradise down here during the lockdown. People have realised city life isn’t always that great,” Boag says. “The air is fresh and the sea is clean here. It’s what makes life so good.” Judging by the developers eyeing off the area and tourists looking to escape down the highway from Sydney at weekends, Boag says it seems as though the rest of the world has come to the same conclusion. But Boag and other locals are increasingly concerned about plans to open up the Jervis Bay marine park – one of just five in New South Wales – to the cruise ship industry. “I can’t see any positives to be honest. The only thing is that business owners might make more money,” Boag says. “The health of our marine ecosystem is what sustains us all. There’s nothing environmentally safe about cruise ships.” An industry on pause After a two-year hiatus and the hit to its reputation from the Ruby Princess fiasco, Australia’s $5.2bn cruise industry is itching to get back on the water. Industry figures met the NSW health minister, Brad Hazzard, in early November to talk about what it would take. The industry had hoped to have a new season under way by now, but it has been a patchy start, with large operators such as P&amp;O Australia cancelling cruises due for 2022 due to a lack of certainty about government permission to operate. But the desire to get back to business is reviving tensions between the industry and communities living near current or proposed destinations over environmental concerns. They say the two-year break should have been used to resolve outstanding issues. In Queensland, a contentious proposal for a new cruise ship terminal on the Gold Coast has been refloated, while residents in Sydney’s Yarra Bay have been working to stop a new terminal being built there. Penny Davidson from the Jervis Bay Community Cruiseship Coalition says questions have gone unanswered by the NSW government, who she says has handled the issue in a confusing and opaque way. The Port Authority of NSW has repeatedly denied it has plans to open up the marine park to cruise ships, but a draft NSW mainland marine park management plan names Jervis Bay in plans by the Department of Primary Industries to boost cruise tourism in regional areas. Meanwhile cruise companies have been selling tickets that include Jervis Bay on the itinerary – raising fears that decisions have been made behind closed doors. “Our worry is that once you introduce this for one, you won’t be able to say no to others,” Davidson says. “Given our fragile environment, have they done the studies to show current levels of use aren’t already harming our ecosystem without adding more pressure?” A spokesperson for the Port Authority of NSW said the agency had taken over management of minor ports in Jervis Bay in 2018 and had “inherited a situation” where cruise ships were given permission by the Marine Park Authority to stay overnight in the area. They said Jervis Bay was not being considered as a cruise destination after discussions with the Shoalhaven city council and the authority was taking this consultation in future decisions. The Department of Primary Industries was contacted for comment. A familiar problem Prof Susanne Becken, who teaches sustainable tourism at Griffith University, says the situation faced by Jervis Bay and other communities is a “very familiar” story. From Vanuatu to Canada’s Northwest Passage, the pressure to open up new areas to the cruise industry is relentless, but decisions are often made without detailed independent research on economic benefits or environmental impact, she says. “Nobody really knows how much economic benefit the industry brings in and nobody really knows about how much pollution they are responsible for,” Becken says. “If you put in a new road you have a very comprehensive cost-benefit analysis and community consultation. The need for independent data is really important here.” The pollution the industry generates is not to be underestimated. As floating hotels that carry hundreds of people at a time into some of the world’s most pristine and fragile ecosystems, cruise ships generate an average 2,358m³ of greywater and treated sewage, 84m³ of oily waste, and 266m³ of solid waste a week, under normal conditions. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning And from the moment a passenger steps aboard a cruise ship, their carbon footprint triples thanks to the “bunker fuel” the ships burn. Bunker fuel is a low-quality fuel made from the dregs of the oil-refining process, and is hazardous to human health. Before global efforts to reduce the amount of sulfur in this fuel took effect in 2020, bunker fuel was thought responsible for 400,000 deaths worldwide from lung cancer and 14m cases of asthma. Even with the new regulations, the fuel is expected to cause 250,000 deaths a year. Becken says the “latent risks” also include the potential for spills both accidental and deliberate. In 2016 a Carnival Cruise subsidiary was handed a $40m fine when it was found crews aboard its ships in the UK and US used a make-shift bypass known in the industry as the “magic pipe” to dump thousands of litres of untreated oily water into the ocean. Coupled with the physical impact from anchors ripping up the seafloor, noise pollution from increased naval traffic and the cumulative pressure from the construction of support infrastructure such as piers or bus terminals, cruise shipping can be a dirty business. The industry says it is working to improve. A spokesperson for Cruise Lines International Association said its ocean-going members had committed to pursue “net carbon neutral cruising by 2050” and was supporting research efforts to develop zero emissions fuels. The spokesperson said the industry in Australia was covered by multiple levels of state and federal regulation that “includes strict measures covering discharges such as wastewater and ballast”. They said Australia had adopted global regulations know as “Marpol” aimed at improving the quality of maritime fuel, and cited the industry body’s waste management policy that “prohibits the discharge of untreated sewage at sea, anytime, anywhere, around the globe”. ‘We need world’s best standards’ Though the industry and government point to these regulations to soothe concerns, others in affected communities say they are wide enough to drive a cruise ship through. Kate Horrobin is among residents living near the White Bay cruise terminal in Sydney, who have been working to get authorities to address health and environmental concerns since it opened in 2013. Around that time, she says, residents began to compare notes about headaches and asthma attacks, which they came to believe were linked to inhaling exhaust from cruise ships idling at the terminal. “You’ll hear people say our problems have been solved because of the Marpol regulations, but they are intended as a standard when floating way out at sea,” Horrobin says. “You can still come right into Sydney Harbour burning 0.5% sulfur fuel. We need that to come down to 0.1%.” Horrobin says the industry may be raring to go after the pandemic, but for her it’s been a “lovely holiday” and a “complete relief” from cruise ship pollution. She wants the NSW government to build “shore to ship power” so that cruise ships can switch off their engines while in port. “It’s a do-no harm policy,” Horrobin says. “Our attitude is: come back, but in coming back you need to adhere to the world’s best standards, not the world’s worst. And you must protect the health and environment of communities you’re pulling up alongside.”Flipping through the Australian Ballet 2022 season program, you could be forgiven for thinking something was missing. Where are the tutus? Beloved by the many little girls who dream of becoming ballerinas, the great tutu ballets – Swan Lake, Nutcracker, Giselle and The Sleeping Beauty among them – are notably absent. Have the iconic tutus been pensioned off? Artistic director David Hallberg, whose tenure at the helm of Australian Ballet began mid-pandemic with a much-disrupted 2021 season, is quick to reassure. “The tutus are here to stay. Tutu ballets were my bread and butter throughout my dancing career, and come 2023, they will be back.” The scarcity of tutu ballets in the 2022 program reflects the realities of programming in unprecedented times, Hallberg explains. The AB’s productions of Anna Karenina and Romeo and Juliet, both dramatic story ballets without tutus, have been rolled over from the company’s pandemic affected 2020 and 2021 seasons, respectively. “I felt that these works really needed to be seen,” says Hallberg. “We made a financial investment in those productions but they are also testament to [former AB artistic director] David McAllister’s taste as a curator – something I want to honour and continue, and not just throw by the wayside.” Hallberg’s vision for the company is perhaps more evident in the programming of Kunstkamer, a large-scale contemporary work for 40 or more dancers (no tutus, no pointe shoes) created by choreographers Paul Lightfoot, Sol León, Marco Goecke and Crystal Pite for Nederlands Dance Theater. The Australian Ballet production will be the first staged by another company. “I believe ballet audiences in Australia are very open to the new,” says Hallberg. “There isn’t a preconceived idea of what ballet should be, like in Russia or in London. There is an openness here.” That openness extends to the AB’s dancers. “They’re not bogged down in tradition or by the patina of companies like the Bolshoi or Royal Ballet,” Hallberg says. “They can absorb varying styles more easily than a dancer trained in the French, Russian or English style.” Hallberg will be putting his personal stamp on Anna Karenina and Romeo and Juliet, too. “I want to emphasise individual interpretation,” he explains. “I want to empower the dancers in their own ability to interpret characters. In the ballet world – and I was subject to this – we focus so much on technique that it’s possible to lose sight of the true essence of the art form.” What really moves people, he says is “in the character you portray”. Those in need of a tutu fix might consider the Australian Ballet’s Celebration Gala, a stripped back showcase featuring 15 of the company’s senior dancers. “If you’ve never been to the ballet before, this is the one to come to because you’re getting a short, sharp greatest hits of ballet,” says Australian Ballet principal artist Benedicte Bemet. “It will have that purist tutu aesthetic and some contemporary works. I’m performing in La Favorita and the tutu is a beautiful red, very feminine and sexy. But then you’ve also got the Black Swan and the Sugar Plum Fairy tutu is just stunning, it has thousands of crystals sewn onto it.” Performing in a stiff tulle tutu is very different to dancing in Juliet’s loose dress or one of Anna Karenina’s elegant gowns, Bemet says. “The tutu often has a corseted bodice so the way you hold your back is very upright and perfect for those regal ballets where you want to be long and poised. “Wearing a dress for a younger character like Juliet, there is a bit more abandon and a free-flowing physicality. Even how we stand is affected. In a tutu, you are always standing in a formal classical position with your feet. But in a dress, you can stand like a normal human with both feet flat on the ground. Your whole mindset changes in a tutu.” The only tutu ballet in the AB’s season 2022 is Harlequinade, a lesser-known work by Marius Petipa (Swan Lake), revised by Alexei Ratmansky. The precision required makes it a challenging work, despite its “old school ballet aesthetic”, says Bemet. “We imagine the more modern ballet aesthetic of high legs and heaps of turns to be more difficult or impressive. But Harlequinade is very challenging in getting the lines right. I was really surprised – and there are some great tutus!” The Australian Ballet’s Celebration Gala plays at the Sydney Opera House from 24 November to 3 December and Arts Centre Melbourne from 9-18 December. Harlequinade plays in Melbourne in June 2022 and will be live streamed for audiences outside of Melbourne on 24 June.Darting and bobbing on spindly pink legs, the hooded plover places pebbles, seaweed and other beach debris around its nest at the high water mark on Johanna beach. The decorations will do little to deter birds of prey, off-leash dogs, human feet and other threats to the eggs and to the fluffy, sandy-brown juveniles that hatch. There are just 1,000 or so hooded plovers left, estimates area chief ranger for Colac Otway – Parks Victoria, Carl Gray. “It’s probably as close as you’ll get to a threatened species in your life,” he says. Johanna beach is the halfway point of the 110km Great Ocean Walk. Despite being one of Australia’s iconic long-distance coastal walks, most Australians haven’t heard of it, even in Melbourne, which is just a few hours from Apollo Bay where the full seven-to-eight-day trek begins. The Great Ocean Road, meanwhile? Oh yes. Everyone from Brunswick to Beijing has heard of that, and most have driven it, mainly to see the 12 Apostles. But you won’t see the Otway black snail from a car. Endemic to the area and with sharp, backward-pointing teeth, you’re most likely to see the carnivorous snail locomoting through leaf litter on day one as you walk inland from Apollo Bay through the Otways’ temperate rainforest of towering mountain ash, giant beech and lush fern gullies. Glow worms thrive in this moist bushland too. After hiking through the forest, the terrain changes. The next six or seven days (it depends on your speed) are along the undulating strip of the Great Otway National Park that fringes the coastline. This is beautiful Eastern Maar country, teeming with tea tree, xanthorrhoea forests, bush tomato, seaberry saltbush and headlands carpeted in Victoria’s floral emblem, the pink heath. It’s only on the final day, after you cross the Gellibrand River into Port Campbell National Park, that the 12 Apostles (now just eight) loom Instagramably offshore. It’s possible to do the entire Great Ocean Walk as an unassisted camping trip. Unlike a lot of Australia’s more remote long-distance trails, there’s car access at several points, so food drops can be arranged. Splurging on a guided walk with accommodation rolled in, however, means you’ll have a light pack, no meals to deal with and have raincoats, backpacks, walking poles and gaiters (for protection against tiger snakes and brown snakes) included. The Australian Walking Company version is a “highlights reel” of the final four days of the trail. The 46km walk begins at Castle Cove lookout and has dedicated accommodation for walking parties at 12 Apostles Lodge in Johanna. Our small group is returned to the lodge each afternoon for a foot spa among the trees, a glass of Victorian wine, dinner at a communal table and a fire pit for night owls. The lodge is family-run. So much so that I find pebbles in my foot bath, put there by the resident mischievous toddler, Luna. One of our guides, Jamie Brown stops us in a shaded forest nook on the first day to acknowledge the Gadubanud people. “They managed it so it’s as pristine as we see it now,” she says. “They did a phenomenal job. Look around and say your own thanks.” Ngootjoo, Ngootjoon means “all is well, all is healthy”. Yet it’s not entirely true. At several points, boot washing stations block the path. One by one, we step onto the submersible steel platform and douse our boot soles and the tips of our walking poles in frothy liquid that kills any cinnamon fungus spores we may be carrying in. The fungus rots the roots of grass trees; the few diseased plants we see are wilted and brown. Elsewhere, blackberries rise in a thorny tangle. Weeds thrive on and around cleared land and the Otways’ history of logging, bushfires and present-day agriculture has taken a toll, with lots of dairy farms bordering the park. Growing numbers of farmers, however, are working with environmental organisations such as Landcare to improve their practices. “A lot of landholders are revegetating parts of their properties to add to wildlife corridors,” Gray says. “This modern way of looking at farming, where you try to increase your biodiversity, is more and more common.” Our guides check the tides for each day so beaches are accessible. I’m usually the beach grinch, found admiring the plants while others glory in a classic coastal view. Not on this walk. Perhaps it’s the moody weather but the beaches on the Great Ocean Walk have a kind of exhilarating end-of-the-world bleakness. I drop back to walk alone and with no markers of era in sight, it could be a hundred years ago; a thousand. The sense of being unmoored from time satiates some abstract yearning I didn’t even know I had. Kelp as black and glossy as Batwoman’s suit is looped along shore pools filled with strange and perfectly smooth stones, while the eroded rocks at Milanesia beach protrude from the sand like pagan fertility figurines. Dinosaur footprints are visible here, as well Australia’s oldest-known bird tracks from the cretaceous period, 105m years ago. At Wreck beach, meanwhile, two huge rusting anchors poke wearily from the sand, one of them a relic from the Fiji, which smashed ashore in 1891 on its way to Melbourne from Hamburg. We feel little of the southwesterly wind that pummels this coast, mainly during winter, but its force is imprinted in the wind-pruned scrub and sloping, stunted trees. Parts of the track are steep but the path is firm, flat and grassy with the exception of some loose gravel downhills. Relief comes at high points where a sudden breeze rushes in and you can stand, arms outstretched, with no land mass between your sweaty skin and Antarctica. We see gang-gang cockatoos (the Black Summer bushfires toppled this once-common breed towards nationally-endangered status) and wedge-tailed eagles swooping low. “Can anyone remember when they last walked alone in the bush?” Brown says. She’s initiating us into the company’s solo walk practice, where they allow only one of us to set off through the stringy bark forest at a time. “Walk at your own pace, open your ears and your noses to what’s around,” she says. All walking companies should steal this trick. Not only does the physical separation stop the small talk that we are socialised to produce and consume, it focuses our attention in a mindful way on the silence. And then – in a rush of birdsong and wind whooshing through the tops of trees and the pound of waves on the shore – on everything that isn’t human that fills the silence up. Guardian Australia was a guest of Visit Victoria, Great Walks of Australia and Australian Walking Company. Parks Victoria asks those planning to walk unassisted to complete a trip intention form. If you miss low tide, don’t venture onto beaches.Joe Biden issued a statement in honor of Transgender Day of Remembrance, memorializing the dozens of transgender people who were killed this year in America and saying “each of these lives was precious”. Biden noted that 2021 has been the deadliest year on record for transgender Americans, particularly Black and Latino individuals. A recent study found that transgender people are over four times more likely to experience violent crimes than cisgender people. “This year, at least 46 transgender individuals in this country – and hundreds more around the world – were killed in horrifying acts of violence,” Biden said in a statement Saturday. “Each of these lives was precious. Each of them deserved freedom, justice and joy.” Transgender people killed this year in the US ranged in age from 16 to 49, according to the non-profit Human Rights Campaign. Two siblings, one who was transgender and one who was non-binary, were killed by their mother in Pennsylvania in February. Natalia Smut Lopez, a 24-year-old beloved drag entertainer from the Bay Area, was murdered by a man who she was in a relationship with in April. More than 100 people attended her memorial service in her honor. Trans women of color comprise four in five of all known violent killings of transgender, non-binary and non-conforming people, according to a report released by Human Rights Campaign in October. Since 2013, at least 256 transgender ad gender non-conforming people in 36 states and DC have been murdered. “The rhetoric and stigma aimed by anti-equality political leaders at transgender and non-binary people have led to an unprecedented level of horrific violence against our transgender community,” said Human Rights Campaign president Joni Madison on Twitter. “We must bring this epidemic of violence to an end.” In his statement, Biden said that he called on his administration to coordinate across the federal government to address the violence and advance equality for transgender individuals. He also called on state leaders to “combat the disturbing proliferation of discriminatory state legislation targeting transgender people, especially transgender children”. Over 100 anti-trans bills – including over a dozen that were passed – were proposed by lawmakers this year across 37 states. The laws include bills banning transgender girls from participating on girls’ sports team in Florida, Arkansas, Mississippi and West Virginia and bills prohibiting trans children from using bathrooms and locker rooms that match their gender identity.English football has been rocked by a fresh racism scandal after black and Asian referees revealed the scale of abuse and prejudice that, they say, is holding them back. A dossier compiled by match officials, and seen by the Observer, alleges that racism in the Football Association’s refereeing system is undermining efforts by black and Asian people to reach the highest levels of the game. The diversity report submitted to the FA contains racist comments allegedly made by the observers who assess referees for promotion to the higher leagues. The FA is now facing calls for an urgent inquiry. Tony Burnett, chief executive of the anti-racism charity Kick It Out, said: “The lack of diversity in refereeing is our biggest failure in football. Black and Asian people are not getting through to elite refereeing.” An investigation by the Observer reveals: •A report presented to the FA highlights allegations of racism among observers who mark referees for promotion. One observer is alleged to have told one referee: “You lot can all run fast, but that’s all you are good for.” •The lower levels of the refereeing system have been dubbed by some referees from ethnic minorities the “black man’s graveyard” because of allegations they are blocked by a small number of white assessors from reaching the highest levels. •There are no black or Asian referees officiating in the Premier League or Championship. There are just four referees from ethnic minorities officiating in the country’s top seven divisions. •The FA’s 14-member referee committee, which has the task of improving diversity in the 24,500-strong referee workforce has no black or Asian representatives. A 2015 FA report on diversity in refereeing, Widening the Net, set a target of 10% of its referee workforce being from ethnic minorities. The FA says ethnic minorities among referees has risen from about 4% in 2015 to about 8%. Joel Mannix, chair of the Black, Asian and Mixed Heritage Ethnicity (BAME) Referee Support Group and one of the highest-ranked black referees in the country, said: “You’ve got observers who are racist and they are marking down officials on their colour.” He said reforms need to focus on representation, recruitment and retention. The group submitted a diversity report last year to the FA that detailed alleged racist comments by observers. It compiled the report from referees from ethnic minorities to show the racial discrimination faced out by some referees. The report set out a road plan for reform. The BAME Referee Support Group now wants the FA to publish a detailed breakdown of the number of referees from ethnic minorities officiating across the various divisions. The Observer understands that referees have also compiled evidence on one observer, including video footage seen by the newspaper, who is alleged to have made racist comments. FA officials said that they did not comment on individual allegations, but would “investigate all alleged incidents of discrimination”. An analysis of FA figures has also found the official diversity figures cited by officials are of limited use because they are inflated by including white Polish and Irish referees as minority ethnic groups. The FA confirmed last week that all referees who were not from “white British backgrounds’ were recorded in the ethnic minority figures. There are about 24,500 referees in England, most of whom officiate amateur Sunday league football. While amateur referees may get as little as £25 a match, the professional referees can earn more than £100,000. Campaigners say while the football world will next year be celebrating the 150th anniversary of the FA Cup, it will also be a reminder that in its history no black or Asian referee has ever officiated at the tournament’s final. The FA said an equality working group is working on recommendations on the recruitment, retention, support and development of referees from all backgrounds. It is also updating its diversity figures and was unable to provide any detailed breakdown of its current figures. A spokesperson said: “We remain committed to ensuring the diversity of those playing, coaching, officiating and leading English football is truly reflective of our modern society. As part of this, within the 2018-2021 national game strategy we set inclusion targets across the game for the first time.”Liverpool’s 2-0 victory over Tottenham under bright blue skies at White Hart Lane on 11 May 2008 was described by the sports writers at the time as a lacklustre affair. But it has turned out to be a historic fixture: it was the last time a black referee officiated in England’s top league. It was hoped Uriah Rennie, the Premier League’s first black referee, would be the trailblazer for a new generation of minority ethnic referees. Instead, the business administration and law graduate, who refereed more than 170 Premier League matches, proved to be an outlier. While its footballers take the knee each week in a gesture to support anti-racism, no black or Asian referee has officiated a Premier League match for more than a decade. There are 40 referees on the books for the 2021-22 season in the Premier League and the Championship. They are all white. Out of a workforce of about 200 referees over the country’s top seven divisions, just four (2%) are black or Asian: Sam Allison, Joel Mannix, Aji Ajibola and Sunny Gill. There are approximately 24,500 referees in England, most of whom officiate amateur Sunday league football, and the Football Association (FA) claimed last week that about 2,000 (8.2%) are minority ethnic. So why are they failing to break into the country’s two highest divisions? Top minority ethnic referees say the answer lies in a refereeing report on diversity submitted to the FA in the summer of last year. The 53-page report, compiled by the Black, Asian and Mixed Ethnicity Referee Support Group, alleges that some of the FA observers who assess referees for promotion to the higher leagues are racist. According to the report, one observer is alleged to have told a referee: “You lot can all run fast, but that’s all you are good for.” Another is claimed to have said: “If you want to progress, you need to cut your dreadlocks.” Another made an offensive comment about throwing a banana. The FA this weekend faces calls for an inquiry into its referee programme and allegations of racism; more transparency over its diversity policies; and an audit of the appointment system for referees. Reuben Simon, 49, from Hanworth, west London, who was a referee in southern England between 2005 and 2015, said he was initially baffled at why the significant number of black, Asian and minority ethnic (BAME) referees officiating in the lower leagues were not climbing the ranks as quickly as white officials. He concluded that racism and unconscious bias were blocking them. Simon said: “There are lots of black referees at the grassroots level, but they are not getting through the system. It’s possible that every single black referee is rubbish, but if that’s absurd, what’s the other conclusion? They are being blocked because of racial bias. “Not every observer is racially biased, but the margins are so small the higher you go up the system that if just one person marks you down it’s game over.” Simon said he told a senior FA official in 2011 that regular and transparent audits of observers, including the use of “ghost observers” to shadow official assessors, would tackle the issue of racism and unconscious bias. The proposal was not taken up. Most referees are classified on an ascending scale from level seven to level one, with annual opportunities for promotion. The elite referees in the Premier League and the Championship are in two higher groups: select group one and select group two. The assessments for appointment to the next level are based on reports by FA observers and input from football clubs. Level 1 and the two select groups are overseen by Professional Game Match Officials Ltd (PGMOL), a company partly controlled by the FA and Premier League; levels 2 to 4 are overseen by the FA; and levels 5 and below are overseen by county FAs. A referee in the lower division will typically earn between £25 and £40 a match, while a professional referee in the Premier League can earn more than £100,000 a year. Mannix, who chairs the BAME support group and is a level-2 referee, said: “Levels 3 and 4 are known as the ‘black man’s graveyard’ because you’ve got observers who are racist and they are marking down officials on their colour.” He said the observers were mostly “old, white males”. The frustration is compounded by the fact that the FA’s 14-strong referee committee overseeing the diversity initiatives has no black, Asian or mixed heritage members. It is headed by David Elleray, a former referee who was sanctioned by the FA in 2014 after allegedly making racist comments to another official. Mannix said the FA was keen to address the diversity issue, but was not implementing the fundamental changes required. He recounted how, during one diversity meeting, a senior FA official had suggested that additional black referees could be recruited from among people leaving prison. “It was incredibly insulting,” Mannix said. Tony Burnett, chief executive of the anti-racism charity Kick It Out, said: “Black and Asian referees are not getting through to elite refereeing and it suggests a systemic problem. We need a review so we can understand the numbers and home in on the problem. It will not be a quick fix. This is going to take years.” The FA’s official diversity figures are of limited use because they have been boosted by counting white Irish and white Polish referees as ethnic minorities. Any referees “not from white British backgrounds” were included in the minority ethnic figures, the FA told the Observer. It has now launched a review and update of the data. Any allegation of discrimination would be taken extremely seriously, the FA said. Unconscious bias training has been delivered for referees, coaches and observers operating throughout the professional game and national leagues. An FA spokesperson said: “We want to grow the pipeline of a high-performing refereeing workforce across both grassroots and elite football, which is representative of females, black, Asian, mixed or other ethnic groups and disabled people.” Mike Riley, managing director of PGMOL, said: “We believe there should be no barriers to entry or opportunity in football. We have established an inclusion advisory group to focus on creating and implementing initiatives to address under-representation, as well as reviewing our existing practices and policies.”So much of the buildup this week recalled the events of 2 November 2019 in Yokohama. Back then, the Springbok pack scrummed England off the park, laying an indomitable foundation from which they controlled the game. When England’s backs got a sniff of the ball the South Africa defenders held the line like Spartans at Thermopylae. For the first 20 minutes of Saturday’s contest the opposite was true. England’s outside backs regularly outmanoeuvred the Springbok rush defence, scoring tries in either corner by sucking in the peripheral wing. Kyle Sinckler, so cruelly injured in the opening exchanges of the World Cup final, helped win two penalties from the first two scrums. After taking a 14-3 lead, memories of Ellis Park 2018 and England’s 24-3 advantage came to mind. However, that match finished with a 42-39 Springbok win. Ever since they have carved a reputation as a team that won’t go away. A strong bench helps, but there is an apocryphal notion that South Africans perform at their best when the odds are against them. Matches against England in the self-aggrandising “Home of Rugby” hardly need any additional impetus, but the apparent World Rugby awards snub this week and the punishment of Rassie Erasmus meant there were a few scores to settle and not just against Eddie Jones’ charges. Now with an early deficit to overcome, those old Springbok virtues were needed. Momentum shifted when Handré Pollard nailed a 50-metre penalty on the angle near the right touchline on 27 minutes. Three minutes later he squeezed another through the posts from the left. England would frequently visit South African territory, courtesy of a dominant kicking game, but they lacked the same cutting edge. The Boks scrum landed some blows of its own. Ox Nché flattened Bevan Rodd. Duane Vermeulen and Damian de Allende began to boss their channels. South Africa went into the half-time break behind by five points but well in the scrap. After establishing themselves as the darlings of the rugby world two years ago, Siya Kolisi’s team have become a lightning rod for a lot of nasty rhetoric. Much of that is the result of a jingoistic cabal within the South African press corps and the teams’ frothing fanbase. There is also no denying legitimate concerns over one-eyed reports from afar. Scoff all you like, but barbs from the UK still sting. In the second half, the Springbok scrum, restocked by a fresh front row four minutes in, gained the upper hand which also saw the maul grab the ascendancy. Eben Etzebeth, whose personal battle with Maro Itoje deserved its own highlight reel, was immense, marauding through holes and hammering English carriers. His two steals on defensive lineouts after Kolisi was sin-binned looked to be decisive acts of heroism. That he would end up a loser on the night is the result of two breakdown penalties won by the home side – one within Marcus Smith’s range and the other inside their own 22 with the finish in sight. For the second consecutive visit to London, South Africa lost by a single point. That will hurt, particularly given how well they stormed back into the fight. But legitimate questions will be asked about the way they began. That is now seven games and counting that they have been behind at half-time. Against this England team, who are unbeaten in the past 22 matches in which they have been ahead at half-time, this proved the difference. It has been a strange season for the world champions. Last time they were here they left with a sense of optimism regarding what was to come. Erasmus had yet to devise the “Bomb Squad” tactic, the Chasing the Sun documentary had yet to yank tears from a million eyes, a glorious future lay in wait. Now they leave the UK with yet another reason to feel aggrieved and prove the doubters wrong.NHS England officials said the health service is ready to extend the availability of vaccines quickly when and if expert recommendations for who should receive them change, after a report suggested plans to give the Covid jab to children aged five to 11 could become reality next year. Covid-19 vaccines are licensed in the UK only for children aged 12 and over, and any decision on extending them to children younger than 12 would be made by the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA). According to a report in the Sun newspaper, leaked proposals suggest that health bosses are preparing to roll out the jab to children aged between five and 11 in the spring. An unnamed source told the Sun that plans for who gets the jab could change, adding that asking parents for permission to vaccinate young children “is in the schedule”. The MHRA said vaccines would only be authorised for children in this age category if safety, quality and effectiveness standards had been met. If the MHRA were to extend the licence for younger children, the Joint Committee on Vaccines and Immunisation (JCVI) would advise the government on how to interpret such a guidance change before the vaccines would be rolled out. A spokesperson said: “Extending the use of a Covid-19 vaccine to children aged five to 11 would only be authorised if the expected standards of safety, quality and effectiveness are met. As with children aged 12 and above, parents can be fully assured that for any potential authorisation in this age group, the safety of the children would be our top priority.” Asked about the newspaper report, NHS England said: “The NHS regularly plans for how it would operationalise opening vaccines to more people so it is ready to extend the jab quickly when and if any decision is recommended by the JCVI.” In the UK, children aged 12 to 15 have been eligible for one Covid-19 jab since September. The JCVI is yet to make a recommendation on second jabs for children in this age group who haven’t been infected with the virus. US health officials approved giving a third of a normal Pfizer Covid vaccine dose to five to 11-year-olds in early November, a move that means 28 million children in that age group will become eligible for a child-sized Covid shot. Hong Kong on Saturday approved lowering the age limit for the Covid-19 vaccine from China’s Sinovac Biotech to three years, down from 18. This week, experts from the UK Health Security Agency said children aged 12 and over who have contracted the virus should not get a vaccine until 12 weeks later. Deferring the jab could help to reduce even further the “very, very small” risk of heart inflammation after vaccination, the experts said.Mikel Arteta went toe-to-toe with Jürgen Klopp on the touchline but a chasm remains between their teams on the pitch. The youthful revival of Arsenal was halted emphatically by Liverpool, who inflicted familiar torment on their visitors with a stirring and necessary recovery of their own. Anfield has been home to recurring nightmares for Arsenal in recent times and, despite the confidence generated by a unbeaten run with bold young talent to the fore, this was no exception. Liverpool made it six successive Premier League home wins over Arsenal and maintained their record of scoring at least three goals in every one. Sadio Mané opened the scoring in a competitive first half. The second was completely one-sided, however, and goals from Diogo Jota, Mohamed Salah and substitute Takumi Minamino reflected the heights Arteta’s team must aspire to, and still have to reach, before their development troubles the established elite of the Premier League. The one place and two points that separated the sides prior to kick-off appeared an illusion as Liverpool comfortably ascended to second in the table. “When we had to grow momentum at the start of the second half we gave the game away,” Arteta lamented. “We gave the ball away under no pressure and were punished. They had all of the momentum. They were the better team and that is the level. They have been together for six years. We haven’t. That is the difference.” It was a reflection of Liverpool’s superiority that Aaron Ramsdale, the visiting goalkeeper, produced a fine display yet still conceded four times. The breakthrough had been coming when Mané headed past the new England international but it took a 32nd-minute flare-up between the two managers to spark a flat contest into life. Klopp took exception to the Arsenal bench demanding a card for Mané when he was penalised for a foul on Takehiro Tomiyasu as they challenged for a header. Arteta erupted in fury, racing down the touchline and squaring up to the Liverpool manager before being held back by his assistant head coach, Steve Round. Arteta continued to try to reach Klopp, who was kept back by his own coaching staff, and both managers were booked once the melee died down. The Kop made its feelings clear to the former Everton midfielder. They should have thanked him, as Liverpool immediately upped the tempo and seized control. Klopp said of the incident: “It was a completely clean situation with two guys jumping in the air but the Arsenal bench were going for it. I said to them: ‘What do you want for that?’ It looked like everyone wanted a yellow card and I am sick of these moments when everyone is going for Sadio. It happened against Real Madrid and also against Atlético Madrid when we had to take him off at half-time because he was on a yellow card. It’s just not right.” Arteta said: “He was defending his side and I was defending mine.” Ramsdale denied Thiago Alcântara, plus the improvised rebound from Mané, before blocking from Salah and tipping over a Trent Alexander-Arnold drive as Liverpool – players and crowd alike – ignited their efforts in the aftermath of the managers’ confrontation. Cracks were beginning to appear in the Arsenal defence and, when Alexander-Arnold floated a free-kick deep into the visitors’ area, Mané ghosted in-between Gabriel Magalhães and Tomiyasu to plant a textbook header past Ramsdale. From Arteta’s perspective it was a poor goal to concede. Klopp may have appreciated converting from a set piece after the problems his team had with them in defeat by West Ham. With Ramsdale’s resistance broken and Arsenal offering little in attack, Liverpool sought to press home their superiority immediately after the restart. Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain placed a shot just wide having been released into the box by Fabinho. A dreadful mistake from Arsenal’s left-back Nuno Tavares then gave the hosts the comfort of a two-goal lead. Tavares appeared to have done his defensive duty when winning the ball from Alexander-Arnold but he played a needless reverse pass straight to Jota. The Portugal international pounced with cool precision. First he read White’s overcommitted challenge and stepped inside the flying centre-half before wrongfooting Ramsdale to convert into an empty net. Klopp’s team were flying through the Arsenal lines at will. But for Ramsdale, the visitors would have endured a heavier defeat. The goalkeeper saved bravely at the feet of Jota when the striker was played clean through by Salah. He denied Jota again, this time with a fine reaction save, after Salah had opened up Arsenal’s penalty area with a superb pass. When Arsenal finally broke the pressure, Alisson denied Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang with his feet. Salah’s performance was rewarded with the goal it deserved when he volleyed home Mané’s cross at close range. The move had started with Alisson’s clearance out of defence to Konstantinos Tsimikas, who headed inside for Jota to send the Senegal international scampering away. Another flowing team move brought the fourth. Mané, Salah and Alexander-Arnold then combined intuitively for Minamino to score at the back post with his first touch. “We had to show a reaction and we gave a mix of a very mature performance and a very exciting performance,” said Klopp, who lost Jota to a knee injury. “There were exciting goals, an exciting press and it is a very impressive result.”“In the beginning, it was really painful to watch Tottenham’s games, really painful,” Mauricio Pochettino says, the emotion rising, seemingly out of nowhere. “Because when you feel a club is like home, it’s not easy to split from this feeling.” It is Wednesday afternoon, Pochettino is zooming in from Paris Saint-Germain’s training ground and England is on his mind, partly because his team are at Manchester City in Champions League Group A this Wednesday coming. But mainly it is because of Spurs. “Today is 17 November,” the manager continues. “And in two days, it is the anniversary. The two years since we left Tottenham. It’s in my mind, no?” Pochettino truly is the most gloriously soppy of former Argentina centre-halves and this is what a breakup looks like – the regret, the sudden pangs – even if he says that he is doing better these days, he is moving on. “When I watch the games now, it’s always with a smile and trying to support them because when you love a club and you feel at home, always you wish the best for the people that you know,” he says. One of them is Harry Kane who, if things had worked out differently over the summer, would have been lining up for City at the Etihad Stadium against Pochettino. “I love Tottenham fans and I love Tottenham and I am so happy that Harry is in Tottenham,” Pochettino says. “But I want the best for Harry and I want the best for Tottenham. That’s it, no?” If feels like the moment to ask Pochettino whether, if things had worked out differently for him over the summer, he might have found himself back at Spurs. It was Steve Hitchen, the technical performance director and Pochettino’s close friend, who had explored whether the sensational reunion could happen as the club cast the net for a permanent successor to José Mourinho. Pochettino said nothing at the time in late May, which went down badly in Paris, and he is keen to explain the stance. In short, Pochettino did not drive the story so why was he going to comment on it? “You never know from where these rumours appear and I am a person who doesn’t like to take advantage of these things,” Pochettino says. “That’s why I didn’t talk. The people criticised me here in France, the media … ‘Why doesn’t Mauricio give his word about staying in Paris?’ But when you don’t create things, why am I going to say something? I don’t need to clarify things. Of course, I listened to everything. But, yes … never happened, that.” Did Pochettino not end up extending his PSG contract? “No, we didn’t extend,” he replies. “When I signed in January, it was one and a half years plus the option of one more. The club activated the option and now it’s this season plus one.” Was it to discourage Spurs? “Haha, maybe,” Pochettino says. “I don’t know. I didn’t ask the president and I didn’t ask Leonardo [the sporting director]. Maybe it was that” Pochettino will never lose his sense of mischief, his joie de vivre, but it feels as though it has been tested during his 10 and a half months in Paris, where he continues to live in a hotel. His wife, Karina, younger son, Maurizio – who is on Watford’s books – and beloved dog, Sansa, remain in London and it is a long way from being ideal for such a family-oriented man, although his older son, Sebastiano, is with him at PSG where he is the fitness coach. “The situation is a little bit strange,” Pochettino says. “It’s not easy but we’ll see what will happen – if I can find some apartment or house then I will move soon. With coronavirus and the lockdown, it was difficult to find a house and the right house. But I’m OK. I’m not in a bad place. I’m in a good place. The good thing is that I’ve found very nice people in the hotel. Now we are like a family. It’s unbelievable how all the staff treat me.” Pochettino must deal with suffocating levels of expectation, with PSG required not only to win every match but to do so in style. “This season is massive and all the people believe that we should be winning the games before we play – after one minute, if you have not scored three, four or five goals, the disappointment is massive,” Pochettino says, without the hint of a smile. PSG are well clear at the top of Ligue 1 while they trail City by one point after four Champions League games, with a four-point cushion to Club Brugge in third. But the football has sometimes been unconvincing, lacking in beauty and thrills, and the criticism has been remorseless. It is put to Pochettino that no matter what he does, it can never be enough. “No, exactly,” he says. “That is the feeling. But that is good because we are living a very good experience. It is an amazing experience.” It is probably Lionel Messi’s fault because, with him arriving in August to supplement Kylian Mbappé and Neymar up front, rival defences ought to be little more than quivering wrecks. Plainly, it is not that simple, with none of the trio appearing to suit Pochettino’s fast-pressing style or to be overly bothered about tracking back. Balancing the team is a fiendishly difficult task, although does anybody want to hear that? “Each of the three can be the king of any club in the world,” Pochetttino says. “But you have three kings in the same club, three with different needs and who need different things from the team. Mbappé needs space to run and high tempo in the transition. Neymar needs to have the ball and feel the ball, and sometimes he needs to drive the ball. And Messi needs maybe another tempo in the game. That is not easy to put all together. “We’re working to find the right way to play in which Mbappé feels comfortable, Neymar and Messi feel comfortable and then the rest of the team understand that sometimes we need to increase the tempo and sometimes we can play on the space, sometimes we need to play more horizontal and build in the slow possession. It’s not an easy task but it’s an amazing challenge which we are enjoying, a beautiful time to have the possibility to work with these amazing players.” What Pochettino seemingly must do is win the Champions League, because regaining the domestic title and retaining the French Cup is not enough. If he did not deliver the biggest prize, the one that the club’s Qatari owners have craved since their takeover in 2011, he would most likely be branded a failure and he knows it. “I agree,” Pochettino says. “The feeling is about winning the Champions League and, if not, you will feel that you have failed. For sure. The people translate that feeling.” Pochettino is not blind to the realities of life at PSG. He signed with his eyes wide open to them. “It’s all about winning,” he says. “It’s completely different to another project. When I accepted the job, I knew that if you play well and you don’t win, there’s nothing to do.” And yet Pochettino continues to push a more layered take, his own reality, in which time to adapt and build are recurring themes. If they apply to the collective, then they must do so on an individual level for Messi, who has previously known only life at Barcelona for so many years. “We hope that we have the time to develop in the way that we want to play,” Pochettino says. “It’s only with time and commitment. If we have the capacity to create this commitment, all together, I think it’s going to be an amazing journey. If all the players are committed to the project then, for sure, we are going to be close to winning the Champions League. That’s the job we are doing now – to work, to convince and to make that happen. “The easiest thing for us would have been to wait for another project, a normal project, with no pressure and to build something long-term. But we are brave and we love the challenge. It makes us grow. We are enjoying this period but we know that the line is so thin. You can be over the moon one day and, the day after, you can be at the bottom. That is how these types of clubs live.”It seems remarkable that there was a time, not so long ago, when the Premier League was seen as holding England back. Only about a third of its players were England-qualified, the argument went, and so opportunities for English youth were restricted. The Premier League has many problems and causes many problems, and for the vast majority of young players perhaps it is difficult to secure game time. But for those at elite level it can be a useful finishing school, offering the most promising young players regular high-class opposition and the very best teachers. These are extraordinary times for English football. Imagine you are picking the squad for next year’s World Cup. Assuming the 3-4-2-1 Gareth Southgate fielded against Albania and San Marino is the default, there are perhaps five spaces available for the two inside-forward roles to operate either side of Harry Kane – which, along with right-back, is the area of real strength. When was the last time that was true? English football has traditionally produced centre-backs and centre-forwards, hard-grafting midfielders and reliable goalkeepers. It has not really done position-defying craft and creativity. Raheem Sterling is the man in possession, and was probably England’s best attacking player at the Euros. Mason Mount is loved by coaches for his tactical intelligence. Then there’s Jack Grealish, Bukayo Saka, Emile Smith Rowe, Marcus Rashford, Mason Greenwood, Callum Hudson-Odoi and Jadon Sancho, none of them older than 26. But it feels increasingly as though this season may be witnessing the emergence of the greatest of them all: Phil Foden. The fretting over whether he was getting enough pitch time is ebbing. Pep Guardiola’s panegyrics to his ability sound increasingly sincere. The excitement at an emerging talent and the lust to see him as often as possible shouldn’t occlude the desirability of patience, of the benefits of letting him develop at his own pace. Guardiola may turn out to have got it just right; certainly it’s easy to see his influence on the player Foden is becoming. Discomfort at where the money comes from is reasonable, and there probably should be a moral reckoning: English football undoubtedly benefits from the fact the Premier League can afford to recruit the best coaches in the world. It’s not only Foden’s poise and vision, his 87.6% pass completion rate and average of 1.4 key passes a game, his work rate and his positioning: it’s his versatility. He may have scored only three goals this season and registered one assist (although in six league starts, that’s a perfectly reasonable strike rate), and he may not top any charts for chance creation or for dispossessing opponents, but that’s largely because his range has been so varied. This season, he has been used in at least five different roles. Role A: Chelsea 0 Manchester City 1, Premier League, 25 September 2021. City set up, as so often, in a 4-3-3, with Foden the central forward between Gabriel Jesus and Grealish. His role was very much as a false 9. He had only 32 touches in the game and didn’t register a shot, but made 27 pressures and was a key factor in the way City smothered Chelsea – although he also created four shooting opportunities. This was the centre-forward as midfielder. Role B: Liverpool 2 Manchester City 2, Premier League, 3 October 2021. That James Milner, usually such an unflappable emblem of calm efficiency, should have been fortunate not to be sent off said everything about how Foden, playing on the left of a front three, tormented him. He went past him on the inside, he went past him on the outside, and he effectively neutralised Liverpool’s right-back as an attacking threat by constantly hitting the space behind him. His goal capped a complete performance that included 19 pressures and 30 carries, seven of them of more than five metres. Role C: Andorra 0 England 5, World Cup qualifier, 9 October 2021. England started in a 4-3-3, with Foden not as one of the three forwards but on the left side of midfield, sitting deep and measuring passes into the narrow space behind the Andorra defence, a ploy that was undeniably effective. Against better opposition, perhaps Foden would be less successful in that more withdrawn role, his creative instincts compromised by the hurly-burly, but against a deep-lying defence his ability to calibrate a pass was hugely important. Role D: Brighton 1 Manchester City 4, Premier League, 23 October 2021. Foden played in the middle of a front three and while there were occasions on which he dropped deep, he operated almost as an orthodox centre-forward, harrying the Brighton defence and scoring twice. It helped that Brighton played with a high line, but he repeatedly made dangerous runs in behind. He had eight shots in that game, four of them on target. Role E: England 5 Albania 0, World Cup qualifier, 12 November 2021. Foden started as the right-sided forward in a 3-4-3 and linked well with Reece James as England pulled Albania apart before half-time, transforming what could have been an awkward game into a stroll. It was his corner that brought the fifth goal, but more significant was the intelligence of his movement and passing, the way he kept the ball moving, never letting Albania settle. At the Euros he had looked out of sorts on the right but here, and then in the first half against San Marino, he was running games from that flank. “I like Phil for the fact he knows how to play football,” Guardiola has said. “We can have an extra man in the positions we want to play, to pass the ball you have in certain areas to have more players.” That sort of positional intelligence and ability to improvise within a defined framework has traditionally been rare in English players. And that, perhaps, is the most significant detail. It’s not only that Foden is technically gifted and works hard; it’s that he is tactically smart as well. And that intelligence, with the guidance of Guardiola, means it looks as though he could be very special indeed.That’s all for today. Thanks as always for following along with us and be sure to check back shortly for the full match report. What a finish! Aubrey Bledsoe, the two-time NWSL Goalkeeper of the Year who slammed the door on Chicago’s comeback hopes late in extra time, is named Most Valuable Player of the final. And there’s the final whistle! The Washington Spirit are NWSL champions for the first time in their history after coming from behind to defeat the dogged Chicago Red Stars at Lynn Family Stadium! 120 min: Another hair-raising moment for Washington as Arin Wright nearly equalizes with a thunderbolt toward the upper-right corner that just misses the mark! The Spirit are clinging on as the fourth official signals for two minutes of stoppage time. 119 min: Another set piece for Chicago, this one a free kick from distance, but nothing comes from it. Tick, tick, tick ... 117 min: Doniak gets a step on her defender and runs into a pocket of space onto a perfect ball. This could be the equalizer. She tries to slot it past Bledsoe and Bledsoe makes the stop! The save of the match by the two-time NWSL Goalkeeper of the Year! 116 min: Substitutions coming in for both teams. For Washington, Saori Takarada replaces the tireless Ashley Hatch. For Chicago, Nikki Stanton comes on for Bianca St Georges. 115 min: The increasingly desperate Red Stars are throwing numbers forward into attack. A speculative effort by Doniak sails into the gloves of Bledsoe. About five minutes to go. 112 min: Chicago win a foul near the corner flag. It’s initially cleared before popping out to Davidson, whose on-target shot is saved by Bledsoe. 111 min: Hatch is back on. Well-drilled defending by Washington shuts down a Chicago foray. 110 min: Hatch slowly makes her way off the field as play resumes with Washington down a player. 108 min: Ashley Hatch is down in a pile with hard challenges happening all over the field. 106 min: The second half of extra time is under way. Fifteen minutes to go and Washington appear to be in firm command after Kelley O’Hara’s unlikely header. Can the Red Stars deliver one final plot twist? 105 min: One minute of stoppage time, the fourth official says. 102 min: Julia Roddar is shown the first yellow of the game after a (somewhat dubious) foul call that gives Chicago a free kick from a dangerous area. The Red Stars can’t capitalize, though, as it’s quickly cleared into the middle third. The unlikeliest of goal-scorers breaks through for Washington as Kelley O’Hara, the longtime USWNT right back, slips through the backdoor on to a gorgeous cross by Trinity Rodman and heads it past Cassie Miller. It’s the 33-year-old’s first goal of the season and the Spirit are ahead only seven minutes into extra time! 92 min: We’re under way in extra time with St Georges on for Milazzo. Some extracurriculars between Arin Wright and Trinity Rodman after a spirited challenge for the ball. No booking for either as the referee was a bit late to spot it. And we will need extra time in Louisville to settle this year’s NWSL final after Chicago survive Washington’s second-half assault. 90 min: The fourth official signals for four minutes of stoppage time as the Spirit move into attack. 89 min: Rodman is back on as Washington look to close in on a winner. 88 min: Rodman walks on the field after getting shaken up and it looks like she will re-enter after a moment. The Washington forward Sanchez comes off for the substitute Taylor Aylmer. 86 min: Another dangerous chance for Washington keyed through a suddenly unstoppable Rodman but Wright can’t finish it. Moments later Rodman goes down in a heap after a full-steam ahead collision with Doniak. 84 min: Another chance for Washington as Rodman flicks a nifty pass to Sanchez inside the area but the Spirit forward can’t put it home. 82 min: Hatch carries it into the area with her defender in tow before firing a right-footed bullet directly at the keeper. 81 min: Sullivan has a go on goal from outside the area but the well-placed shot toward the far post is saved by a diving Miller. 78 min: The Red Stars make their third substitution as Alyssa Mautz comes on for the goal-scorer Rachel Hill. 77 min: A rare half-chance for Chicago but the threat is quickly broken up by the industrious O’Hara. 73 min: Washington make their first substitution as Anna Heilferty comes on for McKeown in a swap of rookies. 71 min: Tara McKeown beats Davidson to the spot and heads a cross toward the goal, but it’s just wide left of the target. All Washington right now as Chicago seem to be hanging on for dear life. The captain steps up and fires toward Cassie Miller’s left. The keeper guesses correctly and, frankly, is positioned to make the save. But it somehow skids under her reach and into the back of the net for the equalizing goal! 66 min: McKeown runs onto a pass from Rodman in the area and is taken down by Davidson. The referee points to the spot. Not a controversial call. Sullivan will take the penalty ... 64 min: O’Hara makes a marauding run down the right side before sliding it across the top of the box toward three onrushing attackers. Bailey runs onto the cross and fires it on goal but it’s saved. The Spirit have come alive over the last five minutes and are battering the Red Stars. It feels like the equalizer could come at any moment. 61 min: Rodman uncorks a thunderbolt from distance but it caroms off the post. What a shot from the 19-year-old rookie! 60 min: More pressure from Washington over the past few minutes but they can’t translate it into meaningful scoring chances against this disciplined, well-organized Chicago defense. 55 min: Might be time to put out a missing person report for Trinity Rodman, who’s been conspicuously quiet on the afternoon. 54 min: A well-worked possession in the final third by the Spirit ends ... with nothing. Out for a goal kick as Hatch tries to work it along the end line for an opportunity. 50 min: More slow, choppy play in the early going after intermission, a pace that favors the Red Stars. 46 min: Mallory Pugh, who went off with an injury in first-half stoppage time, is out for today’s match. Danielle Colaprico comes on in her place. That’s Chicago’s second substitution of the afternoon after Vanessa DiBernardo was hurt in the 13th minute and replaced by Makenzy Doniak. So the Red Stars are already down two starters, but lead by one goal. And there’s the whistle after the Red Stars break through on, essentially, the final kick of a mostly lackluster opening half. Arin Wright beats Kelley O’Hara on the left flank, then floats a cross over Bledsoe toward Rachel Hill, who calmly heads it into the back of the net. No Pugh, no problem! 45 min+5: A wobbly Pugh gingerly makes her way off the field without assistance and play resumes with Chicago down a player. 45 min+2: Pugh goes down in a heap after getting tangled up with USWNT team-mate Kelley O’Hara. The trainer is out to assist her as she covers her eyes with her right arm. 45 min+1: The fourth official has signaled for three minutes of stoppage time. 45 min: Rodman, the NWSL Rookie of the Year who’s been mostly held in check in the first half, has an open look from the top of the box but her shot is corralled easily by Cassie Miller. 39 min: Washington win a third corner. It’s poorly taken and Chicago quickly clear it. Roughly five minutes to go in a mostly choppy opening half where neither side has been able to hold things together for long. 36 min: Washington’s Dorian Bailey is hacked down from behind by Katie Johnson for a free kick. Sullivan tries to link up with an onrushing Sonnett, but her service is overcooked and out for a goal kick. 34 min: Rachel Hill cuts into the area and sends a liner toward the goal that’s deflected out for a Chicago corner. Pugh, who missed the semi-final due to Covid protocol, delivers another poor corner that’s easily cleared into the middle third. 31 min: After a bit of a slow patch for both sides Washington win a corner kick, their second of the match. Sullivan stands over it before curling it toward the goal. It’s deflected out and looks like it should be another corner, but referee Tori Penso rules it a goal kick. 25 min: The Red Stars win another corner. Pugh sends it into the area, where it pinballs around a gaggle of players before Katie Johnson fires a shot toward the post that a fully extended Bledsoe pokes away for another corner. This time it’s quickly cleared from danger. 22 min: Chicago try to spring Pugh, but her USWNT team-mate Sonnett is there to break up the attack. Moments later it’s out for a Washington goal kick, which Bledsoe plays short as the Spirit look to build up from the back. 20 min: The Spirit are able to win back possession quickly, moving it to the foot of Rodman, whose shot on goal sails wide of the target. 19 min: McKeown wins a free kick for Washington. Sullivan delivers it to the far post, where it’s headed toward the center before Miller snatches it away from danger. 17 min: Doniak pounds a low shot from the edge of the area but it’s deflected by a Washington defender on to the foot of Kelley O’Hara, who keys a counter-attack up the right flank that peters out in the final third. 15 min: And now Doniak, who just came on, is down after a blind-side collision with Staab while making a run on goal. But she’s up on her feet after a brief spell and play resumes. 13 min: The veteran Vanessa DiBernardo – the Chicagoland native who is the the only Red Star to play every playoff minute in club history – is down with an injury. And it looks like she will be coming off. Heartbreaking moment. Makenzy Doniak will enter in her place. 11 min: Chicago are really turning the screw on Washington in the early going, dominating possession and spending an increasing amount of time in the final third. The Spirit are able to intercept a pass and key a quick counter-attack targeting Rodman, but it’s busted up by the Red Stars’ center backs and Chicago resume the attack. 9 min: Katie Johnson puts a shot on target for but it deflects out off of Sam Staab for a corner. The set piece is quickly cleared but Chicago regain possession from the back, where a long ball to Johnson finds the forward offside. 6 min: First chance of the afternoon for Chicago as Mallory Pugh’s shot from just outside the area is well-taken but headed out of danger. 4 min: The Spirit win the first corner of the match. Sullivan plays it short and Emily Sonnett’s attempt to redirect it on target goes out for a goal kick. 2 min: Andi Sullivan has a go from distance and it’s hauled in comfortably by Cassie Miller, who’s been Chicago’s first-choice keeper in the absence of Alyssa Naeher, who was injured playing for the USWNT at the Olympics. 1 min: And we’re off! Washington are attacking from right to left in dark blue shirts and red shorts, Chicago from left to right in all-white strips. The players are taking the field for today’s final. After a bit of throat-clearing for the national telecast, we should be under way any moment now. Here’s a look at today’s lineups. The Red Stars have won two and drawn one in three meetings with the Spirit this year. They have met only once in the playoffs in their histories: when Washington won 2-1 in extra time in the 2016 NWSL semi-finals. Washington Spirit XI: Bledsoe, Staab, Sonnett, McGrady, O’Hara, Sanchez, Bailey, Sullivan, Hatch, McKeown, Rodman Subs: Speckmaier, Aylmer, Heilferty, Yokoyama, Biegalski, Kerr, Nielsen, Takarada, Roddar Chicago Red Stars XI: Miller, Davidson, Gorden, Woldmoe, Wright, Milazzo, Gautrat, DiBernardo, Pugh, Hill, Johnson Subs: Colaprico, Sharples, Mautz, Stanton, Doniak, Morse, St Georges, Boyd, Goralski Referee: Tori Penso Hello and welcome to today’s NWSL final between the Washington Spirit and the Chicago Red Stars at Lynn Family Stadium in Louisville. A fascinating matchup looms between two sides each vying for their first ever title. The dominant Spirit, who have gone 11 matches and 105 days since their last defeat, reached today’s championship match with a 2-1 win over OL Reign in last week’s semi-finals, conceding in the opening minutes before goals from Trinity Rodman and Ashley Sanchez on either side of half-time. The scrappy Red Stars, who upended the Portland Thorns by a 2-0 scoreline in the last four, will look to finally break through after bowing at the semi-final stage each year from 2015 through 2018, then falling to the North Carolina Courage in the 2019 championship and the Houston Dash in last year’s Challenge Cup final. “If you were look at the two teams you would probably go, ‘Washington might edge it,’” NWSL MVP Jess Fishlock of the OL Reign told Reuters. “But, listen, I just would never go against Chicago at this point: I think their resilience this year has been one of the most phenomenal things to have seen, honestly.” We’re about a half-hour from kickoff and will be back with the team sheets for today’s final shortly. Bryan will be here shortly. In the meantime here’s a look back at last week’s NWSL semi-finals.It is a win and such is the number of caps missing from this outfit, Wales will take it. A young side found redemption with a winning penalty from the veteran Rhys Priestland at the death. And so a mixed autumn has been salvaged with consecutive wins. But they have been achieved against teams reduced to 14 by early red cards. This time Australia’s No 8, Rob Valetini, was the man sent off for an upright tackle in which his head clashed with Adam Beard’s. The Wallabies’ autumn thus does not find the redemption of a single win against their European opponents. One would have to say they have themselves to blame: a clearly talented outfit but missing key personnel, they could not quite make it tell. Wales’s typically vociferous home crowd provided the edge. For Wales, any excitement will be tempered by the realisation they scored one try when Australia were down to 13 and the other from an interception. The concession of three tries will also grate. “We can talk about red cards and yellow cards,” said Wayne Pivac. “But pressure creates cards, and we’re good enough to create it.” Two wins – and a narrow defeat against the world champions – is a reasonable return for a side missing so much experience. Taine Basham has emerged to add to Wales’s riches in the back row and, perhaps best of all, Ellis Jenkins has confirmed his return. Strangely he was replaced despite being captain for the 10 minutes of the second half when Wales were reduced to 14 after Gareth Thomas’s yellow card. Coincidentally or not, that was the period when Wales started to lose control of the match. But the key development was that red card in the 15th minute. Valetini thumped into Beard with upright posture. The clash of heads was violent and, in different ways, did for both men’s further involvement. Beard was replaced by Ben Carter, the 20-year-old lock, while Valetini’s technique was subject to an unsympathetic review by the referee and the crowd. Annoying, too, for Australia, of course. All the more so, given they were a try up at that point. From the kick-off they put together a punishing series of phases: Nic White’s chip set Len Ikitau away and the mighty Taniela Tupou scattered a few with another carry before Hunter Paisami put in a second chip behind the Welsh defence, to which Andrew Kellaway won the race. Dan Biggar landed two penalties, the second following the red card, to bring Wales to within a point but another Tupou charge set up James O’Connor for his first penalty shot at goal. Within five minutes Australia were cursing their discipline again. Kurtley Beale’s slapdown of Nick Tompkins’s pass meant the Wallabies were reduced to 13 while he served time in the sin-bin. A penalty try would not have been controversial but Wales had their seven points from the resultant lineout, a lovely move at the front working Ryan Elias into the corner. Biggar landed the conversion from the touchline to give Wales the lead for the first time. The theme of self-induced Wallaby pain continued after the break. Tom Wright forced a pass which Tompkins patted down. Unlike Beale in the first half Tompkins managed to hook his hand round the ball so that it did not go forward. Everyone stopped, including Tompkins after he had regathered, but the referee waved him on for an interception try and 10-point lead. Wales’s authority evaporated after that and when Thomas saw yellow for an illegal clear-out, Australia enjoyed numerical parity for 10 minutes. Tellingly, they made it count with the try of the game, and followed that up with the next-best even after Thomas returned. Beale has had his moments in this stadium over the years. This time his step inside Willis Halaholo was wicked, as was his fend on Aaron Wainwright. Ikitau was in support and found White, who finished between the posts. Then, just after Wales were returned to 15 men, Paisami broke their line and swift hands gave Filipo Daugunu a chance in the corner which he finished in great style. O’Connor hit the post with his conversion attempt, so Wales were still ahead by a point. Not for long. Beale stepped up to land a penalty from 45 metres out with two minutes remaining to give Australia the lead. Beale was almost away again but for a tackle by Christ Tshiunza, yet it was Gareth Davies who broke the game for the last time. His snipe down the left had Wales hammering at Australia’s line at the death. The Wallabies infringed, and Priestland stepped up.Michael Aylwin was at the stadium, read his match report: Wayne Pivac is having a chat “I thought the boys had done well enough at 23-13, but we let them back in and some mistakes crept in. We’ve learned a lot about players who wouldn’t be in the squad without all our injuries so that’s been a good thing for the team. The young guys would’ve got a lot out of the series.” James Slipper, Wallaby Captain. “Lack of discipline really hurt us. In Test matches you just can’t win when you put yourself under that much pressure. Our plan coming into the game was to start well, but then we lost our No 8. But we put ourselves in a position to win that game, and I couldn’t be more proud. It’s been a long year for us, we’ve been on the road since June and the boys will be happy to get home.” Ellis Jenkins, the winning captain, speaks: “We were probably more relieved than celebratory to be honest. I’m not sure why we make such hard work for 14 men, we just try to carry on playing but probably didn’t do that as well as we could’ve.” Taine Basham is Man Of The Match. He says: “I’m proud we stuck in and didn’t give up. We didn’t take enough opportunities, it should have been a ten point game really. We’ve beaten two of our 2023 World Cup opponents, which is a positive Autumn and I’m going to keep learning.” The young back row made 19 tackles today, he’s been the find of the series for Wales. PEEEP-PEEEP! Australia are devastated, Wales are delighted. HE SLOTS IT! WALES WIN!! 80+1 mins. Wales are up to 19 phases of repelled carries, the latest being Christ Tshiunza held up! But there was an advantage being played and Rhys Priestland will have a kcik to win it... 79 mins. Gareth Davies gallops into the Australia 22, but he’s hauled down. The attack is set up for endless carries for the Wallaby line.. 78 mins. Under a chorus of boos, Beale cannons it forty-odd metres to put his side in front with minutes left! 77 mins. Wales have a bit of ball, but the standard pattern is to throw a long pass to Priestland standing very deep and pass it through hands. The Aussie defence simply walk forward as there are tricky patterns to confuse them in any way. Soon after, Wales are penalised for holding on in fron of the post and just inside the home side’s half. More Subs. Australia Tate McDermott for Nic White Lalakai Foketi for Hunter Paisami Wales Elliot Dee for Ryaan Elias Gareth Davies and Rhys Priestland for Tomos Williams and Dan Biggar. 71 mins. The hugely impressive Hunter Paisami breaks in midfield, steps around Williams, but is chopped down by the scrambling McNicholl. But Wales’s defence is low on number and the Wallabies work it left through hands and Filipo Daugunu scores. James O’Connor bounces his conversion off the post. It’s a one point game. Strap yourselves in! 68 mins. This could be the stupidest penalty I’ve seen since, well, since the last one. Australia have Wales pinned in the corner, struggling to recycle and clear, and Will Skelton just walks around the ruck and jumps on Tomos Williams. Honestly, it’s hard to overstate what a brainless action that is at this stage of the match and in that part of the field. Wales clear upfield. Australia Sub Lachlan Swinton is on for Pete Samu 65 mins. Dan Biggar, limping a bit after a collision, doesn’t let that affect his accuracy and he continues his 100% record for the day. 62 mins. Australia have been on top since the daft Wales yellow card. In their latest phase they go over the top in the lineout to Paisami, then it’s fed left to Beale who steps through the line. He pops the ball inside to Wright, who finds White in support to score under the posts. A bloody wonderful try, quite frankly. O’Connor converts. In an Abe Simpson in the brothel GIF moment, Gareth Thomas is off the field very soon after entering it. 57 mins. Wales have a promising attack and a fast ball ruck is ruined when Gareth Thomas throws himself, shoulder first, at Alaalatoa lying on the ground. The ref and TMO are taking a look at this, and Alaalatoa’s potential high tackle on Basham to start with. It looks like Thomas could be saved because his mad and stupid swinging arm wasn’t accurate enough to connect cleanly with the Aussie prop’s head. It was, by any measure, a pointless and dangerous action from the Wales sub. 56 mins. Ryan Elias’s lineout throwing is losing a little focus and the latest is stolen on halfway. With the possession the Wallabies go left through hands that allows Ikitau to slip Halaholo and feed Paisami to drive into the Wales half. Liam Williams does a great job in the scramble to force a spill from the Aus attack. Subs. Louis Rees-Zammit is off for Johnny McNicholl Wyn Jones and Tomas Francis are replaced by Gareth Thomas and Dillon Lewis. Rory Arnold is off, Will Skelton is on for Australia 51 mins. Halaholo messes up taking the restart and then Wales are offside. This leads to a period of possession for the Wallabies in the home 22 which results in a lineout close to the Wales line in the right corner. The visitors catch and drive but Wales do enough to stop it then hold them up to win the turnover when the maul hits the deck. Wales will have a scrum on their own five-metre line. 48 mins. This is a very odd one. Nick Tompkins is in between Beale and Wright and sticks his arm out. The ball hits his arm and then the deck, everybody stops but the ref shouts “backwards!” so Tompkins picks it up and runs in unopposed while Australia are a mixture of bewildered and fuming. TMO takes a look and, wouldn’t you know it, it did go backwards. Try given, Biggar converts. 46 mins. Some decent possession from the Wallabies probes the Wales defence, but the home side hold their shape and eventually force a kick to touch. Wales win the ball on their own 22 and clear. 43 mins. Strong start from Wales, moving the ball easily left and right and getting some offloads away with Liam Williams prominent joining the line. But the ball is stripped by Australia and cleared before Ryan Elias throws a squint lineout. Latu and Tupou are off for Folau Fainga’a and Allan Alaalatoa Dan Biggar kicks us back into action. If nothing else, Wayne Pivac continues his happy knack of somehow having opposition players red-carded for doing something dangerous. Even with that, Wales remain only three up and Australia continue to cause problems with the ball. However, the Wallabies issue with giving away endless penalties added to the player numbers disadvantage surely means this is there for the taking for the home side. 40 mins. Off the latest attack attack Biggar sends it left to Josh Adams who runs in behind but it stopped by Tom Wright brazenly grabbing his collar from behind. On the advantage Halaholo fires a beautiful miss-one pass to Basham but he can’t break away. From the lineout Wales can’t secure possession and after Australia clear Dan Biggar hacks it out to end the half. 38 mins. The fly-half puts his side back in front. 37 mins. Halaholo has his first carry of the game and his steps and jinks around Ikitau and Beale. A wonderful little run and Tupou is offside in the retreating defence and the big prop is also limping a fair bit. He’s going to try to walk it off while Biggar tees up this penalty. 35 mins. A period of each side probing with kicks ends as O’Connor overcooks a 50-22 attempt and send it out touch-in-goal. Wales will have a scrum from where he kicked it, back in the Aus half. 32 mins. It’s even better for Australia as Wyn Jones is penalised and O’Connor kicks it as far as he can to clear his lines. Kellaway collides with Adams in the air and has come off worse as he’s down and not looking comfortable. The ref considers the Wallaby wing has overrun it, so it will be a Wales penalty in their own half when play resumes. Tom Wright will replace Kellaway. 30 mins. From the restart, Tupou is penalised for holding on as Ellis Jenkins clamps onto him. Biggar sends the ball to the corner, but the maul from the lineout crumples and the ball is stuck in there leading to Australia winning the scrum. I imagine the Wallabies will reset this as much as they can as Beale is due back on in a couple of minutes. 27 mins. As has happened often this Autumn, Wales struggle to stay onside when under pressure in their own 22. O’Connor takes all the time he’s allowed to bring his side level. SUB. Adam Beard will not return after his HIA, so Ben Carter is on permanently. 23 mins. The Wales forwards set up as if the catch and drive is coming from the lineout, but the ball is popped to Tomos Williams looping around to the blind side who feeds Elias to score in the corner. Biggar makes a fabulous kick from the touchline 22 mins. Nick Tompkins drifts outside and looks to backhand offload to Rees-Zammit. The ball doesn’t reach the winger but that’s because there was a deliberate one-handed knock-on from Beale. He’s off and Australia will have ten minutes with thirteen men. 21 mins. Wouldn’t you know it after my snarky preamble this is turning into a very good game with some good attacking. This time it’s Wales who go via a Biggar delay pass that puts Ellis Jenkins into the open. The ball is recycled and kicked left for Rees-Zammit to chase but Nic White just beats him to it. 18 mins. A huge carry from Tupou after a lovely Slipper offload puts Australia back into the Wales half and at the breakdown the home side have little discipline. James O’Connor wastes no time extending the visitors’ lead. Great response. Lots of chat on comms about how Valetini wouldn’t have meant to do that and how he’s not an nasty player etc. But that’s all irrelevant as he should be hitting low and simply not tackling like that. 16 mins. Biggar kicks the resulting penalty. 15 mins. Wales have their first real platform of the game from a lineout on the Wallabies 22. Adam Beard carries the ball up and takes a head-on-head collision with Rob Valetini. Valentini was very upright, he was in at speed and the Ref cannot see any mitigation for the Aussie 8. Beard is very, very tall so to catch his head you’re technique has to be pretty bad. Beard himself is off with blood coming from his head. 13 mins. The Australian scrum is getting much of the early nudge on as Wales’s set-piece woes continue. They drive the home pack backwards and win a penalty to set up another attack, but Beale is isolated out wide and Tompkins wins a breakdown penalty. 9 mins. Australia have a scrim on halfway after Taine Basham knocks on when ripping the ball in the tackle and it’s solid and moved wide left on first phase. Wales contain it but the Wallabies continue to work the blind side, but it comes to a halt when James Slipper is penalised for a neck roll on Basham. The Dragons back row is putting himself about early. 5 mins. Well, that’s a great start by Australia. A varied attack featuring power and some nice touches that Wales had very little answer to. But, directly from the restart Izack Rodda obstructs Josh Adams. Utterly daft penalty and Biggar makes them pay. 3 mins. A chip in behind from O’Connor is snaffled by Paisamion the bounce and this puts the Wallabies on the attack in the Wales 22. They work the phases and are up to double-figures and on a penalty advantage Paisami slides a kick towards the line for Kellaway to gather and score. James O’Connor slots the extras. Wales receive the ball and clear it back upfield. Flames, disco lights and Metallica fill the stadium as Wales emerge from the tunnel. “Off to never-never land” is a strange lyric to get yourselves pumped for a game, but each to their own. While you have a few minutes.. Michael Aylwin has higher hopes of the game than I, so maybe you should take him some his yin to my yang by reading this. I’m sure you all have opinions and I for one would love to hear them. Send them all via email or tweet. Seven changes in Wayne Pivac’s line-up from Fiji. In the backs, Josh Adams is back on the wing, Uilisi Halaholo is in the centres and Tomos Williams reclaims the scrum-half shirt. In the pack there are returns for Wyn Jones, Tomos Francis, and Aaron Wainwright, while Seb Davies is promoted from the bench. Captain and World Player Of The Year nominee Michael Hooper is a huge injury loss for Australia; Pete Samu replaces him in the back row. James Slipper will take over as captain and will be joined by new starters Latu and Toupous to make up the front row. In the backs, Filipo Daugunu replaces Tom Wright on the wing. Wales: Liam Williams; Louis Rees-Zammit, Nick Tompkins, Uilisi Halaholo, Josh Adams; Dan Biggar, Tomos Williams; Wyn Jones, Ryan Elias, Tomas Francis, Adam Beard, Seb Davies, Ellis Jenkins, Taine Basham, Aaron Wainwright. Replacements: Elliot Dee, Gareth Thomas, Dillon Lewis, Ben Carter, Christ Tshiunza, Gareth Davies, Rhys Priestland, Johnny McNicholl. Australia: Kurtley Beale; Andrew Kellaway, Len Ikitau, Hunter Paisami, Filipo Daugunu; James O’Connor, Nic White; James Slipper, Tolu Latu, Taniela Tupou, Rory Arnold, Izack Rodda, Rob Leota, Pete Samu, Rob Valetini. Replacements: Folau Fainga’a, Angus Bell, Allan Alaalatoa, Will Skelton, Lachlan Swinton, Tate McDermott, Lalakai Foketi, Tom Wright. Roll up! Roll up! Come and grab your tickets for the Underwhelming Cup! Gasp! As you see set pieces crumple! Marvel! At the disjointed nature of the attacking patterns! Mutter under your breath! As another penalty at the breakdown is given away! All this and more, here in Cardiff today. Of course, it may not go that way and both teams will be aching with desire for that not to be the case. But on evidence thus far in the Autumn, this is what awaits us. Maladroit games are not necessarily bad ones for us watching as they can be frenetic and dramatic, but Wayne Pivac and Davie Rennie will want some significantly better quality than what has been tipped out of their teams’ performance buckets up to now, especially after last week. Cue a magnificent high quality game, and me receiving endless “your preamble aged well” comments. Australia don’t have to look that far back to find some very good performances from the summer; with Wales it’s a bit more tricky as even their own supporters grudgingly accept the JamSlam nature of their 2021 Six Nations victory.That’s your lot, then. A reminder that Andy Hunter’s report has landed. Here it is. Thanks for reading this MBM. Nighty night! Mikel Arteta’s turn. “The first half was very competitive. We had moments, and a goal disallowed. We competed well. We needed to be patient and try to build the game in our favour. But we did the opposite. We just crashed and started to give the ball away. They can press and are one of the best teams doing it, but we got sloppy. They were better than us, we have to accept that, congratulate them and learn.” As for the nose-to-nose exchange of views with Klopp ... “Klopp was defending his team, and I was defending my team. That was that. It doesn’t matter. I have congratulated him. For me the incident stays there, and was just part of the heat.” Jurgen Klopp speaks to Sky. “It was an exceptional performance. We grew into the game, controlling it in a really good way and played some exciting stuff. We were really ruthless in the decisive area, and that’s why we won. This league is incredibly intense, and the most intense part is ahead of us.” As for the locking of horns with Arteta ... “It was absolutely no foul from Sadio, but the Arsenal bench went up like it was nearly a red card. I said: what do you want? I cannot get that any more. I had to take Sadio off against Atletico Madrid because they went only for that, and wanted him to get a yellow card. It is just not OK. The ref did really well, I deserved a yellow card. If there’s a harsh challenge we are all like this. But it was nothing. He didn’t even touch him. It was just two players going in the air. That was not OK, and that’s what I said.” Some hot manager chat coming up soon, hopefully. In the meantime, Andy Hunter’s report has landed, and here it is. Trent Alexander-Arnold speaks to Sky. “It’s exactly what we needed, and what we expect of ourselves. We were massively disappointed with the loss [at West Ham] but we bounced back today. A clean sheet, four goals, and a very good performance. They came with two banks of four and were tough to break down, but we broke them down in the end. The first 15, 20 minutes of the second half were as good, pressing wise, as we’ve played all season. That second half was outstanding.” Liverpool’s victory sends them back into second place. Manchester City can leapfrog them tomorrow with a win over Everton at the Etihad. Arsenal remain in fifth place, with a little daylight now between them and the Champions League places. Liverpool end Arsenal’s ten-game unbeaten run in comprehensive style. Mikel Arteta may regret going nose to nose with Jurgen Klopp, an incident that whipped up both home crowd and team. The handshake between the managers is purely functional. 90 min +2: White crunches in on Mane. All perfectly legal, and payback perhaps for that kick across the back of the legs just before half time. 90 min: Liverpool play some more keepball. There will be three extra minutes. 88 min: Liverpool stroke it around at half pace. Everyone could do with hearing the final whistle, for one reason and another. 86 min: Not a great deal going on right now, leading Mary Waltz to observe: “Since the match is decided, the only reason to stick around is the post-match managers handshake.” 84 min: Both teams make a change. Elneny comes on for Partey, while 19-year-old Tyler Morton makes his Premier League debut. He replaces Thiago. 82 min: Salah thinks he’s won a corner down the right. But he hasn’t. The sort of decision that would normally raise hackles, but with Liverpool four up, the home crowd let it slide. 80 min: Space for Saka down the right. He slips Tomiyasu away on the overlap. Tomiyasu looks for Aubameyang in the middle, but his cross is way too long. 78 min: That’s Minamino’s first goal for Liverpool at Anfield, and he celebrates accordingly. He’s already scored here, of course, a pearler for Red Bull Salzburg in the Champions League. What an introduction! Minamino scores 48 seconds after coming on! Salah considers a shot, just inside the box on the right. Instead he feeds Alexander-Arnold on the overlap. Alexander-Arnold fires a low cross into the six-yard box, where Minamino slams home from close range. 76 min: Liverpool make a double change, replacing Jota and Oxlade-Chamberlain with Minamino and Henderson. 75 min: Partey looks to curl one into the top right from distance. Alisson tips over the bar for a corner, from which nothing comes. Fine effort by Partey, lovely save. Tsimikas flicks a header on down the left. Jota eyebrows another header down the channel, and releases Mane. He races into the box, draws Ramsdale, and squares for Salah, who leaps to sidefoot into the net from close range. That’s a fine goal. 73 min: A third weird Tavares backpass nearly finds Mane, but Ramsdale hacks clear in time. No matter, though, because ... 72 min: Salah tries his luck again down the inside-right channel but runs slap-bang into Gabriel, who flatly refused to budge. Fine defending. “Not sure if Aaron Ramsdale deserves sainthood, but the defence in front of him are certainly going the way of martyrdom,” quips Charles Antaki. 70 min: Salah goes over in the Arsenal box with Gabriel tugging away at his back. He wants a penalty but he’s not getting one. There was very little in it. Odegaard tries to counter, and is clipped by Fabinho, who receives a yellow card. The timing of the two incidents sends the home fans into an incandescent lather, but both decisions looked correct. 68 min: Salah dribbles into the box from the right. He considers shooting but instead rolls across the box to Jota, who powers a shot towards the top right. Ramsdale makes another superman save, sticking out a strong arm to parry, Gabriel hacking out for a corner. Nothing comes of that. 67 min: Paul Griffin (62 min) might be onto something, because Tavares plays another preposterous blind pass in from the left, allowing Mane to tear purposefully into the Arsenal half. Mane’s pass wide right fails to find Salah, and a fine chance is spurned. 66 min: Lacazette is replaced by Odegaard. 65 min: Laczette threads a lovely pass down the inside-right channel for Aubameyang, who enters the box and shoots low from a tight angle. Alisson kicks clear. Better from Arsenal, who haven’t done much in this second half so far. 64 min: It’s tipping down on Merseyside. In addition, Tsimikas, Oxlade-Chamberlain and Thiago take turns in short order to rain in the crosses. Eventually Ramsdale puts a stop to the torrent by claiming. 62 min: A slow restart to the game as Liverpool stroke it around the back. “Tavares must be missing a brain cell,” sings Paul Griffin, because somebody had to. 60 min: Looks like Jota has taken a whack on the knee, while poor Ramsdale took one in the fruit bowl. Both men finally get back up and are good to go. 58 min: Oxlade-Chamberlain finds Salah inside the box with a cute pass down the right channel. Salah flicks inside for Jota, who takes a heavy touch with only Ramsdale to beat. Jota and Ramsdale clatter into each other, both entitled to go for the loose 50-50 ball. Both stay down. 57 min: Salah dribbles hard down the right. He hooks back for Alexander-Arnold, whose shot is blocked. Arsenal can’t clear, under pressure from Oxlade-Chamberlain and Jota. The ball breaks to Mane, who shoots towards the bottom right. Ramsdale parries, and stops Salah slotting the rebound. The flag then goes up for offside on Mane. 55 min: Thiago nicks the ball off a dozing Tomiyasu out on the left. He strides into the box but his shot from ten yards is blocked by White, standing firm. Arsenal are struggling to deal with the Liverpool press right now. 53 min: Anfield is bouncing. Arsenal react by replacing Lokonga with Maitland-Niles. Tavares strips Alexander-Arnold down the Liverpool right. He turns, cuts inside and plays a blind ball across the face of his own box, straight to Jota. Jota strides into the area, sits White down, drops a shoulder to dummy Ramsdale, and slots into the unguarded net. What a cool finish ... but what a mistake by Tavares. 50 min: Oxlade-Chamberlain is sent scampering down the left channel by Fabinho. He enters the box, opens his body, and steers a shot just wide of the bottom-right corner. Liverpool soon come again, Salah unable to get a crisp shot away from a tight angle on the right. The ball nearly squeaks through to Mane, but Ramsdale smothers bravely at his feet. 49 min: Alexander-Arnold latches onto Tavares’s loose pass out from the back, but his cross fails to beat first man Gabriel. He had plenty of team-mates in the middle to look for, as well. An uncharacteristic error. 47 min: Smith Rowe nearly releases Aubameyang down the inside-right channel. Van Dijk slide-hooks away just as the Arsenal striker prepares to shoot. Very close to the perfect start to the second half for the visitors. Arsenal get the second half underway. Liverpool are kicking towards the Kop. No half-time changes. Half-time entertainment. There were fast starts for Steven Gerrard and Dean Smith, plus a six-goal thriller at Newcastle ... but the big story developed at Vicarage Road as Manchester United unravelled yet again. Oh Ole. Oh Harry. It’s been a passionate affair, with Sadio Mane in the thick of everything, one way and another. He’s instigated a brouhaha between the managers, scored with a fine header, and sparked off another touchline spat, this time involving a few miffed Arsenal players, for kicking White. He walks off chatting to the opposition. The second half promises to be a lot of fun; whether Mane sees it out is another issue altogether. 45 min: There will be one added minute. 44 min: Mane takes a late whack across the back of White’s legs. Several Arsenal players discuss the matter in depth with both player and official. Just a booking. Half time can’t come soon enough for quite a few folk, all of whom are on a rolling boil. 43 min: Saka makes off down the right again and rolls infield for Lokonga, who whistles a low drive straight at Alisson. 41 min: Arsenal try to hit back immediately, Saka working his way along the byline to the right of goal and pulling back for Smith Rowe. Just as Smith Rowe shapes to shoot, Oxlade-Chamberlain slides in and hooks clear. Matip is clipped by Aubameyang out on the right. Free kick. Alexander-Arnold curls to the far post. Mane meets the ball six yards out, steering his header across Ramsdale and into the bottom right! Anfield erupts. The place has been bubbling since the spat between Klopp and Arteta, to be fair. 37 min: Alexander-Arnold exchanges passes with Thiago, cuts in from the right, and sends a rising shot goalwards. Ramsdale tips over the bar, one for the cameras. His broad smile is extremely photogenic too. The corner is dealt with easily enough, and Arsenal counter. Lacazette has got Aubameyang and Smith Rowe free on the left, with only Fabinho back! But Fabinho slides in to block tackle Aubameyang, and that’s a quite sensational last-man challenge. 35 min: Another outrageous Ramsdale save, as Mane skates down the left and rolls infield for Salah, whose close-range shot is blocked by the keeper. Salah tries to force home again, but Ramsdale extends a telescopic arm and pushes it away from danger. Partey bashes behind for a corner, and you know how those have been panning out this evening. 33 min: Mane goes up for a ball with Tomiyasu. A hint of a flapping arm. It’s a garden-variety free kick, nothing more, but it incenses Arteta so much that he gets right up in Klopp’s grille, offering the Liverpool boss a square go. Klopp responds with some hot chat. Arteta has to be pulled away, then held back! Eventually they calm down, and are both booked. They’re still muttering away as they return to their respective benches. 31 min: Smith Rowe releases Aubameyang down the inside-left channel with an outrageous defence-splitting backheel. Aubameyang draws Alissoon and rolls across for Lacazette, who ostentatiously slams into the empty net. But he knows Aubameyang was clearly offside, and up goes the flag. 30 min: Nothing comes of the set piece. 29 min: Alexander-Arnold crosses from the right. Arsenal fail to clear. Thiago tries a volley towards the bottom right. He doesn’t catch it, but Ramsdale fumbles. Mane tries to force it home, but the prone keeper sticks out a strong arm to deflect out for a corner. 27 min: Oxlade-Chamberlain strides purposefully down the inside-right channel and opts to take a dig. He gets plenty of meat behind his shot, but it’s deflected out for another wasted corner. 26 min: In the technical area, Mikel Arteta relays some beneficial advice to Partey in the agitated style. An intense Spanish manager micro-managing? Should bring back a few memories for the home fans. 25 min: Salah bursts into space down the right and finds Alexander-Arnold, who fizzes a low cross towards Jota, in a crowded six-yard box. Jota can’t quite reach the ball and Saka hacks behind for a corner, from which nothing comes. 23 min: It’s good end-to-end fun, this. Saka runs at Van Dijk again, with similar results. He had options in the middle, too. 22 min: Salah drops a shoulder to move in from the right. Oxlade-Chamberlain takes over, steaming into the box, but his shot is blocked by Gabriel. 21 min: Oxlade-Chamberlain busies himself down the right and crosses deep for Mane, who can’t direct his header goalwards from six yards. 20 min: Salah romps into space down the middle, Oxlade-Chamberlain having nicked the ball off Smith Rowe. Salah gets the ball stuck under his feet, so tries to tee up Jota, at which point the flag goes up for offside. 18 min: Free kick for Arsenal, 35 yards from goal. Instead of sending it into the mixer, Saka pulls back for White, who attempts to release Tavares down the left with a raking pass. Too much juice, and it flies out for a goal kick, but full marks for training-ground imagination. 17 min: Tomiyasu crosses from the right. Saka stoops to head home from six yards, but Oxlade-Chamberlain arrives to block, just in time. Arsenal very close to taking the lead there. 16 min: White shuttles the ball down the middle. Lacazette attempts to flick it further on for Saka, but doesn’t guide it in the right direction and the ball ends up with Alisson. 15 min: Lacazette bowls Mane to the ground, 30 yards out on the right. Another free kick. Alexander-Arnold swings it in. Matip clumsily clatters into the busy Tomiyasu and it’s a pressure-releasing free kick to Arsenal. 14 min: Jota finds Salah just inside the Arsenal box on the left. Salah takes a touch but can’t work space to shoot. He flashes across the face of the box, but neither Thiago nor Oxlade-Chamberlain can connect. 12 min: Mane and Tsimikas try a combination down the left, but Tomiyasu ensures the door is firmly shut. Mane tries again, getting a yard on the defender and winning a free kick. Tsimikas sends the set piece into the mixer, Van Dijk heading harmlessly wide and high. 10 min: Liverpool pass it around the back again, showing more patience. With Arsenal holding a firm shape, they’ll probably need plenty of it. Salah tries to release Fabinho down the right, but the pass is too heavy. Goal kick. 8 min: Aubameyang finds space down the left and gets a cross in. Lacazette challenges Thiago at the far post, too enthusiastically as it turns out. A foul and a chance for Liverpool to gather themselves. 7 min: Saka makes good down the right. He’s got options in the middle, but also Van Dijk on his case. Van Dijk wins out this time, but that situation looked dangerous for a minute and will give Saka and Arsenal encouragement. 6 min: Liverpool pass it around the back patiently. Bob Paisley would appreciate this. 4 min: White strides upfield but has the ball picked off his toe by Oxlade-Chamberlain, who finds Salah. The Premier League’s leading scorer drags an uncharacteristically lame effort wide right. 3 min: Van Dijk goes long down the left. Tomiyasu’s defensive header is poor and drops to Tsimikas, who considers shooting from the edge of the box but opts to look for Mane instead. His pass is off and the danger is cleared. 2 min: A rare old afternoon-pints atmosphere at Anfield. Liverpool are kicking towards the Anfield Road end in this first half; Arsenal the Kop. Liverpool get the match started ... but only after everyone takes the knee. There’s no room for racism. Before kick-off, there’s some warm applause in memory of Louis Bimpson, who played for Liverpool during their dismal Fifties, but still scored 39 goals. Bimpson, who also played for Blackburn Rovers, Bournemouth, Rochdale and Wigan, died earlier this week at the age of 92. The teams are out! Liverpool prefer to wear red, so Arsenal, similar of mindset, sport retro yellow with old-school cannon badge, a lovely late 70s / early 80s homage. We’ll be off in a couple of shakes, but in the meantime here’s Gunners fan Charles Antaki: “There’s little profit being reasonable in predicting a win at football at any time, so one might as well put all one’s chips on 10-0 to the Arsenal, at least until the opium haze of pre-match enthusiasm dissipates with the first Liverpool goal. The last match between the two ended 0-0, I think you said? That’ll do as the prudent fan’s prediction aspiration.” Jurgen Klopp speaks to Sky. “It’s an opportunity. It’s a strong opponent. We’re not bad as well, so we really want to give it a go. We have played worse games than West Ham and won them, but we should not concede three goals. That’s something we are working on, and we have to show today that extra percentage of desire and passion. Organisation is good but in the little moments we have to win the challenges, especially with the counter-attacking threat of Arsenal.” Mikel Arteta talks to Sky Sports. “It always helps when confidence is high and results are good. But it is a different game, and we will have to be at our best to get a win here. Liverpool are one of the most creative teams in the league and you have to be aggressive and have really good organisation and control to minimise the potential they have.” Wolverhampton Wanderers have just beaten West Ham United 1-0. The result moves Wolves into sixth spot, but more importantly gives Liverpool and Arsenal the chance to make up ground on David Moyes’ high flyers. A draw would be enough to send Liverpool third at the Hammers’ expense, on goal difference, while a Liverpool win would take them into second spot, two points ahead of Manchester City, who host Everton tomorrow. An Arsenal win would see the Gunners leapfrog Liverpool into fourth, where they’d be level with West Ham on points but behind on goal difference (unless they win 10-0 tonight, but come on, be reasonable). These two teams have history. So do we, and here it all comes together with a couple of old Joy of Sixes to pass the time before kick-off. Liverpool make two changes to the team that went down 3-2 at West Ham. Andy Robertson is injured while Jordan Henderson is only fit enough to make the bench. Thiago and Kostas Tsimikas take their places. Arsenal make one change from the 1-0 win over Watford. Thomas Partey returns from injury, Ainsley Maitland-Niles dropping to the bench. Liverpool: Alisson, Alexander-Arnold, Matip, van Dijk, Tsimikas, Thiago, Fabinho, Oxlade-Chamberlain, Salah, Jota, Mane. Subs: Konate, Henderson, Minamino, Phillips, Gordon, Kelleher, Beck, Morton, Bradley. Arsenal: Ramsdale, Tomiyasu, White, Gabriel, Tavares, Saka, Sambi Lokonga, Thomas, Smith-Rowe, Lacazette, Aubameyang. Subs: Leno, Tierney, Odegaard, Maitland-Niles, Holding, Cedric, Pepe, Elneny, Martinelli. Referee: Michael Oliver (Northumberland). Liverpool versus Arsenal usually brings the goals. Here are the scorelines of the last ten matches between these two giants at Anfield: 5-1, 2-2, 3-3, 3-1, 4-0, 5-1, 3-1, 5-5, 3-1, 0-0. OK, the last one ended 0-0. But you get the general point. Both sides go into this one with confidence. The Reds have been rattling in the goals against all and sundry so far this season. They even managed two, and probably should have scored three, when having the seat of their trousers handed to them at West Ham a fortnight ago. Arsenal meanwhile, after a slow start to the season, are unbeaten in ten and looking good for it too. Mikel Arteta thinks his men will win this evening if they “raise their game”. Jurgen Klopp will be desperate for his side to bounce back from their first major setback of the season. This could be a lot of knockabout fun. Apologies in advance if it ends up 0-0 again. Kick off is at 5.30pm GMT. It’s on!Marcus Smith paid tribute to England’s World Cup-winning fly-half Jonny Wilkinson after his last-minute penalty clinched a famous one-point win over South Africa in fairytale fashion. Smith was given a masterclass in training by Wilkinson this week before going on to nail the 80th-minute kick to steer England to a dramatic 27-26 victory, avenging the 2019 World Cup final defeat. Smith, 22, was making only his fourth England start and Jones has tipped the mercurial fly-half for big things, provided he doesn’t get “too much poison poured into his head”. It was a statement that echoed Jones’s recent warning about the pitfalls of fame, using the example of Emma Raducanu to do so. Smith finished the match with 12 points, assuming kicking duties with Owen Farrell sidelined after ankle surgery. He revealed that the captain has been in regular contact this week but reserved special praise for Wilkinson, who has worked on consultancy basis with England in the past and made his first trip of the autumn into camp on Wednesday. “It’s all down to him,” said Smith. “He’s been working hard with me and, again, putting his arm around me and allowing me to explore at the weekend. I appreciated it, big time. We said four weeks ago this was the game we wanted to target. The boys bought into the last four weeks. We got extremely close as a group. It was a massive, massive part of our journey as a young group of players and to beat the world champions in front of 82,000 at home was special. It’s a day I’ll never forget. “I hit the kick and it was like slow-motion watching it sail through the posts. But we still had a job to do retrieving that kick-off. To win the penalty and properly celebrate at the end was amazing. This group will never forget that day.” With Farrell a fitness doubt for the start of the Six Nations Smith is set to continue in his role as the spearhead of England’s attack when they return to the field at Scotland next February. Jones said: “Look, he’s going to be good, mate. As long as you blokes don’t pour too much poison in his head. He’s a work in progress and each game he’s going to get a little bit better. I thought he did a great job but I know he’s going to be better in the Six Nations.” In a thrilling finish Smith’s kick was the fourth time the lead changed hands in the final quarter, with South Africa coming back strongly in the second half. Jones conceded that England were “at breaking point” and finished the match with 18 penalties against them, but he heralded his side’s resilience after selecting the rookies Bevan Rodd and Jamie Blamire in his front row and losing Manu Tuilagi to injury in the eighth minute. “Twenty minutes into the second half I thought we were almost at breaking point,” added Jones. “They were squeezing us at the scrum, winning more than their 50-50 of high balls and starting to get a little bit more out of their attack. We got away a bit in the first half but we knew they’d come back. They tend to win the second half and we just managed to hang in there, absorb the punishment and when we got the opportunity we managed to take it. As I said before the game, it’s a one-off between the first in the world and the third in the world and we’re happy to knock off the top team in the world. “It’s an important win but our stated aim is to win the World Cup. It gives the players a lot of confidence. They’ve worked hard, enjoyed each other’s company and when they come into Six Nations they’ll have a spring in their step. We’ve never been bad. We had a bad Six Nations but we’re not a bad team. We had a tough period where we didn’t play well and we got a bit stale. We’ve refreshed ourselves now and we’ll go forward.” South Africa’s head coach, Jacques Nienaber, was magnanimous in defeat, reflecting on how the last time the Springboks visited Twickenham they were also beaten by a solitary point in another nerve-shredding finish. “All week we spoke about how [England] are a quality team,” said Nienaber. “They had [eight] players from the World Cup final, we had 10 so there are a lot of similarities. They played well and they gave a proper Test match for their home fans.”Kelley O’Hara scored in the 97th minute and the Washington Spirit won the National Women’s Soccer League championship with a 2-1 extra-time victory over the Chicago Red Stars on Saturday afternoon. The championship game closes a tumultuous ninth season for the league. The Spirit had to forfeit a pair of games this season because of coronavirus issues. The team played under interim coach Kris Ward after Richie Burke was fired in September for violating the league’s anti-harassment policy. It was the first league championship for the Spirit, who advanced to the semi-finals with a 2-1 victory over second-seeded OL Reign. O’Hara, a defender who was on the US national team that won the World Cup in 2015 and 2019, scored her first goal of the season. Her game-winning back-post header came off a pass from Trinity Rodman, the NWSL Rookie of the Year. Mallory Pugh, who didn’t play in the semi-finals because of Covid-19 protocol, started for the Red Stars but left the game in first-half stoppage time with an apparent injury. Shortly after her departure, Rachel Hill scored off a cross from Arin Wright to give the Red Stars a 1-0 lead. Chicago downed the top-seeded Portland Thorns 2-0 in the semi-final. Earlier in the game, Chicago’s Vanessa DiBernardo was subbed off with an injury. Despite their struggles, the Spirit’s roster included Golden Boot winner Ashley Hatch and Goalkeeper of the Year Aubrey Bledsoe, as well as Rodman, who is former NBA player Dennis Rodman’s daughter. Rodman nearly tied the game in the 61st minute with a blast from distance that hit the post. But the Spirit pulled even a short time later when captain Andi Sullivan made a penalty kick that beat Chicago goalkeeper Cassie Miller. Chicago had a chance in the second extra time period on Makenzy Doniak’s shot, but it was deftly stopped by Bledsoe. Games were cancelled and players protested during the season after North Carolina coach Paul Riley was accused by two former players of sexual harassment and coercion, allegations he denied. Burke’s dismissal game shortly before Riley was fired in the wake of the serious allegations leveled against him by former players Sinead Farrelly and Mana Shim. After those reports, NWSL commissioner Lisa Baird resigned and the NWSL and US Soccer commissioned independent outside investigations. The league cancelled a weekend of games, and when play resumed players stopped matches momentarily to gather in a circle at midfield, in a quiet show of unity. Fans at Saturday’s championship match had signs reading “Sell the team, Steve” in reference to Spirit owner Steve Baldwin. OL Reign coach Farid Benstiti was also dismissed over the summer following an incident in practice where he was accused of behaving inappropriately. Next season, the 10-team league will expand to 12 teams with the addition of Angel City FC in Los Angeles and the San Diego Wave. The announced attendance for the championship game at Lynn Family Stadium was 10,360. It was the second time the title game had gone to extra time. Broadcast on CBS, the game came a day after Nike announced it had extended its sponsorship deal with the league.He was the teenage supermarket worker who shocked MPs examining loyalist anger in Northern Ireland by claiming that sometimes violence “was the only tool you have left”. Joel Keys left the committee chair, Tory MP Simon Hoare, “chilled and appalled” and he faced a media backlash. Six months on Keys, now 20, has not disappeared into oblivion after his 15 minutes of fame. Nor has he abandoned his position on violence. He has ambitions to become a local politician representing young loyalist communities that he describes as “goldmines” left behind by unionist parties and education leaders. But his willingness to discuss the possibility of a united Ireland, or a “new Ireland” as he puts it, has led to him being branded a “weak loyalist”. Sitting on a park bench next to a mural in the loyalist Belvoir estate in south Belfast, Keys explains how challenging, but exhilarating, life has been as he enters the political fray. Hours before, former taoiseach Bertie Ahern had called similar estates in east Belfast “ghettos” where people who might have got involved in trouble this year had “no clue” about the Northern Ireland protocol. Keys tweeted that he “couldn’t care less” what a “retired politician” had to say but protests that leaders expect loyalists to simply “shut up” about the Northern Ireland protocol. “For me the argument is about identity. I think a border on the island of Ireland was wrong but a border in the Irish sea is equally unacceptable. We have got to come up with something else. What we were given was an oasis, a mirage in the desert and now we are left just eating sand.” He says he is opposed to violence and that those who accused him of supporting it after his appearance before the select committee failed to listen to his full remarks. “I like to choose my words carefully,” he says, saying the only cohort who think violence is never justified are “pacifists”. Keys was asked to appear before the Northern Ireland affairs committee in May after being introduced to the Loyalist Communities Council (LCC), a group supported by the UDA, UVF and Red Hand Commando paramilitary groups, just two days before. He had been arrested but released without further action in the Easter riots, and a BBC team working on a documentary about Northern Ireland’s centenary with Patrick Kielty had been alerted to him. The comedian said he was worried that a smart, aware young man like Keys could get sucked into the ways of the past. Keys says he is not being sucked in: rather, he believes a fresh perspective is needed and the current batch of leaders in the Democratic Unionist or Ulster Unionist parties need “a wake-up call” to understand that a new generation wanted better education, jobs, homes and health outcomes, not the old politics of orange versus green. “I talk to peers of my age and they could not tell you who Jeffrey Donaldson [the leader of the DUP] is. If you want to reach young people you need to do more,” he said. Peter Shirlow, professor and director of the University of Liverpool’s Institute of Irish studies, said Keys represents a younger generation with different views from their parents’. “We have evidence, over and over again, that nearly half the people who say they want to stay in the union do not vote for Unionist parties. There’s a younger generation who wants to talk about jobs, investment, et cetera. They don’t want to hear about the past and legacy. They’ve moved away,” said Shirlow. Keys is considering politics but says the existing parties don’t offer him a route to representation as they would constrain his attempts to move loyalism into a space where its views are communicated nationally. He was recently hit by a backlash after suggesting on Twitter that the conversation over a united Ireland needed to be rebranded as a discussion of “new Ireland”. He knew it was controversial, he says. For a unionist or loyalist to even enter this discussion is considered an act of “bad faith” and a concession to “the other side”, a phrase he says he hates. “I was accused of not being a real loyalist” or a “weak loyalist”, he says. Days later the police called at his house to say a threat had been made against him, warning him the use of firearms “could not be ruled out”. He tweeted that he was “genuinely disappointed that some people within the loyalist community felt that this approach and this logic is flawed, or perhaps even treacherous”. Sitting beside a mural in Belvoir proclaiming “young people can do wonderful things”, he says: “I am very proud of my British identity. I’m confident in it. But I’m eager to get stuck into these conversations because if someone, somewhere down the line hands us a silver plate with something that is better than what we have” – in other words, a united Ireland – “are we … out of our minds to take it?” “People say ‘nothing will be better than what we have’,” he says, pointing out that doesn’t help prepare a unionist counter-argument against a united Ireland – or investigate whether underprivileged loyalist communities should demand better of their leaders.America’s Covid-19 infections are climbing again, and could soon hit a weekly average of 100,000 cases a day as daily case reports increase more than 20% across the upper midwest. The fresh worsening of the coronavirus pandemic in the US comes as temperatures cool during the approach of winter, forcing people indoors where the virus is believed to spread more readily and may presage another wave. It is also happening ahead of the Thanksgiving national holiday where tens of millions of Americans are expected to travel all over the country as families gather together in homes for the annual feast. With medical authorities struggling to get adult vaccination rates above 60% nationally, the states first to experience the onset of winter – Michigan and Minnesota – lead the country “by a significant margin in recent cases per capita”, according to analysis by the New York Times. The seven-day moving average for the US was 93,196 on Friday. On 25 October it had been 70,271. However, as federal medical workers travel to Minnesota to support hospital response to the increase in cases, the country as a whole is still averaging far fewer cases a day than it did during the worst of the summer’s Delta variant surge. People who are fully vaccinated are also far less likely to be hospitalized – and very unlikely to die – even if they are infected with the virus. But several states with high rates of early vaccination take-up, including New Mexico, New Hampshire and Vermont, are also reporting elevated Covid case levels, suggesting that the efficacy of vaccines may be diminishing in terms of infection. After federal health authorities approved booster shots and vaccines for five- to 12 year-olds, the US is administering about 1.5m new doses a day, with a gently rising graph of vaccination rates still around 15 percentage points below the 80% threshold that epidemiologists would like to see. On Friday, the FDA approved booster shots to all adults. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) agreed to the new policy. Under the new rules, anyone 18 or older can choose either a Pfizer or Moderna booster six months after their last dose. For anyone who got the single-dose Johnson &amp; Johnson vaccine, the wait already was just two months. “We heard loud and clear that people needed something simpler and this, I think, is simple,” FDA vaccine chief Dr Peter Marks told the Associated Press. Around a dozen states had already made boosters available to all adults. “The direction is not a good one. People are going inside more and, ‘oops’, next week happens to be the largest travel week of the year, so it probably makes sense to do whatever we can here to try to turn the tide,” Marks added. Some experts worry that placing attention on boosters may harm efforts to reach the 47m US adults who remain unvaccinated and widen disparities between wealthy nations and poorer countries who have not been able to acquire sufficient vaccines to treat more than a fraction of their populations. The rise in new US infections come as several European countries are reporting a brutal resurgence of the coronavirus pandemic. New infections are at record levels in some countries and Austria will reimpose a nationwide lockdown next week, while Germany is clamping down on unvaccinated people and has not ruled out imposing new restrictions on movement. The European trend toward tighter controls, from mask mandates in Spain to a partial lockdown in the Netherlands, has also led to some outbreaks of unrest. Violent demonstrations broke out in Rotterdam on Friday night over the Netherlands’ proposals to exclude negative tests from the national health pass, with police firing warning shots and breaking up crowds of protesters with water cannon. At least seven injuries were reported. In the US, preparations for the Thanksgiving holiday next week hit new complications with reports of a shortage of Covid-19 home testing kits – a supplementary precaution for family members planning to come together for the first time in two years. Distributors have reported kit shortages, though pharmacy chains like CVS and Walgreens now say they have ample supplies as manufacturers, supported by more than $3bn in government spending, have increased production. However, health experts have also warned that a new surge of the virus could overwhelm supplies, especially if holiday gatherings and cooler temperatures spark new outbreaks across the country. The number of US Covid-19 deaths recorded in 2021 has now surpassed the toll in 2020, according to federal data and Johns Hopkins University compiled Saturday and published in the Wall Street Journal. The total number of reported US deaths linked to the disease now surpasses 770,780: more than twice the 385,343 Covid-19 deaths recorded in 2020.If you are reading this article, you probably already care about football. Perhaps you protested against the European Super League or felt the pain of Bury, Bolton or Wigan fans. You have heard the football rumour mill grinding: the Crouch review is on its way and, with it, the potential for major change. Here’s a common story. Some people inherit houses, some even still inherit titles. I inherited football. My grandad got a free ticket to Anfield in school and 55 years later he took me. My life has been counted not just in school years and, every so often, elections, but in football seasons. It is how my family functions. However, in the first year of being the MP for my home town, I found myself in the crazy situation of having to battle to save the club I love from near collapse. A bad sale to the wrong people led to the club being brought to the brink. There then followed years of questioning how this was allowed and what could be done to stop it ever happening again. But it did happen again – to people in Bury and Wigan, while friends in Newcastle have experienced a similar kind of deep anger that the club which they feel belongs to them can be operated with little care for them. Each powerless year has been the same during my 11-year stint in parliament. I have heard debate after debate on football governance, to no end. I have concluded that there is a fundamental flaw in the game we love. Rewards at the top are extreme, so people take crazy financial risks. And those lower down the leagues must take huge gambles if they want to compete. Even many responsible owners must make huge financial donations to keep clubs solvent. But for all the debate, all the column inches, we have failed to protect our sport from itself. Finally, after all this time, if this week we hear from the Conservatives that they are prepared to legislate to change football, something good could happen. Boris Johnson made a promise that this time he has to keep. For many of us, this could be the first time in our lives where we have any sense of control over the future of football. Labour supports an independent regulator. We believe that one should be created with the purpose, in legislation, of promoting sporting competition in the broad interests of the supporters of football clubs. Our vision is for a modern football, where fans enjoy the best the world of football can offer from male and female players, free from racism and inclusive of all, in which governance structures support sustainable growth of the game we love. The current financial dangers down the pyramid are unacceptably large. We want to see better redistribution of resources, with a smoother taper down the men’s leagues and more redistribution from the men’s to the women’s game while we deal with continuing inequality. The regulator must be the backstop guarantor of this redistribution, in pursuit of sporting competition. We also want transparency on resources allocated to the grassroots and for supporters’ voices to be heard properly, especially in relation to key decisions. We want a non-partisan process for appointing the regulator’s leadership and board and would support a protected role for supporters in the structure. What’s more, it should not be as difficult as it is to find out how the finances of football flow, not just at an individual club level, but at the structural level. Give every team a financial fair shot. That should be the test for the Crouch reforms. Put this right and you remove the incentive for owners to risk it all in pursuit of wins. Do that and you make it less likely that clubs collapse. I, for one, never want to see any group of fans having to protest outside a shut stadium again like they did at Gigg Lane. Even better, it will underpin good competition, making the sport better to watch. Give people their football dreams: no guarantee of winning, but a chance at the journey. Parliament must get to work on that dream. • Alison McGovern MP is shadow minister for Culture and SportThis year’s award for “the proponent of the most preposterous piece of pseudoscientific or paranormal piffle” has been awarded to the United Australia party MP Craig Kelly. The Australian Skeptics gave Kelly the “undesirable” Bent Spoon gong for spreading misinformation about Covid and vaccinations. In January, Australia’s chief medical officer, Paul Kelly, rebuked Kelly for advocating for the use of anti-parasitic drug ivermectin against Covid, saying there was “no evidence” it worked. The Australian Medical Association vice-president, Dr Chris Moy, called on the prime minister, Scott Morrison, and other government leaders to counter misinformation from politicians such as Kelly. In February, the Royal Australian College of General Practitioners president, Dr Karen Price, condemned Kelly for promoting unproved Covid treatments including hydroxychloroquine and ivermectin. Also in February, Kelly was banned from Facebook for a week after posting links that mentioned those treatments. In September, the Therapeutic Goods Administration demanded that the MP stop distributing what it believed to be “seriously misleading” information after he texted “incomplete extracts” of adverse events after vaccinations. (Kelly has, in turn, declared the TGA’s statements to be “misleading”.) The Australian Skeptics executive officer, Tim Mendham, said Kelly was the “hands down” winner, picked unanimously by Skeptics groups around Australia. “Politician Craig Kelly has been spreading – or more likely shouting – misinformation about Covid and vaccinations for some time, offering dubious cures, conspiracy theories, and an interesting way with statistics,” Mendham said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Also at the 2021 Skepticon conference on Monday, the Guardian Australia medical editor Melissa Davey was named as the winner of the Barry Williams award for skeptical journalism. Williams was the president of the society until 1997, and died in 2018. Davey was declared the winner for her work exposing false claims about ivermectin and its promotion. She has revealed serious flaws in ivermectin research, and separately revealed the Australian professor Thomas Borody had been promoting an unapproved Covid treatment including ivermectin. Davey revealed Borody had filed a patent for a combination of drugs including ivermectin. He had not widely declared that he was seeking a patent, which would potentially allow him to manufacture, market and profit from the treatment. In a statement to the Guardian sent via lawyers, Borody denied any wrongdoing and said: “My client has never hidden the fact that he applied for patents over his [Covid-19] treatment. That is a matter of public record for some time now.” Prof Kristine Macartney, the National Centre for Immunisation Research and Surveillance executive director, won the Fred Thornett award for the promotion of science and reason. “Both winners, like apparently anyone who steps up and supports scientific evidence in the public arena of vaccination and Covid, have faced legal, online and personal threats from keyboard warriors,” Mendham said. “We congratulate both winners for their bravery and persistence.” • Tory Shepherd was on the panel of judges for the Barry Williams awardSenior Conservatives on Saturday urged Boris Johnson to ditch plans that would see many of England’s poorest pensioners paying more for their social care – or risk being forced by his own MPs into a humiliating U-turn. The prime minister, still reeling from sleaze allegations and fury among “red wall” MPs over scaled-back rail investment in the north, is facing another potentially damaging Commons rebellion at the hands of an increasingly mutinous party. The Observer has learned that several northern Tory MPs took part in an emergency call set up by care minister Gillian Keegan on Friday afternoon, during which she was said to have been “monstered” by backbenchers complaining that the plans were unfair and had not been fully explained or thought through. According to MPs in on the call, former Tory chief whip Mark Harper challenged Keegan to produce more detailed analysis of the plans – which neither she nor two civil servants present was able to do. Harper then said it would not be good enough for her to produce details on the day of the vote, which is expected to be Monday or Tuesday. Tory whips are understood to have been told by several senior Tory MPs that they are considering voting against the plans, or abstaining, unless they are amended to make sure pensioners would not be forced to sell their homes to pay for their care, as Johnson previously promised. Jeremy Hunt, former health secretary and current chair of the health select committee, said it was “deeply disappointing” that the new plans were “not as progressive” as those put forward by Andrew Dilnot, the economist who drew up the original plans for a cap on individual contributions. He said it would now be up to government to improve entitlements once the cap had been introduced. Damian Green, the former Tory cabinet minister, who was also on the call, told the Observer that the government should drop the plans and adopt a system that would guarantee that people could retain a percentage of their housing wealth. “I would urge them to adopt a different approach,” Green said. “I think it would be infinitely preferable to guarantee that people can keep a percentage of their housing wealth rather than having a flat rate applying to the whole country.” Tory WhatsApp groups were said to be full of comments from MPs – including many in red wall seats – talking about a potential rebellion unless the government backed down. Last week, when MPs’ minds were focused more on troubles over sleaze and the decision to axe the eastern section of the high-speed rail line to Leeds, ministers announced changes to social care plans which would mean poorer pensioners would not, after all, be able to count means-tested payments by the state for their care towards a total cap of £86,000 for any individual. It is believed the change was made under pressure from the Treasury. Critics said this meant that while someone who owned a £1m house would be able to protect more than 90% of their asset, someone with a home valued at £70,000, in a less wealthy part of the country, would lose almost everything. Dr Dan Poulter MP, who works part time as a psychiatrist in the NHS, said that the unwelcome change to the plans was the result of government not having set aside enough money for social care when its main announcements on extra NHS funding and care reform was made in September. “The initial set of proposals for a £86,000 lifetime cap of social care costs were strong and addressed the injustice of people having to sell their homes to pay for their care, but there were always questions about whether the government’s sums added up,” Poulter said. “So, while this this policy change is surprising, I suspect it may well have been driven by the realisation that an extra £5.6bn, while welcome, was never going to be enough to meet both the care and workforce challenges in the social care system as well as to properly finance the introduction of an £86,000 cap on care costs. Unfortunately, it will be poorer pensioners who have relatively modest assets that will be most affected by these changes.” When she announced the plans last Thursday, Keegan said they would “reduce complexity” and ensure that people “are not unfairly reaching the cap at an artificially faster rate than what they contribute”. Analysis by the Observer shows that almost three-quarters of the seats the Tories won from Labour at the last election will be among those hit hardest by these changes. Of the 54 seats the Conservatives won from Labour in 2019, 41 have average house prices below that level. In the Burnley constituency, for example, the average house is worth £99,950. In Darlington, it is £135,000 and in Durham North West it is £120,000, according to recent figures from the House of Commons library. Appearing before a committee of MPs last week, Dilnot said that about 60% of older people who end up needing social care would lose out under the government’s plans. “The people most harshly affected by this change are those with assets of exactly £106,000,” he said. “But everybody with assets of less than £186,000 would do less well under what the government is proposing than under the proposals we made and that were legislated for. That was a big change announced yesterday. It finds savings exclusively from the less well-off group.” Shadow health secretary Jonathan Ashworth said: “Boris Johnson’s care plans are descending into chaos, with Tory MPs squabbling while ministers admit they haven’t even studied how the proposals disproportionately hammer those with modest assets. “As civil servants confirm that these changes will clobber some of the poorest pensioners, many in the north and Midlands, Tory MPs must join with Labour in voting down this unfair care con and demand ministers come back with a fair alternative.” Charles Tallack of the Health Foundation said the average house price in red wall seats of £160,000 meant they were “most likely to be affected by the proposed changes”. The type of people currently using care are also more likely to be worse off under the plans. The majority of people in care are women over 80, who have a median wealth of £156,000.Police have arrested 30 climate activists after a major bridge in central London was blocked by a sit-down protest. The arrests on Lambeth Bridge came after Public Order Act conditions were imposed on the protest, which had been held in support of nine Insulate Britain campaigners who were jailed this week. The bridge had been shut to traffic for a number of hours on Saturday by the sit-in, which initially involved up to 250 people who had marched from the Royal Courts of Justice. Referring to Public Order Act conditions imposed on the protest, the Metropolitan police said: “Lambeth Bridge has now been reopened, 30 arrests were made for breach of S14 conditions.” The force also said that Vauxhall Cross, where some of the demonstrators had moved, had reopened. Earlier, climate protesters blocked the two London bridges as part of a demonstration against the jailing of nine Insulate Britain activists. Members of the group were sentenced this week after breaching a court injunction in place to stop further road blockades that have caused serious disruption for motorists since September. Campaigners stopped traffic on Lambeth Bridge, which crosses the Thames between Westminster and Lambeth, just after 2.10pm on Saturday. A sit-down protest forced police to divert traffic to other routes. Earlier on Saturday evening, the Met imposed public order conditions on the protest and urged the remaining protesters to leave. Four of the protesters had glued themselves together. The public order notice said the group have “no identified organiser” and “warm clothing, food, seats” and if they fail to leave, could face arrest. An offshoot protest also blocked Vauxhall Bridge, the next bridge upriver. Gabriella Ditton, 27, who was taking part in the demonstration at Lambeth Bridge said she believed she would end up in jail for taking part in the protests. She has been arrested six times with the campaign group, once for breaking the injunction. “I have known for a couple of years that the only thing that is going to serve us is civil resistance. I have faith in people coming together. “Solutions to this crisis exist, we just need the political will to do it.” Zoe Cohen, 51, who had travelled from Warrington in north-west England to take part, said: “I am angry, distraught and grieving for the huge amount of nature that we have already lost.” She added that “ordinary people should not have to do this and risk prison”. “Any disruption is microscopic to the suffering of millions of people who are dying now across the world due to this crisis.” Insulate Britain said it was not involved with setting up the event, which began after more than 200 supporters of the imprisoned activists gathered outside the Royal Courts of Justice in the afternoon. One campaigner, Gully, told the crowd: “Make no mistake, these are political prisoners and they will not be the last.” The group then walked from the courts to Westminster, chanting “power to the people”. Insulate Britain began a wave of protests in September and blocked the M25, other roads in London, Birmingham and Manchester, and near the port of Dover in Kent. The nine protesters were sentenced at the high court on Wednesday after admitting breaching an injunction by taking part in a blockade of the M25 during the morning rush hour on 8 October.Sathnam Sanghera’s two-part documentary on how imperialism has shaped Britain opens with a clear demonstration of one of its legacies. Namely, what happens when you dare to talk about it as a brown or black person. “Such utter crap,” says the writer and journalist in the powerful opening moments of Empire State of Mind (Channel 4). “You are just another little man terrified of saying anything good about your benefactor.” Sanghera is reading aloud one of many letters sent to him (along with thousands of abusive tweets) since his book on the same subject, Empireland, came out at the start of this year. “The things we find dehumanising … for some white people are just an interesting intellectual debate,” he says. “For us it’s really depressing and personal.” Sanghera has learned to manage his feelings in public, but privately gets “deeply upset”. It’s at this point that he has to stop talking because he’s on the verge on tears. And I, a fellow fortysomething child of Indian immigrants, start crying on to my laptop. This is how emotionally charged the subject of empire remains for so many of us. For Sanghera it leads him on a whistlestop tour, not just through four centuries of British colonial rule and the wilful collective amnesia that has supplanted it, but to the Midlands, where he is from. “People write to me all the time now, telling me to get back to where I come from,” he deadpans. “I thought I’d take their advice and come back to Wolverhampton.” Sanghera’s Sikh family arrived here in 1968, two decades after India gained independence, and a few months after Enoch Powell’s racist “rivers of blood” speech. His paternal grandfather was first to settle in Britain. He worked into his 70s in a foundry, had no teeth and was known to dip his Spam sandwiches into tea to soften them. Empire State of Mind is full of such lovely details. Also, painful ones. Outside their old house, Sanghera and his brother talk about the racial violence that plagued their schooldays, like the day his brother came home with a stabbed leg and their mum said, “Why have you cut yourself?” How unspoken and normalised it all was. “It’s taken me a lifetime to understand what was going on,” Sanghera says as they walk their old streets. This was a slum when they were growing up, the only place his parents could get a house. Only now does he see the link with the racist housing segregation policies of the Raj. He gets up to all sorts. At a Wolverhampton Wanderers match, Sanghera and his brother hang out with Punjabi supporters, then watch segments of the crowd boo as the players take the knee, and direct monkey chants at commentator Rio Ferdinand, who was at the match as a pundit. He asks Ukip adviser and former West Midlands MEP Bill Etheridge what he makes of all the messages on Twitter saying he is a racist. (I won’t bore you with the answer. I only wish programmes such as this, of which there are still too few, did not have to include right-wing politicians.) Even tackling such difficult subject matter, Sanghera is an affable guide. In Penzance, he goes canvassing with mayor Nicole Broadhurst, who has been targeted with racist abuse over the council’s removal of union flags flown to celebrate Brexit. “Put the fucking flags back up,” someone screams from a passing car during their interview. In Edinburgh, he meets the writer Alex Renton, who recently discovered his Scottish ancestors were slave owners. They would be appalled at his speaking up. “My class, which has ruled Britain for 300 years, has kept power through closing ranks … we don’t speak to outsiders.” Back in his car, Sanghera talks about how amazing it is “to hear a white man of his class say that”. Which it is. And also amazing that it’s amazing. This is no history lesson, although the history Sanghera does excavate is damning, and includes distressing films showing precisely how loyal British subjects were treated when they resisted. They were beaten, brutalised and killed. Rarely shown footage like this is a reminder of how much propaganda we have been drip-fed since the dissolution of the empire. How little we know. And how we have just started to reckon with our past. Mostly, though, this is the journey of one person trying to come to terms with his country and his past. How generous of Sanghera to invite us to travel with him.The UK government has joined the mounting chorus of concern over the apparent disappearance of tennis star Peng Shuai, urging the Chinese authorities to offer “verifiable evidence” of her whereabouts and safety. Peng, a former doubles world No 1, has not been seen or heard from publicly since she accused a former high-ranking Chinese government official on 2 November of forcing her to have sex after playing tennis at his home. The demand by the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office (FCDO) came hours after Chinese state media claimed Peng has been staying in her own home “freely” and would make a public appearance “soon”. The FCDO, however, is among those sceptical about such an explanation, releasing a statement that said: “The Chinese authorities should urgently provide verifiable evidence of her safety and whereabouts. Everyone should be allowed to speak out without fear of repercussions. All reports of sexual assault, anywhere in the world, should be investigated.” The Foreign Office’s intervention follows criticism on Friday when shadow foreign secretary Lisa Nandy denounced the government for its “deafening silence” over Peng’s disappearance. The British Olympic Association (BOA) also joined the mounting tide of criticism against China, calling for its authorities to provide “urgent clarification” that Peng was safe. It follows similar calls from the UN and the White House for the Chinese government to share proof of Peng’s whereabouts. Soon after the UN made its demands, photos purporting to show the tennis player were released by a Chinese state-affiliated journalist, but have not been independently verified. Peng disappeared after stating on Chinese social media on 2 November that she had a long, on-off relationship with the married former vice-premier Zhang Gaoli and that three years ago he coerced her into having sex. Neither Zhang nor the Chinese government have commented on her allegation. Peng’s social media post was quickly removed by the authorities, who are now censoring mentions of tennis on social media website Weibo and scrambling signals of foreign news channels when they report on the case. Yesterday Hu Xijin, the editor-in-chief of Global Times, which is published by the People’s Daily, the official newspaper of China’s ruling Communist Party, wrote: “In the past few days, she stayed in her own home freely and she didn’t want to be disturbed. She will show up in public and participate in some activities soon.” Hu said he had confirmed through his sources that the photos shared on Twitter by a journalist working for Chinese state media, purportedly showing Peng at home, depicted her “current state”.The Foreign Office, however, appears unconvinced, stating: “We are extremely concerned at the apparent disappearance of Peng Shuai, and are following the case closely.” The BOA said in a statement: “We join the wider sporting community in expressing our concern for the welfare of Peng Shuai.“We call on all responsible bodies to provide the urgent clarification of her safety that we all require.”” It is understood that the BOA is attempting to put pressure on the International Olympic Committee, which has caused disquiet by its controversial decision not to comment on Peng’s matter, explaining it believed “quiet diplomacy” offered the best opportunity for a solution. Some experts, though, believe the IOC could be pushed into taking a hard line over the hosts of the 2022 Beijing Winter Olympics, which starts in February, with the potential for a boycott.yesterday on Saturday that it was “very concerned” for Shuai and hoped contact with her and fellow athletes could be established soon. “Together with the worldwide athlete community, the IOC Athletes’ Commission is very concerned about the situation of three-time Olympian Peng Shuai,” the commission, made up of athletes elected by their peers, said in a statement. • This article was amended on 21 November 2021 with regard to Peng Shuai’s account of her relationship with Zhang Gaoli.Three people were being treated in hospital in Rotterdam on Saturday after they were seriously injured when police fired shots during a demonstration against Covid-19 restrictions. In what the Dutch city’s mayor described as an “orgy of violence”, crowds of several hundred rioters torched cars, set off fireworks and threw rocks at police during the protests on Friday evening. Police responded with warning shots and water cannon. Police said on Twitter on Saturday that 51 people had been arrested, about half of whom were under 18. “Three rioters were wounded when they were hit by bullets, they remain in hospital,” police added, in an update after earlier reporting two wounded. The mayor, Ahmed Aboutaleb, told reporters in the early hours of Saturday morning that “on a number of occasions the police felt it necessary to draw their weapons to defend themselves” as rioters rampaged through the shopping district, starting fires and throwing stones and fireworks at officers. “They shot at protesters. People were injured,” Aboutaleb said. Photos in Dutch media showed at least one police car on fire and another with a bicycle smashed through the windscreen. Police said city authorities had closed the city’s main railway station. Riot police and the use of water cannon quelled the unrest after midnight. There were further violent scenes around the Netherlands on Saturday, when largely peaceful daytime protests turned ugly as night fell. Rioters pelted police with stones and fireworks in The Hague, while officers in riot gear charged groups of demonstrators. Five police officers were injured and at least seven people arrested. Riots also erupted on Saturday in the central “Bible Belt” town of Urk and cities in southern Limburg province, while angry fans disrupted two football matches being played behind closed doors because of coronavirus rules, Dutch media said. It was one of the worst outbreaks of violence in the Netherlands since coronavirus restrictions were first imposed last year. In January, rioters attacked police and started fires on the streets of Rotterdam after a curfew came into force. The Dutch justice minister, Ferd Grapperhaus, condemned the events. “The riots and extreme violence against police officers, riot police and firefighters last night in Rotterdam are disgusting to see,” he said in a statement. “Protesting is a great right in our society, but what we saw last night is simply criminal behaviour. It has nothing to do with demonstrating.” An independent investigation into the shootings by police has been opened, as is the case whenever officers use their weapons. The local political party Leefbaar Rotterdam condemned the violence. “The centre of our beautiful city has this evening transformed into a war zone,” it said on Twitter. “Rotterdam is a city where you can disagree with things that happen, but violence is never, never the solution.” The government has said it wants to introduce a law that would allow businesses to restrict the country’s coronavirus pass system to people who are fully vaccinated or have recovered from Covid-19, which would exclude people who test negative. The country has reported record numbers of infections in recent days and a new partial lockdown came into force a week ago. Cases are rising across Europe because of a combination of low vaccine uptake, waning immunity among people already inoculated and growing complacency about masks and distancing after governments relaxed curbs over the summer. According to figures from OurWorldInData, the EU’s average has quadrupled in recent weeks, from just over 110 new daily cases per million people on 1 October to 446 on Thursday. The government has also banned fireworks on 31 December for the second consecutive year. The ban is intended “to prevent, as much as possible, extra strain on healthcare, law enforcement and first responders”, it said on Friday. Organisers of a protest planned in Amsterdam against the coronavirus measures on Saturday said they had cancelled the event after Friday’s violence.This would have to do for now but cannot do for much longer. Twice as many people were at the Camp Nou than the last time Barcelona played here in La Liga, 74,000 fans hoping to witness a brave new world. Instead, they watched as their side needed a Memphis Depay penalty to win the derby and begin the Xavi Hernández era with a victory the new coach described as “vital”. Just. If the opening night started well enough, it ended in nerves and a feeling of déjà vu. Relief too. There was youth, optimism and in the first half signs of something good, but reality intervened and Barcelona had to hang on against Espanyol, familiar flaws revealed. To repeat Gerard Piqué’s now famous phrase, “it is what it is”, and it is too early for Barcelona to be anything other than a team with issues to address. “In general, I’m very happy but there are things to improve,” Xavi conceded after a game in which Espanyol deserved more, wasting three clear chances to have equalised. With five minutes left and the home side having lost the thing their new manager most treasures – the ball – Raúl de Tomás headed the last of those against the post. This wasn’t the way it was supposed to be. The sound of a new era came with Xavi’s name chanted throughout, optimism returning, while a vision of it came with his first XI. There was a debut for 17-year-old winger Ilias Akhomach, one of eight La Masia graduates and three teenagers, which was part conviction, part circumstance: the new manager said he wanted to play with wingers opening up the pitch but the absence of Ousmane Dembélé, Ansu Fati and Sergiño Dest meant he didn’t really have any. Pedri and Martin Braithwaite were also missing. Dani Alves has returned, aged 38, but will not play until January when, given how much Óscar Mingueza struggled here, he may even be first choice. There are doubts whether Sergio Agüero ever will, the forward having been diagnosed with a heart arrhythmia, although the club’s vice president Rafael Yuste said that, contrary to reports that the Argentinan’s retirement is imminent, he expects the full three-month observation period to be completed before any announcement is made. Xavi insisted: “I don’t know where those stories come from.” Wearing 37, Ilias started wide on the right and the first time the got the ball was dumped on the turf by Adrià Pedrosa. The second time, he had a shot blocked. The third, he smashed a glorious chance over from seven yards. Thirteen minutes had been played and a pattern was emerging that saw Barcelona reach half-time with 70% of the possession and all the territory but no goals, although Diego López had made a superb save from Memphis Depay at his near post. Sergio Busquets had made that and his shot was also pushed away by the goalkeeper, who is 23 years older than Ilias and Gavi. For Espanyol, Raúl de Tomás was the outlet, his control often impressing and one shot spinning on to the roof of the net. Ilias was replaced by another young winger at half-time, 19-year-old Abde Ezzalzouli making his second appearance and soon becoming the first player booked after a confrontation with Pedrosa. By then, Barcelona had the lead. Gavi’s neat pass released Depay who went down. The penalty was described as a “joke” by De Tomás but a VAR protocol that seeks contact rather than a foul validated the decision. Depay smashed in the shot and on the touchline, Xavi raised his fists. This was not done yet though, and the momentum slipped from Barcelona. De Tomás shot just wide having got in behind Mingueza again. He also bent a free-kick just wide. And Landry Dimata missed a simple header. “Nine times out of ten that goes in,” lamented his manager, Vicente Moreno. Barcelona had lost control and confidence. They lost Busquets, another injury for the list. And they could even have lost an opening night victory with five minutes to go, Marc-André Ter Stegen and everyone else watching powerless as the ball came back off their post.Manchester United are a club hooked on instant highs and short-term fixes, where memories are short and judgments are definitive, right up until the moment they aren’t. New episodes arrive twice a week. Redemption is – usually – only ever 90 minutes away. United’s 4-1 defeat at Watford on Saturday proved a watershed moment for Ole Gunnar Solskjær’s management, the final straw – except the humiliation against Manchester City was supposedly the final straw. So too the 5-0 trouncing at home to Liverpool. Or the time they conceded a goal to Istanbul Basaksehir without a single defender in their own half. Even so, the dead energy to United at this particular moment seems vaguely new and vaguely familiar all at once. The glumness and the vacant stares are redolent of the Louis van Gaal end-days; the half-paced running and basic lack of sacrifice a throwback to the José Mourinho years. If United in their worst moments under Solskjær have occasionally looked like a team running around with no idea what it was doing, then it was at least marginally preferable to them not running around at all. Afterwards Solskjær was asked where things were going wrong. Honestly, you may as well have asked him to explain the internal combustion engine. “That’s human beings,” he said in response to a question about why so many garlanded footballers were playing so drastically within themselves, and from his perspective it probably is that bafflingly simple. Humans. They play football. Sometimes they win. Sometimes they lose. Either way, enjoy it. One actually felt for him. It’s hardly Solskjær’s fault he was handed a job for which he was so patently ill-equipped, and with this in mind it’s probably fair to say he exceeded expectations. He may not have the personality or the CV to mould a dressing room in his image, the tactical nuance required to coach title-winning sides. But for three years he at least kept the show on the road, reached a European final, made some memories. Nobody really saw that coming. And yet by a curious quirk of fate it is probably Solskjær’s lack of intrinsic ability that had kept him in the job this long. It is often said that managers can weather defeats but not being turned into a punchline. Solskjær, by contrast, was appointed as a punchline, the Norwegian Ted Lasso, a fun sketch taken just a little too far. And so when things started going wrong the only real option was to double down on the joke, spin it out, suspend our disbelief even longer. To do anything else would be like Jason Sudeikis breaking the fourth wall and earnestly admitting to the audience that yes, the whole thing was actually fictional from the start. As for the football itself, United were dysfunctional before Solskjaer arrived and will probably continue to be dysfunctional after he has gone. At times one could glimpse the bones of something promising in there: a second-placed league finish, big European scalps, a home-grown core with a sturdy defence and an exciting forward line (although not always at the same time). And so, in retrospect, the decision to go all-in on Jadon Sancho and Cristiano Ronaldo in the summer rather than strengthening in midfield or at full-back may go down as one of those crossroads moments in the club’s modern history: the point at which they were on the verge of building a new house, but instead decided to blow it up for the YouTube numbers. Indeed, perhaps the biggest mistake United could make at this point was to conclude that Solskjær is the root of their current problems. The rot goes far deeper: an imbalanced squad of many egos but few leaders, where players are signed on their individual merits and play largely the same way. The need for some sort of grand idea or defining identity can occasionally be overplayed a little – what is Chelsea’s defining identity over the last decade, for example? But at a bare minimum you need a proper structure, applicable footballing expertise at boardroom level, a coach with more tools in his locker than “just believe in yourselves”. United are too big and too rich to keep making the same mistakes indefinitely. Wealth and power are like an infinite supply of lottery tickets; one day, eventually, you’ll nail it. It was Solskjær’s eternal ambition to be the man holding the ticket when that day came. Alas, his luck has finally run out.Jakob Glesnes scored late in extra time and the second-seeded Philadelphia Union outlasted the seventh-seeded New York Red Bulls 1-0 in round one of the MLS Cup playoffs on Saturday in Chester, Pennsylvania. In an expected low-scoring, tight affair between two of the Eastern Conference’s best defensive teams, it looked as if the match was headed to penalties. But when the Red Bulls were unable to clear the ball, it chested off Glesnes, who positioned himself just outside the top of the box and curled his shot high past leaping keeper Carlos Coronel and into the corner of the net in the 123rd minute of the contest. It was no surprise that scoring was at a premium in this contest. New York’s 33 goals conceded during the regular season tied for fewest in MLS. Philadelphia, meanwhile, allowed just 35. The Union and Red Bulls met three times during the regular season, with five total goals scored. New York had a pair of strong back-to-back chances early in extra time – both from Patryk Klimala. Alone from the right side, Klimala missed wide left in the 94th minute. Seconds later, his follow-up strike was stopped by Union goalkeeper Andre Blake – New York’ first shot on target of the match. Sergio Santos nearly gave Philadelphia the lead early in the second-half of extra time when his well-timed, point-blank strike was abruptly stopped by Coronel. Shortly after, New York’s Kyle Duncan nicked the far post on his shot. These sides combined for 17 shots during regular time, with the Union recording the only one on target. But, it was a golden chance from Alvas Powell, whose point-blank strike was saved by Coronel in the first half. Philadelphia stepped up the pressure about halfway through the second half. In the 82nd minute, Santos got in close and set up teammate Kacper Przybylko for a glorious chance, but the Union’s leading scorer sent the ball well high over the net. A streaking Santos had a side chance of his own in the waning seconds of regular time, but his strike landed into the hands of a standing Coronel. Philadelphia move on to the semi-finals against the winner of Tuesday’s match between No 3 seed Nashville SC and No 6 Orlando City SC. Sporting KC 3-1 Vancouver Sporting Kansas City got goals from three unlikely scorers, including the first career postseason goal by 13-year veteran Graham Zusi, as they defeated the Vancouver Whitecaps 3-1 in the first round of the MLS Cup playoffs on Saturday afternoon. All three goals were the first postseason goals of the goal-scorer’s career. Sporting KC will face the winner of Tuesday’s Seattle v Real Salt Lake match on 28 November. The match will be at Children’s Mercy Park in Kansas City or in Seattle. Zusi fired one over the outstretched arm of leaping Vancouver keeper Maxime Crepeau from about 30 yards out in the 58th minute, giving Sporting a 3-1 lead. Zusi started his 19th career postseason match, almost double the entire Vancouver roster (10), but he’d never found the back of the net in those matches. Vancouver appeared to cut into the lead in the 86th minute, but Bruno Gaspar was ruled offside. Gaspar then drew a yellow card for kicking the ball into the stands. Sporting KC saw a season-long trend continue. The club was 17-0-0 when they scored at least two goals, but they were 0-10-7 when they didn’t. Khiry Shelton put Sporting on the scoreboard with a beautiful cross-footed shot in the 17th minute. The play was set up by a steal in the defensive end by Zusi. He fed it to Daniel Salloi on the left flank racing forward. Salloi crossed it to Zusi just outside the box near the right end line. Zusi sent it to Shelton in front of the six-yard box. Vancouver tied it in the 39th minute on a penalty kick by Cristian Dajome. The penalty was awarded after a VAR review ruled that Luis Martins committed a hand ball in the box. But Sporting responded in the third minute of first-half stoppage time. Defender Nicolas Isimat-Mirin deflected a loose ball in front of the net with his knee after a scramble off a corner kick. It was Isimat-Mirin’s first goal for Sporting in all competitions.