They say that grandchildren are life’s greatest joy, and now the first study to examine grandmothers’ brain function has suggested grannies may be more emotionally connected to their grandkids than to their own sons and daughters. Since the 1960s, researchers have posited that one reason women tend to live decades past their reproductive years is that it increases the chances of their grandchildren surviving, through the physical support they often provide – the grandmother hypothesis. More recent evidence has suggested that children’s wellbeing and educational performance is also boosted by the presence of engaged grandparents. To better understand the biological underpinnings of this connection, Prof James Rilling, an anthropologist at Emory University in Atlanta, Georgia, and colleagues recruited 50 women with at least one biological grandchild aged between three and 12, and used functional magnetic resonance imaging to scan their brains as they looked at photos of that child, the child’s parents, and images of an unrelated child and adult. “What really jumps out is the activation in areas of the brain associated with emotional empathy,” Rilling said. “That suggests that grandmothers are geared toward feeling what their grandchildren are feeling when they interact with them. If their grandchild is smiling, they’re feeling the child’s joy. And if their grandchild is crying, they’re feeling the child’s pain and distress.” Rilling previously performed a similar exercise with fathers as they looked at pictures of their children. The activation seen in the grandmothers’ emotion processing areas, and in those associated with reward and motivation, was stronger, on average, than the fathers’ – although there were some dads who had just as much activation in these areas. In contrast, when the grandmothers looked at images of their adult child, slightly different brain areas tended to be activated: those associated with cognitive empathy. This could indicate that they were trying to cognitively understand their adult child, rather than experiencing this more direct emotional connection. “Emotional empathy is when you’re able to feel what someone else is feeling, but cognitive empathy is when you understand at a cognitive level what someone else is feeling and why,” Rilling said. This could possibly help to explain the experience many grown-up children have of their parents often seeming more excited to see their grandchildren than them. “I think that’s plausible,” said Rilling, whose findings were published in Proceedings of the Royal Society B. “Young children have likely evolved traits to be able to manipulate not just the maternal brain, but the grand-maternal brain. An adult child doesn’t have the same cute factor, so they may not the same emotional response.” The results support the idea that there may be a global caregiving system in the brain that is activated in mothers (who have been examined in separate studies), fathers and grandmothers. Rilling now hopes to study grandfathers and other childcare providers to see how they compare.The Department for Work and Pensions has lost control of universal credit fraud, according to an influential cross-party committee after the latest figures showed billions of pounds were lost to scams during the first year of the pandemic. The public accounts committee (PAC) said benefits fraud and error hit record levels in 2020-21, when £8.3bn was overpaid, up from £4.5bn on the previous year. These overpayments accounted for 7.5% of the DWP’s non-pension benefits spending. Most was related to universal credit, including a £68m “mass identity hijack” carried out by organised crime groups who stole the identities of thousands of claimants to fraudulently obtain advance payments. Some 10,000 claimants had their benefits stopped or were wrongly asked to repay money as a result. The MPs accused the DWP of lacking the ambition to recover overpayments, which have been steadily rising in recent years, and were now costing taxpayers billions of pounds a year. Although the DWP had warned the pandemic increase in benefit claims would drive up fraud, MPs said current levels were unacceptable. “The department appears unequipped either to properly administer our labyrinthine benefits system or detect and correct years of mistakes across too many of our basic state welfare entitlements, far pre-dating its current woes,” said the chair of the PAC, Dame Meg Hillier. “This situation is untenable and taxpayers – who also include benefit claimants – are losing billions because of it. There needs to be a step change in understanding the impact of benefit errors on people’s lives and restoring trust because, as we’ve seen recently with pension underpayments, once a mistake in the system materialises it can take years to resolve.” The DWP said the explosion in universal credit claims during the first Covid lockdown in March and April 2020, when at its peak 100,000 people a day were coming into the benefit system, helped drive fraud and errors. Officials relaxed some counter-fraud controls during this period, such as face-to-face identity checks, to focus on providing rapid support to claimants. A government spokesperson said: “It is disappointing that the PAC has failed to acknowledge that, in the midst of an unprecedented pandemic, we prioritised supporting record numbers of genuine claimants. Thanks to this decision, the universal credit system stood up to the challenge of the pandemic so people received vital financial support at their time of need.” However, MPs are concerned that the basic design of universal credit makes it prone to error and fraud. The original business case for universal credit said it would cut fraud, but overpayments have risen every year since 2015 when the DWP started to measure them. Last year 14.5% of all universal credit payments were overpaid – the highest recorded fraud and error rate of any benefit for which records exist. The designed-in five-week wait for a first universal credit payment means claimants often have to take out a cash advance to pay for food and rent during the wait. Around 1.5m people were issued with advances in 2020-21. MPs said such advances were “particularly vulnerable to fraudulent claims.” There was a steep rise in the numbers of individuals who claimed universal credit while understating or not declaring levels of personal savings. People with savings over £16,000 are ineligible for universal credit, suggesting that many may have lied to get financial support while protecting their private nest eggs.Thousands of mentally ill people are in prison after being failed by every part of the criminal justice system, a comprehensive multi-inspectorate report has found. Six regulatory bodies have concluded that people with suspected mental health issues across England and Wales are offered poor support if they are arrested, prosecuted, incarcerated or placed on probation. HM Inspectorate of Constabulary and Fire &amp; Rescue Services, HM Crown Prosecution Service Inspectorate, HM Inspectorate of Prisons, HM Inspectorate of Probation, the Care Quality Commission and Healthcare Inspectorate Wales found: Unacceptable delays in psychiatric reports for court and in transferring extremely unwell prisoners into secure mental health hospital beds for treatment. A “broken” system for sharing information between agencies. Confusion over data protection rules and incomplete and inaccurate records. A shortage of services and long delays to access them, made worse by the Covid-19 pandemic. About a third of people in police custody have some form of mental health difficulty, as do 48% of men and 70% of women in prison. Inspectors drawing up the 107-page report examined more than 300 cases from six regions, interviewed 550 professionals, and heard from 67 people with mental health problems who had been through the criminal justice system. Commenting on the report, the chief inspector of probation, Justin Russell, said not enough progress had been made since the last joint inspection by the bodies 12 years ago. “Police forces, prosecutors, prisons and probation services all assess individuals in different ways, which leads to gaps and inconsistencies. Even when mental health needs are identified, the information is not always recorded fully or used to make effective decisions. There are significant problems in the exchange of information in every agency and at every stage of an individual’s journey in the criminal justice system. This part of the system is broken and needs to be fixed urgently,” he said. Inspectors found extremely unwell prisoners were often left in prison instead of being transferred urgently to mental health hospitals. Women in particular were placed in prisons as a “place of safety” if they were experiencing a mental health crisis, including suicidal feelings, the report said. “Senior managers at one women’s prison counted 24 such incidents in the previous 12 months; these cases involved extremely vulnerable women being remanded in prison as a last resort, as suitable alternatives could not be accessed. We believe that prisons should not be used as a place of safety – it is inappropriate and inhumane,” the report said. Delays were often caused by a lack of medium and high-security beds, the report found, while the mental health of prisoners deteriorated as they waited. The report concluded that a lack of a common definition of mental ill health meant there was an inaccurate picture across the criminal justice system. Probation practitioners told the inspectors their work was hindered because community mental health services would not allow them to access information, despite the fact these requests are lawful. The inspection found delays were common at every stage of the criminal justice system. Courts faced long waits for psychiatric reports, used to make sentencing decisions. The shortage of good-quality mental health provision also led to “unacceptable delays” for individuals accessing services. Russell concluded: “Criminal justice agencies need to make major improvements to the way they work with people with mental health issues. The inspectorates have made 22 recommendations following our joint inspection. We urge police forces, the Crown Prosecution Service, prisons and the probation service to work with the government and NHS to improve delivery for people with mental health issues in the criminal justice system.”That’s it from me, Samantha Lock, for our live blog today. Stay tuned in to all developing Covid news by following along here. A quick rundown of today’s biggest headlines can also be found here if you missed it earlier. US pharmaceutical giant Pfizer has announced a deal to make its prospective antiviral Covid-19 pill, Paxlovid, available more cheaply in the world’s poorest countries. Pfizer will sub-licence production of the pill to generic drug manufacturers for supply in 95 low and middle income nations covering around 53% of the world’s population. Under the deal struck with the global Medicines Patent Pool (MPP), Pfizer - which also produces one of the most widely-used Covid vaccines with German lab BioNTech - will not receive royalties from the generic manufacturers, making the treatment more affordable. The agreement is subject to the oral antiviral medication passing ongoing trials and regulatory approval. “This license is so important because, if authorised or approved, this oral drug is particularly well-suited for low-and middle-income countries and could play a critical role in saving lives, contributing to global efforts to fight the current pandemic,” Charles Gore, Executive Director of MPP, said in a statement on Tuesday. The gulf between wealthier nations in the west who boast high vaccine uptake rates and poorer nations who are still struggling to vaccine their populations continues to grow. While some in the west are triple-dosed, the vast majority of health workers in Africa remain unprotected. Here’s a Guardian view on vaccine justice and what the world needs now. Samantha Lock here, taking over from my colleague Leonie Chao-Fong. First up, some numbers out of Australia for you. The state of NSW recorded another 231 new cases and no Covid-19 deaths. Victoria recorded 996 new Covid-19 cases and nine deaths. And according to a new survey, the average Australian is working 1.5 hours more unpaid overtime each week since the start of the Covid pandemic. The poll, which used a nationally representative sample, found the average employed Australian is working 6.13 hours unpaid each week in 2021, up from 5.25 hours in 2020 and 4.62 hours in 2019. That’s it from me, Léonie Chao-Fong, for today. I’m handing this blog back to my colleague Samantha Lock. Here’s a quick roundup of what’s been happening so far: Pfizer has announced it is asking US regulators to authorise its experimental antiviral Covid-19 pill, Paxlovid, which has been shown in clinical trials to cut the risk of hospitalisation and death for adults by almost 90%. The company has said it will allow generic manufacturers to supply its experimental antiviral Covid pill to 95 low- and middle-income countries. People in Ireland are being asked to work from home where possible from Friday and bars, restaurants and nightclubs will introduce a midnight closing time on Friday as a raft of new restrictions is agreed by the government in the face of rising hospitalisations. Thousands of restaurant owners in Greece shut their businesses in a nationwide protest against recent measures that fine establishments for serving customers without proper documentation of their vaccination or test status. The UK has recorded another 37,243 Covid cases in the last 24 hours, and a further 214 deaths within 28 days of a positive test. That is compared with 39,705 infections and 47 deaths reported the day before. Scotland’s Covid passport scheme could be extended to cinemas, theatres and bars next week if that helped avoid a harsher lockdown closer to Christmas, Nicola Sturgeon has confirmed. Hospitality firms said further restrictions would be “a devastating blow”, warning it could force some venues to close. Portugal may bring back some measures to stop the spread of Covid in the run-up to the holiday season as infections soar across Europe, prime minister Antonio Costa said. The number of new cases has been gradually rising over the past month in one of the world’s most vaccinated nations, reaching a two-month daily high of 1,816 infections on Saturday. Slovakia plans curbs on unvaccinated people as hospitals reach a “critical” situation, prime minister Eduard Heger said. The government is due to decide on Thursday on tighter restrictions to limit access to services to those unvaccinated or those who had overcome Covid in the past six months. In Germany, plans are also underway for the introduction of tighter restrictions on people who have so far chosen not to be vaccinated against Covid-19, in an effort to control its highest infection levels since the pandemic began. Munich became the first major German city to cancel its upcoming Christmas market, blaming the “dramatic” coronavirus resurgence. Covid is now a pandemic of poor nations, Dr David Nabarro, the WHO’s special envoy on Covid told a cross-party group of MPs, adding that governments that are attempting to vaccinate their way out of the pandemic are taking a huge risk. Without mentioning the UK by name, Nabarro said wealthy countries that were attempting to “vaccinate a population out of an active pandemic” were taking a huge gamble. Pfizer’s announcement on Tuesday that it is seeking US regulatory authorisation for its Covid-19 antiviral pill, Paxlovid, has been hailed as a promising sign that a new easy-to-use antiviral pill could prevent people with mild-to-moderate symptoms from developing severe disease. But it is not the only company with an oral antiviral that could mark a global game-changer in the fight against the pandemic. Earlier this month, the UK medicines regulator announced it had approved molnupiravir, a drug developed by Ridgeback Biotherapeutics and Merck Sharp and Dohme, becoming the first in the world to approve an oral antiviral pill for Covid. Under deals announced in October, the UK expects to receive 480,000 doses of molnupiravir, also known as Lagevrio, from mid-November, with 250,000 courses of Paxlovid due in late January. Paxlovid is a combination of an antiviral drug with ritonavir, a drug usually used to treat HIV/Aids. The drug will initially be given to patients through a national study run by the NHS and will be given as a priority to elderly Covid patients and those with particular vulnerabilities, such as weakened immune systems. Prof Peter Horby, the co-leader of the groundbreaking Recovery trial of Covid treatments at the University of Oxford, said the decision by the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency was very welcome and amounted to a watershed moment in tackling the pandemic. Both Merck and Pfizer’s antiviral pills must be administered within a few days of contracting Covid-19 to be effective, experts have said, with the course of pills typically lasting a period of five days. A clinical trial in the US of molnupiravir showed a five-day course of the pills halved the risk of hospitalisation or death for at-risk patients. Following news that Munich has become the first major German city to cancel its upcoming Christmas market, Reuters reports that Hamburg will only allow people who are vaccinated or recently recovered from Covid to enjoy its festive market’s gastronomic section. The unvaccinated will be able to visit the northern German city’s Christmas handicraft stalls, listen to carols, ride on the merry-go-round or admire the nativity scenes, but they will not be permitted to indulge in steaming hot mulled wine and candied almonds or gingerbread. Organisers have said security guards will be checking for proof of vaccination or recovery at the entrance once the market opens next week. “There have to be access restrictions,” said Marion Begas as she set up her pottery stand at the Hamburg market, which will have 40% fewer stalls this year to ensure greater social distancing. “It is a way to protect everyone.” On Tuesday, Munich’s mayor Dieter Reiter called the cancellation of its market “bitter news” for the city’s residents and stallholders, but said it would be irresponsible for the event to go ahead. Germany’s southern Bavaria region is grappling with one of the country’s highest infection rates amid a ferocious fourth wave of the pandemic. In Greece, thousands of restaurant owners shut their businesses in a nationwide one-day protest against recent measures that make establishments responsible for checking the vaccination or test status of customers. Any restaurant or cafe found serving customers without the proper documentation risks a fine of €5,000 (£4,200) and temporary closure but owners have pointed out that customers are only fined €300 (£250). One week after the introduction of the new restrictions, business owners claim turnover has dropped by 50%, at a time when hundreds of restaurants are facing bankruptcy and employees are being fired en masse. The Panhellenic Federation of Restaurant and Related Professions (Poese) union, which represents workers in the service and tourism industries, urged the government to re-regulate business-owner fines, provide rent rebates and tax breaks. People in Ireland are being asked to work from home where possible from Friday as the government announced a new state of semi-lockdown amid rising case rates and hospitalisations. Pubs, nightclubs and restaurants will be imposed a new curfew for closing time from Thursday, a blow to the night-time economy which only reopened after 20 months of restrictions on 22 October. In a televised address this evening, Taoiseach Micheal Martin said it was increasingly clear the country was experiencing “another surge of Covid infection” and that he needed “to act now”. He added that the range of measures being introduced “represent an appropriate response to the situation we find ourselves in”. “Our advice is now that everyone should work from home unless it is absolutely necessary that they attend in person,” he added. The last week has seen the second-highest rate of Covid hospital admissions this year, despite Ireland having one of the highest vaccination rates in the world. UK tax officials have ramped up efforts to claw back £1bn from fraudulent or incorrect furlough payouts, after opening up tens of thousands of investigations against companies. More than 26,500 interventions have been launched by officials since the spring, as HM Revenue and Customs stepped up the number of investigations into potentially fraudulent pandemic support claims over the past eight months. The details, shared with the Guardian, cover the multibillion-pound furlough programme, which was closed at the end of September after subsidising the wages of about 9 million workers in Britain at its peak last year. It also covers investigations into the Treasury’s parallel income support scheme for the self-employed, as well as Rishi Sunak’s “eat-out-to-help-out” restaurant discount scheme, which was taken up by thousands of hospitality venues across Britain last August. Read the full story here: While we’re on the subject of Pfizer, the company has announced it is asking US regulators to authorise its experimental antiviral Covid-19 pill that could give patients an easy-to-use treatment they could take at home and keep them out of hospital. Pfizer said it completed submission of its application for emergency use authorisation of the drug, Paxlovid, with the US Food and Drug Administration. The news comes after the company said clinical studies of the drug showed that it was 89% effective at preventing hospitalisations and deaths for infected Covid adults. In a statement, Pfizer CEO Albert Bourla said: We are moving as quickly as possible in our effort to get this potential treatment into the hands of patients, and we look forward to working with the U.S. FDA on its review of our application. It’s not clear when regulators will rule on the application but the oral drug could prove a promising weapon in the fight against the pandemic. Currently, the only other treatments for mild to moderate Covid are monoclonal antibodies which need to delivered through injection or infusion. Paxlovid could also become an important tool in countries and areas with limited access to vaccines. Good evening. It’s Léonie Chao-Fong here, taking over the live blog from Lucy Campbell. A new study shows Pfizer, BioNTech and Moderna are making combined profits of US$65,000 (£48,000) a minute from their Covid-19 vaccines, Agence-France-Presse reports. The People’s Vaccine Alliance, a coalition campaigning for wider vaccine access, criticised the companies for selling the vast majority of their doses to rich countries while the world’s poorest countries remain largely unvaccinated. Based on its calculations on the firms’ own earning reports, the group estimates that the trio will make pre-tax profits of $34 billion (£25 billion) in 2021 between them, which works out to over $1,000 (£740) a second, $65,000 (£48,000) a minute or $93.5 million (£70 million) a day. In contrast, AstraZeneca and Johnson &amp; Johnson have provided their vaccines on a not-for-profit basis – although both have announced they foresee ending this arrangement in future as the pandemic winds down. Maaza Seyoum of the African Alliance and People’s Vaccine Alliance Africa said: It is obscene that just a few companies are making millions of dollars in profit every single hour, while just 2 percent of people in low-income countries have been fully vaccinated against coronavirus. Here is a quick recap of some of the main developments from today so far: Slovakia’s government will decide on Thursday on tighter restrictions to limit access to services for unvaccinated people, the prime minister Eduard Heger said, as hospitals have reached a critical situation because of a surge in Covid infections. The health ministry said there were just 20 beds with lung ventilators currently available for new patients as hospitals rushed to re-purpose beds and shipped patients around the country. With only 45% of the total population vaccinated, the government agreed to prepare measures that would only allow vaccinated people to attend large events; set rules for testing at workplaces; and limit entry to non-essential shops and services, sports, wellness and hotels to those unvaccinated or those who had overcome Covid in the past six months. Covid is now a pandemic of poor nations, Dr David Nabarro, the WHO’s special envoy on Covid told a cross-party group of MPs, adding that governments that are attempting to vaccinate their way out of the pandemic are taking a huge risk. Story here. Germany is paving the way for the introduction of tighter restrictions on people who have so far chosen not to be vaccinated against Covid, in an effort to control its highest infection levels since the pandemic began. The state of Saxony, where 85% of ICU beds are occupied by patients with Covid, became the latest to introduce so-called 2G rules in all non-essential shops and facilities, meaning only people who can prove they have been vaccinated or have recovered from Covid will be allowed entry. North Rhine Westphalia is due to follow suit, with unvaccinated people to be excluded from entry to all non-essential facilities and events including football matches and Christmas markets. Berlin is also on track to introduced similar “2G-plus” rules, its mayor, Michael Müller, said. Story here. Nicola Sturgeon has confirmed Scotland’s Covid passport scheme could be extended to cinemas, theatres and bars next week, if that helped avoid a harsher lockdown closer to Christmas. The first minister told MSPs the devolved government’s cabinet was considering extending the vaccine passport scheme, where customers need to prove they have had both vaccine doses, from larger sports and entertainment venues to a wider range of venues. A decision is due to be taken next Tuesday. Bars, restaurants and nightclubs in Ireland will introduce a midnight closing time on Friday as a raft of new restrictions is agreed by the government in the face of rising hospitalisations. The government has also paused the planned return to offices with the work from advice remaining in place, and Covid certificates showing vaccination records, already required for hospitality, will also be required for cinemas and theatres. The government’s cabinet took the decision after being shown projections that could more than quadruple the number of patients in intensive care. Portugal’s prime minister Antonio Costa said that authorities may bring back some measures to stop the spread of Covid in the run-up to the holiday season as infections soar across Europe. Government ministers are expected to meet health experts on Friday to evaluate the situation and only then will decide on which rules to impose. Costa said measures would be only applied when “strictly necessary”, adding that it was unlikely to bring back a lockdown and that the new measures would aim to “disturb people’s lives as little as possible”. Munich became the first major German city to cancel its upcoming Christmas market, which usually draws 3 million visitors, blaming the “dramatic” coronavirus resurgence. The city’s mayor, Dieter Reiter, called it “bitter news” for the city’s residents and stallholders, but said it would be irresponsible for the event to go ahead. “The dramatic situation in our hospitals and the exponentially increasing infection figures leave me no other choice: unfortunately, the Munich Christmas market cannot take place this year,” Reiter said in a statement. Eyes are now turning to cities such as Cologne, Stuttgart, Nuremberg and Dresden, which are in the midst of preparing their own popular Christmas markets. Only a small fraction of attendees at the Cop26 climate summit in Glasgow tested positive for Covid during the event, at a rate of around 1 in 250 people, Public Health Scotland said. Pfizer Inc said it will allow generic manufacturers to supply its experimental antiviral Covid pill to 95 low- and middle-income countries through a licensing agreement with international public health group Medicines Patent Pool. This will allow the UN-backed group to grant sub-licenses to qualified generic drug manufacturers to make their own versions of PF-07321332. The 95 countries in the license agreement cover around 53% of the world’s population and include all low- and lower-middle-income countries and some upper-middle-income countries in sub-Saharan Africa.They also include countries that have transitioned from lower-middle to upper-middle-income status in the past five years, Pfizer and the MPP said. Pfizer will waive royalties on sales in low-income countries. It will also waive them in the other countries covered by the agreement as long as Covid remains classified as a public health emergency of international concern by the World Health Organization. Cyprus health officials said they would gradually offer Covid vaccine booster shots to anyone over 18, following a surge in daily cases and an increase in hospitalisations. The health ministry said that booster jabs would be available at walk-in centres for anyone aged 40 and over from Wednesday, provided they completed their initial vaccination scheme six months earlier. Slovakia’s hospitals are in a critical situation because of a surge in coronavirus infections and the government will decide on Thursday on tighter restrictions to limit access to services for unvaccinated people, the prime minister Eduard Heger said. The country of 5.5 million reported record daily cases of around 6,500 in recent days. The health ministry said on Tuesday there were just 20 beds with lung ventilators currently available for new patients as hospitals rushed to re-purpose beds and shipped patients around the country. “Situation in hospitals is critical,” Heger told reporters. “We need to significantly tighten [restrictions] in the coming three weeks to calm down the situation at hospitals.” Heger said the government agreed to prepare measures, and approve them on Thursday, what would only allow vaccinated people to attend large events. The government will also set rules for testing at workplaces. It also plans to limit entry to non-essential shops and services, sports, wellness and hotels to those unvaccinated or those who had overcome Covid in the past six months. Slovakia is one of Europe’s least vaccinated countries, with 45% of the total population vaccinated compared to EU average of 64.9%, according to data from the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. The country has reported 13,644 deaths since the pandemic began, including 46 in the past day. The number of people in hospitals with Covid jumped by 225 on Tuesday to 2,862, the Health Ministry said. Covid is now a pandemic of poor nations, a leading global expert has told a cross-party group of MPs, adding that governments that are attempting to vaccinate their way out of the pandemic are taking a huge risk. Dr David Nabarro, the World Health Organization’s special envoy on Covid, told the all-party group on coronavirus that the world was still deep in the pandemic, with 5,413 reported deaths in the past 24 hours alone, adding: This is a disease now fundamentally of poor people and poor nations. Without mentioning the UK by name, Nabarro said wealthy countries that were attempting to “vaccinate a population out of an active pandemic” were taking a huge gamble, saying one concern was the rise of new variants that may evade current vaccines, while another was that the population may be reluctant to comply should measures such as mask-wearing and social distancing be re-introduced. He said: If there is a hoovering up of vaccines for the boosters, that is just going to have a global consequences that are really quite extreme, and everybody needs to know that. According to official data, more than 22% of people in the UK aged 12 or over have had a booster dose, while an estimated 68.6% of the entire population have had at least two jabs. In stark contrast, in Africa just 6% of people had been fully vaccinated by the end of October, the WHO said. According to figures from Our World in Data, some African countries have even lower levels – in Nigeria the figure is only 2.8%. More on this story here: Germany is paving the way for the introduction of tighter restrictions on people who have so far chosen not to be vaccinated against Covid-19, in an effort to control its highest infection levels since the pandemic began. On Tuesday the country’s disease control agency, the Robert Koch Institute, recorded a seven-day incidence rate of 312 cases per 100,000 people, with several areas at more than 1,000. A year ago, before the vaccine was introduced, the rate stood at 139. There were 265 deaths reported on Tuesday, much fewer than the pre-vaccine peak. With the country in political limbo, the old government of Angela Merkel operating in a caretaker capacity until a new three-way coalition takes the reins next month, management of the pandemic appears to have lost direction. Less than 70% of the population is fully vaccinated, leaving Germany considerably behind other European countries such as Italy, Spain and Portugal. The spread of the more infectious Delta variant, an increase in communal activity, a return to the workplace and a sluggish rollout of booster vaccines, which are recommended six months after the second jab, have been blamed for the increase in infections. A rise in health conditions usually related to the colder months has contributed to some hospitals being on the verge of being overwhelmed. Some hospitals have stopped all but essential surgery to cope with the increase in patients. The state of Saxony, where 85% of ICU beds are occupied by Covid patients, became the latest to introduce so-called 2G rules in all non-essential shops and facilities, meaning only people who can prove they have been vaccinated or have recovered from Covid will be allowed entry. Saxony’s social minister, Petra Köpping, said that in addition tests would be required if the incidence continued to rise to the extent that hospitals were unable to cope. 2G is a reference to the German words for vaccinated and recovered (geimpft and genesen). North Rhine Westphalia is due to follow suit, with unvaccinated people to be excluded from entry to all non-essential facilities and events including football matches and Christmas markets. People wanting to attend carnival events as the season kicks off will be required to take a test in addition to being vaccinated or having recovered. Berlin is also on track to introduced similar “2G-plus” rules, its mayor, Michael Müller, said on Tuesday. The city hopes to reopen vaccine centres, which were closed across the country at the end of the summer when they were deemed no longer necessary, but authorities have said this would happen in January or February at the earliest. Read the full story here: The credibility of New Caledonia’s third and final independence referendum has been questioned after indigenous leaders warned that participation could be adversely affected by the Covid pandemic, Helen Fraser reports. The French government has announced that the referendum will proceed as planned in December after the coronavirus crisis eased. But the pro-independence FLNKS party has been calling for a postponement and has called on supporters not vote on 12 December because the indigenous Kanak people – who are more likely to vote for independence – are in mourning for victims of the pandemic. Kanaks have been far more seriously impacted by the pandemic than Europeans in the Pacific territory. The referendum is the third and final poll asking whether the Pacific territory wishes to become an independent nation. Support for independence increased from 43.3% in the first vote in 2018, to 46.7% in 2020. It had expected to be close to, if not over the required 50% in the final vote. However, Covid has greatly impacted the push for independence. Eighty percent of New Caledonia’s 267 deaths and 10,500 Covid cases have been among the Kanak and other Pasifika people, who were more likely to support independence in previous votes. The virulent Delta surge saw the territory go from zero cases at the start of September to more than 10,000 cases within six weeks, with lockdown measures affecting traditional Kanak mourning rites. The lockdown measures include curfews, a ban on gatherings of more than five, anda limit of nine mourners at a funeral. As lockdowns lift, FLNKS leaders have said that the first priority of Kanak communities will be to complete customary mourning ceremonies, which often take several months, rather than campaigning for the upcoming independence vote. Full story here: The UK has recorded another 37,243 Covid cases in the last 24 hours, and a further 214 deaths within 28 days of a positive test, according to the latest data from the government’s coronavirus dashboard. That is compared to 39,705 infections and 47 deaths reported the day before. Germany should demand proof of vaccination or recent recovery from Covid for all indoor leisure activities, and require vaccinated people to also present a negative test for risky environments, a regional leader said on Tuesday. Hendrik Wüst, the premier of North Rhine-Westphalia, made the comments before leaders of Germany’s 16 federal states hold a meeting on Thursday to discuss how to respond to a new surge in Covid cases, Reuters reports. Germany recorded 32,048 new infections on Tuesday, a rise of 47% compared to a week ago, and another 265 deaths, bringing Germany’s total during the pandemic to 97,980. Wüst, who chairs the body that groups Germany’s regional premiers, said he would press on Thursday for the whole country to allow only vaccinated people or those who have recovered from Covid to access leisure-sector facilities, in some cases paired with a negative test. Several German regions, including the capital Berlin, have already introduced such a rule, in effect excluding non-vaccinated people from places such as cinemas, hairdressers, restaurants and fitness studios. Berlin is also considering requiring negative tests and proof of vaccination from next week. It is not clear who should be responsible for policing the new rules. Berlin’s mayor Michael Mueller called on city officials to check vaccine passports rather than issue parking tickets. “It isn’t a matter of illegal parking but human lives,” he was quoted as saying in the Berliner Zeitung daily. The new wave of infections is challenging a government in transition, with three parties negotiating to form the next cabinet after September’s federal election. Neighbouring Austria, where approximately 65% of the population is fully vaccinated, imposed a nationwide lockdown on unvaccinated people on Monday in an effort to deal with a surge in infections. Germany’s vaccination rate, at 68%, is among the lowest in western Europe. Nicola Sturgeon has confirmed Scotland’s Covid passport scheme could be extended to cinemas, theatres and bars next week, if that helped avoid a harsher lockdown closer to Christmas. The first minister told MSPs the devolved government’s cabinet was considering extending the vaccine passport scheme, where customers need to prove they have had both vaccines, from larger sports and entertainment venues to a wider range of venues. She said Wales had extended its scheme. She said ministers could also allow proof of a recent negative test to get entry to a venue. A decision would be taken next Tuesday: the surge of Covid cases in Europe was a reminder the virus was still very active. Cases in Scotland were rising again, she said, to around 3,000 new cases a day. Sturgeon said an evidence and options paper would be released later this week. Hospitality firms said further restrictions would be “a devastating blow” in the run-up to Christmas, warning it could force some venues to close. Five large trade bodies representing hotels, pubs and nightclubs said a survey of 150 businesses, many of which had seen trade fall by 20 to 40%, found a large majority would need to lay off staff and government bail-outs to remain viable. “Scotland’s hospitality sector is in a precarious situation, making the recovery period all the more important,” they said. “Four out of five businesses are significantly below pre-pandemic levels and with inflation, debt levels and other costs rising, the sector is facing a very difficult winter ahead.” Bars, restaurants and nightclubs in Ireland will introduce a midnight closing time on Friday as a raft of new restrictions is agreed by the government in the face of rising hospitalisations. The measure is a blow to the night-time economy, which was reopened after 20 months of restrictions on 22 October. The government’s cabinet took the decision after being shown projections that could more than quadruple the number of patients in intensive care. On Monday, the chief executive of the health service executive said the situation was “grim”, with 114 people in ICU. “The modelling is very stark … If we did nothing, if we were to continue as is, we could be looking at somewhere between 200 and maybe up to 500 people in ICU. Obviously that’s not something we can countenance,” said the health minister Stephen Donnelly. The government has also paused the planned return to offices with the work from advice remaining in place. Covid certificates showing vaccination records, already required for hospitality, will also be required for cinemas and theatres. Antigen tests, which unlike in the UK are not free in Ireland, will also be required to be taken by anyone in contact with a person with Covid. They will also have restrict their movements for five days. Portugal’s prime minister Antonio Costa has said that authorities in one of the world’s most vaccinated nations may bring back some measures to stop the spread of Covid in the run-up to the holiday season as infections soar across Europe, Reuters reports. The number of new cases has been gradually rising over the past month in Portugal, reaching a two-month daily high of 1,816 infections on Saturday. The 14-day infection rate stood at 156 cases per 100,000 people on Monday, about double that in neighbouring Spain, which has a slightly lower share of its population fully vaccinated, but still well below over 500 in Germany and more than 900 in the Netherlands. Costa told reporters on the sidelines of an event in central Portugal: We must try to act now so we can reach the Christmas period with less fear. The later we act, the greater the risks. Government ministers are expected to meet health experts on Friday to evaluate the situation and only then will decide on which rules to impose. Costa said measures would be only applied when “strictly necessary”. About 86% of Portugal’s population of just over 10 million is fully vaccinated against Covid-19. It has reported about 1.1 million cases and 18,265 deaths since the pandemic began. The country faced its toughest battle against Covid in January, forcing authorities to impose strict lockdown measures, that have since been lifted. Costa said the government was unlikely to bring back a lockdown and that the new measures would aim to “disturb people’s lives as little as possible”. Mask-wearing is still required in public transport, shopping malls and large gatherings. The EU digital Covid-19 certificate is required to enter nightclubs and big events, as well as to travel. JP Morgan’s billionaire chief executive Jamie Dimon was allowed to skip Hong Kong’s strict 21-day hotel quarantine rules because he runs “a very huge bank” with “key business in Hong Kong”, the territory’s chief executive, Carrie Lam, said on Tuesday. Dimon flew into Hong Kong on Monday on JP Morgan’s private jet, becoming the first Wall Street bank boss to visit the territory or mainland China since the pandemic began. Questioned about why Dimon was allowed to enter the territory without complying with coronavirus rules, Lam said: The justification is related to economy, as this is a very huge bank with key business in Hong Kong. He needed to come and work for about a day in Hong Kong. But there are restrictions, including restrictions over his itinerary, so the risk is completely manageable. Hong Kong is pursuing a Covid Zero strategy alongside China, and has imposed some of the world’s strictest travel rules to keep the virus out. Measures include mandatory hotel quarantines of three weeks for any resident returning from the UK or US, regardless of vaccination status, followed by seven days of self-monitoring. Tourists and most non-resident visitors are banned from boarding flights to the city. In August, the government also granted an exemption to the Hollywood actor Nicole Kidman, who had flown into the territory to film a TV series, prompting a brief outcry from frustrated residents who have been forced to pay out for expensive hotel stays. They have complained on Facebook in the HK Quarantine Support Group that the city is allowing the rich and powerful better treatment than long-term residents. “The privileged can jetset into Hong Kong on a breeze without [any] consequences … the rest of us [are] forced into three weeks of solitary confinement with [poor] food and no fresh air,” one user said. Read the full story here: The proportion of schoolchildren absent due to Covid has halved according to the latest figures from the Department for Education, after it issued its first full attendance figures for schools in England since the October half-term holiday. The rate of absences defined by the DfE as Covid-related halved from 3.2% on 21 October to 1.6% on 11 November, the lowest since state schools reopened in September. The number of pupils with suspected cases of Covid also fell, from 87,000 in mid-October to 50,000 last week, while confirmed cases recorded by the DfE fell from 127,000 to 67,000. However, the DfE has advised schools to record absences with continuing cases of Covid as ill, meaning its Covid-related figure leaves out such cases. Headteachers and school leaders warned that the dip in absences was partly due to the “circuit-breaker” effect of schools being closed for half-term, with most closed for the last week of October. James Bowen, director of policy for the National Association of Head Teachers, said: As predicted, schools being closed for a week does appear to have had an impact on the number of cases among pupils and so attendance levels at the start of the new half-term have improved. It’s important not to over-interpret short-term data, but this does appear to belie the suggestion from some that schools are not playing a key role in Covid transmission. In secondary schools, attendance was 89.5% on 11 November, while primary schools had less than 94% of children present. Including Covid-related absences suggests that more children remain out of school than normal. However, the DfE’s figures are not comparable to its usual attendance data because it includes different year groups, and because the proportion absent through illness appears to be higher than pre-pandemic. Munich became the first major German city to cancel its upcoming Christmas market, which usually draws 3 million visitors, blaming the “dramatic” coronavirus resurgence, AFP reports. On Tuesday, the city’s mayor, Dieter Reiter, called it “bitter news” for the city’s residents and stallholders, but said it would be irresponsible for the event to go ahead. “The dramatic situation in our hospitals and the exponentially increasing infection figures leave me no other choice: unfortunately, the Munich Christmas market cannot take place this year,” Reiter said in a statement. Many German Christmas markets were called off in 2020 because of the pandemic, but Munich “Christ Child Market” is the first of the larger, more popular events to be axed this year. It was due to open on 22 November. Germany’s southern Bavaria region is grappling with one of the country’s highest infection rates amid a ferocious fourth wave of the pandemic. Bavaria had a weekly incidence rate of 554.2 recorded infections per 100,000 people on Tuesday, according to the Robert Koch Institute, well above the nationwide figure of 312.4 - an all-time high for the country. Germany hosts 2,500 Christmas markets each year that are popular with visitors who come to savour mulled wine and roasted chestnuts, and shop for seasonal trinkets among clusters of wooden chalets. In pre-pandemic times, they drew about 160 million domestic and international visitors annually who brought in revenues of €3-5bn, according to the BSM stallkeepers’ industry association. Eyes are now turning to cities such as Cologne, Stuttgart, Nuremberg and Dresden, which are in the midst of preparing their own popular Christmas markets. Several smaller markets have already been cancelled across Germany, but so far many organisers have said they plan to go ahead. Some plan to impose stricter rules barring access to the unvaccinated, while other cities will demand proof of vaccination, recovery or a negative test before allowing visitors into the Christmas market zones. Only a small fraction of attendees at the Cop26 climate summit in Glasgow tested positive for Covid during the event, at a rate of around 1 in 250 people, a public health agency has said. Public Health Scotland said its estimate of four cases per 1,000 people compared well to the Scotland-wide average during the two-week summit of 12 per 1,000. The UN and UK health authorities imposed a stringent testing regime: delegates were required to produce a negative lateral flow test result before entry every day; masks were required indoors and physical-distancing measures maintained. Alongside that, 261 people involved in Scotland-wide events linked to Cop reported contracting Covid between 15 October and 13 November, when the summit ended. That was less than 0.5% of all positive cases reported via Scotland’s test and trace system during that period. PHS warned that some infections linked to the event could still emerge, particularly following the main climate protest marches, which drew more than 100,000 people to Glasgow on 5 and 6 November. Remote working during the pandemic has made it easier for white-collar workers to moonlight in more than one, and in some cases as many as four, full-time occupations. But how do they cope with clashing meetings and several bosses? And can the rewards be worth the lies? Daisy Schofield investigates: Growing numbers of people catching Covid are experiencing an unpleasant distortion of smells. Scientists are still unsure what causes this often distressing condition, known as parosmia, where previously enjoyable aromas trigger feelings of disgust. In this week’s episode of Science Weekly, Madeleine Finlay talks to science correspondent Linda Geddes about her own parosmia, and chemist Dr Jane Parker discusses research into why the smell of coffee seems to be a trigger for so many people. Listen to the episode here: Pfizer Inc has said it will allow generic manufacturers to supply its experimental antiviral Covid pill to 95 low- and middle-income countries through a licensing agreement with international public health group Medicines Patent Pool (MPP). Reuters reports that the voluntary licensing agreement between Pfizer and the MPP will allow the United Nations-backed group to grant sub-licenses to qualified generic drug manufacturers to make their own versions of PF-07321332. Pfizer will sell the pills it manufactures under the brand name Paxlovid. Pfizer, which also makes one of the mostly widely used Covid vaccines, has said the pill cut the chance of hospitalisation or death for adults at risk of severe disease by 89% in its clinical trial. The drug will be used in combination with ritonavir, an HIV drug that is already available generically. Pfizer’s licensing deal follows a similar arrangement by rival Merck &amp; Co for generic manufacturing of its Covid treatment. The deals are unusual arrangements that acknowledge the dire need for effective treatments as well as the pressure drugmakers are under to make their life-saving drugs accessible at very low costs. “We are extremely pleased to have another weapon in our armoury to protect people from the ravages of Covid-19,” Charles Gore, the executive director of the MPP, said in an interview. Gore said he hoped the generic version of Pfizer’s drug will be available within months. The 95 countries in the license agreement cover around 53% of the world’s population and include all low- and lower-middle-income countries and some upper-middle-income countries in sub-Saharan Africa. They also include countries that have transitioned from lower-middle to upper-middle-income status in the past five years, Pfizer and the MPP said. “We believe oral antiviral treatments can play a vital role in reducing the severity of Covid-19 infections... We must work to ensure that all people - regardless of where they live or their circumstances - have access to these breakthroughs,” Pfizer chief executive Albert Bourla said in a statement. Pfizer will waive royalties on sales in low-income countries. It will also waive them in the other countries covered by the agreement as long as Covid remains classified as a public health emergency of international concern by the World Health Organization. Pfizer’s version of the drug will be in high demand. The company has said it expects to manufacture 180,000 treatment courses by the end of next month and at least 50 million courses by the end of 2022. Even so, the drugmaker could be stretched trying to supply 47% of the world’s population. A Pfizer executive said last week the market for the drug might be up to 150 million people and that many countries might also be interested in buying doses for their strategic reserves. Pfizer has said it will sell the supply it produces using a tiered pricing approach based on the income level of each country. In the United States, it expects to price its treatment close to where Merck has priced its drug at around $700 a course. Merck has license agreements for it Covid pill, molnupiravir, in over 100 countries. Still, some international health officials said even that is not enough for the medicine to reach many in low- and middle-income countries in large enough numbers. Cyprus health officials said they would gradually offer Covid vaccine booster shots to anyone over 18, following a surge in daily cases and an increase in hospitalisations, AFP reports. The health ministry said that booster jabs would be available at walk-in centres for anyone aged 40 and over from Wednesday, provided they completed their initial vaccination scheme six months earlier. This follows a cabinet decision on Monday to expand the booster rollout to the entire adult population from 18 upwards, with lower age groups set to join the programme later. The Mediterranean island nation of about 1 million people contained a surge in Covid cases to the low hundreds from a peak of 1,152 daily infections, mainly thanks to a high vaccination rate. But the adult vaccination drive has struggled to move forward after reaching 80%, and on Monday new cases rose to 354, their highest level since August. In early September, Cyprus rolled out its booster shot scheme for people residing in nursing homes and healthcare workers to prevent a new wave of infections as immunity wanes in older groups. Since then, authorities have pushed the age limit down regularly. But the majority of people eligible for a third dose have not come forward. According to health ministry figures, 57.8% of those over 80 have received a booster shot, but only 23.3% of over-70s and 13% of over-60s have turned up for the third dose. Cyprus has reported a total of 128,038 Covid cases and 588 deaths. The 14-day cumulative case rate leading up to 8 November was 284.7 per 100,000 people. The head of the NHS in England has said that the guidance on wearing masks in healthcare settings is “clear”, PA reports. Amanda Pritchard said that “people should wear masks in healthcare settings”. Asked what she thought when she saw images of the prime minister Boris Johnson without a mask in hospital, the NHS England chief executive said: The guidance is clear: people should wear masks in healthcare settings. I wasn’t on the visit. So I’m afraid I don’t know the ins and outs of exactly what happened there. Pressed on whether she would have told Johnson to put a mask back on, she added: I’m sure my colleagues did encourage everybody there to follow the appropriate guidance. Johnson visited Hexham General Hospital in Northumberland last week, and photographs showed him meeting masked nurses at the hospital, talking to them and bumping elbows with them, despite not having his face covered. Soon after that photo opportunity, he put on a mask, which had been handed to him by an aide. Northumbria Healthcare NHS Foundation Trust said the prime minister “did wear a mask for the majority of the visit”. But “after the prime minister left a welcome meeting, he walked along a mezzanine corridor, for a very short period of time, without a mask”. “As soon as this was identified he was given a mask and he put it on,” the trust said. Johnson’s mask-less appearance at the Cop26 climate change summit in Glasgow also raised eyebrows as he sat next to 95-year-old environmentalist Sir David Attenborough, who was wearing a face covering. At a Downing Street press briefing on Monday, the prime minister insisted that he takes a “responsible” approach to wearing a mask. I wear a mask wherever the rules say that I should, and I urge everybody else to do the same. People have actually seen me wearing face coverings quite a bit more regularly as we have seen the numbers ticking up in the UK. I think that is the responsible thing to do and I am going to continue to do it. Johnson said the government would “continue with our approach, which is to rely on people’s common sense - on people’s sense of personal responsibility to themselves and to others”. “But clearly in confined spaces, where you are meeting people that you don’t normally meet, you should wear a face covering,” he added. Amazon has agreed to pay a $500,000 fine and be monitored by California officials after the state’s attorney general said the company failed to “adequately notify” workers and health authorities about new Covid-19 cases. Amazon employs about 150,000 people in California, most of them at 100 “fulfillment centers” – sprawling warehouses where orders are packed and shipped. The agreement, which must be approved by a judge, requires the Seattle-based retailer to notify its workers within a day of new coronavirus cases in their workplaces. Amazon also agreed to notify local health agencies of new virus cases within 48 hours and will stop issuing notices that Rob Bonta, California’s attorney general, said do not adequately tell employees about Amazon’s safety and disinfection plan and workers’ rights related to the pandemic. “As the company enjoyed booming and historic sales with its stock price doubling, Amazon failed to adequately notify warehouse workers and local health agencies of Covid case numbers, often leaving them unable to effectively track the spread of the virus,” Bonta told reporters in San Francisco at an event held across the street from an Amazon warehouse. Bonta added: “This left many workers understandably terrified and powerless to make informed decisions to protect themselves and to protect their loved ones,” such as getting tested for the virus, staying home or quarantining if they’ve been notified of a potential workplace exposure. Bonta said the judgment is the first of its kind in the US and complies with a state “right-to-know” law that took effect last year. Read the full story here: Good morning from London. I’m Lucy Campbell, I’ll be bringing you all the latest global developments on the coronavirus pandemic for the next eight hours. Please feel free to get in touch with me as I work if you have a story or tips to share! Your thoughts are always welcome. Email: lucy.campbell@theguardian.com Twitter: @lucy_campbell_ A Kyiv crematorium has doubled its cremations compared with the summer months as virus deaths soar in the Ukraine capital. The news comes as Ukrainians will soon be offered a cash incentive to get double-vaccinated against Covid-19 in a bid to boost the country’s low inoculation rate. Russia continues to report fairly consistent numbers of Covid deaths and cases as authorities wait anxiously to see whether the week long paid shutdown at the beginning of the month has made a dent into the transmission of the virus. Today Russia announced 1,240 deaths, which is close the record high, and 36,818 new cases. Russia has granted approval for Pzifer to conduct clinical trials in Russia of its experimental antiviral pill to treat Covid-19. As Germany battles its worst infection rate since the pandemic began, some states are considering putting in place so-called 2G rules, which effectively exclude people who choose not to be vaccinated from many areas of public life. Berlin adopted the new rules on Monday. Only people who are fully vaccinated or who have recovered from Covid-19 in the past six months are permitted to eat inside restaurants or go to clubs or bars. Only children and those who have medical reasons for not being vaccinated are exempt from the rule. ONS figures show that the number of deaths involving Covid in the week ending 5 November was the highest in England since 19 March 2021 and in Wales the highest since 5 March 2021. Amanda Pritchard, chief executive of the NHS in England, has said “The guidance is clear that people should wear masks in healthcare settings” in response to questions about Prime Minister Boris Johnson’s maskless appearance in a hospital last week. Labour’s shadow home secretary Nick Thomas-Symonds has accused the UK government of letting “its foot off the pedal” on the Covid booster jab programme, where the numbers receiving jabs are much lower than the government had predicted. The Czech Republic reported 11,514 new Covid-19 cases for 15 November, the fifth time daily infections have topped 10,000 in past seven days Cathay Pacific is bringing in new regulations for its aircrew in Hong Kong that will mean they will have to quarantine for 21 days after trips abroad. The regulations will come into force from tomorrow. The first person infected with Covid linked to the St Basil’s aged care home outbreak in Australia, in which 50 residents died, has spoken publicly for the first time, telling a coroner she was cleared to work despite living in a high-risk suburb with relatives experiencing “throat discomfort”. Vaccine mandates are taking effect in New Zealand as the nation sets another daily record for community Covid-19 infections and a new death. Our Science Weekly podcast this week asks why does Covid-19 make things smell disgusting? Andrew Sparrow has the UK politics live blog today. Lucy Campbell will be here shortly to continue bringing you the latest Covid developments from the UK and around the world. I’m Martin Belam, and I will see you here again tomorrow. The weekly data bulletin on deaths in England and Wales has been issued this morning by the Office of National Statistics (ONS). The main findings this week are: In the week ending 5 November, 11,550 deaths were registered in England and Wales; 563 more deaths than the previous week and 16.8% above the five-year average, which equates to 1,659 more deaths. Of the deaths registered, 995 mentioned “novel coronavirus (Covid-19)” on the death certificate. That is 8.6% of all deaths, an increase from 7.8% the previous week. The number of deaths involving Covid was the highest in England since 19 March 2021 and in Wales the highest since 5 March 2021. Cathay Pacific is bringing in new regulations for its aircrew that will mean they will have to quarantine for 21 days after trips abroad. The regulations will come into force from tomorrow. Crew have been told that for the first three days after an overseas trip they must stay at home except for a small number of exemptions like solo exercise and the purchase of essential food and medicines. For the next 18 days they are then told they must avoid all unnecessary social contact. Hong Kong still has a strict set of travel precautions in place, with most arrivals to the city having to spend 14 or 21 days in hotel quarantine. Yellow school buses are part of the American streetscape, familiar to families across the US and an easily recognizable symbol the world over. But the drivers of the vehicles that shuttle America’s children to and from school are now caught up in the wave of labour unrest sweeping across the US in the wake of the Covid-19 pandemic. Strikes, walkouts, protests or sick-outs among school bus drivers have taken place this fall in many states including North Carolina, New Mexico, Maryland, Florida, Indiana, Georgia Pennsylvania and New York among others. Some school districts have periodically closed schools due to bus driver shortages or changed school schedules to accommodate the shortage. Other districts have raised pay and offered sign-on bonuses to try to lure workers into vacant school bus driver positions. Read more of Michael Sainato’s report here: US school bus drivers in nationwide strikes over poor pay and Covid risk Russia continues to report fairly consistent numbers of Covid deaths and cases as authorities wait anxiously to see whether the week long paid shutdown at the beginning of the month has made a dent into the transmission of the virus. Today, Russia announced 1,240 deaths, which is close the record high, and 36,818 new cases. This is slightly down on yesterday’s figure. The highest caseload recently was on 6 November, when new cases breached 40,000. The seven-day average has been trending slightly downwards for 10 days now. There’s a committee session in parliament in the UK about to begin looking at global vaccine access. The all-party parliamentary group on coronavirus is running the session from 10am-11.30am in London, and those giving evidence include: Dr David Nabarro, the World Health Organization’s special envoy on Covid-19. Dr Ayoade Alakija, co-chair of the Africa Union Africa Vaccine Delivery Alliance. Dr Nicaise Ndemb, chief science adviser to the Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention director. Anna Marriott, health policy adviser for Oxfam. If you fancy watching that, it is being broadcast live on their YouTube channel and starts in about 10 minutes’ time. Andrew Sparrow has launched our UK politics live blog for the day. With accusations that the prime minister’s father inappropriately touched a Conservative MP and the fall-out from last night’s parliamentary shenanigans involving Christopher Chope, he will have a very full day of politics ahead of him. I will continue to cover UK angles on Covid here, as well as news from the rest of the world. There is a slight return this morning of the row over British prime minister Boris Johnson’s recent visit to Hexham General hospital on 8 November, where he was photographed not wearing a face mask. Amanda Pritchard, chief executive of the NHS in England, was asked about it on the BBC Radio 4 Today programme this morning. “The guidance is clear that people should wear masks in healthcare settings,” she said. PA Media reports that pressed on whether she would have told Johnson to put a mask back on, she added: “I wasn’t on the visit. So I’m afraid I don’t know the ins and outs of exactly what happened there. I’m sure my colleagues did encourage everybody there to follow the appropriate guidance.” The Covid pandemic does generate a few good news stories, and Ngouda Dione and Cooper Inveen report for Reuters this morning that quieter beaches in Senegal have been a boon to the local turtle population. Increased fishing, tourism and construction have left fewer safe nesting grounds for Senegal’s turtles, which are listed as threatened by the International Union for Conservation of Nature. Only two or three turtles have laid their eggs in Guereo in recent years, while dozens did a generation ago, Djibril Diakhate said. The 47-year-old barkeeper patrols this beach up to 75 nights a year to keep predators from their nests until the eggs are ready to hatch. “I have always been affected by the birth of these turtles,” he said. “The first time I witnessed a hatching, I cried at these creatures of God.” Saliou Mbodji, president of the nearby Somone Marine Protection Area, attributes the change to Covid-19 restrictions that halted local fishing and tourism for much of 2020. “There were not many people at the beaches or the hotels,” Mbodji said. “There was less light, so more turtles came to lay their eggs on the beaches.” This year, however, the number of nests has again diminished as restriction begin to life. Polina Nikolskaya reports for Reuters that Russia has granted approval for Pzifer to conduct clinical trials in Russia of its experimental antiviral pill to treat Covid-19, a state registry of medicines showed on Tuesday. The trials conducted on 90 people located in home-like conditions with someone who has symptomatic Covid-19 began on 12 November and will continue until March 2023, the registry’s website said. Pfizer said earlier this month the experimental antiviral pill cut by 89% the chance of hospitalisation or death for adults at risk of severe disease. It hopes to make the pill available globally as quickly as possible. The pill has the brand name Paxlovid. Our economics editor Larry Elliott has written his analysis this morning on how the UK economy is beginning to emerge from Covid, but old problems remain. He concludes: The economy as a whole is now starting to go post-Covid. The inflation figures due out on Wednesday will still show the impact of the virus on global energy prices and on supply chains but in other respects it is as if the past 18 months never happened. There are two sides to that. The good news is that the labour market has emerged relatively unscathed. The bad news is that the problems of February 2020 – low investment, low productivity, weak underlying growth – are problems that remain to be tackled in November 2021. Read more of Larry Elliott’s analysis here: UK economy begins to emerge from Covid but old problems remain The first person infected with Covid linked to the St Basil’s aged care home outbreak in Australia, in which 50 residents died, has spoken publicly for the first time, telling a coroner she was cleared to work despite living in a high-risk suburb with relatives experiencing “throat discomfort”. The former personal care assistant at the home, identified only as “A” to protect her identity, said she was swabbed on 5 July 2020 at a drive-through testing clinic after she finished a shift at St Basil’s. She was tested with her husband, sister-in-law, brother-in-law and sister, as they all lived together in Moreland, an area the Victorian government had identified as high risk for Covid-19. All five were asymptomatic at the time, A told the coroner on Tuesday. She said staff who tested her knew she worked in aged care and told her because she was asymptomatic she could go to work. Read more of Melissa Davey’s report here: Aged care worker living with relatives who had Covid symptoms cleared to work at St Basil’s, inquest hears In the UK, Labour’s shadow home secretary Nick Thomas-Symonds has been on Sky News, and was asked about two things pertaining to the pandemic. On the suggestion that booster jabs might be required in order to obtain a Covid passport for international travel, Thomas-Symonds said: That’s something that the government needs to deal with logistically. But in terms of the booster programme, my worry is that the government has let its foot off the pedal as far as the vaccination programme is concerned. The Covid boosters are what will prevent the need to introduce further restrictions and they are also what will ease the pressure on the NHS this winter. So rather than pulling their foot off the pedal, the foot needs to go down on the pedal to really speed up that booster programme, which is absolutely vital. Secondly, he was asked about the prospects of vaccination being approved for children between the ages of five and 11. He said: I think we have to follow, as we have throughout, the scientific advice on this. I appreciate they’re already doing that in Israel. We need to be looking at that scientific advise, and if that’s the way it points, of course we look at that very carefully. Here is an update on the caseloads across Europe at the moment. The darker the colour in the map, the higher the incidence. Yesterday, the Robert Koch Institute measured the incidence in Germany at the highest rate it has been since the pandemic began. The Czech Republic reported 11,514 new Covid-19 cases for 15 November, the fifth time daily infections have topped 10,000 in past seven days, health ministry data showed. This means that the seven-day rolling average of new cases stands at 10,988. A week ago, it stood at 7,643. Reuters report that hospitalisations grew to 4,296, including 635 people in a serious condition, according to the figures. The outgoing government of prime minister Andrej Babišhas been debating bringing in tougher restrictions including a proposal for some form of lockdown for unvaccinated people. Ministers had not reached an agreement by late on Monday and would return to the issue on Thursday, officials said. The number of UK workers on company payrolls surged by 160,000 last month and there was no sign of a jump in redundancies despite the furlough support scheme introduced during the pandemic coming to an end, according to figures from the Office for National Statistics (ONS). PA Media is carrying a quote from the UK chancellor Rishi Sunak, who has said the latest jobs figures were “testament to the extraordinary success of the furlough scheme”. He said: “We know how vital keeping people in good jobs is, both for them and for our economy – which is why it’s fantastic to see the unemployment rate falling for nine months in a row and record numbers of people moving into employment.” Hello, it is Martin Belam here in London taking over from Samantha Lock. Damian Hinds, minister of state for security in the UK, has been on Sky News already this morning. He was asked whether the government was planning to make it so that only people who have had a booster jab would continue to qualify for a Covid passport to travel abroad, as has been reported in the media. He didn’t really have an answer for that beyond broadly praising the vaccination programme, saying: It has been enormously successful. It helps to keep us all safe, inching back towards normality. I think that’s a good thing. I think it is what people have welcomed. So my encouragement to everybody is, when you get the invitation to get the booster, to go ahead and do it. It is good for all of us. It’s good for us as individuals, it is good for us as a society. This is how we’ve been able to start to move out of difficult period for so many people, a tragic period for those who’ve lost a loved one. And the booster jab is very important. Growing numbers of people catching coronavirus are experiencing an unpleasant distortion of smells. Scientists are still unsure what causes this often distressing condition, known as parosmia, where previously enjoyable aromas trigger feelings of disgust. In our Science Weekly podcast this week, Madeleine Finlay talks to science correspondent Linda Geddes about her own parosmia, and chemist Dr Jane Parker discusses research into why the smell of coffee seems to be a trigger for so many people. As Germany battles its worst infection rate since the pandemic began, some states are considering putting in place so-called 2G rules, which effectively exclude people who choose not to be vaccinated from many areas of public life. Berlin adopted the new rules on Monday, 15 November. Under the rules, only people who are fully vaccinated or who have recovered from Covid-19 in the past six months are permitted to eat inside restaurants or go to clubs or bars. Only children and those who have medical reasons for not being vaccinated are exempt from the rule. “In light of the rising number of coronavirus infections and looming shortages in intensive care units, the Senate has decided to significantly expand the so-called 2G rule,” the city government said. Only vaccinated and recovered persons will be allowed to enter places such as restaurants, cinemas, theatres, museums, galleries or concert venues. The rule also applies to gymnasiums and swimming pools, leisure facilities such as saunas and thermal baths, and amusement venues such as arcades. Unvaccinated people are also no longer allowed into enclosed areas inside amusement parks, zoos and botanical gardens. The 2G rule also applies to hairdressers, beauty salons, gyms and dance studios. Brandenburg, Baden-Württemberg and Bavaria are expected to follow suit. 2G rules are already in force in some districts where Covid hospitalisations are particularly high. Similar proposals are being discussed for adoption on a national level and, if approved, would come into effect later this month. The centre-left Social Democrats, Greens and pro-business FDP said on Monday they would add harsher measures to their draft law under consideration by the Bundestag (lower house of parliament) to deal with the outbreak. On Thursday, the German parliament is due to vote on a new legal framework for coronavirus restrictions drawn up by the parties that are expected to form the country’s next coalition government. Welcome back to our live Covid coverage. I’m Samantha Lock and I’ll be taking you through all the latest developments from across the world. Here’s a rundown of everything you might have missed. A Kyiv crematorium has doubled its cremations compared with the summer months as virus deaths soar in the Ukraine capital, a spokesman told AFP. The news comes as Ukrainians will soon be offered a cash incentive to get double-vaccinated against Covid-19 in a bid to boost the country’s low inoculation rate. President Volodymyr Zelensky announced the news on Monday in the nation where fewer than a third of the population has been fully vaccinated. Vaccine mandates are taking effect in New Zealand as the nation sets another daily record for community Covid-19 infections and a new death. From Tuesday, new mandates kick in for many government workers in health, education, disability and the prison system who now must be vaccinated to do front-line jobs. Europe: Police in Austria have begun carrying out routine checks on commuters to ensure compliance with a nationwide “lockdown for the unvaccinated”, as the Alpine country tries to get on top of one of the most rapidly rising infection rates in Europe. Germany’s prospective coalition government is pondering lockdown restrictions for the unvaccinated, as infections in the country continue to rise. Measures could include requiring the unvaccinated to show proof of a negative test before travelling by bus or train. Belgium’s government is bringing forward a meeting to decide on tighter measures to control the spread of Covid-19 amid a rapid increase in infections and hospital admissions. Britain’s booster vaccine rollout is to be extended to people aged between 40 and 49, officials said, in a bid to boost waning immunity in the population ahead of the colder winter months. UK prime minister Boris Johnson warned people against complacency, saying that a new wave of Covid has “steadily swept through central Europe” and is now affecting the nation’s closest neighbours. Employers in Latvia are allowed to dismiss employees who refuse to get vaccinated against Covid-19 from Monday. The pressure on Dutch hospitals mounts from a surge in Covid-19 patients as cases break records. The worst has yet to come, the head of the country’s hospital association said on Monday. The number of Covid-19 patients in Dutch hospitals increased to about 2,000 on Monday, including almost 400 in intensive care, reaching the highest level since May. Americas: US president Joe Biden’s vaccine requirements are prompting more Americans to get Covid shots, White House press secretary Jen Psaki said. The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) advised against travel to the Czech Republic, Hungary and Iceland because of a rising number of Covid-19 cases in those countries. Peru, the country with the world’s highest Covid-19 mortality rate, is to require adults to show proof of vaccination to enter indoor spaces from next month. Asia: India opens again to foreign tourists from countries with reciprocal agreements after a 20-month ban due to the pandemic. Thousands of children in the Philippines are allowed to return to classrooms for the first time since the start of the pandemic. Cambodia announces that fully vaccinated foreign travellers can visit the kingdom without quarantine. China is battling the spread of its biggest Covid-19 outbreak caused by the Delta variant as case numbers in the north-eastern city of Dalian outpace anywhere else in the country. The Dalian outbreak has prompted China to confine nearly 1,500 university students to their dormitories and hotels in the city. China’s president Xi has agreed to upgrade the “fast track lane” for US business figures to come to the country, Chinese state media reports. Oceania: Australia’s Indigenous vaccination rates continue to lag across every jurisdiction amid heightened fears over an outbreak in the Northern Territory. Nationally, just under 58% of Indigenous people aged 16 and older are double-dosed, while about 69% are partially vaccinated, much lower than Australia’s overall double-dose rate of 83%. Africa/Middle East: Israel gave the green light Sunday to start vaccinating children aged between five and 11 against Covid-19 using Pfizer/BioNTech jabs.Usman Khawaja and Travis Head have been named in a 15-man Australia squad for the first two Tests of the Ashes series, after selectors left the door open to both players to make the final cut for next month’s opener against England. The pair are now likely fight it out in a practice match in Brisbane between Australia and an A team, starting on 1 December, to win the No 5 spot vacated by Matthew Wade. Khawaja’s last Test appearance came during the 2019 Ashes series in England but his scintillating start to this year’s Sheffield Shield – he tops the run charts after hitting back-to-back centuries, including 174 against South Australia last month – has prompted his return to the fold. “Usman Khawaja has been in great touch. He brings a calm, consistent and experienced component to the batting lineup and is a proven run-scorer at Test level,” the chairman of selectors, George Bailey, said. “He also has the ability to bat across a range of positions in the batting order. Khawaja said he was excited after getting the phone call from Bailey on Tuesday morning, but he tempered that with a touch of realism. “Playing for Australia is always an honour and being selected in the 15-man squad is obviously an honour too,” he said. “I’m excited but it’s still business as usual – we’re still in the middle of the season – so you can’t get too far ahead of yourself.” Head also started the domestic season in good nick, but has fallen away in recent outings, scoring one half-century in his past six innings. “Travis finished last summer strongly, second only to Cameron Green for runs scored, and has again started the season well,” Bailey said. “He drives the game forward and can put the opposition under pressure with his ability to score quickly.” Otherwise, the team to face England’s tourists at the Gabba from 8 December and then in Adelaide for the day-night Test starting on 16 December appears to be settled, with incumbent Test opener Marcus Harris to partner David Warner at the top of the order. Harris’s development at Leicestershire convinced selectors to retain him, Bailey said. “He is a good player who will be looking to build a strong partnership with David Warner at the top of the order.” At the other end of the teamsheet, the pace trio Pat Cummins, Josh Hazlewood and Mitchell Starc will only be displaced in the event of injury or fitness concerns, with Jhye Richardson the most likely to step in if needed. Richardson was included along with the uncapped fast bowler Michael Neser and leg-spinner Mitchell Swepson in a squad that was well-balanced, Bailey said, with a “mix of experienced, proven performers and emerging, developing talent”. Six players from the T20 World Cup-winning team – who arrived back in Australia on Tuesday – feature in the squad and Cummins expects the confidence off the back of Australia’s success in the 20-over format to flow into the red-ball series. The Test vice-captain said: “It’s a different format but you saw somebody like Davey Warner, player of the tournament, that’s going to have huge confidence for him going into the summer. “As an Australian side, we all probably felt like we’ve underperformed a little bit in the last few years, haven’t won as many games as we’d probably expect. “To get back out and win a title on the world stage … it can be era-defining for a side. Everyone’s just absolutely buzzing, really excited for what’s next.” Mitchell Marsh’s T20 World Cup heroics in the UAE were not enough to see him make the cut, but he features on the Australia A list for the practice match, as does Sean Abbott, Ashton Agar and Josh Inglis. The 15-man squad selected for the opening two matches will be reassessed for the Boxing Day Test at the MCG and beyond to Sydney and Perth. Australia’s 15-man Test squad: David Warner, Marcus Harris, Marnus Labuschagne, Steve Smith, Travis Head, Usman Khawaja, Cameron Green, Tim Paine (capt, wkt), Pat Cummins, Mitchell Starc, Josh Hazlewood, Nathan Lyon, Jhye Richardson, Michael Neser, Mitchell Swepson. Australia A top-up players for tour game: Sean Abbott, Ashton Agar, Scott Boland, Alex Carey, Henry Hunt, Josh Inglis, Nic Maddinson, Mitchell Marsh, Matthew Renshaw, Mark Steketee, Bryce Street.The education minister, Alan Tudge, says the federal government’s revised religious discrimination bill will allow schools to hire on the basis of faith, but they will not be able to discriminate on other characteristics, such as sexuality. As the government flags its intention to pass the legislation through the Senate by the end of the year, former Labor senator Jacinta Collins is also urging Labor to support the positive discrimination employment right for faith-based institutions. But even if Labor supports the move for faith-based schools, the revised bill’s passage through parliament is complicated by the inclusion of a controversial “statement of belief” clause that will override other state, territory and commonwealth anti-discrimination laws. The government has scrapped the contentious Folau clause, which would have protected employers from claims of indirect discrimination if they sanctioned employees for misconduct for expressing religious beliefs. But it retains a similar measure for qualifying bodies. Moderate MPs are still reserving their right to cross the floor over the legislation, which will be presented to the Coalition party room when parliament resumes next week. Tudge defended the move to protect the right of schools to employ people of their own faith, but said this would not extend to allowing a Catholic school, for example, to discriminate against a gay teacher. “That wouldn’t be lawful under our bill,” Tudge told Sky News on Wednesday. “So the bill will certainly allow religious schools to employ people of their own faith – now, this is a critical principle at stake here, because … you can’t be a Catholic school if you can’t employ Catholic teachers, you can’t be a Muslim school without employing Muslim teachers. “So we plan on protecting that very critical right for schools to be able to employ teachers of their own faith.” He said this would override existing state and territory laws “where necessary”. When asked whether it was appropriate that this would mean a Catholic school could refuse to hire a Muslim maths teacher, Tudge said it was about the “overall values of the individual”. “If a school has a set of religious values which they are imparting, then they should be able to employ teachers who have values consistent with those articulated principles.” However, Equality Australia chief executive Anna Brown said the comments were “breathtakingly misleading”, given that existing federal law allowed discrimination against LGBT teachers and students in religious schools. “Nothing in this Religious Discrimination Bill acts to fulfil the federal government’s previous commitment to protect LGBT students. In fact, the Morrison government’s bill licences more discrimination against all our communities, by overriding existing protections for women, people with disability, LGBTIQ+ people and even people of faith.” Collins, now the chief executive of the National Catholic Education Commission, welcomed any proposal to allow schools to take teachers’ faith into account when first employed and in the course of their employment. “I would expect preparedness in Labor to support legislation for religious freedom,” Collins told Guardian Australia, citing its platform. Labor’s platform states it recognises “the right of religious organisations to act in accordance with the doctrines, tenets, beliefs or teachings of their faith” and that “such rights should be protected by law” and be subject only to such limitations as are necessary to protect fundamental rights and freedoms of others. Collins, a vocal proponent of religious freedom in parliament, noted that in 2018 Labor had supported symbolic second reading amendments recognising schools’ right to maintain their ethos. But she acknowledged there are “nuances around how that’s expressed and the biggest complexity will be this state override issue”, meaning whether a positive right in federal law to set an institutional ethos will override state anti-discrimination laws, such as Victoria’s equal opportunity laws. On gay teachers, Collins said there was no intention to use ethos provisions to discriminate on grounds including sexuality, which is “not a problem or mischief in our schools at all”. The Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, has said he doesn’t support discrimination based on religion but won’t support measures that “increase discrimination in other areas”. Collins noted the Folau clause had been removed from the bill, which should make it easier for Labor to support “reasonable provisions to support religious freedom” but added “exactly what that involves remains to be seen” as the bill had not been released and hadn’t passed the Coalition party room.Go secondhand splurging Buying preloved items isn’t a new concept, but the way we do it has changed dramatically in the past few years. Sure, antique stores and op shops still exist, but lately, more and more goods are listed on social media marketplaces as opposed to in physical marketplaces. This means your options as a shopper have exploded (figuratively speaking, unless you’re in the market for fireworks). You don’t have to rush to a vintage store to find a bargain, or elbow others out of the way at a local market. Now, you can find everything you need using just your phone. The best part? Shifting to digital hasn’t taken away the two best parts of secondhand shopping: the hunt, and the haggle. Just be polite, OK? Get mending You know the expression, “If it ain’t broke, don’t fix it”? Well, sometimes things do break, and need fixing. It can be tempting to chuck something out if we don’t have the skills to repair it ourselves (just think of all the genuinely good gear left out during hard rubbish). But why not see a breakage as an opportunity to learn a new skill? We guarantee you will feel so much better about yourself even if you do something as small as sewing on a button. And if you don’t have the time or inclination, repair stores and alteration places still exist. Support small businesses while reducing waste. Everybody wins. The Three Rs Reduce, reuse, recycle. Captain Planet has been singing this tune since he blasted out of the sky and forced us to think about which bin to put our empty bottles in. It’s a classic phrase for a reason, and is becoming more important with each day. You’re probably aware of the growing dangers of climate change, but did you know that Australia put 76m tonnes of waste in landfill in 2018-19? As environmentalists are keen to highlight, “reduce” is the very first R for a reason. The less we use, the less we have to recycle or throw away. It sounds simple, but every one of us has the power to make more conscious choices. We can shift our thinking from ‘It’s OK, this thing is recyclable” to “Do I really need to buy this thing?” It’s an important transition that benefits everyone. Rent The three Rs have just been mentioned, but maybe a fourth one should be added: renting. Sites such as Car Next Door and Airbnb use this model, and the space is growing. Co-founder of online rental marketplace Releaseit, Peter Krideras, says the rise of the share economy has fundamentally changed the way younger Australians view ownership. “We no longer need to own things, we just need access,” he says. Releaseit has innovated the rental space, creating access to goods in a wide range of categories, including clothing, home and garden, electronics, vehicles and even party goods. This means more people can use these items, secure in-demand brands, have more experiences, save money, and lighten their environmental footprint. “What we wanted was to create a sustainable platform, allow consumers to reuse what they already have, and reduce overall production and waste,” Krideras says. Rent No, that’s not a typo - we did say “rent” again. But this time, why not try being the one to share? You don’t have to be a landlord to collect rent. Sites such as Releaseit allow you to sign up quickly and easily to list and share your own items for others to enjoy (temporarily). And don’t worry: there are heaps of protections in place for both renter and seeker to ensure everyone makes the most of the experience. The list of categories is impressive, and will only grow from here, so take a look around: do you have a power tool collecting dust? Gazebo left over from a party? Renting out to others helps you make some extra cash while knowing nobody contributes to landfill. Captain Planet would be proud. Start a side hustle with a positive impact via Releaseit.One in three people across the Pacific Islands region have paid a bribe when using a public service in the last year, while a quarter of people have been offered a bribe for their vote in the last five years, according to a report by Transparency International. The findings for the watchdog group are based on a survey of more than 6,000 people in 10 countries and territories, and is the most comprehensive look at corruption ever carried out in the region. Kiribati, Papua New Guinea, and the Federates States of Micronesia (FSM) top the list for both percentage of people who have paid a bribe and percentage of people who have been offered a bribe for their vote. The report notes that 15% of people surveyed said they had also received threats of retaliation if they did not vote a specific way. “What we can now see is that bribery is worse in the Pacific region than any other region in the world,” said Mariam Mathew, Pacific regional lead at Transparency International. “It’s certainly very alarming.” The most common public services people paid bribes for were health care and education. Others include government offices issuing documents, providers of water, sanitation or electric services, the police and the courts. The report also notes that over 40% of respondents believe sexual extortion happens at least occasionally, with 38% across the region stating they or someone they know has experienced sexual extortion – the act of demanding sexual favours in exchange for official services - in the last five years. While New Caledonia and French Polynesia, both oversea French territories, fared better on whether people had paid a bribe or received a bribe for their vote, they ranked worst on other issues, particularly sexual extortion. The highest rate of sexual extortion was reported in French Polynesia, where 92% of respondents said they have experienced this form of corruption themselves or know someone who has, followed by New Caledonia (76%) and Papua New Guinea (51%). French Polynesia also ranked worst on nepotism, with 84% of respondents believing that public servants commonly influence a hiring decision in their departments to favour a friend or family member. More than half of those surveyed in New Caledonia said they had used personal connections in the public service in the previous 12 months. Dr Henry Ivarature, a corruption expert from PNG and a Pacific lecturer at the Australian National University, said the report’s findings are not surprising. “Petty corruption like paying for public officials for services is very common, if you want to escape a fine or get say passport, police clearance or land titles processed quickly,” he said. In Solomon Islands and Papua New Guinea, 97% and 96% respectively believe that corruption in the government is a big problem. The report notes that people view businesses as a major part of the problem, with government contracts considered a hotspot for corruption. Almost half of those surveyed believe there is little control over companies involved in extracting natural resources, many of which are foreign owned. “We have seen many allegations of opaque deals being made. A lot of these companies are foreign mining companies and so we asked the question in the survey of whether businesses have influence over government decision making and the response was quite high,” said Mathew. “The Solomon Islands was a reoccurring worst performer on a number of those business-related questions, such as obtaining government contracts where over 90% of respondents said businesses at least occasionally rely on connections or offering money to obtain these contracts.” The Pacific is one of the most under-studied regions in the world on corruption, Mathew said this report offers an opportunity to improve anti-corruption safeguards, adding that people’s attitudes reflect a willingness to do this. “People believe that governments are doing a good job in handling corruption, which initially could seem strange,” she said. “But then when you look closely, it could be that governments have actually started to make reform. There’s a lot of potential to build on this positive momentum.” In 2020, the president of Kiribati, the prime ministers of Samoa and the Cook Islands and ministers and anti-corruption officials from other Pacific nations attended the first Pacific Regional Anti-Corruption Conference, held in Kiribati, where they agreed on a vision to tackle corruption.Residents of low-lying parts of the New South Wales central western town of Forbes have been warned not to become complacent about the threat of flooding, despite the rising waters moving at a “snail’s pace”. The Lachlan River peaked at 10.75 metres overnight, with low-lying areas of the town expected to flood late on Wednesday. The emergency services minister, David Elliott, said 275 SES volunteers were stationed there and he was “delighted” there had been no flood rescues overnight. But he warned people to stay on high alert for rising flood waters and alert to closed roads. “It can be many many days before some of these flood waters actually make their way to their final resting place,” he said. The mayor of Forbes, Phyllis Miller, said residents have been waiting for the flood for almost a week but waters were rising at “a snail’s pace” and she was concerned that people were becoming complacent. Miller told Guardian Australia she was concerned complacency was exacerbated by the SES issuing evacuation orders based on mapping from previous floods as old as 1952, despite the uniqueness of each flood event. Miller said as locals “we know where inundation areas are and we need to make our instructions more targeted so that we can be more accurate in the way we issue our evacuation orders,” Miller said. “But our river is coming up and it will peak some time today. Every flood is different. “We’re not sure what that will do inside the town or what will happen with the lake system when that water starts to join up with the river water.” On Tuesday morning about 1,800 residents were ordered to evacuate by the State Emergency Service, which was concerned the river levels would match or exceed major floods in 2016. The SES commissioner, Carlene York, said 800 homes could be flooded as she pleaded with some reluctant locals to evacuate. “It’s not unusual for people who have lived in that area and lived through a number of floods to say, ‘It didn’t flood last time, I’ll take the risk and stay,’” she told reporters on Tuesday. “But every flooding is different and water flows in different ways.” An evacuation centre has been set up at St Andrews Presbyterian church for those unable to get to alternative accommodation with family or friends. Moderate flooding has already occurred upstream at Cowra, with major flooding at Nanami, where the river peaked at more than 12 metres. Downstream from Forbes, major flooding was also expected at Cottons Weir and Jemalong from Thursday. The Macquarie, Paroo, Macintyre, Belubula, and Snowy rivers have also flooded after parts of the state copped a month’s worth of rain in days. Jodi Bilsborough, a third-generation resident of Forbes, was choosing to stay with her family and their three horses, eight chickens, one cat, two birds and two dogs in the home on Bathurst Street where she has lived since she was three, despite the SES issuing evacuation orders for the area. Bilsborough’s home is surrounded by an earth levy and sandbags. The SES knocked on her door on Tuesday telling her to evacuate but she made the same choice as her mother had in previous years. An SES superintendent, Stewart Fisher had said it was “disappointing” not everyone had followed evacuation orders. But Miller defended her constituents’ choices, saying locals often knew better than the volunteers who have come from across the state. “They’ve got volunteers that come to town that don’t understand what the area is like so these kind of things happen,” she told Guardian Australia. “I’ve explained this to my community, it’s no one’s fault, it’s the system we have to work under. I trust that my community knows what they’re doing.” Bilsborough didn’t believe the SES volunteer she spoke to knew the situation as well as she did. “I feel locals would know a bit more about how the flood works out here,” she said. “We’ve never had a flash flood come through this place. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “When you lived out here and done a few floods here, you know it just sort of creeps up the road and surrounds the place and that’s about it. “We were always staying, I never thought about leaving. Maybe if it was rushing I may have taken the kids out and moved the animals.” Bilsborough said the family was stocked up for the coming days. Her son Eli said: “It’s like we’re just in lockdown again.”Why didn’t we nip climate change in the bud? Nathaniel Rich poses that question in an important article for the New York Times Magazine in 2018 (later published as a book). He notes that, for a brief period in the late 1980s, a consensus developed on the necessity for action. Back then, no one considered the science controversial and so a surprising number of mainstream politicians both acknowledged the threat facing humanity and pledged themselves to address it. “The conditions for success,” Rich says, “could not have been more favorable.” The opportunity was squandered because of a reluctance to sacrifice “present convenience to forestall a penalty imposed on future generations”, something he attributes to human nature. The Canadian writer Naomi Klein rejects that part of the argument with a righteous fury. She insists that, in fact, the timing could not have been worse, since the late 1980s represented “the absolute zenith” of the neoliberal turn. Rather than human nature, the problem was that, just as “governments were getting together to get serious about reining in the fossil fuel sector, the global neoliberal revolution went supernova, and that project of economic and social reengineering clashed with the imperatives of both climate science and corporate regulation at every turn”. Fanatically committed to the free market as a regulator of all human social interactions, politicians ruled out public spending or direct bans on emissions. The only measures deemed credible centred on creating trading systems that turned environmental outcomes into commodities on which global financiers could speculate – in essence, nominating the most venal people on the planet as the best bet for saving humanity. Unsurprisingly, corporate business continued as usual and the environmental disaster grew exponentially worse. We might complement Klein’s account by noting another way that the climate crisis emerged at a particularly inopportune moment. The 1980s were, after all, also a decade in which progressive politics changed significantly. Many of the core assumptions of the left developed from the social movements of the 1960s and the 1970s. That was an era dominated by what in my book Trigger Warnings I call “direct politics”: a time of collective protests, of grassroots mobilisations with a focus on participatory democracy centred on workers, students and the oppressed. The advocates of direct politics drew connections between seemingly disparate issues (national liberation, black liberation, women’s liberation, gay liberation and so on) arguing that all manner of social ills required material social change, achievable only if the masses united against the small minority that benefited from the status quo. As the radicalism of the 1960s waned, the mass action of direct politics became more difficult to organise. Activist and historian Todd Gitlin notes that, from about the mid-1970s, the formerly prevalent commitment to revolutionary ideals gave way to what he calls “the practical pursuit of reforms”. Many ex-radicals managed to find professional outlets for their activism. Some became academics; others formed or joined non-governmental organisations, political parties, consultancies, charities and businesses. In the new climate of the 1980s, with protests, rallies and strikes smaller and harder to organise than before, leftists became accustomed to presenting arguments in the name of a constituency that no longer mobilised. Rather than the radical participation associated with direct politics, they embraced a “delegated politics”, in which activists – usually with some sort of institutional authority – advocated on behalf of a largely passive rank and file. That corresponded with different slogans. Instead of pushing for deep, structural change, they increasingly focused on symbolic or cultural reforms, centred particularly on places like university campuses. Though many of the demands associated with delegated politics were entirely valid, the new emphasis had profound consequences – and nowhere more so than in relation to climate change. Global warming is, after all, quintessentially material: a process resulting from the peculiar relationship capitalism mandates between humanity and nature. Yet the new propensity for activists to see politics primarily in terms of culture enabled corporations to shift the focus away from production and into the symbolic realm. Climate duly became a central front in the culture war that has raged more or less unabated since the 1990s, a conflict fought out largely at the level of representation. Abandoning economics to the free market right, progressives sought to inspire change either through individual examples (recycling, bicycle riding, etc) or symbolic events such as Earth Hour. Politically, environmentalism often manifested in terms of belief rather than action. With conservatives pandering to climate scepticism, liberals voted for candidates who promised they “accepted the science”. Yet, on their own, such statements of faith changed nothing. Think of Barack Obama’s soaring speech at Cop26. Symbolically, his oratory could not be more different from the overt denialism of Donald Trump or the grudging acquiescence of Scott Morrison. Yet, during an impeccably neoliberal presidency, Obama had, as he later boasted, turned America into the world’s largest oil and gas producer. In terms of symbolism, Obama stood with progressives against the anti-science Republicanism who despised him. Materially, though, he only intensified the reliance on fossil fuels. Atmospheric carbon does not care about culture war. Neither should we. Global warming exacerbates every kind of inequality, disproportionately affecting the poorest and most oppressed people on the planet. In that way, it creates a tremendous potential constituency for direct politics, for a mass, participatory campaign to fundamentally reshape how humans relate to nature – and to each other. But to seize the opportunity, progressives need a quite different orientation. If we keep fighting in the realm of symbolism, our last, best chance to save the planet will slip through our fingers, too.Anthony Fauci, the top infectious diseases public official in the US, said on Tuesday that if America further ramps up vaccination rates and those already immunized take booster shots that it is feasible Covid-19 could be reduced from a pandemic emergency to endemic status next year. More than 70% of adults in the US are fully vaccinated. Fauci said if a lot more Americans take the vaccines, and if the US makes boosters available for everyone, the country could get control of the virus by spring of 2022. But with his forecast Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases and the chief medical adviser to Joe Biden, was acknowledging what experts now widely believe: that Covid-19 cannot be eliminated and will probably become endemic, meaning it will always be present in the population to some degree, such as the flu or chickenpox. Booster doses of the vaccines are vital for reaching the point where falling infection rates allow the disease to be downgraded from the current pandemic public health emergency to the status of endemic, Fauci explained in an interview on Tuesday during the Reuters Total Health conference. “To me, if you want to get to endemic, you have got to get the level of infection so low that it does not have an impact on society, on your life, on your economy,” Fauci said. “People will still get infected. People might still get hospitalized, but the level would be so low that we don’t think about it all the time and it doesn’t influence what we do.” Even to get to that point, many more people need to take the vaccine for the first time and others need to get boosters, he added. Booster shots are currently available – at least six months after completing prior vaccination – to the immunocompromised, those 65 and older and other people at high risk of severe disease or frequent exposure to the virus through their jobs or living situations. Some states and New York City have already expanded booster availability more widely than the federal recommendations. An influential US panel that advises the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) will discuss on Friday expanding eligibility for booster shots to all adults, which could make the shots available as early as this weekend. “Look what other countries are doing now about adopting a booster campaign virtually for everybody. I think if we do that … by the spring we can have pretty good control of this,” Fauci said. There is a wide range of opinion as to what might be considered getting the virus under control, Fauci noted. “You could control it at 50,000 cases a day. To me, that’s not good control, and that’s not endemicity that I would accept.” He disagrees with those who argue that it is time to start learning to live with the virus all around us all the time. “I don’t want to sit back when we have 70,000 to 85,000 new infections a day and say, ‘Oh, well, we can’t do any better than that. Let’s live with that.’ Sorry, that’s not where we want to be,” he said. That is why he keeps pushing to get as many people vaccinated as possible. “For me, endemicity means a lot more people get vaccinated, a lot more people get boosted, and although you don’t eliminate or eradicate it, that infection is not dominating your life,” he said. The number of new Covid cases is rising in more than half of US states amid fears of another winter surge. Infections were firmly falling from mid-September to late October but the US is now averaging more than 83,000 cases a day, up 14% from a week ago, NPR reported on Tuesday. Minnesota has the worst infection rate in the US over the last week, the Star Tribune reported, and Michael Osterholm, director of the University of Minnesota’s center for infectious disease research and policy warned that the “whole midwest is lighting up” with new coronavirus cases.Joe Biden and leading figures in his administration plan a flurry of further visits, following the president’s trip to New Hampshire today, to promote the benefits of the $1.2tn bipartisan infrastructure legislation signed into law yesterday. Top US infectious disease expert Anthony Fauci said that it is “conceivable” for the spread of Covid-19 to downgrade to endemic levels rather than a pandemic, but that boosters and continued vaccinations are key. The White House is confident the Biden administration’s $1.85tn Build Back Better social program and climate action legislation will get voted through by the House before Thanksgiving, and maybe this week, before it goes back to the Senate, where the president also expressed optimism that it can get passed. California representative Jackie Speier announced that she will not be seeking reelection, adding to the list of Democrats who will not be running for reelection ahead of a shaky 2022 midterm election cycle. Dick Durbin, chairman of the Senate judiciary committee, demanded that attorney general Merrick Garland immediately fire the director of the federal Bureau of Prisons over reports of misconduct involving corrections officers. The House will vote Wednesday on a resolution to censure Paul Gosar, the Arizona Republican congressman who posted an anime video that depicted him attacking the New York Democrat Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez with a sword and threatening Joe Biden. – Joanna Walters and Maanvi Singh Donald Trump’s secretary of state and treasury secretary discussed removing him from power after the deadly Capitol attack by invoking the 25th amendment, according to a new book. The amendment, added to the constitution after the assassination of John F Kennedy in 1963, provides for the removal of an incapacitated president, potentially on grounds of mental as well as physical fitness. It has never been used. According to Betrayal: The Final Act of the Trump Show, by the ABC Washington correspondent Jonathan Karl, the treasury secretary, Steven Mnuchin, talked to other cabinet members about using the amendment on the night of 6 January, the day of the attack, and the following day. Removing Trump via the amendment would have required a majority vote in the cabinet. Karl reports that Mnuchin spoke to Mike Pompeo, Trump’s secretary of state and an avowed loyalist. Mnuchin did not comment for Karl’s book, which is published on Tuesday. Karl writes that Pompeo responded only after Karl told Trump the former secretary of state had not done so. “Pompeo through a spokesman denied there have ever been conversations around invoking the 25th amendment,” Karl writes. “The spokesman declined to put his name to the statement.” Read more: Mini Timmaraju, president of Naral Pro-Choice America, braces for an era in which the federal right to an abortion may no longer exist. Born a month after the landmark 1973 supreme court decision establishing a constitutional right to abortion, Mini Timmaraju has never lived in an America without the rights enshrined by the landmark Roe v Wade supreme court ruling. Now she is helping lead the reproductive rights movement into an uncertain, “frightening” future where the federal right to an abortion may no longer exist. Just days into her new role as president of Naral Pro-Choice America, a conservative supreme court will hear arguments in a case that many advocates fear will be the death knell for Roe v Wade. “It’s frightening times for advocates of reproductive freedom – for all Americans,” she said in an interview. And yet, Timmaraju sees reason for optimism. “It can be the bleakest of times and it can be terribly scary,” she said. “It can also be an incredible opportunity.” Earlier this month, the supreme court took up two separate challenges to a Texas law effectively banning abortions in the second most populous state in the nation. But the more direct threat to Roe comes on 1 December, when the court will consider the constitutionality of a Mississippi law that bans abortions after 15 weeks of pregnancy – about two months earlier than Roe and subsequent decisions allow. These are the first abortion cases to be considered by the expanded, 6-3 conservative majority, which includes three appointees of Donald Trump, who had promised to nominate only “pro-life” justices. If Roe were to be overturned, there are 26 states that are “certain or likely” to ban the procedure, according to the Guttmacher Institute. The list includes nine states with abortion bans still on the books from before Roe, and 12 states with so-called “trigger” laws, which would be enacted if Roe is overturned. “With Scotus in mind and with the midterms at play,” Timmaraju said, “we have a real opportunity to wake up a big majority of the electorate that we know supports reproductive freedom and double down and ramp up that work to meet the moment we’re facing right now, this moment of crisis.” Read more: The House will vote Wednesday on a resolution to censure Paul Gosar, the Arizona Republican congressman who posted an anime video that depicted him attacking the New York Democrat Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez with a sword and threatening Joe Biden. If the resolution passes, Gosar would be the only first representative to be censured in more than a decade. Censure resolutions are rare in Congress and require the censured member to stand in the well of the chamber while the resolution is read out loud. Gosar, who sits alongside Ocasio-Cortez on the oversight committee would lose his position if censured. “The video was posted on Representative Gosar’s official Instagram account and used the resources of the House of Representatives to further violence against elected officials,” the censure resolution reads, in part. “Depictions of violence can foment actual violence and jeopardize the safety of elected officials, as witnessed in this chamber on January 6, 2021.” Here’s more background: Alexandra Villarreal reports: Filing suit in response to whistleblower allegations which have rocked Facebook, the attorney general of Ohio, Dave Yost, accused the social media company of “creating misery and divisiveness for profit”. Yost sued Meta – as Facebook was recently renamed – after revelations from the whistleblower Frances Haugen shocked consumers and sent stock prices tumbling. Filed in the northern district of California, the Ohio suit claims that chief executive Mark Zuckerberg and associates violated federal securities law by knowingly deceiving the public. “Facebook said it was looking out for our children and weeding out online trolls, but in reality was creating misery and divisiveness for profit,” Yost said. “We are not people to Mark Zuckerberg, we are the product and we are being used against each other out of greed.” The litigation comes amid a larger backlash against Zuckerberg and his online empire, after Haugen shared what the suit calls “a trove of internal company documents” showing Facebook’s complicity in the harm its platforms cause. Through Wall Street Journal articles and other reportage, Haugen’s leaks uncovered how little Facebook’s leadership was doing to protect users or even abide by its own rules. The revelations have further eroded trust in the social media behemoth and caused financial repercussions. Between 13 September and 21 October – as the Wall Street Journal published its exposés – “Facebook’s stock price declined by $54.08 a share, or over 14%”, the Ohio lawsuit states. Yost filed the complaint on behalf of Facebook investors and the Ohio Public Employees Retirement System, a public pension fund affected by falls in Facebook shares. Read more: The US politics live blog will now hand over from the east coast to the west coast and our colleague in California, Maanvi Singh, will take you through events over the next few hours. So do stay tuned. Today so far: Joe Biden and leading figures in his administration plan a flurry of further visits, following the president’s trip to New Hampshire today, to promote the benefits of the $1.2tr bipartisan infrastructure legislation signed into law yesterday. Top US infectious disease expert Anthony Fauci said that it is “conceivable” for the spread of Covid-19 to downgrade to endemic levels rather than a pandemic, but that boosters and continued vaccinations are key. The White House is confident the Biden administration’s $1.85tn Build Back Better social program and climate action legislation will get voted through by the House before Thanksgiving, and maybe this week, before it goes back to the Senate, where the president also expressed optimism that it can get passed. California representative Jackie Speier announced that she will not be seeking reelection, adding to the list of Democrats who will not be running for reelection ahead of a shaky 2022 midterm election cycle. Dick Durbin, chairman of the Senate judiciary committee, demanded that attorney general Merrick Garland immediately fire the director of the federal Bureau of Prisons over reports of misconduct involving corrections officers. Joe Biden is wrapping up his visit to New Hampshire and returning to the White House right now. But he intends a further flurry of visits, himself and by some of his top figures this week to, as the White House puts it, communicate the benefits of infrastructure investment and “highlight how the president forged consensus to demonstrate how democracies can deliver real results”. Tomorrow, Biden will visit Detroit. Interior secretary Deb Haaland will visit Barnstable, Massachusetts, on Thursday, San Francisco on Saturday and then head for her native New Mexico on Monday. Vice-president Kamala Harris intends to travel to Columbus, Ohio, on Friday and on that day labor secretary Marty Walsh will follow in Biden’s footsteps to visit Detroit, while transportation secretary Pete Buttigieg goes to Arizona. On Saturday, housing secretary Marcia Fudge goes to Atlanta and on Monday energy secretary Jennifer Granholm will visit Oak Ridge, Tennessee. The White House has been at pains to emphasize the mix of destinations between red and blue states, cities large and small. Public health officials are warning about a surge in coronavirus cases in several states with one saying “the whole midwest is lighting up” with Covid. Minnesota’s rate of new infections has been worst in the nation over the week and is putting a strain on hospitals in the state, the Star Tribune reports today, citing federal statistics. “We are in the middle of a Covid blizzard right now in Minnesota, so that’s a challenge,” state infectious disease director Kris Ehresmann has said. The official echoes the country’s top infectious diseases public health expert, Anthony Fauci, in continuing to encourage people to get vaccinated and, for those who are already immunized, getting their booster shots. “If we could get more people vaccinated and if people continue to seek out boosters, that will make a difference,” Ehresmann said. Minnesota yesterday reported another 5,266 coronavirus infections and a 9.7% positivity rate that brings Minnesota close to its 10% high-risk threshold for widespread viral transmission for the first time since December, the Star Tribune further reports, noting also that unvaccinated people make up the majority of new cases, hospitalizations and deaths. Meanwhile, Michael Osterholm, director of the University of Minnesota’s Center for Infectious Disease Research and Policy has warned that the “whole Midwest is lighting up” with infection. He also reiterated that vaccination is the key strategy against a winter surge and getting the coronavirus pandemic finally under control. “The size of the surge is completely related to vaccine levels,” Osterholm added. You can read the full Minneapolis Star Tribune report here. Pfizer asked US regulators today to authorize its experimental treatment pill for Covid-19, an approval that could result in a take-home treatment for coronavirus by this winter, the Associated Press. Pfizer’s pill comes as coronavirus infection rates increase across the country, particularly as colder weather causes more people to stay indoors. In addition to Pfizer, the Food and Drug Administration is currently reviewing an anti-viral pill from Merck, with other smaller drug producers expected to seek approval for their own Covid-19 pills. “We are moving as quickly as possible in our effort to get this potential treatment into the hands of patients, and we look forward to working with the US FDA on its review of our application,” said Pfizer’s CEO Albert Bourla, in a statement. Pfizer noted earlier this month that their pill cut the rate of hospitalisations and deaths by nearly 90% for adults who had early symptoms of Covid-19, were unvaccinated and had risk factors including age or co-morbid health factors. Today, Pfizer also signed a deal with a UN-backed group to allow drugmakers to produce generic, cheaper versions of the pill for certain countries. Merck, whose anti-viral pill was approved in Britain earlier this month, has a similar deal. The US has approved one other antiviral drug for Covid-19, remdesivir, and authorized three antibody therapies that help the immune system fight the virus, notes the AP. Top US infectious disease expert Anthony Fauci said that it is “conceivable” for the spread of Covid-19 to downgrade to endemic levels rather than a pandemic, but that boosters and continued vaccinations are key. Fauci spoke about trends in the Covid-19 pandemic, noting that while there is no ‘magic number’ of daily coronavirus cases to determine when the US is an endemic phase, reaching that stage is possible. “To me if you want to get endemic, you have got to get the level of infection so low that it does not have an impact on society, on your life, on your economy,” said Fauci in an interview during the Reuters Total Health conference. “People will still get infected. People might still get hospitalized, but the level would be so low that we don’t think about it all the time and it doesn’t influence what we do.” Fauci went on to say that if the US makes boosters available to everyone, the virus could be under control by spring 2022. “Look what other countries are doing now about adopting a booster campaign virtually for everybody. I think if we do that, and we do it in earnest, I think by the spring we can have pretty good control of this,” Biden said he is “confident” that his “Build Back Better” bill will get passed by the House within a week and urged bipartisanship to address US infrastructure needs, including those exacerbated by climate change, during remarks he made today in New Hampshire. Biden also touted that the bill would lower the deficit, pre-empting a potentially negative assessment from the Congressional Budget Office about the bill’s cost estimates. During his speech, Biden also highlighted many benefits to his recently passed infrastructure laws, including fixing blighted bridges, road, and other infrastructure across the country, fixing “100%” of lead pipes in the country, and providing high-speed internet, a service proved even more essential during the Covid-19 pandemic. “Despite the cynics, Democrats and Republicans, we can work together, we can deliver real results,” said Biden. “The middle class built this country and they’ve been left out,” said Biden. Biden spoke in Woodstock, New Hampshire, located two hours outside of New Hampshire’s capital, and at the Pemigewasset River Bridge, which is in need of major repairs, according to the WMUR, a local news affiliate. Biden has had low approval ratings in New Hampshire, similar to dismal approval ratings nationwide. In a recent poll from 20 October by the UNH Survey Center, only 37% of Democratic primary voters said they would vote for Biden in the 2024 primary. House speaker Nancy Pelosi released a statement on the retirement announcement of long-serving California representative Jackie Speier. In a press release about Speier’s announcement that she will not be seeking reelection in 2022, Pelosi spoke about Speier’s accomplishments and legacy in the House, calling Speier “an extraordinary Member of Congress and a significant leader in our country”. “Her courageous and values-based leadership, particularly on behalf of the women, survivors and the vulnerable, has made a difference in the lives of countless Americans and has strengthened our nation,” said Pelosi via the statement. Pelosi also spoke Speier’s role as chair of the military personnel subcommittee of the armed services committee as well as her work to address sexual harassment and assault in the military, college campuses, and in Congress. “Her colleagues in the Congress look forward to continuing to benefit from her leadership for the remainder of her term, and from her legacy for years to come. It has been my personal honor to share representation of San Francisco with her and work with her to save the San Francisco Bay,” said Pelosi. Speier, 71, who has served seven terms as congresswoman for the San Francisco Bay Area, announced her retirement in a video message published to Twitter, saying that while it was an “extraordinary privilege” to serve in public office, she was ready to move on. The White House downplayed pending, potentially negative CBO scores on the Biden administration’s $1.85tn “Build Back Better” bill, calling the CBO’s experience into question. In his first gaggle as White House deputy press secretary, Andrew Bates discussed the potential impact cost estimates from the Congressional Budget Office could have on the bill being passed, directly challenging the CBO’s expertise, reported Politico. “There has been wide agreement on the part of everyone involved, moderates, liberals, etc, that CBO does not have experience analyzing revenue amounts gained from cracking down on wealthy tax cheats who are taking advantage of every honest taxpayer,” said Bates. Bates also said that several economists, including former US Treasury secretary and controversial figure Larry Summers, have said the White House is underestimating the amount of revenue Biden’s spending package could bring. “There’s a huge body of work,” Bates said, “from economic experts – including Republican former Treasury secretaries, IRS commissioners who have served under presidents of both parties, as well as Larry Summers, with whom we have sometimes had important differences – affirming that, if anything, our estimates lowball how much revenue can be brought in by cracking down on rich tax cheats. “This is something that has been known for months and everyone is on the same page,” concluded Bates. Previously, CBO scores have hampered legislation discussion including drafts of the Obamacare bill. Former president Barack Obama was reportedly so fed up with the budget office that the name was banned in his presence, instead calling it “banana”, according to Politico. Joe Biden is en route to New Hampshire this morning, to North Woodstock, and is due to make remarks on his infrastructure bill and related matters at 2.25pm ET there. The White House is “confident” that “Build Back Better” bill will pass in both House and Senate California representative Jackie Speier announced that she will not be seeking re-election. US House Majority leader Steny Hoyer said today that a House vote on the Biden administration’s “Build Back Better” agenda could happen on Friday The Chairman of the Senate judiciary committee demanded that Attorney General Merrick Garland immediately fire the director of the federal Bureau of Prisons (BOP) following an investigation by the Associated Press. House minority leader Kevin McCarthy privately urged House Republicans not to punish the 13 members who voted for Biden’s infrastructure bill that was signed into law yesterday. During a closed meeting with members, McCarthy and others urged that now was not the time for retaliation against those who supported the bipartisan bill, asking Republicans to remain unified ahead of a House vote on Biden’s “Build Back Better” plan. It was unclear though if future punishment was still possible, according to Politico. Far-right Republicans, including Colorado congresswoman Lauren Boebert, had been pushing for those who were key in getting Biden’s infrastructure bill passed to face punishment, including having their committee assignments stripped. It is unclear if McCarthy’s remarks will limit immediate consequences for members who crossed party lines. Following the talk, Freedom Caucus member Representative Ralph Norman of South Carolina called McCarthy’s remarks “good message” but also said that dissenting members should “accept some responsibility.” Following public admonishment from some fellow Republicans, some members who were among the GOP rank and file who helped the bill pass the House say they have received death threats. Reminder: Senate minority leader Mitch McConnell voted for the infrastructure bill, calling it a “godsend” for his homestate of Kentucky. In the briefing on Air Force One en route to New Hampshire just now, deputy press secretary Andrew Bates was asked whether the White House was concerned that the Congressional Budget Office scoring of the financials on the $1.85tn Build Back Better bill “may not be as favorable as you have projected”. And he was also asked whether moderate Democrats in the Senate can be persuaded to agree to pass the bill. The bill, slimmed down to a $1.85tn price tag from its previous size of more than three trillion, is currently awaiting a vote in the House. As previously mentioned, House leaders are hoping for it to pass this week and certainly before Thanksgiving and the CBO expects to indicate its estimates for the spending bill by Friday. But even if this happens, there is still expected to be conflict in the Senate over the price and content of the bill. Taking the second point first, Bates said: “We are confident that we are going to obtain 50 votes in the Senate for the Build Back Better Act.” The Democrats intend to pass BBB via the reconciliation process, as it is a budgetary item, meaning they need a simple majority in the senate, not the 60-vote majority normally needed to satisfy the filibuster rule. But with the 100-seat Senate split 50-50 Dems and GOP, Biden can’t afford to have even one Democratic senator vote against Build Back Better, which is why moderates Joe Manchin of West Virginia and Kyrsten Sinema of Arizona, are holding such sway in their opposition to a big price tag and some of the bill’s social spending and climate action elements. Meanwhile, Bates said, essentially, that the CBO’s estimates are not the be all and end all and the Biden administration is supremely satisfied that “this is going to be paid for”. “This will reduce the deficit, that’s the bottom line for us,” he said. Joe Biden is en route to New Hampshire right now. Air Force One is in the air and deputy press secretary Andrew Bates is gathering now with reporters onboard, for a briefing. Bates just began and we are tuning into the audio-only live stream online and Bates is talking infrastructure and now basketball … we’ll bring you anything meaty. The US president’s long, virtual summit last night with Chinese president Xi Jinping is the first topic that’s come up from reporters. Bates says he has nothing to add to a report this morning in the Washington Post that Biden and his administration plan a diplomatic boycott of the winter Olympics, being held next February in Beijing. “That was not part of their conversation … it was not part of their discussion” last night, Bates says. Tuning into an AF1 gaggle is intriguing! We just heard a loud rattle and Bates, who is still gaggling – this is his first such briefing – had a gaggle giggle and said: “This is the first time I’ve ever landed standing up.” We hear the roar of engines going into reverse thrust, as the Boeing 747 slows after landing, and the party has arrived in New Hampshire and is preparing to alight. Just before Bates talked about the expected House and Senate votes on Build Back Better – catch you in the next post on that. California representative Jackie Speier announced that she will not be seeking reelection, adding to the list of Democrats who will not be running for reelection ahead of a shaky 2022 midterm election cycle. Speier, 71, who has served seven terms as congresswoman for the San Francisco Bay Area, announced her retirement in a video message published to Twitter, saying that while it was an “extraordinary privilege” to serve in public office, she is ready to move on. “It’s time for me to come home,” Speier said. “Time for me to be more than a weekend wife, mother and friend.” Speier noted that she was motivated to serve in public office after accompanying Representative Leo J. Ryan of California to Guyana in 1978 during an attempt to rescue 900 followers of the cult leader Jim Jones. The trip ended in massacre, with Ryan and four others killed and Speier herself shot five times. “I vowed that if I survived, I would dedicate my life to public service. I lived and I served,” said Speier during her retirement announcement. Speier is one of 14 Democratic representatives who have said they will not seek re-election in 2022. While many have cited reasons such as spending more time with family or allowing others to serve in public office, the growing list of retirees, in addition to the more expected, is a sign of Democrats losing representation in Congress and potentially becoming the minority party. US House Majority leader Steny Hoyer has been speaking with reporters about the latest development concerning the Biden administration’s “Build Back Better” bill, a $1.85tn, 10-year, social spending package. Hoyer noted to reporters that debate on the bill should be happening tomorrow, with a House vote expected on either Friday or Saturday, reports Politico. “We’re going to get it done this week,” said Hoyer, with House Speaker Nancy Pelosi telling House representatives that the Congress will not go on Thanksgiving break, as Thanksgiving is next Thursday, until the House passes the bill. The Congressional Budget Office released a statement saying that it would provide cost estimates for sections of the “Build Back Better” agenda by Friday. The stalled cost estimates are an upset for moderate Democrats who want the estimates before voting, increasing the chances of a weekend vote. The cost estimates that will be published by Friday include: Education and Labor Energy and Commerce Judiciary Natural Resources Ways and Means If the House passes the bill, the plan will advance to the Senate where it currently faces united Republican opposition and difficulty amid moderate Democrats. US House Majority leader Steny Hoyer said today that a House vote on the Biden administration’s “Build Back Better” agenda could happen on Friday, though acknowledged the vote could be pushed to the weekend instead, reports Reuters. “My expectation is that we will vote on this Thursday or Friday,” Hoyer told reporters. More details to follow. The Biden administration will soon announce a diplomatic boycott of the Beijing Winter Olympics, the Washington Post reports Citing multiple sources familiar with the planned boycott, the Post wrote that while the decision has not been finalized, the White House is expected to announce that neither Biden nor any US government official will attend the games, with Biden expected to approve the plan before the end of the month. The timing of this process was not linked to the Biden-Xi virtual meeting Monday evening, which was billed as a way for the two leaders to demonstrate their ability to manage complex U.S.-China relations in an era of rising tensions. Various reports this week have said that Xi Jinping intended to bring up the Olympics issue with Biden, perhaps even inviting him to personally attend. But the issue didn’t come up at all during the 3½-hour meeting, according to initial reports. “President Biden raised concerns about the [People’s Republic of China’s] practices in Xinjiang, Tibet, and Hong Kong, as well as human rights more broadly,” the White House readout of the Biden-Xi meeting stated. Biden administration officials have been virtually silent on Olympics-related issues in recent months, refusing to speculate on whether Biden would support a full athlete boycott (as human rights groups and activists are calling for), or a more limited boycott, or no boycott at all. Now that the Biden-Xi virtual summit is complete, sources said, the administration has one less reason to hold off on announcing the diplomatic boycott. The administration will inform allies but leave them to make their own decisions on whether to follow the U.S. lead... In a May hearing, House Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.) called for a U.S. diplomatic boycott of the Beijing Olympics as a way to express international concern about China’s human rights abuses without punishing U.S. athletes. “What moral authority do you have to speak again about human rights any place in the world if you’re willing to pay your respects to the Chinese government as they commit genocide?” she said. “So, honor your athletes at home. Let’s have a diplomatic boycott. … Silence on this issue is unacceptable. It enables China’s abuses.” Officials from China have vehemently denied allegations of human rights abuse, citing the US’s own track record of human rights issues including “the continuing spread of xenophobia, white supremacy and discrimination against people of African and Asian descent and Islamophobia”. The Guardian’s Vincent Ni wrote on the pushback from officials in China following Pelosi’s call for a boycott: China has labelled the US House speaker, Nancy Pelosi, “full of lies and disinformation” after her calls for a diplomatic boycott of next year’s Beijing Winter Olympics and Paralympics on human rights grounds. “Some US individuals’ remarks are full of lies and disinformation,” a foreign ministry spokesperson, Zhao Lijian, said on Wednesday. “US politicians should stop using the Olympic movement to play despicable political games” or using “the so-called human rights issue as a pretext to smear and slander China”, he added. Read the full Post report here (paywall). Read the Guardian report here. The chairman of the Senate judiciary committee demanded that Attorney General Merrick Garland immediately fire the director of the federal Bureau of Prisons (BOP) following an investigation by the Associated Press detailing ongoing, unchecked misconduct involving correctional officers. Senator Dick Durbin of Illinois, who chairs the committee, called on Garland to dismiss BOP’s director Michael Carvajal who has led the organization during a series of ongoing crises including the unmitigated spread of Covid-19 in prisons as well as dozens of escapes – at least 36 within the last 22 months, deaths and chronic understaffing that has limited critical emergency responses. AP’s investigation published two days ago also found that over 100 BOP employees had been arrested, convicted or sentenced for crimes since the start of 2019 and that the agency failed to address allegations of misconduct or suspend employees that had been arrested for crimes, including one official at a prison in Mississippi who remained in his position despite being arrested on charges of stalking and harassing fellow employees. “It is clear that there is much going wrong in our federal prisons, and we urgently need to fix it. That effort must start with new leadership,” said the Senate judiciary committee in a statement posted on Twitter, also calling the BOP a “hotbed of abuse, graft and corruption.” Durbin also noted the need for new leadership in an ongoing attempt by some Democrats to reform America’s criminal justice system. “We have a new Administration and a new opportunity to reform our criminal justice system. It’s clear that there is much going wrong in our federal prisons, and we urgently need to fix it. That effort must start with new leadership,” tweeted Durbin. Carvajal had been appointed to his position by then-Attorney General William Barr, one of the few holdovers from the Trump administration. Deputy Attorney General Lisa Monaco also said that she had confidence in Carvajal despite continued issues during his leadership. Despite inflation increasing the price of goods nationwide, Americans have increased their spending in the last month at retail stores and online, providing gains to the US economy. According to the Associated Press, the US Commerce Department reported on Tuesday that retails sales increased by 1.7% since September, the biggest spending gain since March: Solid hiring, strong pay raises, and healthy savings for many households are underpinning robust spending. Americans are also still buying more cars, furniture, and other goods than they did before the pandemic, which is overwhelming U.S. ports and shipping firms and pushing up prices. The solid spending last month suggests the holiday shopping season is off to a strong start. Tuesday’s retail sales figures aren’t adjusted for inflation, which rose 0.9% in October, the government said last Wednesday. In some categories, such as gas station sales, which rose 3.9% in October, a jump in gas prices accounted for nearly all the gain... Businesses and other employers are rapidly increasing pay to fill a near-record number of open jobs. Wages and salaries jumped in the July-September quarter, compared with a year earlier, by the most in 20 years. That’s giving more Americans extra money to spend. Yet inflation has eroded those gains for most Americans. Prices jumped 6.2% in October from a year earlier, the government said, Wednesday the most in 31 years. Read the full report here. Top experts warn that the inflation surge widely felt nationwide will get worse this winter before it gets better. Addressing clients via a report titled “2022 U.S. Economic Outlook,” Goldman Sachs Global Investment Research spoke to current US inflation trends, saying that,“The current inflation surge will get worse this winter before it gets better,” reports Axios. Researches from Goldman Sachs though also noted that they expect the economy to “reaccelerate to a 4%+ growth pace over the next few quarters,” noting that the economy will likely approve as the service sector continues opening, consumers increase their spending, and inventory stocking increases. Experts also expect unemployment rates to fall from 4.6% recorded in October to 3.7% by mid-2022 and 3.5% by the end of next year. A new poll has Biden’s approval ratings at a record low, showing increasing frustration from Democrats and independents, reports the Hill. A weekend survey conducted by The Washington Post and ABC News put Biden’s approval rate at a dismal 41%, a slight drop from 44% recorded in September. The poll also f0und that 53% of people disapprove of the way that Biden is handeling his job with 6% having no opinion. Biden’s approval rating is specifically dropping among Democrats and Independents. Only 80% of Democrats surveyed said they approved of the job Biden was doing compared to 94% in September. Similarly, among independents, only 35% said they approved of Biden’s performance while 58% said they disapprove. Biden’s poll numbers could be indicative of much-felt frustration by many Americans over economic hardships, including increasing prices for goods and inflations, as well as the Covid-19 pandemic. In better news, the recent poll did demonstrate that the majority of Americans support the recently passed infrastructure bill, with 63% of those surveyed saying they approved of the government “spending one trillion dollars on roads, bridges and other infrastructure” and 58% saying they supported the government “spending about two trillion dollars to address climate change and to create or expand preschool, health care and other social programs.” Joe Biden will be making a trip to New Hampshire today to speak on $1.2tn infrastructure bill that was signed into law yesterday. The president will be traveling to Woodstock, New Hampshire, located two hours outside of New Hampshire’s capital, and speaking at the Pemigewasset River Bridge, which is in need of major repairs, according to the WMUR, a local news affiliate. Biden’s speech will primarily focus on how the newly passed infrastructure bill will benefit rural communities such as Woodstock, as town officials have spent nearly $250,000 across the past decade doing temporary repairs on the bridge. “I think it’s a great compliment to the Granite State that this is the first stop he’s making after signing the infrastructure bill,” said Democratic state representative Steve Shurtleff, who also said that the money New Hampshire will receive from the bill is very needed. Biden has had low approval ratings in New Hampshire, similar to dismal approval ratings nationwide. In a recent poll from 20 October by the UNH Survey Center, only 37% of Democratic primary voters said they would vote for Biden in the 2024 primary. Good morning, US politics live blog readers, Joe Biden is heading to the regions today to sell his legislative agenda, fresh from signing the $1.2tn bipartisan infrastructure deal yesterday in Washington. So please stay tuned for a lively day. Here’s what’s afoot: The US president is heading to New Hampshire this morning, to North Woodstock, and is due to make remarks on his infrastructure bill and related matters at 2.25pm ET there. Deputy press secretary Andrew Bates will “gaggle” with the media aboard Air Force One today after the expected departure at 11.15 of the presidential party from the White House. But Biden is pushing forward against strong headwinds. The latest ABC/Washington Post poll has him at a record low approval rating, especially because of frustration from Democrats and independents. Inflation is set to keep going this winter, a new report yesterday from Goldman Sachs concluded, and this is always a big worry for any president as they are limited in their ability to control it. Homeland security secretary Alejandro Mayorkas testifies before the Senate judiciary committee this morning on the US-Mexico border situation and immigration policy in general.A tiny city in the top US coalmining state of Wyoming is set to become the home of an experimental nuclear power project backed by Bill Gates. The new Natrium nuclear power plant will be located in Kemmerer, officials announced on Tuesday, and will replace a coal-fired plant that is set to close in 2025. “Our innovative technology will help ensure the continued production of reliable electricity while also transitioning our energy system and creating new, good-paying jobs in Wyoming,” said Chris Levesque, the CEO of TerraPower, the company behind the project that was founded by Gates about 15 years ago. Construction is set to begin in 2024. The project will employ as many as 2,000 people during construction and 250 once operational in a state where the coal industry has been shedding jobs. Kemmerer, one of four cities in the running to host the project, is home to 2,600 people and is located about 130 miles (210 km) north-east of Salt Lake City. If it’s as reliable as conventional nuclear power, the 345-megawatt plant would produce enough climate-friendly power to serve about 250,000 homes. The announcement came days after world leaders met at the Cop26 summit in Glasgow. Gates, co-founder of Microsoft and chairman of TerraPower, in June announced plans for the Wyoming project along with officials from Rocky Mountain Power, Joe Biden’s administration and the state of Wyoming, which produces about 40% of the nation’s coal. “We think Natrium will be a gamechanger for the energy industry,” Gates said at the project’s launch in Cheyenne, Wyoming. Proponents of the project, which will feature a sodium-cooled fast reactor and molten salt energy storage, say it would perform better, be safer and cost less than traditional nuclear power. “Natrium will be that next improvement on safety. Importantly it won’t rely on outside sources of power, pumps and extra equipment to help the plant recover in the event of an emergency,” said Levesque, referring to the 2011 Fukushima nuclear disaster caused by a tsunami that knocked out emergency generators. The high heat-transfer properties of sodium will allow the Natrium plant to be air-cooled. That will enable the plant to be quickly shut down in case of an emergency, and the absence of emergency generators and pumps will save on costs, Levesque said. Others are skeptical about the benefits of sodium compared with water for cooling as in conventional nuclear plants. “The use of liquid sodium has many problems. It’s a very volatile material that can catch fire if it’s exposed to air or water,” said Edwin Lyman, director of nuclear power safety with the Union of Concerned Scientists science advocacy non-profit. Countries including the US have experimented with sodium-cooled fast reactors for decades but only Russia has fielded such a reactor on a large, power-producing scale, Lyman said. “Honestly I don’t understand the motivation,” Lyman said. “There are some people who are just strong advocates for it and they’ve sort of won the day here by convincing Bill Gates that this is a good technology to pursue.”The remains of some of the men killed in the Pike River mine disaster, one of New Zealand’s worst mining disasters, have been found more than a decade after the explosion. The blast in November 2010 killed 29 workers, and many of the families have been fighting to have the remains of their loved ones found ever since. The mining tragedy – New Zealand’s worst in 100 years – resonated around the world: among the men who died were 24 New Zealanders, two Australians, two British citizens and one South African. Police announced on Wednesday, just two days before the 11th anniversary of the disaster, that some of those remains had been found – but that they were in the farthest reaches of the mine, and could not be recovered. “We have recovered some images from the boreholes that confirm two deaths, two bodies, and with the possibility of a third body,” Ch Supt Peter Read said. “It’s a really stark reminder of the pain, of the loss,” Read said, “but they add to a picture of investigation and hopefully they’ll go towards getting some answers to the families.” “While we’ve been unable to identify the remains, we’re working with forensic experts to see what we can do to confirm.” Anna Osborne, whose husband Milton was killed in the mine, said the news came as a shock. “My mind was actually on the 19th of November, which is the anniversary …it was the furthest most thought from my mind … so it was a bit of a shock, I wasn’t prepared for it.” But she also felt relief and “a bit of pride”. “We fought really hard to get this police investigation up and going,” she said. Osborne said Wednesday’s news provided the families with some reassurance that police were doing a good job. “They are finding evidence, which is like building that jigsaw puzzle.” “Twenty-nine men didn’t deserve to die, but the families definitely deserve some justice,” she said. Rick “Rowdy” Durbridge, whose son was killed in the mine, told the New Zealand Herald he too was shocked. “You know the guys are down there but to know they have been seen, it hits you hard,” he said. “We’ve fought hard for years now to get justice for our boys, and this is part of it happening. “This is why we worked so hard to negotiate these boreholes and we’ll be supporting the police in whatever way we can to take this further if it needs to happen.” Police are still conducting a criminal investigation into the mine explosion. A royal commission in 2012 found safety warnings were ignored at the site, and that government regulators had failed to inspect it effectively. No individual has ever been successfully prosecuted over the disaster. The news followed recent drilling of boreholes into the mine. Read said the discovery of the remains was “not unexpected” and had been enabled by technological advances. “We know that there were 29 men down there and we’re drilling boreholes in areas where we know people were working so it’s not unexpected,” Read said. “[With] old technology, we were lucky if we could see five or 10 metres – this is allowing us to see 40 or 50 metres.” Police said they could not speculate on whether prosecutions would result from the new images, and that there was no timeline for when the investigation would be concluded. New Zealand’s government had spent more than NZ$50m (£26m) on exploring the access tunnel in an attempt to find the remains. This year, the government announced it would stop funding that mission, but continue to support the police inquiry. Andrew Little, the minister responsible for Pike River re-entry, was notified about the discovery of human remains on Wednesday morning. “You take a moment to reflect, and look, the families have been carrying this for some considerable time, not just the disaster itself and the loss of the loved ones, but the process of government and the government departments I think have led them to expect that various things were going to be done, and they haven’t been done.” The Pike River agency has reached the end of its budget, Little said, and advice from the police and the agency is that recovery is likely to be “impossible”. He said the new information did not signal any plans to unseal the mine. “As we had agreed with the families, and the family representatives, safety is the paramount consideration. All the advice was, simply, that it is not safe, nor technically possible, to get through the most unstable and dangerous part of the mine site, which is the roof fall.” Little will speak to family representatives over the next few days and will seek advice from officials. “There’s no question in my mind – the Pike River Mine company was trying to get the quickest return on investment, knowing that this was an incredibly difficult project to pull off and people have paid for those judgments, and misjudgments, with their lives.”Protests are planned outside Western Australian parliament today over the introduction of a new bill that Aboriginal people say will continue to allow the destruction of their cultural heritage. It comes despite WA government assurances that the bill will be a “new way” of protecting heritage in the wake of the Juukan Gorge disaster. The Aboriginal cultural heritage bill was made public late on Tuesday and will be introduced to parliament on Wednesday. The state government says the bill gives “Aboriginal people a much stronger say” in managing their cultural heritage and was developed after a lengthy consultation process. But many Aboriginal traditional owners, land councils and heritage groups say they have not seen this version of the bill, despite asking for almost a year. The Kimberley Land Council was shown a copy of the legislation on Tuesday night, less than 24-hours before it was tabled in parliament. There have been more than 100 changes to the updated draft. The new bill makes consultation with Aboriginal people compulsory in a “tiered process” of development planning. An Aboriginal cultural heritage council, with majority Aboriginal membership, will be appointed to advise the minister. The draft gives the Aboriginal affairs minister, Stephen Dawson, the final say over heritage disputes. The minister will be able to issue stop activity and prohibition orders, amend plans and impose conditions. But traditional owners have limited rights of judicial appeal over those decisions. They will only be able to go to the state administrative tribunal in six specific circumstances. The Kimberley Land Council warned of a “cultural catastrophe”. “It’s a devastating day for Aboriginal heritage,” said the KLC’s chief executive, Tyronne Garstone. “We have repeatedly called on the McGowan Government to pause this Bill and make the changes required to ensure Aboriginal heritage is protected. By ignoring our concerns the McGowan Government has treated Aboriginal people beneath contempt.” Garstone said the McGowan government, with its 88% majority, had “become arrogant” and was not listening to the concerns of traditional owners. “The state government has proved it is too close to industry and too dependent on royalties to be objective and transparent when it comes to matters concerning Aboriginal heritage,” he said. The Greens senator Dorinda Cox, a Yamatji Noongar woman, said the McGowan government had disrespected traditional owners and Aboriginal elders across WA by not giving them time to see the bill before it was introduced. “This is a sad day for First Nations people in Western Australia, and, from this day forward, no Aboriginal person can believe that this government will protect cultural sites if a mining proposal looks too good to refuse,” Cox said. “There is still a lot of mistrust and trauma after the Juukan caves were destroyed by a system that handed out permits to mining companies to destroy our cultural heritage. “The government claims that this bill was co-designed in equal and genuine partnership with First Nations people, but First Nations people have not been provided with the latest version.” Cox says the bill does not give free, prior and informed consent to traditional owners. “If TOs and mining companies can’t agree, the minister gets the final say. Now we know that of the 143 section 18 permits that have been considered by the minister between 2017 and 2020, only one was knocked back. “This system favours the developers and the mining companies at the expense of thousands of years of cultural heritage and connection to country for First Nations peoples.” Cox is calling for “Labor backbenchers who say they support First Nations people” to cross the floor and vote against the bill. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning WA’s heritage legislation is widely viewed as outdated and in need of an overhaul. Rio Tinto obtained ministerial consent to destroy Juukan Gorge under the old Aboriginal Heritage Act. That explosion led to an international shareholder revolt, cost the jobs of three senior Rio executives and sparked a federal inquiry, which said new federal laws were needed to set the standard for states and territory heritage laws to uphold. It said those new laws should give traditional owners the right to withhold consent over developments on their country. Traditional owner groups say a “tragedy the scale of Juukan Gorge can, and will, happen again” under the new proposed heritage laws.The former Labor MP and trade union official Craig Thomson has been arrested by Australian federal police over an alleged multimillion-dollar fraudulent visa scheme. Thomson has been accused of facilitating more than 130 fraudulent visa applications – focusing on the food service and regional farm worker industries – over four years, resulting in more than $2m allegedly being gained from this activity. He is due to appear before Gosford local court on the New South Wales Central Coast on Thursday. The multi-agency investigation, led by the AFP and comprising the Australian Border Force (ABF), Austrac, the taxation office and Department of Home Affairs – allegedly found evidence of an alleged scheme intended to defraud legitimate visa programs. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning It was triggered by a border force investigation into allegations of significant visa and migration fraud, dating back to August 2019. In July, 2021 nine search warrants were executed by AFP and ABF officers in relation to the investigation at premises in Wamberal, Terrigal and Copacabana on the Central Coast, in the Sydney suburbs of Revesby and Rockdale, and at East Maitland, NSW, and Bundaberg West, Queensland. Additional search warrants were executed on Thomson’s Terrigal residence on Wednesday and at a Tuggerah premises. Thomson has been charged with providing false documents and false or misleading information relating to non-citizens, and breaching restrictions on charging fees for immigration assistance. He faces a maximum penalty of 10 years’ imprisonment if convicted of either offence. Thomson became a federal Labor MP in 2007 and held the seat of Dobell on the NSW Central Coast until 2013. The AFP’s commander of investigations for eastern command, Craig Bellis, said the charges laid in the immigration matter involved allegations of a serious breach of public trust. “The alleged offences in this matter involved the exploitation of federal government programs designed to assist Australian businesses, and it is incumbent on the AFP to investigate and prosecute instances of large-scale fraud against Australian taxpayers,” he said. The ABF’s Erin Dale said the agency took a zero-tolerance approach to anyone allegedly trying to profit through the exploitation of vulnerable foreign workers. “This investigation demonstrates the unwavering resolve of the ABF and AFP in preventing the exploitation of foreign workers in Australia. ‘Cash for visa’ schemes, as they are often known, target vulnerable visa holders who may not be aware of Australian laws and workplace entitlements”, she said. “Together, the ABF and AFP will continue to pursue facilitators of visa and migration fraud, while protecting foreign workers who play a vital role within the Australian community.” Austrac’s Michael Tink said his agency had been involved in tracing funds and had identified more than $2m in income likely derived from the alleged offences.Britney Spears has spoken out about the realities of her new freedom after her 13-year conservatorship was lifted last week. In her longest and most detailed statement since a judge terminated the controversial legal arrangement that controlled many aspects of her personal and financial life, the pop star spoke about her excitement and gratitude at being able to do things like use a debit card and possess her own car keys. “I’ve been in the conservatorship for 13 years. It’s a really a long time to be in a situation you don’t want to be in,” she said in a video posted to social media. “So I’m just grateful for each day and being able to have the keys to my car, to be able to be independent and feel like a woman. Owning an ATM card, seeing cash for the first time … It’s the little things.” She also thanked the fan-led #FreeBritney movement for shedding light on her situation and alleged abuse and corruption by her father and the attorneys involved in the arrangement. “You guys rock,” Spears said. “My voice was muted and threatened for so long and I wasn’t able to speak up and say anything … you guys saved my life, 100%.” The singer also said that she hopes that the media attention on her case will lead to reforms in the conservatorship system. “I’m here to be an advocate for people with real disabilities and illnesses,” Spears told her millions of followers. “Hopefully my story will make an impact and make some changes in the corrupt system.” Her statement comes after Friday’s decision by a Los Angeles judge marked an extraordinary victory for the singer who had fought for years to regain her independence. She was placed under the conservatorship in 2008, which took away her rights to make basic decisions about her finances, career and personal life. Conservatorships are typically put in place for older or infirm people who can no longer make decisions for themselves, but in Spears’s case, the courts established an indefinite conservatorship even as she continued with a successful career. Spears had strongly objected to the arrangement for years but efforts to end it gained steam in recent months after Spears was allowed to testify in court and retain a lawyer of her choosing. “Honestly it still blows my mind every day I wake up how my family and the conservatorship were able to do what they did to me,” Spears wrote in the Instagram caption accompanying her video statement, describing the situation as “demoralizing and degrading”. But she ended on a hopeful note: “Let’s move forward. We’re gonna have a good year and a good Christmas. Rock on!” Sam Levin contributed reportingTwo climate activists shut down activity at the world’s largest coal port on Wednesday morning by climbing on top of machinery at the Port of Newcastle and pressing an emergency safety button, bringing the export of coal to a standstill. “As scary as [the police] might be, as scary as taking action which might ostracise you from certain communities might be, it’s not as scary as the future we are heading to,” one of the protesters, 21-year-old Hannah, said. Over the past 10 days, a handful of climate activists have allegedly used their bodies, rope and glue as part of “destructive action” to block key bottlenecks in the multibillion-dollar coal supply chain in the Hunter, with politicians and police so far unable to stop them. The NSW police commissioner, Mick Fuller, said protesters face jail sentences of up to 25 years, but activists who have already been charged over alleged offences last week are vowing to continue. Home to the largest coal port in the world, the city of Newcastle and its surrounding Hunter region is an important chapter in Australia’s history of mining prosperity. Protecting jobs in the region has also become a common excuse offered by politicians who have seen the nation become a notorious laggard on climate action. The coalmining industry directly and indirectly employs up to 61,000 people in the Hunter, where the lush green landscape is dotted by open-cut coalmines and marked by a rail line that transported about 150m tonnes, or more than A$19bn, of coal to power plants in Australia and the world in 2020 alone. Which is why a campaign allegedly being waged by the newly formed “Blockade Australia” has already been labelled as “nothing short of economic vandalism” by the New South Wales police minister, David Elliot. The deputy prime minister, Barnaby Joyce, was furious with the protesters when he visited Singleton this week. Appearing at the train station as a coal load sped past, he claimed each train load of coal was worth about $1m in export value. He said that by Monday the blockades had disrupted $60m in exports. “If they’ve got other ways that this nation can earn money right now, then we’re all ears,” Joyce said. “[But] in the meantime, we’ve got to make a buck. “It’s about $100,000 in royalties, so what you’ve got here is payments for your NDIS, payments for your pharmaceutical benefits scheme, payments for pensions and unemployment benefit.” Even Matt Kean, the NSW treasurer and energy minister who has been vocal in his criticism of the federal government’s climate transition strategy, has lashed out at the disruptions, calling for police to “throw the book” at the protesters. “Pull your heads in – get out of the way and stop hurting other people going about their lives, running their businesses,” Kean told Sydney radio 2GB on Wednesday. “There are hundreds of ways to make your views known and advocate for change but risking the lives of rail workers is definitely not one of them.” Faced with a backed up rail line into the port and a continuation of the activities that had resulted in the arrests of 17 protesters and disruption to $60m worth of coal exports, Fuller upped the ante, announcing the establishment of Strike Force Tuohy to target the activists on Monday. He also warned protesters that he had received legal advice he could use an obscure charge relating to interfering with a railway with the intention of causing death or bodily harm, which carries a jail sentence of up to 25 years. On Tuesday, two people were charged, who will now face the potential 25-year sentence. Blockade participant Clancey Maher, who was arrested and is awaiting charges over a disruption last week, told Guardian Australia she is “fully committed to taking this kind of action again” despite the latest threats of harsher penalties. At about 4.30pm last Friday, the 26-year-old allegedly climbed on to a railway bridge that runs across the Hunter River and into Newcastle port’s coal terminal on Kooragang Island, and tied rope to the tracks. Maher, together with another protester, Tim Neville, then allegedly abseiled off the bridge, hanging about five metres above the river. Trains could not pass, authorities were alerted and a police rescue boat drove underneath the pair as officers above lowered their ropes into the vessel. While Maher was the first to be arrested, Neville kept rescuers occupied for considerably longer, having glued his hands to the bridge. They allegedly stopped coal entering the port for about two-and-a-half hours. While Neville has already appeared before court, receiving a criminal conviction and a $1,500 fine, Maher’s matter has been adjourned. She is not optimistic about the legal process she faces, saying she’s “got a history” related to previous climate protest activity. Maher describes herself as a fulltime community organiser, and has previously been involved in protests at the Adani coalmine site. In discussing the police operation, Fuller has said the protesters “are coming from other states and territories with particular expertise and they’re locking themselves on to these locomotives and tracks”. Many of the protesters police have arrested have been from Victoria, and while Maher has spent time previously living in Newcastle, she is open about not being a local. She said protesters fund their own travel to the Hunter, and that the same will apply with future Blockade Australia events. Regarding police concerns that the protesters are endangering all users of the rail line, not just workers on coal loads, Maher said this was an “expected line”, and that the participants themselves risked the most danger. “Trains are stopped with more than enough warning.” She also said she doesn’t delight in the economic ramifications for the entire region that have infuriated politicians. “We see it as the only way to be able to force necessary action. The alternative is less desirable.” In statements sent to media, Blockade Australia doesn’t describe itself as a solely anti-coal group. Instead, it says it is “committed to taking the action necessary to disrupt economic bottlenecks of Australia and stop the exploitative colonial project”.The decorations are up already in Dianna Haddad’s home in Sydney, but she faces the prospect of yet another Christmas separated from her sister, niece and nephew. “They were so excited when they got the visa,” Haddad says of her sister’s children. “They had even chosen the clothes they were going to wear on the plane. Now for two years they have had no school, no work, no money.” Twenty months ago, in March 2020, her sister Mirna and her family, having escaped war-ravaged Syria, were sheltering in northern Iraq when they were told they had been granted humanitarian visas to resettle in Australia. “It was a very happy day when we got the visa,” Mirna says from Iraq, where they remain stranded. “We felt we would finally end all this suffering and the feeling that we had no future. We sold our car to pay for our flights. “Then everything changed. Instead of flying to Australia and finally settling down, we have been in Iraq, just trying to find basic necessities for our children.” For three years, Mirna says, her children’s educations have stalled. “More than anything we want them to go to school,” she says. “There are a lot of families like ours. They have been sponsored by family in Australia, but they’re waiting and waiting for borders to open.” Mirna and her family are four of nearly 10,000 holders of humanitarian visas accepted by Australia to resettle because of persecution, discrimination or human rights abuses in their home country, but who for 18 months have largely been barred from entering the country. Australia reduced its humanitarian intake from 18,750 to 13,750 in last year’s budget, but even that reduced quota was less than half-filled. Ultimately, only 5,947 of those humanitarian places were filled, 4,558 offshore and 1,389 through the onshore protection process, according to the home affairs department’s annual report. It was the lowest annual humanitarian intake in 45 years. “The emergence of Covid-19 and the volatile global health landscape has significantly impacted the delivery of immigration and humanitarian programs,” the department said. The government, however, was able to fill its general migration program quota – 160,052 of 160,000 places – in the same year. Thousands locked out despite reopening While Australia’s international borders have reopened for citizens and permanent residents, people holding humanitarian visas to resettle in Australia remain barred from coming into the country unless they apply for – and are granted – a specific exemption from home affairs. Just over 1,400 humanitarian visa holders have been granted exemptions to travel to Australia since border restrictions were implemented in March 2020. But more than 3,000 humanitarian visa holders’ applications for exemptions were rejected last financial year. An estimated 9,500 humanitarian visa holders are currently stranded overseas, some in dire circumstances, unable to get into Australia. The national reopening roadmap says that in “phase C” of the transition – reached on 6 November when 80% of people aged 16 and over were fully vaccinated against Covid – the government would remove the requirement for an exemption, and “allow increased capped entry of student, economic, and humanitarian visa holders”. However, the government has still not lifted the exemption requirement, nor allocated a cap for humanitarian entrants. “The Commonwealth continues to work on timing for exemption free arrivals of humanitarian visa holders under phase C,” a government spokesman told the Guardian. “The immediate focus is on returning Australians as we settle border arrangements and reopening.” A new report from the Human Rights Law Centre argues Australia’s continuing border closures have hit migrant and diaspora communities hardest. People without citizenship or permanent residency remained barred from entering Australia unless they had a specific exemption from the Australian Border Force. This has also functioned as a de facto ban on leaving the country for long-term residents of Australia on temporary visas, because they have no right to return. Political leaders, the report argues, have sought to reduce the purpose of travel to holiday opportunities or a tool for meeting labour shortages. “This ignores the importance of travel to people and communities whose lives have been suspended and who have spent more than 18 months unable to be with their loved ones,” it says. “It ignores the reality that Australia’s population is made up of people with … deep connections with other parts of the world.” More than a million in limbo Scott Cosgriff, a senior lawyer at the Human Rights Law Centre, said more than a million people remain in limbo, separated from families, or in precarious and often dangerous situations because of the ongoing travel restrictions. “People with lives in Australia still have no idea when they will be able to see their families, simply because of the kind of visa they hold. “Our friends, neighbours and colleagues on temporary visas should be allowed to plan for their future, not continue to be forced to beg for rare exemptions to avoid missing out on critical moments in their lives.” Cosgriff said the government had neglected its humanitarian commitments during the pandemic, cutting more than 28,000 places from its humanitarian intake since the 2019 budget. “Australia’s refugee intake has now slowed to its lowest level in 45 years, and nearly 10,000 people the Australian government has already committed to resettle remain stranded overseas. “If some level of interruption due to Covid-19 was unavoidable, a permanent deficit in Australia’s refugee intake is not.”A recent sighting of the Kangaroo Island assassin spider, feared extinct after the disastrous 2019–20 bushfires, has given researchers new hope for the survival of the species. Assassin spiders belong to an ancient family that dates back tens of millions of years. So named because they prey on other spiders, the invertebrates are also known as pelican spiders for their unusually elongated necks and jaws, which they use to impale their prey. The Kangaroo Island assassin spider, about 5mm long, was only known to live in the Western River wilderness protection area, which was completely destroyed by the 2019–20 bushfires. “That was burnt at high severity to such an extent that there was no vegetation, no organic matter at the site,” said Dr Jessica Marsh, who has been studying invertebrates on the South Australian island for 13 years. After months of surveys of unburnt areas nearby, a research team discovered two assassin spiders in September, on a patch of leaf litter 4km from their previously known habitat. The team is keeping the precise location of the sighting confidential for the time being. Marsh, an honorary research associate at the South Australian Museum, said: “That we found one after all this time – it was really a moment that will stick with me. It was very powerful.” Marsh said the Kangaroo Island assassin spider was vulnerable to even low-severity fires. The species lives in leaf litter suspended in low-lying vegetation, which burns readily when bushfires hit. She said only an estimated one third of all invertebrate species in Australia have been discovered, posing a major conservation challenge. “For two thirds of species, we have no way of assessing their conservation risk or knowing if they’ve gone extinct.” Marsh said while people were aware of the importance of pollinators such as bees, there was “general political and public apathy towards invertebrates”. “They’re vitally important to ecosystem function but they also largely ignored,” she said, citing the role of detritivores in breaking down leaf litter and recycling nutrients into the soil, and predators and parasitoids that help to regulate ecosystems. “It’s really likely that the Kangaroo Island assassin spider isn’t the only one that’s been severely impacted [by the fires].” A report published last month found that more than 14,000 species of invertebrate lost habitat as a result of the 2019-20 bushfires, and recommended a doubling of the number of species listed as threatened. “I think with invertebrates, a lot of people don’t have any emotive connection to them. They either mostly ignore them or actively dislike them,” Marsh said. “When you get to work closely with a species and you get to know and respect them, you do build up an emotional connection.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The Kangaroo Island team will continue surveying for more sightings that might increase the assassin spider’s known range. Feral pig activity in the north west of the island threatens their survival, in addition to fire. It was important to prevent the pigs from digging up vegetation and in around creek lines, which would help to protect the spider, Marsh said.Captain Sam Kerr and vice-captain Steph Catley headline a near-full strength Matildas squad to play the United States in a friendly series coach Tony Gustavsson is treating as a dress rehearsal for the 2023 World Cup final. Twenty-one players return from October’s home series against Brazil to again play in front of home crowds, this time against the world No 1 nation who denied them an Olympic bronze medal in Tokyo. The USA, for whom Gustavsson was a long-time assistant including throughout their 2019 World Cup-winning campaign, are sending a squad comprised of mostly young and fringe players for the matches in Sydney on 27 November and then Newcastle on 30 November. But even without Megan Rapinoe and Alex Morgan on the team sheet, Gustavsson means business – the next World Cup is around the corner and he knows co-hosts Australia will be expected to make at least the final stages. “There truly is a no more exciting challenge for the team than to be taking on the world No 1 team, in front of thousands of passionate fans, in the stadium where the Fifa Women’s World Cup final will be played in 2023,” Gustavsson said. “This could not be a better dress rehearsal for a World Cup final and we are going to treat it in the same way. From when we arrive to those match days with what we hope will be record crowds, this is our chance to prepare for the big moments that want to be a part of in 2023.” Among the Matildas returning from injury are Manchester City winger Hayley Raso (shoulder) and Aston Villa forward Emily Gielnik (toe), though their involvement will likely be limited. Sydney FC duo Jessika Nash and Charlize Rule, both 17, are the latest new call-ups and the Young Matildas could yet add their name to this year’s growing debutante list. The large-scale retention is a nod to January’s Asian Cup, and Gustavsson will use the friendlies to fine-tune his line-up. “In selecting the squad, balance was at the heart of the decision-making,” said the Swede. “We know that this is our final occasion to see the group together before announcing the squad for the AFC Women’s Asian Cup next year, and our focus remains on this crucial preparation. “However, with another camp at home, we didn’t want to miss the chance to expose another two young players to our standards and team philosophy, and to find out whether they can be a part of the building of depth towards the Fifa Women’s World Cup in 2023.” Matildas squad: Mackenzie Arnold, Angela Beard, Ellie Carpenter, Steph Catley, Kyra Cooney-Cross, Caitlin Foord, Mary Fowler, Emily Gielnik, Charlotte Grant, Bryleeh Henry, Alanna Kennedy, Sam Kerr (captain), Teagan Micah, Jessika Nash, Courtney Nevin, Clare Polkinghorne, Hayley Raso, Karly Roestbakken, Charlize Rule, Remy Siemsen, Kyah Simon, Emily van Egmond, Clare Wheeler, Lydia Williams, Tameka Yallop.ClubsNSW has successfully restrained former employee and whistleblower Troy Stolz from making public statements that are calculated to “intimidate, harass, or otherwise bring improper pressure” on the clubs lobby as it sues him for disclosing confidential information about lax compliance with money laundering in the state’s poker machine industry. Stolz, a former ClubsNSW money laundering and counter terror financing compliance manager, spoke to the ABC last year about what he alleged was a widespread failure to comply with money laundering and terror financing laws in the sector. ClubsNSW is now suing him for breach of confidence in the federal court. Earlier this year, ClubsNSW told the court it was victim to an “oppressive” public campaign by Stolz, who had spoken about the case to Guardian Australia and other media outlets, and in tweets, retweets and via a GoFundMe page he set up to help pay for his defence. The body said Stolz’s comments had prompted members of the public to send derogatory messages, including saying its “blood-sucking organisation is just a parasite” and accusing it of “legal thievery”. ClubsNSW said the campaign was “inflammatory and frankly misleading” and an attempt to put pressure on it during the proceedings. It said the campaign was designed to falsely imply it was suing Stolz as retribution for him blowing the whistle. The federal court earlier this year considered whether it needed to restrain Stolz using an injunction to prevent his comments from interfering in the administration of justice and causing contempt of court. Stolz’s lawyers had argued the public commentary had not interfered with the administration of justice. But Justice David Yates on Wednesday ordered Stolz be restrained. “As to injunctive relief, I’m satisfied, based on Mr Stolz’s past conduct, that [ClubsNSW] has demonstrated a real threat that Mr Stolz will, unless restrained, continue to engage in that conduct or conduct of a similar kind,” he said. The order proposed by the court would restrain Stolz from saying anything about the conduct of ClubsNSW in the case that is calculated to “intimidate, harass, or otherwise bring improper pressure on the respondent”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning ClubsNSW had sought for an order “restraining public statements, including to the media, about the applicant’s purpose in maintaining the proceeding against the respondents and its conduct in the proceeding”. The court said that was too broad. Yates said the orders would not stop the applicant from speaking publicly about the case. But he said Stolz would now need to “tread carefully”. “For its compliance, the injunction the applicant seeks does no more than call for the exercise of the judgment which must be exercised in any event if, for example, one wishes to take the step of commenting publicly on the course of litigation or on the conduct of a party in, or in respect of, that litigation,” he said. “If this is the path that Mr Stolz chooses to take, there is no restraint on him doing so.” “But, if he wishes to continue on that path, he must tread carefully.” The court had previously heard that Stolz had retweeted a tweet suggesting a conflict of interest in the court’s consideration of the injunction. That was described by ClubsNSW as “deeply irresponsible” and Stolz’s lawyers apologised to the court for the conduct and said the tweet was without any foundation. Stolz has also had communications with independent MP Andrew Wilkie’s office about a ClubsNSW report on the handling of money laundering laws by registered clubs. Wilkie subsequently raised the matter in parliament and attempted to table a document given to him by Stolz. ClubsNSW attempts to obtain the Wilkie correspondence has prompted an intervention from parliament’s powerful privileges committee, which found the federal court case may breach the privilege attached to communications between an MP and their constituents. Stolz did not press a claim for privilege over the documents.When Greg Hunt was the federal environment minister under Tony Abbott he had two main tasks on the climate change front: Abolish the carbon price and construct a policy that would plausibly fill the void. Cue Direct Action, with its Emissions Reduction Fund that has so far earmarked $2.55b to pay polluters not to pollute or to support reforestation or other carbon curbing projects. The other main tool was the promisingly named Safeguard Mechanism. Hunt was happy to talk up the scheme as a way to force companies to cut emissions. This mechanism is worth a close look at because energy, industry and emissions reduction minister, Angus Taylor, on Wednesday preemptively attacked Labor, should the opposition make the foolhardy move of implementing government policy, introducing a backdoor carbon price in the process. ‘‘The safeguard mechanism was never meant to be a tool to force businesses to reduce their emissions – which is a carbon tax by stealth,’’ Taylor was reported in today’s Australian Financial Review as saying. What is the Safeguard Mechanism? First up, it’s shape-shifted many times, making it less likely to safeguard anything. The scheme was originally designed explicitly to prevent emissions rising from big polluters thereby undoing the work of the billions of dollars being forked out by taxpayers via the Emissions Reduction Fund. Emitters such as miners, oil and gas companies, and manufacturers were covered by this mechanism, with a facility pollution threshold set at 100,000 tonnes a year of carbon dioxide-equivalent (CO2-e). A limit, also known as a baseline, was applied to such facilities. If owners exceeded that cap, they were supposed to buy carbon credits to offset those extra emissions or pay a penalty. Sounds almost like a cap and trade market that identifies a carbon price. However, as Guardian Australia has reported here and here, polluters have largely dodged paying a penalty, and big polluters’ emissions have kept rising. Why has it isn’t working? Change the baseline and you can neuter the mechanism. As noted by an adviser to The Australia Institute and former industry department staffer, Polly Hemming, the initial baselines were set according to historical emissions. Now, though, instead of absolute tonnes of CO2-e, updated methods have baselines set according to emissions intensity, such as how much pollution resulted per tonne of coal dug up at a mine. These baselines now increase or fall in proportion to expected production, she says. Tennant Reed, who runs climate, energy and environment policy for the Australian Industry Group, last year summed up progress so far: “If it never has to do something to actually reduce emissions it will have been a waste of time for everyone involved,” he says. Could it get worse? Quite possibly. The Morrison government set aside almost $280m in its 2021 budget to implement recommended changes after a review by Grant King, previously the head of the Business Council of Australia (BCA), (remember this organisation, we’ll come back to them.) These included the creation of rewards if emissions intensity fell below existing baselines. Large emitters would get “Safeguard Mechanism Credits” (SMC) that they could then trade if pollution sank below agreed limits. “This government legislated the stick of the safeguard mechanism,” Hemming says. “Now they’re trying to paint it orange and pretend it’s a carrot.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Hemming argues the new type of credit won’t be treated as the equivalent of existing Australian Carbon Credit Units, setting up the prospect of a two-tiered market. “We are throwing so much public money at ‘incentivising’ emissions reduction by big polluters,” she said. “It’s not working and it’s punishing the businesses who genuinely have invested in serious abatement.” The only upside is that the SMC could form the basis of a cap and trade market that Labor could adopt if it wins office. This prospect may be why Taylor is on the attack. (His Labor counterpart was approached for comment.) Does anybody like the Safeguard Mechanism? The BCA does, sort of. The same group that famously attacked Labor’s 2019 election pledge of cutting 2005-level emissions 45% as “economy wrecking” now thinks 46-50% is doable. The Morrison government is adamant it won’t be taking a target higher than 26-28% to the next elections. That’s despite signing up to the Glasgow Cop26 pact that requests nations lift that 2030 goal by next year. Labor is yet to decide on a near-term target. The Safeguard Mechanism, the business lobby group now says, is just the tonic “to deliver a strong carbon investment signal”. It calls for lowering the eligibility threshold so that entities emitting 25,000t CO2-e a year will be captured. Those baselines should be lowered “predictably and gradually over time”, with various exclusions, such as firms exposed to international rivals who may not face similar carbon restrictions. But while it backs the application of the mechanism, the group’s first choice is a climate policy that most economists favour but major political parties won’t go near, noting: “an explicit, economy-wide carbon pricing mechanism is the Business Council’s preferred option”. And so, we come full circle.“Can do capitalism” is the latest Morrison-ism to be tested this election campaign, with the prime minister placing responsibility for the government’s climate change ambition with the private sector, in another attempt to minimise his government’s need for action. “We believe climate change will ultimately be solved by ‘can do’ capitalism; not ‘don’t do’ governments seeking to control people’s lives and tell them what to do, with interventionist regulation and taxes that just force up your cost of living and force businesses to close,” Morrison said last week. “‘Can do capitalism’, not ‘don’t do governments’. I think that’s a good motto for us to follow not just in this area, but right across the spectrum of economic policy in this country. We’ve got a bit used to governments telling us what to do over the last couple of years. I think we have to break that habit.” But what does “can-do capitalism” mean? Will “no sweat neoliberalism” be next? The meaning of “can do” really depends on what part of the world you’re in. In America, it tends to mean you have a confident and optimistic approach to challenges. In the UK, it’s someone who you can count on to take on a task, no matter the challenges. In Queensland, it brings to mind one-term LNP premier Campbell Newman. And in Morrison’s world, it is the latest slogan to describe how to do nothing while appearing to offer solutions. In all likelihood, can-do capitalism will have a short life as a campaign soundbite, as it is merely an extension of “technology not taxes” – the other three-word slogan the government dreamed up to sell its climate policy. Neither are true. The government has committed at least $20bn to encouraging the market to step in and solve Australia’s emissions reduction issue, money which will come from taxes. The government’s own plan to support industry involves legislating funds through the Clean Energy Finance Corporation, which Tony Abbott attempted to abolish in 2015. But even relying on the free market to step in and solve a challenge for a government involves an interventionist approach – something the Coalition, the party of “small government” and champion of free enterprise, regularly engages in. In just one example, Australia – recently named the “colossal fossil” of the Glasgow climate talks by climate activists – continues to subsidise fossil fuels. A report released by the Australia Institute earlier this year found that federal and state subsidies for coal, oil and gas projects came to more than $10bn in spending and tax breaks for fossil fuel industries. And that is before the “gas led recovery” intervention the government is planning, to expand the use of gas in the Australian electricity market. Under the government’s own “modelling”, the Australian fossil fuel gas industry is expected to be 13% higher than 2020 by 2050. In fact, there are a lot of “don’t dos” in the government’s “can do” gas plan, including setting up new gas supply targets for states and territories with “use it or lose it” requirements on gas licences, to get more projects going more quickly. The Coalition has a solid track record in imposing “don’t do” regulation on some people when it suits them, such as the Indue cashless welfare program, which limits where welfare recipients can shop, and what they can purchase with their social security funds. It also has many “don’t dos” for the national broadcaster, with its latest – a Senate inquiry into the ABC’s complaint process – receiving a strong rebuke from ABC chair Ita Buttrose. John Roskam, an executive director of the Institute of Public Affairs, has accused the Coalition government of drifting towards a European-style Social Democratic Party, in terms of “the level of government regulation of the labour market the Liberals accept”. Now, after failing to provide certainty for investors in the renewables market, while continuing to subsidise the fossil fuel industry, Morrison has palmed off the responsibility for Australia meeting its climate responsibilities to the private sector. “The world’s companies are going to solve this problem because they’re the ones who make electric cars,” he told Nine newspapers. “They’re the ones who make hydrogen and use it and create energy. They’re the ones who manufacture things like steel and aluminium, and plastics.” “Governments don’t do any of those things. That doesn’t mean government doesn’t have a role, of course it does, but it’s not the answer. It’s helping support the answer. And ultimately, consumer choice will drive it.” The same man who rubbished electric vehicles in 2019 – because they “won’t tow your trailer” – now wants Australians to embrace those technologies, because “can do capitalism” will save the world. Amy Remeikis is a political reporter for Guardian AustraliaAt least one person has been killed and several more are feared dead after a huge storm hit the Pacific north-west, destroying highways and leaving tens of thousands of people in Canada and the US without power. Canada’s largest port was cut off by flood waters, as emergency crews in British Columbia announced on Tuesday that at least 10 vehicles had been swept off a highway during a landslide. “We’re hopeful to find people alive. But obviously that diminishes with time, the nature of the slide activity. People being caught up in mud and debris, it certainly diminishes as time goes by,” David MacKenzie, the Pemberton district search and rescue manager, told the Globe and Mail. The Royal Canadian Mounted Police confirmed a woman’s body was recovered from the site of the landslide during a search the previous night. “The total number of people and vehicles unaccounted for has not been confirmed, however investigators have received two missing people reports and believe there may have been other occupied vehicles that were lost in the slide,” said Sgt Janelle Shoihet of the BC RCMP. Search crews, working alongside the military, planned to use heavy equipment and dog teams to continue their search for survivors after poor weather hampered efforts. On Monday rescue helicopters airlifted 275 people, including 50 children, from a section of highway blocked by landslides. Although the high winds and the rains caused by an atmospheric river – a huge plume of moisture extending over the Pacific – began easing in the region, large areas of southern British Columbia remained under either flood watch or flood warning. South of the border, tens of thousands of households and businesses remain without power in Washington state. Nearly 50,000 Washington state electrical customers still had no power on Tuesday after days of heavy rain triggered mudslides and floods and forced the closure of the west coast’s main north-south highway near the Canadian border, officials said. Authorities said one person was still missing on Tuesday near Bellingham after being seen in flood waters clinging to a tree. The Washington governor, Jay Inslee, declared a severe weather state of emergency in 14 counties and said the state emergency management division, with support from the Washington national guard, would coordinate the response. Earlier in the day, the port of Vancouver, the largest in Canada, announced that all rail access had been cut by floods and landslides further to the east, a development that could hit shipments of grain, coal and potash. The TransMountain pipeline, which carries 300,000 barrels of oil a day, was also shut down. With all of its surrounding highways closed off due to damage, including a section of the Coquihalla highway that officials warn could take months to repair, the city of Vancouver is cut off from the rest of Canada by road. Aerial footage of the Fraser Valley, south-east of Vancouver, showed swaths of the land, including highways, underwater. “This is an uncertain and scary time for people who are affected. They don’t understand what’s happening and what the future will be,” the Abbotsford mayor, Henry Braun, told reporters on Tuesday after parts of the city were placed under evacuation order. As the scope of the damage became more clear, provincial officials faced questions over whether they adequately prepared residents for the heavy deluge of rain, which broke numerous records. Many of the alerts issued to drivers are highly localized, meaning travellers between two cities might not be aware of regional risks like flooding. BC’s public safety minister, Mike Farnworth, defended his government’s handling of the situation, telling reporters the province warned residents that driving conditions would be dangerous. “Those warnings and travel advisories are out. You know there was a lot of warnings that you know there’s a lot of rain coming and you know what most people stay home,” he said. “Most people stayed home and the reality is that communities are prepared. • This article was amended on 17 November 2021 to specify that flood watches and flood warnings continued in southern British Columbia, rather than in most of the province. The headline and text were also amended on 19 November 2021 to be more accurate about the area affected by these events. The Pacific north-west, which was the only area highlighted in an earlier headline, generally refers just to the US. To make clear that parts of Canada are also affected, “British Columbia” has now been added.Warm oceans, unusual currents and strange weather patterns have coincided with an outbreak of disease that has forced the closure of South Australia’s Coffin Bay farms. Health authorities have said they would now investigate whether climate change was a factor in the spread of Vibrio parahaemolyticus in oysters, which has been linked to 45 cases of gastroenteritis since September. Undercooked shellfish and fish can carry Vibrio, which in turn can cause diarrhoea, vomiting, cramps, fever and headache. Raw oysters are often the cause of Vibrio infection. Oyster production in Coffin Bay, SA, has been stopped while the most recent outbreak is investigated. SA Oyster Growers Association executive officer Lynlee Lowe said the industry was deeply concerned about the cases and would work with a range of agencies to identify the cause. “We are examining highly unusual environmental conditions, something which has not been seen before in SA, which have coincided with this outbreak,” she said. “[There have been] strange weather patterns, unusual ocean currents, ocean water [temperatures] for this time of year.” Asked whether it was likely to be climate change-related, Lowe said: “That’s something we’re looking into. We’ve got a project with the SA Research and Development Institute, looking at what environmental factors have affected this outbreak, and we’ll use that for future cases that might happen in SA, NSW and Tasmania.” In recent years evidence has emerged that warmer oceans cause Vibrio outbreaks in oyster hatcheries. A team of researchers from a range of Australian universities is currently investigating Vibrio blooms as marine heatwaves become more frequent and more intense. SA Health warned the related illness could be serious, particularly in people who are older, pregnant, or immunocompromised. Nathan Rhodes, biosecurity executive director at SA’s primary industries and regions department, said it could be difficult to pinpoint the exact cause of an outbreak, and that inspection had shown the correct food safety practices were in place on the farms. The Coffin Bay closures are likely to continue at least until next week.Australia’s second-biggest debt management company made threats against clients, including telling them they could go to prison if they spent money at McDonald’s, the corporate regulator has alleged. In documents filed with the federal court on Tuesday, the Australian Securities and Investments Commission accused A&amp;M Group, which trades as Debt Negotiators and promotes itself as a “reputable debt help company who uses our knowledge and expertise to help you get out of debt”, of breaking the law by harassing or coercing customers. This included contacting people’s relatives and workplaces “to embarrass or intimidate” clients as well as putting them under pressure with threats of bankruptcy or criminal prosecution over the phone, Asic alleged. Debt management companies offer to help people struggling to repay personal debts including loans and credit cards, usually by consolidating what’s owed into one loan or by striking an agreement with creditors to pay back a reduced amount. In return for reaching such an agreement the companies receive a percentage of what their clients pay to their creditors. In its federal court filings, Asic said Debt Negotiators was “the second largest of 34 registered debt agreement administrators in Australia and administers approximately 5,060 debt agreements which represents approximately 14% of the market”. Asic accuses the company of misleading and deceiving six customers through methods including telling them that creditors were investigating their accounts for non-payment “in order to look into proceeding with legal action ‘such as bankruptcy and fraud charges’”. The statements were not true, but were instead based on templates used by the company, the regulator said. Asic also claims four clients were told their debt agreements would be terminated unless they paid $1,000 that day. The regulator alleges Debt Negotiators contacted one client, LH, and his relatives, by SMS and phone seven times between September and December 2018. In a phone call with LH on 7 December, 2018, a Debt Negotiators employee is alleged to have said the debt agreement was about to be terminated and LH could be forced into bankruptcy, meaning “someone is literally going to go through your expenses with a fine tooth comb”. “If they feel that you had the means to pay your debt agreement, if you made purchases at McDonald’s, if you made pointless purchases, you know things you don’t need, you can potentially be sent to prison,” the Debt Negotiators employee said, according to a transcript of the conversation filed with the court by Asic. “That is a very real situation, that you need to take in, you have little kids, I feel this is not a joke situation,” the employee continued. In some cases, according to Asic’s claims, clients were told Debt Negotiators “may need to contact friends, family, neighbours, workplaces or even landlords”. “We do not like going to these lengths, however if that’s what it requires we will have to resort to that,” company staff allegedly told the clients. Asic asked the court to fine the company and make declarations it broke the law. Company and regulatory records show that the sole director of Debt Negotiators is Ahmed “Adam” Ibrahim, of Sydney suburb Oatley. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The company and Ibrahim have been contacted for comment in relation to Asic’s claims. Asic first expressed concerns about the debt management sector in 2016, when research commissioned by the regulator found fees charged by companies were opaque and difficult to assess. It also said fees were often front loaded by being charged before any services were provided and some companies used high-pressure sales techniques. Guardian Australia understands Debt Negotiators was not named in that research. Up to 1.9 million Australians paid debt management firms for help in 2020, according to a report released by the Consumer Action Law Centre (Calc) in December that described the sector as “debt vultures”. Calc chief executive Gerard Brody said it was “great to see Asic take this action”. “People have also complained about this business to our centre,” he said. He expressed concern about Asic’s allegations that Debt Negotiators threatened to contact relatives of clients. “The conduct in the claim is horrific,” he said. In its December report, Calc said the sector was largely unregulated and called for protections similar to those in the UK, where advice must be in the client’s best interests and tailored to their circumstances. Fees charged in advance should also be banned, Calc said. From 1 July this year debt management companies have been required to hold a credit license and be a member of the Australian Financial Complaints Authority scheme – changes Calc said did not go far enough. Debt Negotiators meets both obligations, according to its website.The worst kind of November dawn: leaden clouds, lashing rain, rivulets meandering down windows. Cabin fever, lethargy by lunchtime. Late afternoon: still raining, but a blue ribbon was widening along the south-western horizon. On with our coats, hats, gloves and boots, across the footpath, past sheep with soggy fleeces sheltering under hedges, through arable fields striped with green corduroy patterns of autumn-drilled barley. By the time we reached the lane, known locally as the Mile Lonnen, the rain has stopped. Just the sound of water trickling into ditches filled with autumn leaves and floating crab apples. A flock of lapwings drops into a saturated pasture, looking for worms forced to the surface of waterlogged ground. Then the clouds part and a tide of sunshine floods across fields and hedgerows, energising the landscape with dazzling intensity, spotlighting bare-limbed ashes and berry-laden hawthorns against distant hills still swathed in cloud shadow. For a few minutes, every rain-glossed autumn leaf, scarlet rosehip and crimson haw hangs bejewelled with raindrops, until a breeze – drawn in by convection currents rising from sun-warmed asphalt – shakes them free. There has been a bumper crop of hawthorn berries hereabouts this autumn but, so far, few redwings and no fieldfares to strip the branches bare. Blackbirds have had the feast almost to themselves, but the intensity of the passing storm leaves windfalls in the road for another beneficiary: a very young wood mouse. It’s unusual to see one of these little rodents abroad in bright sunlight; they are crepuscular creatures. Perhaps this one has been taken unawares by the sudden transformation of a day that, until now, had hardly seemed to dawn. Oblivious to our presence, just a yard from our feet, it is preoccupied with gnawing soft flesh from fallen haws, then extracting seed kernels with sharp incisors. We hurry on to the end of the lane, casting giant shadows as the sun sinks lower over Weardale’s distant fell tops, just in time to watch it set. A day that might have been forgettable, made memorable by a mouse and a late break in the clouds. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryFormer world No 1 tennis star Naomi Osaka has joined the growing calls for answers on the whereabouts of Chinese player Peng Shuai, who has not been heard from publicly since she accused the country’s former vice premier of sexually assaulting her. Peng, one of China’s biggest sporting stars, made the claims in a Weibo post on 2 November, in which she alleged Zhang Gaoli coerced her into sex and that they had an intermittent affair. The Women’s Tennis Association has called for an investigation and its chief executive, Steve Simon, has said that while they have received “assurances” Peng is safe, they have not been able to reach her. Osaka, who has previously been ranked the best player in the women’s game, issued a statement on Wednesday expressing shock at how Peng had “gone missing shortly after revealing she has been sexually abused”. “Censorship is never OK at any cost, I hope Peng Shuai and her family are safe and OK. I’m in shock of the current situation and I’m sending love and light her way. #whereispengshuai,” said the Japanese player. Osaka’s statement followed a rush of calls by tennis stars earlier this week expressing their concern over Peng’s silence. The Chinese government has not responded to the allegations. A spokesman for the ministry of foreign affairs, which deals with international media, told reporters he was not aware of the situation. “I have not heard of the issue you raised,” the spokesman, Zhao Lijian said. “This is not a diplomatic question.” Peng’s post went viral on Chinese social media, despite it being taken down by censors within minutes. Subsequent posts and reactions, even keywords such as “tennis”, also appeared to be blocked, and numerous references to Peng were scrubbed from China’s internet. Peng’s Weibo account is active, but has no mention of Zhang and comments appear to have been disabled. In her post, the 35-year-old alleged she and Zhang, 75, had an on-off extramarital “relationship” over several years, which she said he tried to keep secret. Peng said Zhang had stopped contacting her after he rose in the ranks of the Communist party. About three years ago, she alleged, Zhang invited her to play tennis with him and his wife and then sexually assaulted her in his house. “I never consented that afternoon, crying all the time,” she wrote.Aucklanders will be allowed to leave the city this summer after months in lockdown, the prime minister, Jacinda Ardern, has announced, but public health experts warn it could lead to a torrent of Covid-19 spreading into other parts of the country. The country recorded 194 new cases of Covid-19 in the community on Wednesday and the death of a man in his 60s who tested positive for Covid-19. There have been 36 Covid-19 deaths in New Zealand since the pandemic began. Delta has been steadily spreading into other regions, including Northland, Waikato and Christchurch. In September, the Covid-19 response minister Chris Hipkins responded to the opposition’s pandemic policy with a quip: “They are willing for Kiwis to get Covid for Christmas”. It is a line that may come back to haunt the government. A strict border has been in place around Auckland since 31 August to minimise the spread of Covid-19 into other regions. From 15 December, Aucklanders will be allowed to leave the boundary, providing they are either double-vaccinated or have returned a negative Covid-19 test within 72 hours of leaving. The rules will be in place for the core summer period, until 17 January. The boundary changes are two-way, meaning New Zealanders outside Auckland can travel into the city. With 82% of New Zealanders fully vaccinated, compared with 23% three months ago, and projections of 90% fully vaccinated by mid-December, the country is better prepared for looser restrictions, Ardern said. “Aucklanders have faced restrictions for an extended period of time to keep the rest of New Zealand safe. But with increased rates of vaccination it’s time to open up the ability to travel again,” she said. Waiting until mid-December to loosen the boundary would allow time to get vaccine rates across the country “even higher”, she said, “which is an extra layer of protection”. The police will have the discretion to enforce the rules, including undertaking random spot checks. Those caught breaking the rules could face a NZ$1,000 fine. Vaccine passports, which were made available on Wednesday, will be required when boarding a domestic flight, and on the inter-island ferry between the North and South islands. “Your vaccine pass is your ticket to summer, and is essential under the traffic light system” Ardern said. In October, the government released a new “traffic light” system for Covid management, including a legal framework for vaccination mandates that could affect around 40% of the workforce. The new rules, which begin at 90% vaccination, would loosen almost all restrictions for the fully vaccinated, but require vaccination certificates for many businesses and for workers in public-facing roles like education, nursing, and hospitality. At the end of the month, the government will confirm its decision to move Auckland into the new traffic light system. The city will initially move into red, the highest level in the traffic light. The rest of the country will also move into the framework at the same time. Parts of the country with lower vaccination rates will move into red, which has greater protections that the current alert level 2 system, Ardern said. With some regions still lagging on vaccination rates, New Zealanders can expect the virus to become endemic by the end of the year, according to epidemiologist Michael Baker. “You’re going to see the virus seeded everywhere. Then it’s a matter of the extent to which the combination of vaccine levels, the traffic light system and contact tracing can keep up.” Baker said the South Island may be better protected, given the requirements for vaccine passports on flights and ferries, but summer travel around the North Island is likely to lead to widespread transmission. “It’s gonna be quite a busy period for overworked public health workers.” Baker was particularly worried about Māori and Pasifika, who have lower overall vaccination rates. Dr Rawiri McKree Jansen said: “I’m feeling resigned to the government’s changes – more loosening leads to more spread, with the greatest impact upon whānau [family] with the least resources.” Meanwhile, Te Pāti Māori (the Māori party) co-leaders Rawiri Waititi and Debbie Ngarewa-Packer launched their Covid-19 pandemic response policy, calling for an end to government vaccine mandates, keeping the international borders closed until the Maori vaccination rates hit 95%, and establishing an independent Māori Pandemic Response Group. The party believes mandates are an important tool, but wants Māori to decide for themselves whether to adopt mandates in their own iwi (tribe), whānau (family) and communities. “Every piece of advice given by tāngata whenua [people of the land] over the course of this pandemic has been ignored by this government…Their blatant willingness to ignore Māori health expert advice is committing us to beauracratic genocide,’” Ngarewa-Packer said.“Cow’s milk without cows” will be in Israeli shops by 2023, after a start-up raised a record $13m (£9.7m) in seed funding from investors to help it make traditional dairy products from microorganisms. The Tel Aviv-based Imagindairy, which announced its seed funding result on Wednesday, said the milk it produced would be identical to cow’s milk, but the cow, and her associated methane, would be replaced by fungi or other plant microorganisms programmed to produce milk proteins. At its most basic, the programming process involves inserting DNA instructions for the production of whey and casein, the principal milk proteins, into the microorganisms. To turn the whey and casein proteins produced by the microorganisms into cow-free milk and dairy, Imagindairy will add plant-based fat, sugar and water. Methane-free cow’s milk could significantly reduce the impact of climate change and deforestation, NGOs believe. Livestock rearing is responsible for about 32% of human-generated methane, mainly from the planet’s billion-plus cattle. Cutting methane emissions is thought to be the strongest lever available to slow climate heating over the next 25 years. There are already huge numbers of alternative milks on the market and recent years have seen massive expansions in demand for oat milk, soy milk, almond milk and other varieties, which make “milk” from other substitutes. But cellular agriculture companies working to produce animal-free meat, dairy and fish have struggled to do so at a commercial scale. To date the only other company producing small commercial amounts of cow-free dairy is the US-based business Perfect Day The founder and chief executive of Imagindairy, Eyal Afergan, said his process would be similar to that of Perfect Day but because his team had developed a simpler way to isolate the milk proteins from the microorganisms it would be easier to scale up. Afergan added that his company’s milk only required 10% of the water needed to produce traditional cow’s milk and 1% of the land. The 1% included the land needed to produce carbon and nitrogen sources to feed the microorganisms. Average seed funding, the first investments a company receives, for start-ups using microorganisms and fermentation to produce animal proteins was $2m, a recent analysis found, and the maximum investment was $7m. The analysis was compiled by the Good Food Institute (GFI), a non-profit organisation that supports animal-free protein production. Carlotte Lucas, GFI’s European corporate engagement manager, said if Imagindairy did begin producing commercial levels of “cow milk without cows” by 2023, it would be “a gamechanger in terms of significantly reducing methane emissions from the dairy sector”. Lucas said the $13m raised by Imagindairy was part of recent investment surge in companies producing animal proteins from microorganisms and fermentation. In the first three quarters of 2021, she said, investments jumped to $1.3bn, well above the $597m invested during the full year 2020. With a new survey finding that 23% of European flexitarians were “very likely” to eat alternative cheese products if the product was identical to conventional cheese, the emergence of cow-free dairy could be transformational, said Stephanie Jaczniakowska-McGirr, the head of food industry and retail at the campaign group ProVeg International. If more people switched to an identical product that was methane and cow free, she added, then “we are on our way to a complete transformation of the food system that would help us to meet the 1.5C climate target” and “significantly reduce the 70% of worldwide deforestation linked to clearing land for animals and growing their feed”. ProVeg International aims to halve animal protein reliance by 2040. Commenting on the money raised by Imagindairy, Tom Dunne, the vice-president of European Dairy Farmers, said it was impossible to recreate cow’s milk in a lab. “It will always be missing something. The main elements might be there, but not everything you would find in cow’s milk,” he said. “Cows are a million-year-old natural system for producing milk. Do you want to feed something from a lab to your kids and then only find out later it might not be quite right? It’s Frankenstein stuff.”Nearly two-thirds of people who migrate to the UK in small boats are deemed to be genuine refugees and allowed to remain, a report says, in an apparent contradiction of past statements by the home secretary, Priti Patel. Analysis using Home Office data and requests under freedom of information laws has concluded that 61% of migrants who travel by boat are likely to be allowed to stay after claiming asylum. Patel told the House of Lords justice and home affairs committee last month: “All the data and evidence has shown this – that in the last 12 months alone, 70% of the individuals who have come to our country illegally via small boats are single men, who are effectively economic migrants. They are not genuine asylum seekers. These are the ones who are elbowing out the women and children, who are at risk and fleeing persecution.” The data was disclosed on Monday, a day after hundreds of people arrived by boats to the Kent coast. Across the Channel in Dunkirk, hundreds of people, including families with young children, have been forced to pack up their belongings as police officers with riot shields encircled their camp. It also emerged that the French sports retailer Decathlon has halted the sale of canoes in northern France to curb their use in Channel crossings. On Friday, three migrants were reported missing after trying to cross the Channel to Britain in canoes, while two canoes were found adrift off Calais on Thursday and two people were fished out of the water. The Refugee Council analysed Channel crossings and asylum outcomes between January 2020 and June 2021. The charity found that 91% of people who travelled by boat across the Channel came from 10 countries where human rights abuses and persecution were common. These were Afghanistan, Iran, Syria, Iraq, Sudan, Vietnam, Kuwait, Ethiopia, Eritrea and Yemen. According to the Home Office, 98% of people coming across the Channel apply for asylum. The report sets out the likely outcome of their asylum claims based on what is known as the grant rate. It finds that the majority of people crossing the Channel are likely to be recognised as being in need of protection at the initial decision stage. For the top 10 countries of origin arriving by small boat, 61% of initial decisions made in the 18 months to June 2021 would have resulted in refugee protection being granted, the report states. This compares with 52% of decisions made for all nationalities in the same period. The report shows that for Syrians, 88% are granted refugee status; for Eritreans the rate is 84%; for Sudanese and those from Yemen, 70%; for Iranians, 67%; for Vietnamese, 65%; for people from Kuwait Bidoun, 61%; and for Afghans, 56%. If an asylum claim is refused by the Home Office at the initial decision stage, the applicant has a right of appeal to an independent tribunal. The report shows 59% of appeals are likely be allowed for the top 10 countries of origin, compared with 46% for appeals allowed for all countries. For example, 59% of appeals by Iranians are likely to be successful, as are 69% of Sudanese appeals and 73% of appeals by Syrians. Enver Solomon, the chief executive of the Refugee Council, said: “The analysis contradicts the government’s narrative that people coming across the Channel are not refugees. The reality is that people who come to the UK by taking terrifying journeys in small boats across the Channel do so because they are desperately seeking safety having fled persecution, terror and oppression.” A Home Office spokesperson said: “The UK has a long history of welcoming those in genuine need and this is at the heart of our new plan for immigration. But we must put an end to dangerous journeys, facilitated by violent criminal gangs profiting from misery. “Our plan for immigration provides the only long-term solution to fix the broken system, and that’s why we’re changing the law to deter illegal entry and break the deadly business model of the people smugglers.” In a separate development, a people smuggler has admitted his part in the deaths of 39 Vietnamese people. Dragos Stefan Damian, 28, was extradited from Italy to face a court at the Old Bailey. The victims’ bodies were found in a refrigerated lorry trailer after it was transported by ferry from Zeebrugge to Purfleet in Essex, in October 2019. Earlier this year other members of the people-smuggling gang were jailed at the Old Bailey for their involvement.Investigators have not ruled out concluding that Emad al-Swealmeen’s alleged attack on Liverpool Women’s hospital had “no ideological or political motive” and was therefore not an act of terrorism. Counter-terrorism police and security services inquiries continue but as the inquiry entered its third day, investigators were not yet pointing to any specific ideology behind the explosion on Sunday morning. It had been feared that the bomber’s target could have been the Remembrance Sunday service and procession at Liverpool’s cathedral, which was a 10- to 15-minute walk from where the taxi exploded outside the hospital. But investigators from counter-terrorism police and MI5 are understood to be leaning towards the idea that the maternity hospital itself was the intended target of Swealmeen, who is believed to have made the explosive device. Police declared the attack as terrorist on Monday morning “given all the circumstances”, and any decision to downgrade that assessment remains unlikely. But insiders said on Tuesday “it was still possible” investigators would not find any ideological trigger for the attack. Earlier the security minister, Damian Hinds, told Sky News that while counter-terrorism police were discovering “more by the hour” about Swealmeen, it “could be weeks” before the full picture of “how this came about and what the motivation was” became apparent. It is understood that Swealmeen, who had been in the UK for about seven years, had an asylum claim rejected in December 2020. When a previous claim was rejected, several years earlier, he suffered mental ill-health and was sectioned, according to a friend in the city, Malcolm Hitchcott. Investigators also do not believe the explosive used on Sunday was TATP, an unstable compound that can be made from consumer products, and which has been used by a number of Islamist attackers, most notably in the 7 July 2005 attacks on London’s transport system. Nevertheless, there remain concerns that there have been two attacks in a month, with Sunday’s incident coming soon after the killing of Sir David Amess, a Conservative MP, at his constituency surgery in Essex. One source with knowledge of the thinking of counter-terrorism chiefs said there was real concern that the two violent incidents could embolden those thinking of attempting a fresh atrocity. Such concerns helped underpin the decision on Monday to lift the terror threat level to severe, meaning a fresh attempt at an atrocity is deemed highly likely. The source pointed to a similar effect in 2017 when the first attack in March of that year on parliament was followed a series of others in quick succession, three with a jihadist motive and one with an extreme far-right motive. A counter-terrorism source told the Guardian: “There have been two terror incidents in the last four weeks, and we’ve seen how that can encourage or embolden other extremists.” The second part of the concern among senior counter-terrorism officers is that any spurring on of violent extremists would come as more people are out and about in the run-up to Christmas, for the first time since the pandemic struck. “We’re heading into our first proper Christmas since the start of the pandemic and our towns and cities are going to be incredibly busy, so the cooperation from the public in fighting the threat is going to be vital,” the counter-terrorism source added. Officers specialising in fighting violent extremism are going to exhort the public to report concerns about potential attack plots and say that of 10,000 calls to a counter-terrorism hotline every year, a fifth yield useful intelligence and potentially save lives. Police forces are putting on extra patrols, and arrangements for protective security – that is, making it harder for terrorists to attack – are being reviewed, including for hospitals.Headteachers have reacted with fury and disbelief to government plans to accelerate Ofsted inspections, despite widespread calls from across the sector to suspend all routine inspections in view of the continuing Covid disruption in schools in England. The schools inspectorate revealed on Tuesday that it had been given an extra £24m in the government’s spending review to speed up the rate of inspections, to ensure that all schools and further education providers are inspected in the next four years. The education secretary, Nadhim Zahawi, said the pandemic had provided an opportunity to build back better and fairer, adding: “Accelerating the rate of Ofsted inspections over the coming years will provide parents with an up-to-date picture and swifter recognition of the hard work of leaders and teachers.” Teaching unions were united in their condemnation of the move, which promises that all schools and FE providers will be inspected at least once by summer 2025, a year ahead of schedule. There is also concern over a new drive to inspect “outstanding schools”, which have until now been exempted from regular inspection. Reports suggest that more than two in three have been stripped of their top rating after inspections in September, causing anguish among those heads affected. “Government ministers are showing, yet again, that they have no understanding of the exhaustion and stress felt by teachers and leaders,” said Dr Mary Bousted, the joint general secretary of the National Education Union. Nick Brook, the deputy general secretary of the National Association of Head Teachers, added: “Given the pressure schools are currently under and the recent calls to pause inspections this term, the announcement of more to come feels completely tone-deaf.” Ofsted’s chief inspector, Amanda Spielman, said: “Children only get one chance at school. Everyone working in education must do everything they can to give this generation the best possible chance to fulfil its potential. “Ofsted will play its part – by giving parents and learners up-to-date information, and by helping schools and colleges shape their plans. I’m pleased that we will now be able to reach all schools, colleges and apprenticeship providers by summer 2025.” Critics said the schools inspectorate was facing an unprecedented crisis of confidence among education experts, professional bodies and school leaders, who have accused Ofsted of “losing the plot” and being “completely out of touch” with reality. “It is probably fair to say that opinion on Ofsted has seldom been lower than it is at the moment,” said Geoff Barton, the general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders, adding, “the inspectorate needs to be careful that the damage done to relations is not irreparable”. Many school leaders believe it is wrong for Ofsted to be conducting routine inspections when schools are still struggling with high rates of absence among students and staff and the focus is on helping children to catch-up after months of disrupted learning. “Nobody has got any confidence in them,” said one moderate and widely respected headteacher, while Dame Alison Peacock, the chief executive of the Chartered College of Teaching, recently accused the inspectorate of a “reign of terror” and the government’s new social mobility tsar, Katharine Birbalsingh, has said Ofsted was not “a force for good”. Headteachers suffering pandemic burnout have posted on social media to share the trauma of inspections, which has prompted some to quit. Former school inspectors have added their voices to the growing disenchantment, among them Frank Norris, a former senior HMI with Ofsted, who expressed “deep concern”. “I’m based in the north and the pandemic has hit some of our communities the hardest. Schools have managed amazingly well and kept things rolling,” Norris said. “It is shameful that Ofsted inspectors apparently choose to give this crucial area of work little attention when they produce their inspection reports.” Others have called for the “humiliating” grading system – which measures from outstanding to inadequate – to be scrapped as a priority, among them Caroline Derbyshire, who chairs the Headteachers’ Roundtable. “One of the things that happened during lockdown and the first part of the pandemic, is that heads gained respect from their communities. They rose to the challenge and they regained a little bit of their voice and their professionalism. “Perhaps now there’s a feeling we’ve been putting up with things for too long. To accept a system which is so publicly humiliating is wrong, the shaming is something we should never as a profession have put up with.”The National Cyber Security Centre (NCSC) said it tackled a record number of cyber incidents in the UK over the last year, with ransomware attacks originating from Russia dominating its activities. The cybersecurity agency said it had helped deal with a 7.5% increase in cases in the year to August, fuelled by the surge of criminal hackers seizing control of corporate data and demanding payment in cryptocurrency for its return. Paul Chichester, director of operations, said that “ransomware has certainly dominated a significant portion of year” and that the hacking epidemic had become “global as a story in the last 12 months”. Criminal hackers, based in Russia or in nearby Russian speaking territories, successfully targeted organisations such as the London borough of Hackney and the celebrity jeweller Graff in the UK in the past year. In May, in the US, oil and gas supplier Colonial Pipeline suspended operations after a ransomware attack left it unable to access key data. It eventually paid $5m (£3.7m) to the hackers to regain control of its systems. Central government and the UK public sector do not pay cyber ransoms, although fixing the damage can take months. Rebuilding Hackney’s affected systems cost around £10m, with some of the costs met by central government. However, NCSC officials said they had no power to prevent the payment of ransoms – often around £1m a time – by businesses to hackers, even though doing so ensured the criminal activity continued. “We would say we would prefer people not to pay because that’s what keeps the UK safest collectively,” said Lindy Cameron, the director of the organisation, who acknowledged that commercial pressures meant some businesses felt they had little choice to meet the hackers’ demands for money. British ministers and officials have considered banning cyber ransom payments, but it is understood that is unlikely to be implemented, partly because of concern it would discourage businesses from reporting attacks. Many companies are able to claim on their cyber insurance, although once hackers have access to a corporate system they can seek the insurance policy to work out how much the company is able to pay. Last month the head UK spy agency GCHQ, NCSC’s parent organisation, disclosed that the number of ransomware attacks on British institutions has doubled in the past year. The impact on the British economy is estimated to run into the hundreds of millions of pounds, mostly stemming from the costs of immobilising businesses.Anas Zein Al-Abdeen doesn’t want to close his business for three days a week – but, increasingly, it looks like his only option. He simply can’t get the staff. “It’s horrific,” he says. “We can’t plan for anything.” The 40-year-old British-Syrian businessman runs Damascena, an independent chain of four Middle Eastern coffee houses in and around Birmingham. All of his cafes are affected, but the one in central Birmingham is the most short-staffed, with 25 workers instead of the usual 30. “It’s very stressful,” he says. “Most businesses worry about getting customers. But I’m just worried if we can serve them or not.” Al-Abdeen is caught up in a nationwide hospitality industry crisis. September figures from the Office for National Statistics show that hospitality businesses are now twice as likely as those in other industries to struggle to fill vacancies: 30% of all hospitality businesses reported issues in filling posts, although the rate of vacancies across the labour market appears to have slowed recently, down from 43.4% in May-July 2021 to 23.4% in August-October. Many within the sector chalk this up to the exodus of EU workers from the UK since Brexit. “Employers are telling us that lots of people, even if granted settled status, have chosen to return to their native countries,” says Jane Gratton, the head of people policy at the British Chambers of Commerce. “We’re seeing staff shortages in many sectors that didn’t have shortages before.” Previously, Damascena was reliant on EU workers for most of its workforce – pre-Brexit, 90% of its staff were from elsewhere in Europe. “There’s always a turnover of people in this industry,” says Al-Abdeen. “People don’t tend to stay long. But there were always fresh workers from Europe.” Brexit changed everything. “A lot of people have gone back to their native countries and decided not to return to the UK,” says Al-Abdeen. “That tap of new workers has been turned off.” Previously, he would expect to have 70 applications for a post; now, he is lucky if he gets 10 – and only a few will bother to turn up for an interview. The staff Al-Abdeen can recruit tend to be inexperienced – but he can’t be choosy. “Normally, we’d have a staff member spend three months on probation before they are fully trained and ready to work unsupervised,” he says. “At the moment, most of our staff are new and we’re not able to do that any more.” He will not say how much he pays an hour, but he says it is well above the minimum wage and comparable with other coffee chains. “We’ll also promote people quickly,” he says. “There are some employees who started just three months ago and they’ve already climbed up the wage structure.” He has put up pay, but he can’t afford to pay the same as major corporations without becoming unprofitable. “How can we compete when Amazon is paying £1,000-plus sign-on bonuses?” “I heard Boris’s speech,” says Al-Abdeen, referring to the prime minister’s address last month to the Tory party conference, in which he claimed that Brexit would be positive for UK workers, as their wages would rise. “But that’s easier said than done. I don’t believe the wages are the issue. We can’t force British workers into jobs they don’t enjoy or want. Businesses can’t afford to inflate their wages overnight. If the Tories believed in what they were saying, there would have been a transition to allow businesses to adjust – and financial support so they can increase their wages.” When Al-Abdeen recruits staff, he finds they tend to leave after a few months to work for bigger employers, such as hotel chains, which can afford to pay more. “They finish their training and jump ship to another job that pays an extra 20p an hour,” he says. “We’re used to spending all this time and money training staff and we can’t guarantee they’ll stay.” All this means there is even more work left behind for those who remain. “When you’re short-staffed, the staff get stressed out, because they’re working more than they should,” says Al-Abdeen. “It’s hard to keep morale up. It’s like a chain reaction. It’s terrible.” Everyone has been working extra-long hours to compensate. Inevitably, customer service is affected. “The most frustrating thing is how it affects our service,” he says. “We’re trying our best not to, but there’s not much you can do. We’ve won multiple awards and I think we’re destroying what we’ve achieved. I don’t blame customers for getting annoyed. They’ve paid their money. They have the right to be upset if we’re delayed or the service isn’t up to scratch.” Al-Abdeen is reserved in his criticism of the government. “They did well for businesses, with Covid,” he says. “But the problem of Brexit has been ignored. I think we need to face the problem and find a solution. We have to allow EU workers to come back and apply for these jobs that, for whatever reason, are not attractive to local jobseekers.”What took you so long, House of Gucci? This story was destined to become a movie from the moment the bullet left fashion heir Maurizio Gucci dead outside his Milan office in March 1995 – shot, a witness said, by a hitman with a “beautiful, clean hand”. The film by Ridley Scott now finally arrives dripping with star power, and Lady Gaga as Gucci’s ex-wife Patrizia Reggiani. But the story alone was enough: a glittering tickbox of money, revenge and a villainess kept company in jail by an illicit pet ferret called Bambi. True crime gold. So why, now that the film is actually here, does the Gucci case feel a strange fit for a movie after all? Put it down to timing. The film’s development began in entertainment prehistory: 2006. Back then, a lavish movie was still the grand prize for any news story, and true crime – that trashbag genre – would simply be glad of the association. Now though, film and true crime have the air of an estranged couple. Had Maurizio Gucci been gunned down on Via Palestro last week, Netflix would already have the rights and the podcast would be on Spotify. Such is how true crime conquered the world. The vast success of the 2014 podcast Serial remains the origin story, but the peak never seems to come. The genre has become bigger than the movies – made that way by an interlocking partnership with pods and streaming. “When I started studying true crime, nobody took it seriously,” says New York writer Jean Murley, who in 2008 published The Rise of True Crime: 20th Century Murder and American Popular Culture. “Now it feels like the dominant form of pop culture storytelling. And I’m glad. I think it has a lot to tell us about ourselves.” It just probably wouldn’t tell us in a film. “True crime movies were definitely bigger in the past,” says Murley. “Media changes. We change.” Yet the movies were there first. Consider the classics: Fritz Lang’s trailblazing M sprang out of real child murders; Psycho saw Hitchcock repurpose the grim Ed Gein case. Beyond individual milestones, the very stuff of film storytelling – gangster movies, horror, thrillers, westerns – all grew out of true crime. It is less a sub-genre than the soul of cinema. The big-screen genre became a sliding scale, from sober documentary to the starry and scandalous. House of Gucci is the latter, of course – a bloody soap.Of course Jared Leto is involved, and already a meme in his velvet suit at the London premiere. The red carpet hijinks feel old-fangled too. At the higher end, true crime now carries itself differently. Stories may still focus on the wealthy and notorious – but only with a certain gravity of purpose. Take The People v OJ Simpson, 2016’s acclaimed longform dramatisation. Stylistically, it had everything a series gives and a movie cannot. The breathing space of its running time, the episodic structure, room for breadcrumb-trail detail – all this came with streaming and TV, which are perfect for true crime. But there was also a question of tone. After Serial, a bar had been set, whatever the medium. If a project was going to reopen a famous old wound such as, say, the killing of Nicole Brown Simpson, it would also have to widen the lens, humanise the victim, contextualise everything. The mere crime could not be the only story. For podcasts, the whole point has been the quotidian. Terrible murders, everyday victims. The lesson of movies such as M or Psycho – that monsters are among us so FFS roll the window up – now comes instead from Park Predators and Wine &amp; Crime. The gulf is only made more pronounced by the low-tech of it all, millions of dollars away from the aggressive gloss of a Ridley Scott movie. Still, plenty of true crime podcasts indulge in cinematic scene-setting. This American Life – the series from which Serial span-off – says it makes “movies for radio”. But the filmic touches feel less like homage than a cannibalising for parts. Even a Hollywood crime story now becomes a podcast. Film-maker Vanessa Hope is the granddaughter of movie producer Walter Wanger and actor Joan Bennett, once a leading femme fatale. In 1951, suspecting an affair, Wanger shot his wife’s agent, Jennings Lang, in a Beverly Hills parking lot. This year, Hope told the story in a 10-part podcast, Love Is a Crime, with Jon Hamm and Zooey Deschanel playing her grandparents. To Hope, it made perfect sense that the project was not a movie. “Hollywood has always made money from a gun and a girl. The gun is glorified and the girl – the woman – is silent.” The very nature of film, she says, is wrong for the job. “A two-hour movie always reduces the full arc of people’s lives – and the person most reduced is the victim.” A similar ripple of change has reached Britain. Last September, huge audiences watched Des, ITV’s three-part drama about the 1983 arrest of Scottish serial killer Dennis Nilsen. Co-writer Luke Neal had been inspired by The People v OJ Simpson. “You start out thinking you’re watching to find out how OJ got away with it. And the brilliance is, he ends up a minor character. What keeps you there is the human cost.” In Des, Neal created the same dynamic. “We watch these stories because we want to know who this person is who takes other people’s lives. In fact, he doesn’t matter. What does is the people whose lives he took. The problem with true crime is it wants to compete with fiction, so you end up with countless Ted Bundy movies. But real killers have no glamour. The truth isn’t Jamie Dornan in a sexy game of cat and mouse.” Longform true crime upped the ante elsewhere too. Another landmark was The Jinx, Andrew Jarecki’s 2015 portrait of the US real estate heir and now convicted murderer Robert Durst. The finale featured a muttered confession, seemingly recorded by accident. How could a movie match that? (And who now remembers All Good Things, the Durst-inspired movie released by Jarecki five years earlier, starring a vague Ryan Gosling?) The impulse to crack cases on air has been wired into the true crime podcast. That the results often end in a shrug is not a dealbreaker. Loose threads are simply picked up online. But for a Hollywood movie, uncertainty is death. The exception that proved the rule was David Fincher’s doubt-shrouded Zodiac, a box-office hit that inspired not a single rip-off. (Fincher then took his serial killer habit to Netflix with the sleekly titillating series Mindhunter.) But true crime as live investigation is not the only new remit. Genre fans have always skewed female. Podcasts have only intensified that, and the result is a landscape of work made by women for women about – and this can seem an odd dynamic – women being murdered. There is an explanation. Social psychologist Amanda Vicary is a true crime fan with a professional interest. “My research,” she says, “shows that women like true crime when it gives them information about techniques to escape a killer.” If horror movies give our fear centres a harmless work-out, modern true crime has a bleakly practical purpose. “Women listen,” Vicary adds, “to find out what to do if they’re thrown in the trunk of a car.” Of course, House of Gucci centres on a woman too. The Black Widow trope is as old as it is statistically improbable and commercially alluring. If the story overlaps with Killer Women With Piers Morgan, it is not the first film to draw a prestige male director to a real story of a woman accused. This year’s other major true crime-ish movie was Stillwater, with Tom McCarthy fictionalising the case of Amanda Knox, who was acquitted after four years in an Italian jail for murder. Knox herself went public with her distress. House of Gucci has also drawn criticism from family members on various grounds: 1) violation of privacy; 2) Al Pacino’s rendering of patriarch Aldo Gucci (“fat, short, ugly”). But it would be a mistake to think the old hulk of movie true crime was the only problem. The whole genre still lives on ethical thin ice. The success may not be helping. This September, a giddy podcast-ish hubbub greeted the disappearance of American “vanlifer” Gabby Petito. It only grew louder when she was found to have been killed. Big True Crime was already at work. “When you turn on Hulu,” her mother, Nichole Schmidt, tweeted this month, “and your daughter’s story is the recommended show.” Even lovers of the genre are also troubled by a fixation with one kind of victim. “True crime has never reflected the reality of murder,” Jean Murley says. “It’s almost a fantasy genre. Who gets killed in America? Disproportionately, it is young men of colour. But the quintessential true crime victim is a young, pretty, white woman. It’s very ritualised.” Murley will consider this and other matters in an updated version of her book. There is a lot to say about true crime in the 21st century. Des writer Neal is optimistic – cautiously. “I do think true crime is changing,” he says. “And that’s good. It needs to. Because actually, life is not cheap.” • House of Gucci is released in UK cinemas on 26 November.Whether it is a silent stare or simply a rousing bark, dogs have found myriad ways to communicate with humans. Now researchers have created a hi-tech option for canines left home alone: a ball that allows them to call their owners on the old dog and bone. The device – nicknamed the DogPhone – is a soft ball that, when moved, sends a signal to a laptop that launches a video call, and the sound of a ringing telephone. The owner can choose whether to take the call, and when to hang up, while they can also place a call to their pet – although the dog has to move the ball to pick up. “All this [existing] technology allows you to measure your pets’ steps or ring your pets or remotely give your dog food, but your dog doesn’t really have any choices,” said Dr Ilyena Hirskyj-Douglas, of the University of Glasgow, and first author of the research used to create the device. She added giving animals choice and control had been shown to improve their welfare and wellbeing. The DogPhone considers both owner and the dog – and gives the latter a sense of agency, she said. “This is just one way to demonstrate that dogs can control technology,” said Hirskyj-Douglas. “We can build technology for dogs.” While a canine social media, or FaceBark, has yet to be created, Hirskyj-Douglas said she envisages a future where dogs could call each other. “There’s so many different possibilities that you could have,” she said. The research, which is published in the Proceedings of the Association for Computing Machinery on Computer-Human interaction and being is presented at the 2021 ACM Interactive Surfaces and Spaces Conference in Łódź, Poland, reveals how Hirskyj-Douglas and researchers from Aalto University in Finland settled on a soft ball to create the device. The DogPhone underwent a number of iterations to ensure it had the right level of sensitivity towards movement – these were tested over 16 days by Hirskyj-Douglas and her nine-year-old black labrador, Zack. A diary detailing the calls between owner and pet suggests the latter did not always seem to know what he was doing – despite having been shown five times how the system worked. “Dog rang me but was not interested in our call instead was checking for things in his bed,” Hirskyj-Douglas noted during the testing of one iteration. Another entry reveals the potential pitfalls of the DogPhone. “Dog walking around wagging and then laying down. I was in a meeting so had to hang up quickly,” one record reveals. The team say that many of the calls made by Zack – who was left alone for about eight hours during testing days – appear to have been accidents although they caution that may simply be the human perspective. “For example, when the dog triggered the system with their butt, this could have been deliberate and the dog’s unique way of triggering an interaction,” they write. Hirskyj-Douglas said the technology could bring benefits to pets, in particular dogs who struggle with being separated from their owners – although she admitted the device had actually caused her some anxiety. “It’s just giving a dogs a choice,” she said. “We may not understand the choice that they’re making. But that doesn’t mean they shouldn’t have a choice.”Trees and railways have never really got on with each other. In the days of steam engines, trees alongside railways were cut down to prevent engines sparking fires. Once steam engines were scrapped, the vegetation grew back and more than 6m trees became established alongside Britain’s rail network. However, every autumn led to “leaves on the line” disruption and trees sometimes toppled on to railway tracks in high winds. There led to intense criticism of Network Rail, which then felled many trees, destroying valuable habitats. Three years ago, John Varley published “Valuing Nature”, an independent review of how Network Rail manages its vegetation. This recommended that trees and plants growing beside the railways should be treated as assets not problems. They should be seen as valuable habitats for wildlife, creating ribbons of nature alongside the 20,000 miles of Britain’s railways. Instead of felling trees haphazardly, they could be selectively felled to improve habitats, native species planted to suit the right locations, and railways would still benefit from trees reducing flooding risks and stabilising slopes from landslides. Network Rail then set out plans to achieve a net increase in biodiversity by 2035 – a big pledge that needs considerable effort.There are times when Boris Johnson’s leadership calls to mind the technique for flying outlined by Douglas Adams, in The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy: “The knack lies in learning how to throw yourself at the ground and miss.” In pursuit of Brexit, then in response to Covid, Johnson has hurled himself at disaster and, in defiance of political gravity, avoided impact. Until now. Amid the hullabaloo over Tory MPs’ lobbying sidelines can be heard a crunch of gravel as a prime minister comes down to Earth; gravity restored. For Labour, it has been a frustrating wait. The Conservatives have been in power for 11 years. Even if you measure time on the Borisian calendar, which starts in December 2019, this is midterm with a government looking haggard and directionless. A dip in the Tory poll rating would be normal. A swift bounceback would also be no surprise in the era of Johnson’s flying circus. If the Tories shed support, there is no guarantee that voters will migrate to Labour. The Greens and Liberal Democrats could mop up some of the spill. Or contempt for the whole of Westminster could fuel some as yet unidentified, none-of-the-above insurgency. Keir Starmer is the alternative prime minister by constitutional default, but he has not yet dictated the pace of events or set the terms of debate. He began correcting that yesterday with a mini-manifesto to “clean up politics”. Downing Street pre-emptively met some of the Labour leader’s demands before he had even finished speaking, such is the urgency inside No 10 to engineer a change of subject. Johnson may still come to rue his claim that “Britain is not remotely a corrupt country”. It sounded too much like the sort of self-certification that despotic rulers issue, when every independent authority takes the opposite view. It also conflated the governing elite with the character of the nation. It invites the riposte that Britain is indeed a country that hates corruption, but it is run by people who do not share that abhorrence. It is an important distinction, and one that Labour intends to exploit. Starmer yesterday spoke of a “pivotal moment” that will settle the character of national politics. On one side is “everyone who cares about British democracy”, represented by a Labour leader with a record of honourable service as a public prosecutor, punishing wrongdoing. On the other side, a prime minister who does not recognise sleaze when it stares back at him in the mirror. There is more at stake here than rules on MPs’ earnings. The question of integrity in public office touches on national self-esteem. It gives Labour a rare opportunity to hammer the Tories on a point of patriotic principle. The presumption that Conservative rule expresses the natural order of things runs deep in English politics. (So deep, in fact, that Labour has all too often been seduced into complicity, settling into a role as protest movement – the party that applies pressure on the party of power.) Corruption is the inevitable byproduct of unchecked entitlement to rule. At a certain point, the sheer arrogance of it severs the cultural and economic threads that connect the Tories to their supporters. The effect is cumulative. It is not clear where the tipping point lies; what is the quantum of brazenness that might send Johnson into terminal decline? Old stories might disappear from the news cycle, but they rot out of sight. The smell can then waft back. The affair with Jennifer Arcuri, for example, seemed not to dent Johnson’s reputation at first. Unruly libido was part of the roguish charm. But pushing a lover’s business to the front of a queue for public money – the deal, as Arcuri describes it – is not a saucy bit on the side, it is abuse of office. Likewise, cutting corners to favour friends in the award of public contracts was defended as wartime expediency at the height of the battle against Covid. But in the light of more recent scrutiny, those emergency decisions fit into a pattern as part of one vast, greasy enterprise that blurs the distinction between a commercial agent and a Tory MP. Telling people that the system is rotten is easy. Persuading them that Labour would make it better is harder. There is, these days, more generalised contempt for the political class than there was in the nineties, when Tony Blair benefited from the collapse of a putrescent Tory government. And Starmer sold his legal services earlier in his career as an MP. He acted within the rules, but that defence won’t ward off some cynical shrugs as he claims to represent a new, cleaner order. The Labour leader does at least sound authentically angry about the impact of the scandal on Britain’s reputation. This is his most fruitful line of attack, casting Johnson’s indulgence of cronyism as an insult to all the people who think abiding by rules matters. It is unfair. But also un-British. This a way for Labour to beat a patriotic drum, passing over terrain that has not been churned into a bog by culture wars. The Tories are forever trying to provoke the opposition into voter-repellent rows over flags and statues, believing they can easily win a competition to be the party that venerates historical symbols most noisily. It is a trap. The way to avoid it is by defining patriotism in terms of the values that British people might reasonably expect to see upheld by their government: decency, fair play, respecting the rules. That is what Starmer began to do yesterday. That is the significance of his conclusion that “Britain deserves better”. For perhaps the first time since becoming Labour leader, he can challenge Johnson on one of the fundamental questions that settles voter allegiance: who speaks for the country? On questions of honour and corruption, it cannot be Johnson. How serious a problem that is depends on how effectively Labour presses the advantage. If political gravity is restored, the prime minister can be loaded with baggage that he thought he had cast off. Thus encumbered, it will be much harder for him to miss whenever he next throws himself at the ground. Rafael Behr is a Guardian columnistWork in Progress 9pm, Sky Comedy Abby McEnany’s semi-autobiographical series – which follows a fortysomething queer woman with depression who says she will kill herself if her life doesn’t change within 180 days – returns for a second season. Continuing to push the dramedy genre to its limits, Abby is nearly out of almonds (she uses the nuts from a packet to count down the days), looking for a new therapist she doesn’t hate and navigating a pandemic with a new flatmate. Hollie Richardson Between the Covers 7pm, BBC Two Sara Cox chairs the celebrity book club, with wine critic Olly Smith proving the most perceptive reader of The Coward by Jarred McGinnis and The Bookshop, a 1978 novel by Penelope Fitzgerald. Fern Brady, Lou Sanders and John Thomson complete the panel. Jack Seale Shetland 9pm, BBC One As the leads for Galbraith’s killer dry up, Perez (Douglas Henshall) takes a fittingly bleak trip to the remote and beautiful island of Fetlar. Meanwhile, local residents are feeling uneasy at the return of Donna (Fiona Bell), but is the terminally ill killer still a danger in her weakened state? Hannah Verdier Grand Designs: House of the Year 2021 9pm, Channel 4 Scoffing in the face of the housing crisis, here are some sickeningly incredible homes in the running for House of the Year. Kevin McCloud is back to enable a nosy around a 14th-century fortress in Cumbria and a Georgian farmhouse with a space-age extension. HR Comedians Giving Lectures 9pm, Dave Sara Pascoe tasks three more comics with putting their own spin on pre-existing lecture titles. Nick Helm gets to the point of procrastination, Janine Harouni explores millennial success and Marcus Brigstocke talks weight-loss myths. If it all sounds potentially rather dry, do not underestimate the power of a rude singalong. Graeme Virtue Live at the Apollo 10pm, BBC Two The return of live comedy is in full swing, with Loyiso Gola hosting a second helping of laughs from the Hammersmith Apollo in the new series. Joining him are Edinburgh fringe best newcomer nominee Helen Bauer, and Stand Up from the Shed star Scott Bennett. HRTop story: PM tags on to Labour anti-sleaze motion Hello, Warren Murray with this morning’s messages. A Conservative party donor who supported Michael Gove’s Tory leadership bid won £164m in Covid contracts after the minister referred his firm to a “VIP lane” that awarded almost £5bn to companies with political connections, new analysis reveals. Meller Designs, based in Bedford, was awarded six personal protective equipment (PPE) supply contracts worth £164m from the Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC) during the coronavirus pandemic. When the contracts were awarded, Gove was a minister at the Cabinet Office, which is responsible for government procurement, and in charge of the office of the chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster, which referred Meller Designs for PPE supply. A spokesperson for Gove denied that the referral involved any impropriety. Meller Designs said it approached the government offering equipment and was “extremely proud” of its role in supplying “more than 100m items of PPE”. A list of the 47 companies referred to the government’s VIP fast-track lane for contracts to supply PPE has been revealed. These are five of the significant political figures whose referrals ended up with the companies winning contracts. Boris Johnson will try to outflank Labour and seize back momentum in the escalating row over MPs’ second jobs today. An opposition motion being tabled by the Labour leader, Keir Starmer, would ban MPs from being paid for working as parliamentary advisers. Downing Street said Johnson would table an amendment to “toughen up” the opposition motion by adding that MPs should be investigated and “appropriately punished” if they prioritised other jobs over their taxpayer-funded role. * * * ‘Children only get one chance’ – Headteachers are objecting to government plans for all England’s schools and further education providers to be inspected in the next four years. There are calls to suspend routine inspections in view of the continuing Covid disruption. The education secretary, Nadhim Zahawi, said the pandemic had provided an opportunity to build back better and fairer, and provide parents “an up-to-date picture and swifter recognition of the hard work of leaders and teachers”. But Dr Mary Bousted from the National Education Union said teachers and leaders were already under “exhaustion and stress”. Ofsted’s chief inspector, Amanda Spielman, said: “Children only get one chance at school … I’m pleased that we will now be able to reach all schools, colleges and apprenticeship providers by summer 2025.” * * * Midweek catch-up &gt; Naomi Osaka has expressed “shock” at the disappearance of the Chinese tennis player Peng Shuai, who has not been heard from publicly since she accused the country’s former vice premier of sexually assaulting her. &gt; In North America a deadly storm has hit the Pacific north-west, destroying highways and shutting down power to tens of thousands of Canadians and Americans. Vancouver, Canada’s largest port, was cut off by flood waters. These pictures tell the story. &gt; The sport equipment retailer Decathlon will no longer sell canoes in the north of France to prevent migrants attempting to use them to cross to England. It comes as a report finds nearly two-thirds of such people are genuine refugees entitled to remain. &gt; Britney Spears has spoken out about the realities of her new freedom after her 13-year conservatorship was lifted last week. “I’m just grateful for each day and being able to have the keys to my car, to be able to be independent and feel like a woman. Owning an ATM card, seeing cash for the first time … It’s the little things.” &gt; Pfizer has announced a deal to make its prospective antiviral Covid-19 pill, called Paxlovid, available more cheaply in the world’s least-wealthy countries. The drug interferes with how the virus reproduces. &gt; Eleven years after a mine explosion killed 29 workers, remains of some of them have been found using underground cameras that were put down boreholes at Pike River in New Zealand. The mine remains too dangerous to recover the bodies. * * * Dog and phone – Researchers have created a ball that allows dogs to ring up their owners. The DogPhone is a soft ball that, when moved, sends a signal to a laptop that launches a video call. The owner can also call their pet – although the dog has to move the ball to pick up. “This is just one way to demonstrate that dogs can control technology,” said Dr Ilyena Hirskyj-Douglas, of the University of Glasgow. “We can build technology for dogs.” * * * ‘Feeling the child’s joy’ – Grannies may be more emotionally connected to their grandkids than to their own sons and daughters, the first study to examine grandmothers’ brain function in this regard has suggested. “What really jumps out is the activation in areas of the brain associated with emotional empathy,” said Prof James Rilling from Emory University in Atlanta, Georgia. “If their grandchild is smiling, they’re feeling the child’s joy. And if their grandchild is crying, they’re feeling the child’s pain and distress.” When the grandmothers instead looked at images of their own adult child, brain areas for cognitive empathy were activated – indicating they were trying to understand rather than experiencing direct emotional connection. “Emotional empathy is when you’re able to feel what someone else is feeling, but cognitive empathy is when you understand at a cognitive level what someone else is feeling and why,” Rilling said. This could possibly help to explain the experience many grown-up children have of their parents often seeming more excited to see their grandchildren than them. Today in Focus podcast: Is Trump setting up to steal 2024? Donald Trump’s attempt to overturn the result of the 2020 US election was ultimately thwarted, but through efforts at state level to elect loyalists to key positions, the stage is set for a repeat showing in 2024. Lunchtime read: ‘We have to allow EU workers back’ Anas Zein Al-Abdeen owns a chain of four Middle Eastern coffee houses around Birmingham. But while customers are plentiful, staff are another matter. “It’s horrific,” he says. “We can’t plan for anything.” September figures from the Office for National Statistics show that hospitality businesses are now twice as likely as those in other industries to struggle to fill vacancies. Many within the sector chalk this up to the exodus of EU workers from the UK since Brexit. Jane Gratton from the British Chambers of Commerce says: “Employers are telling us that lots of people, even if granted settled status, have chosen to return to their native countries. We’re seeing staff shortages in many sectors that didn’t have shortages before.” Al-Abdeen says: “We can’t force British workers into jobs they don’t enjoy or want … We have to allow EU workers to come back and apply for these jobs that, for whatever reason, are not attractive to local jobseekers.” Sport English cricket has descended into crisis after Azeem Rafiq’s powerful testimony laid bare its institutional failings on racism, bullying and dressing room culture while also alleging a past drugs cover-up by Yorkshire. Rafiq’s courage, writes Barney Ronay, shows Yorkshire and the ECB what a real leader looks like. The chairman of the Premier League, Gary Hoffman, is to announce his resignation from the role following the controversy over the Saudi-led takeover of Newcastle United. Kieffer Moore cancelled out Kevin De Bruyne’s opener as a 1-1 draw with Belgium was enough for Wales to secure home advantage in their World Cup play-off in March. The coach who guided South Africa’s “Bomb Squad” to World Cup glory is urging his self-styled “Fight Club” of English front-row forwards to make a name for themselves at Twickenham this weekend. Gareth Southgate has indicated that his new England contract should be a formality as he looked forward to a seismic 12-month period and beyond. Usman Khawaja and Travis Head have been named in a 15-man Australia squad for the first two Tests of the upcoming Ashes series, after selectors left the door open to both players to make the final cut for next month’s opener against England. Emma Raducanu will compete in Britain for the first time since her US Open triumph when she faces Elena-Gabriela Ruse at the Champions Tennis exhibition at the Royal Albert Hall this month. The US is going to stage a diplomatic boycott of the Winter Olympics in China and will not send an official delegation in protest against human rights abuses, according to a report. And transgender women should no longer be required to reduce their testosterone levels to compete in the women’s sport category, new International Olympic Committee guidelines have suggested. Business JPMorgan has sued Tesla for $162.2m, accusing Elon Musk’s electric car company of “flagrantly” breaching a 2014 contract relating to stock trading options that Tesla sold to the bank. Musk’s infamous tweet in 2018 saying he was planning to take Tesla private caused a change in the terms of the contract, JPMorgan argues, and it is demanding extra returns. The pound is on $1.342 as the greenback climbed again, but sterling continued to rise against the euro and now fetches €1.186. The FTSE100 is on track to shed 0.3% at the opening. The papers Our Guardian print edition leads today with Michael Gove and the “‘cronyism’ furore” but the picture space is occupied by Azeem Rafiq’s Commons testimony about racism in cricket. Also on the front: “Questions over Prince Andrew’s £1.5m loan”. The Duke of York took out a £1.5m personal loan that was subsequently paid off by companies connected to David Rowland, a multimillionaire Conservative donor and financier, it has been claimed. A spokesperson for the Duke of York said he was “entitled to a degree of privacy in conducting his entirely legitimate personal financial affairs, on which all appropriate accounting measures are undertaken and all taxes duly paid”. The Mirror has that as “Tax haven banker pays off Andy’s loan” – and that diminutive is also used by the Daily Mail. Its lead story though is “Priti: our asylum merry-go-round” as the home secretary blasts the system of reviews and appeals that let the Liverpool bomber stay. But the paper adds “… so when WILL she get a grip?” as it points to “hundreds more” asylum seekers risking their lives to cross the Channel. The Telegraph picks up on the theme: “Church under fire for helping asylum seekers to ‘game’ the system”, as does the Express: “Bomber abused ‘broken’ asylum system”. The Times says the bomber claimed to be Christian as a ploy to stay in Britain, so he could claim he would be persecuted if sent back. Its lead story is “Tory MPs set to revolt over ban on second jobs”. The Metro laments the “Poison at the heart of cricket” after the Rafiq testimony. The i has “Home care cliff edge: 100,000 at risk of sack over jabs”. The Financial Times leads with “Washington and Beijing agree to hold talks on nuclear arsenals” – another big story on its front is Germany suspending approval of the pipeline that would double its reliance on Russian gas. Sign up The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekendJewish leaders have strongly condemned repeated references to Nazi Germany amid heated debate over Victoria’s contentious pandemic laws. While protesters outside parliament wielded placards depicting the premier, Daniel Andrews, as Hitler, the upper house Liberal MP Wendy Lovell compared the proposed pandemic laws to Germany’s 1933 Enabling Act, which preceded the Holocaust. Earlier this month, the controversial MP Bernie Finn also depicted Andrews as Hitler in a social media post which he later deleted, and the outgoing president of the Victorian Bar association described the powers as something “Stasi police” would be happy with. The Jewish Community Council of Victoria president, Daniel Aghion, said the images drew a troublingly false equivalence. “The reason that the Holocaust was and is so horrifying is because of the unique nature of its brutality,” he told Guardian Australia. “The Nazis had the intention of wiping from the face of the Earth a race or religion simply because of what they were. “Nothing in the current proposals is remotely like that, and the comparison to Nazi Germany is therefore shocking, inappropriate and wrong.” The Victorian government is seeking to implement laws that would control how it responds to future pandemics, but critics of the bill have described its powers as too broad. It is expected to pass later this week with amendments. Aghion had not been aware of the specifics of the debate in parliament when commenting about his broader concerns regarding Nazi imagery. On Tuesday, Lovell, a member for Northern Victoria region, said that while she was not comparing members of the Andrews government to the Nazi regime: “I do think that we should consider the legislation that enabled the events in Germany to occur. “We cannot go down this path, and we should not go down this path,” she said. “We should never let a bad episode of history repeat itself. “We must learn from history, and we must also recognise that whilst the current government assure us that this is not how they intend to use these powers, and we accept that none of us know who may inherit these powers in the future or how a future government may use these powers.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Lovell also described the pandemic bill as the worst law she had seen in her 19 years in parliament, and said a Herald Sun cartoon that depicted Andrews driving a tank towards a protester, evoking the Tiananmen Square massacre, encapsulated how the government dealt with people who disagreed with it. The Victorian opposition leader, Matthew Guy, made clear on Wednesday that he opposed any depiction of the Victorian government as Nazis, though he did not specifically comment on Lovell’s speech. But Guy made clear he would not condemn any Liberal MPs who attended the protest, nor rebuke any of them for how they debated the pandemic laws, provided they did so respectfully and without invoking hysteria. Guy attended Zionism Victoria’s annual assembly on Tuesday night, only hours after Lovell made her comments, and said it was made clear to him during the meeting that Nazi imagery should not be used in any way in political debate. The federal treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, has also condemned the depiction of Andrews as Hitler. Aghion, who is a commercial lawyer recently appointed to senior counsel, also said that comments made by Christopher Blanden QC, the outgoing Victorian Bar president, about the pandemic law were inappropriate. Blanden told the Age last month: “Stasi police would have been more than happy with the range of powers if they were given it.” Blanden completed his term as president of the bar association, of which Aghion is a member, earlier this month. Aghion said Blanden’s analogy was wrong. “There can be a debate about the merits of the legislation, but Victoria is not remotely a Nazi dictatorship.”I was in a wheelchair when they brought me home at the end of September 2020. I had been in intensive care for 102 days. For the first two months my wife, Plum, had not been allowed to visit, instead receiving daily reports on my condition – recurrent delirium, two heart attacks, stents, kidney dialysis, pneumonia, memory loss and tracheotomy – all brought on by Covid. Three times she was told I wouldn’t be resuscitated if I suffered any further deterioration and she had come to dread the ringing of the phone. But only when I got home did I fully realise how much she and the families of other Covid patients had suffered. There is something selfish about being critically ill, although you don’t realise it at the time, when all your thoughts are of yourself. Doctors and nurses do everything they can to relieve the pain, but they never let you know that the smile they are wearing at your bedside may be masking their own exhaustion and fears. For the first month at home I hobbled about with a walking frame, but soon a physiotherapist encouraged me to walk with a stick, eventually going with me to buy my newspapers. One day she didn’t come, so I decided to go alone. Off I went on the 50 paces down the road and was just passing the bar on the corner, when … Bang! My face hit the pavement. The manager of the bar had seen me fall. Rushing out, he helped me into a chair, then called an ambulance. My face was a mess of blood. The no-clotting pills, which were now part of my 11-pills-a-day routine, were doing their job very well. There was no waiting in the A&amp;E department, my Covid history at the same hospital pushing me to the head of the queue. But it took hours for the bleeding to stop, during which time I was given X-rays and a brain scan before it was decided that the only real damage was to my self-esteem. For the next four months I never went out alone, and every night I would watch the Covid reports on television. There was a very good one about Michael Rosen, the children’s author, who had been in intensive care with Covid at the same time that I was, although in another hospital. Shared adversity seemed to make us allies, so I wrote him a tweet saying that if things had worked out just a bit differently he and I might have met at the pearly gates. To which he replied: “Yes, Ray, that would have been nice. You could have told me about John, Paul, George and Ringo.” (I interviewed the Beatles on many occasions when I was a young journalist.) By this time in my recovery, I was joking on the phone to friends about my “brush with the reaper” – until my children stopped me. “It isn’t funny, Dad. You weren’t there.” Indeed, I hadn’t been there. I’d been hallucinating my days and nights away. By January I could walk a mile, so we went to get my first vaccination. I had to stop and sit down on a park bench on the way, but it was a start. Fatigue still swamped me every evening, but the walking frame, crutches and sticks eventually went and I continued to get stronger. Then, just a year after I had been hanging on to life through a ventilator, I was invited back to the hospital where my life had been on the edge. This time, however, it wasn’t for more tests. I was there to cut a ribbon, make a speech and declare open the new intensive care unit. To stand with Plum and the medical staff who had saved me changed my attitude to everything. Such a moment wouldn’t have been imaginable a year earlier. I’m now 85% back to where I was pre-Covid. I still get tired at night, can no longer eat red meat or drink more than a glass of watered-down red wine, and I can’t run to the postbox, or anywhere any more. But I’m driving again and in every other way I’m fine. Until I was ill, all I liked to do was to work; writing was my hobby as much as my job. There was always another project. Now I realise that I’ve travelled in the US and France far more than in the UK. There’s so much here to do, so much architecture and country to be admired, so much gardening to enjoy, so many books to read and so many family and friends to see. I’ve been given a second chance. I’m not going to waste it. Ray Connolly’s radio play, Devoted, about his six months in hospital with Covid, can be heard on BBC Sounds.Over the last five years, Mayukh Sen has been writing about figures on the margins of the American food world. His profiles act as counternarratives to a food canon long unconcerned with the accomplishment of non-white chefs. His new book, Taste Makers: Seven Immigrant Women Who Revolutionized Food in America continues this theme by resurfacing the stories of outsider food figures, some of whom were disappeared by a ruthless restaurant economy and an indifferent media. Through the seven chefs, cookbook writers and restaurateurs Sen profiles – Buwei Yang Chao, Elena Zelayeta, Madeleine Kamman, Marcella Hazan, Julie Sahni, Najmieh Batmanglij and Norma Shirley – we see a shadow history of labor and food in America. Some of the women published foundational cookbooks such as Chao’s ambitious How to Cook and Eat in Chinese in 1945 and Batmanglij’s Food of Life, the definitive text on Iranian cooking, which she self-published in 1986. Others, such as Hazan and Kamman, had prolific and influential writing and cooking careers. Despite coming from different backgrounds, the common threads in each woman’s story are the private and public battles they fought in order to sustain their livelihoods and pursue their passions in the United States. In 2019 Sen, who teaches food journalism at NYU, was awarded the James Beard Award for his profile of Princess Pamela, a restaurateur and soul food cookbook author who vanished from the public eye in the late 90s. I spoke to him on the brink of the book’s release. What made you want to write a book about immigrant women in food? I noticed the pervasiveness of certain talking points within the American food media that were along the lines of, “Immigrants feed America” and, “Immigrants get the job done.” They were coming from white institutions, major food magazines, and I found them troubling because whether they intended to or not, they were re-centering a certain kind of consumer whom the American food media has privileged for so long. It’s a middle to upper-middle class, white consumer, who measures the value of immigrant labor based on whatever product they can provide. I wanted to combat that. I felt the best way to do that was to write granular stories about immigrants who had truly labored to shape the way that America cooks and eats. What patterns did you see as you were researching and writing about these seven women? All of them faced challenges to express themselves in creative and culinary terms and survive under American capitalism. Some of them were able to find their way. Others had to look outside the system. The two subjects I’m thinking most about here are Najmieh Batmanglij and Norma Shirley from Jamaica. Batmanglij came to America from France, where she had been living as a refugee around the time of the Iranian revolution. Back in France, she had written a French language Iranian cookbook, but then she moved to America because she realized that France is not necessarily the most hospitable place for her to raise her two brown children. Upon coming to America in the early 80s, she settled in DC. The Iranian revolution along with the Iran hostage crisis loomed quite large within the American imagination. When she sent out a proposal for this Iranian cookbook in the English language, she got either rejection or silence – the idea of publishing an Iranian cookbook in America in the early 80s was seen as anathema to major publishers. So she and her husband Mohamed began their own publishing house, which is not a simple undertaking by any means. They published her first English language cookbook, Food of Life, in the mid 1980s that today is seen as one of, if not the most significant English language cookbook on the food of Iran. By a similar token, Norma Shirley, who was from Jamaica, she made a living in the 1970s as a chef and owner of a restaurant in the Berkshires in Massachusetts. There she was, cooking what she termed French food with Jamaican flair. Then after a few years, she wanted to go to New York and open her own restaurant. Yet upon arriving there in the early 1980s, she had very little access to capital or investorsor the food establishment that would’ve allowed her to really make a living. So she went back home to Jamaica and she started cooking according to her vision. And that is when the American food establishment really started to honor her talents in a way that they were unable to when she was actually in America. How were these women viewed at the time by the food media? I did a lot of digging to see how the press rendered each woman or whether they rendered them at all. And sometimes the contrast was really stark and unsettling. I think the most prominent example of this, for me, is the story of Madeleine Kamman from France. She won a truckload of awards, including James Beard awards, throughout her career. She authored many cookbooks. She was a restaurant chef. She was a cooking teacher. She had her own public television show in America, beginning in the 1980s. Yet the press always framed her in terms of her perceived annoyance with the food establishment, and particularly Julia Child. Early in her career, Madeleine Kamman developed a reputation for being critical of Julia Child, who was seen as the authority on French cooking in America, despite the fact that she was not from France. [Child] would sometimes make comments that were dismissive of the talents of French women in the kitchen. These were matters that Madeleine Kamman took great offense to. Yet within the press, especially in the 70s and 80s, she often found herself characterized as the sort of agitator. It made me very angry to see this happen, because from today’s remove, it just seems so nakedly misogynistic, to position her as the instigator in some sort of “cat fight”. I wanted to make sure that with this book, I was restoring some dignity to her story, because so many books have been written about Julia Child and a good number of them characterized [Kamman] very impolitely. Most of the women you write about came to the US between the 1960s and the 1980s. Do you think that period has had an outsized influence in the way we cook and eat? I would say so. I think that a lot of it has to do with the loosening of immigration laws in the 60s. In Judith Jones’s memoir The Tenth Muse, she writes that in the 1960s, a new wave of immigrant cooks and chefs and food writers in America no longer felt constrained by the need to cook for American audiences in a way that would hide their heritage or the “true” cuisines of their countries of origin. This new wave of immigrants who come from many parts of the world and make a living from cooking, whether it’s through owning restaurants or becoming a food writer, or teaching. The women you feature in the book overcame many struggles in the US food industry. How do you think things have changed? I think speaking in terms of the food media, many of the struggles remain the same. This is still an incredibly inhospitable industry for people who belong to marginalized communities. I think it is still an industry that can be quite hostile to queer people like myself and I say this as someone who grew up pretty comfortably middle class, and has a degree from an elite school, and was able to gain easy access. I am a bit of a cynic in general about the ability of this broken machine to really repair itself in a meaningful or substantial way. I’m inspired by what Stephen Satterfield has at Whetstone, and the ways in which he is attempting to expand that company. I’m investing my hope in independent creators and publications who exist outside of this very concentrated system where certain institutions wield so much power and then dictate who gets access to capital and opportunity. Mayukh Sen’s Taste Makers: Seven Immigrant Women Who Revolutionized Food in America is out now.When I was 20 and straight out of teacher training college I took a job in a school in Connemara for a year. My friends were heading for the bright lights of Dublin, but after a childhood of caravan holidays along Ireland’s west coast I was drawn to the “wild mountainous country” of west Galway beloved of Oscar Wilde and countless other artists and untamed spirits. Instead of the indoor excitement of city life, I spent the year knee-high in bogs, scrambling up the Twelve Bens, island-hopping to Inishbofin and Inishark and pedalling along deserted roads to the show-stopping beaches at Glassilaun and Rossadillisk. A sign on the road for Rossadillisk beach read “Welcome to Paradise”. I learned to ride on Connemara ponies at Errislannan and on weekends I’d hitch lifts to random events in Letterfrack, involving local poets, map makers and sculptors who breathed life into this quiet corner of Ireland. With no advance planning, I’d find myself at the summit of Diamond Hill or spotting porpoises at Renvyle beach with a gang of newfound friends. Pit stops were made at Connemara’s iconic pubs, including O’Dowd’s in Roundstone for its famous fish chowder, Powers Thatch in Oughterard and Keane’s Bar in Maam Bridge, which has arguably one of the most romantic locations of any pub in Ireland. Somehow, I managed to find the time to teach a class of 12-year-olds, too. Aviators Alcock and Brown were also fans of this part of the world, choosing a bog near Clifden as their landing spot for the first ever non-stop transatlantic flight, in 1919. My class assembled a giant papier-mache model of their Vickers Vimy biplane, which we carried aloft down the main street to an exhibition about Alcock and Brown at the library. Stendhal syndrome was a condition in the 19th century, whereby travellers on the Grand Tour would faint or become dizzy when confronted with the beauty of Florence. Those of us who love Connemara can relate. It can feel like the world’s most spectacular wilderness: the endless expanses of bog, mountain, lake and sea completely dominate, and you soon realise that nature, not man, is king in these parts. The colours of the landscape, especially in autumn, are mesmerising, with the mountains and bogs seemingly on fire with multiple shades of ochre, rust and red. I lived on the Sky Road in Clifden, and during the long winter nights I began painting the orange hills and the endless lakes. Before long I’d somehow become an artist too, and I sold my first painting in a gallery in Galway. The summer holidays came, and after a year of being the youngest grownup in the village, I foolishly decided that there was more to life than the great outdoors, and I packed my bags and hitchhiked from Clifden to Galway for the last time. I moved to Sligo and then travelled around the world for a few years, before finally settling in Dublin. Thankfully, my Australian wife is equally enamoured with Connemara and, whenever we can, we pack up our car and head west. Something magical happens every time on the road from Oughterard to Clifden, which pass beautiful spots like Derryclare Lough: city lives get forgotten and the mountains cast a spell. Every autumn we would save up for a night or two at Ballynahinch Castle, the former home of Ranji, an Indian maharaja turned world-class cricketer who retired here to fish. We often set out to see if we could discover the truth behind the rumour that an elephant graveyard lay in the grounds, but the mystery remains deliciously unsolved. One summer we rented a house near Cleggan with three other families. Perched on our knees, our young children steered the group’s cars across the enormous beach that extends to nearby Omey Island at low tide. The final chapters of Maggie O’Farrell’s shimmering 2013 novel, Instructions for a Heatwave, are set on this tiny island on the Aughrus peninsula. Heatwaves being in short supply in Ireland, this is also one of the wettest parts of the country, and many days were spent building sandcastles in the rain at Dog’s Bay (where the final scene of Mike Newell’s 1992 magical realism movie, Into the West, was filmed) and diverting beach streams at Lettergesh (the location for the famous horse race in The Quiet Man). Rain-soaked ascents of Benlettery and Errisbeg near Roundstone haven’t put my son off mountain climbing. We took many wrong turns trying to find elusive Dunlaughin beach near Ballyconneely, which somehow has yet to feature in a major movie. This is one of the only surf beaches in Connemara, and its secret location guarantees few onlookers to witness my woeful attempts to master the near-impossible art of surfing. It’s hard to pick a favourite beach in Connemara, but after many years of traversing the coast we settled on breathtaking Glassilaun, almost at the mouth of Killary Harbour, Ireland’s only fjord. We spent Easter here once, at Dolphin Watch, a self-catering house with a deck overlooking Mweelrea, Connacht’s highest mountain. We drove past the house the year before and were stopped in our tracks by the view. (It was long enough ago that we scribbled down the phone number from a handmade roadside sign on the gate.) Inishturk island hovers on the horizon and further north the peaks of Achill and Clare islands are drawn across the sky. Dodging the abundant Lion’s mane jellyfish that have descended on this bay, my son and I love to swim out to the tiny island that lies just off the shore. If the sun shines (a rarity), the white sand and the green water almost take on the look of the Caribbean. Throughout lockdown I’d daydream about this beach constantly, and imagine breaking the 5km restrictions to ride out the pandemic at this shore. However, in all our trips west we somehow missed out on the very best place to stay in Connemara. Being drawn to the sea over and over, we had forgotten to explore the shores of Lough Corrib, one of the world’s great trout-fishing lakes. Driving past the jetties along the Glan Road, just north of Oughterard, we discovered the gates of beautiful Currarevagh House and promised to visit sometime. Henry and Lucy Hodgson welcomed us into their home like long-lost members of their family. Within seconds of our arrival we were feasting on homemade cakes with Henry’s mother, June, who filled us in on the hotel’s 130-year history and told of the times when a dedicated rail carriage would leave London bound for Currarevagh, such was its fame in the fishing world. While travellers slept, their carriage was rolled on to the boat at Holyhead and breakfast was served as they woke up speeding west towards Connemara. The world recedes here, and all that seems to matter is the giant view of the lake and the stillness of this very calm house. We recently spent three happy days swimming in the lake, eating kedgeree for breakfast and staying up late, drinkingwine. Henry has now installed a glass-fronted sauna in the boathouse with views across the lake. Armed with towels, water bottles and a box of matches, we fired up the stove, poured water over the coals, and looked out to a world where watery clouds merged with the lake.. Wilde described Connemara as a savage beauty: the ground is mostly rock, the famine decimated the region, people have emigrated in their droves ever since, and the land was never enough to provide adequate employment. Still, I sometimes regret that I ever left Connemara.For many, the overriding image of agriculture in the Amazon is one of environmental destruction. About 80% of deforestation in the region has been attributed to cattle ranching, tainting beef exports. Brazil’s beef industry hopes to tempt buyers back to the Amazon region, which covers about 40% of the country’s total area, with a new deforestation-free pledge. But critics are concerned it could effectively legalise deforestation in the region. In May, government officials began fleshing out the details of the so-called Amacro sustainable development zone, which it is hoped will lead to a massive intensification of agriculture in the Amazon. The Brazilian president, Jair Bolsonaro, is expected to greenlight the project later this year. The Amacro zone – an acronym taken from the states it covers: Amazonas, Acre and Rondônia – is a vast 465,800 sq km (180,000 sq mile) region in north-west Brazil. It encompasses the Mapinguari national park, Brazil’s fifth largest protected area, and the Kaxarari indigenous territory, where the tribe has struggled to defend its land against loggers. Greenpeace has identified the northern portion of the zone as an emerging deforestation hotspot. Previous agricultural development projects have led to the loss of vast tracts of native vegetation in other parts of Brazil, but Amacro’s proponents promise it is being designed to prevent illegal deforestation. Edivan Maciel, the former agriculture secretary in the state of Acre, says the aim is to produce more beef on land that has already been cleared. It is about “optimising what we already have without having to advance over the forest”, says Maciel, a Bolsonaro-allied appointee. But Humberto de Aguiar, a federal prosecutor in Acre who handles environmental crimes, told the Guardian that the effect of the plan is such as “to legalise the deforestation already being done”. Amacro is the brainchild of Assuero Doca Veronez, a powerful figure in Amazonian agribusiness, who told a Brazilian news site last year that “deforestation for us is synonymous with progress”. Veronez, a ranch owner and president of Acre’s Federation of Agriculture and Livestock, was fined for illegal deforestation in 2006. He denied any wrongdoing and said he sold the property in 2002. Veronez says more intensive cattle ranching will enable more beef to be produced on less land and protect against deforestation. He claims to produce about 2.5 times the state average for beef. “Amacro can contribute to the preservation of these areas,” he says. The idea that a shift to intensive ranching could cut deforestation in the Amazon is disputed by some researchers. It may be a flawed approach, concluded a University of California report in 2017, which noted, “the opposite could be true”. Judson Valentim, a researcher at Brazil’s agriculture research agency, says intensification is unlikely to change the system responsible for the breakneck pace of deforestation. Veronez, like most large ranchers, relies on a network of smaller producers, most of whom, according to Valentim, lack the technical and financial resources to invest in more efficient grazing practices. While ranchers like Veronez may avoid deforestation, their suppliers may not have the luxury to do so, says Valentim. Growing demand for Amazonian beef has tempted more local people to raise cattle as a viable livelihood for feeding their families, leading to a sharp increase in illegal deforestation. Gabriel Santos*, a small-time rancher from the Amacro zone, has been fined more than $130,000 (£96,000) for illegally clearing land in the reserve for grazing. But he says converting the forest to pasture is his only viable economic option. Because Santos’ farm has been blacklisted by regulators, he cannot sell cattle directly to slaughterhouses. So he sells to a middleman, who sells on to the big ranchers. If big ranchers become more productive, even if they do so without cutting the forest, it pressures the forest-razing cattle producers beneath them to grow their operations as well, says Valentim. Veronez says he has nothing to do with other people’s environmental issues: “I’m absolutely against this kind of control.” Although Brazilian law restricts most Amazonian landowners from clearing more than 20% of their property, lack of regulatory oversight helps to explain why 94% of deforestation may be undertaken illegally. “It is very difficult to stay legal,” says Santos, who has racked up half a dozen eviction orders because of unpaid fines. He says with an annual income of $10,000, he cannot pay. He hides when government agents come to his property and fears he will eventually be hauled to jail. He attributes a recent heart attack to the stress. “How am I going to support my family?” he pleads. “If I had another means of survival, I would leave. I only stay here because I have nowhere to go.” * Name changed This piece was produced in collaboration with the Food &amp; Environment Reporting Network, a nonprofit news organisation Sign up for the Animals farmed monthly update to get a roundup of the biggest farming and food stories across the world and keep up with our investigations. You can send us your stories and thoughts at animalsfarmed@theguardian.comNazi Germany’s elite schools, which were set up to train future leaders of the Third Reich, used British private schools such as Eton and Harrow as their models, a new book reveals. The historian Helen Roche has written the first comprehensive history of Nazi elite schools, known as Napolas. Drawing on research undertaken in 80 archives in six countries as well as testimonies from more than 100 former pupils, Roche discovered just how keen the Nazis were to learn from the “character-forming” example of the British system. Between 1934 and 1939 there was a blizzard of reciprocal exchanges between British and German schools, with boys from Britain’s most prestigious private schools spending extended periods at the Napolas. Roche, an associate professor at Durham University, said the Napola authorities wanted to learn from the British system, ultimately hoping to create a superior model for their own schools. While British private schools had been educating “the rulers of the centuries-old British empire”, Roche said it was envisaged “that the Napolas should train the rulers of the ‘thousand-year Reich’.” The first three Napolas were created in 1933 as a birthday present for Hitler by the then Prussian culture minister, Bernhard Rust. By the end of the war there were 40 Napolas, including four for girls. Roche’s research found the Napolas were much more effective at indoctrinating pupils politically than, for example, the Hitler Youth. That was because children attended from a young age and were highly segregated. They were tough places. One of Roche’s witnesses described the regime at Napola Rügen in Putbus. One common ordeal during the entrance exam, the witness said, was making 10-year-old non-swimmers walk 80 metres along a jetty and jump from a 3-metre diving board into the Baltic Sea. “We older ones brought them out again. No one should hesitate! The swimmers had to jump out of a third-storey window into a blanket. Anyone who hesitated could go right home again.” The sheer amount of school exchanges is eye-opening. Between 1935 and 1938 the Oranienstein Napola, for example, took part in exchanges with Westminster, St Paul’s, Tonbridge, Dauntsey’s and Bingley school in Yorkshire. It entertained headmasters and exchange teachers from Shrewsbury, Dauntsey’s and Bolton. There were also sport tournaments with Eton, Harrow, Westminster, Winchester, Shrewsbury, Bradfield and Bryanston. “The ideal outcome of the programme would be for Napola pupils and staff to learn how things were done in England, and then use that knowledge to improve their own educational techniques,” said Roche, who has been researching Napolas for more than a decade. August Heissmeyer, an inspector for the Napola authorities, often praised the British private school system as a paradigm par excellence of that “character-forming” education, which was the Napolas’ highest aim. Heissmeyer believed that “after such trips, the young man will see Germany with new eyes; he will return rich in experiences; his horizons will be broadened … he will detect weaknesses at home which he must help to remedy. He will learn to love his fatherland more deeply.” He also saw the largely independent role of the private school headmaster as an embodiment of the “Führer-principle”, said Roche. The Napola boys taking part in the exchanges were seen as being “cultural ambassadors” for the “new Germany”. Roche said many of the British boys and masters were impressed by what they saw in Germany, although attitudes changed as relations deteriorated. “We can see this exchange programme as providing a microcosm for more general attitudes towards the National Socialist regime by the middle- and upper-class British public,” she said. “Not wholly convinced by the aims and ideals of the Third Reich, but nevertheless prepared to give their German counterparts the benefit of the doubt, until Nazi belligerence reached its fatal climax.” • The Third Reich’s Elite Schools – a History of the Napolas, is published by Oxford University PressThe Lyric Hammersmith theatre is launching its first festival celebrating black talent, culture and creativity, featuring headline performances from the poet Lemn Sissay and the former Noisettes frontwoman Shingai. For the Culture – Celebrations of Blackness will take place over three days in the new year, with other events including a show by the drag diva Le Gateau Chocolat and a staging of the children’s show Josephine, celebrating the life of Josephine Baker. The festival, which is curated by Peggy Brunache, the director of the Beniba Centre for Slavery Studies at Glasgow University, Tinuke Craig, artistic associate at the Lyric, and Nicholai La Barrie, the Lyric’s associate director, is a response to the global Black Lives Matter movement that gained momentum in the summer of 2020. La Barrie, a Mobo fellow and theatre and a film director, told the Guardian there was a “moment of reckoning” after the death of George Floyd. “Every thinking, feeling human being was reckoning with what our response was going to be to that. We at the Lyric have a space available to us, we have a theatre, and we felt it was our moment to inject some joy and love,” he said. La Barrie, who took up his post at the Lyric in June, making him one of a small number of senior leaders at British theatres, said he wanted to celebrate the culture and the uniqueness of living in Britain as a black person today. He said: “How we feel about ourselves, our ancestors, our children. We wanted the weekend to feel like you’re coming to a friend’s house to hear some music, eat some food, have those conversations you have in the kitchen where you put the world to rights.” Although it has been more than a year since the killing of Floyd, the conversations around racism and equality were no less important than they were then, he added. “We all saw a man get murdered, and that sparked an emotional response. It gave an opportunity to people of colour to go, ‘look, this is how we feel all the time’. It wasn’t a flash in the pan, it was the beginning of a change in conversations and attitudes.” The theatre industry, he continued, has made “leaps and bounds” on the issue of diversity but it still had a long way to go. “I’m in my 40s and I’ve spent most of my working life being the one black person in the room. Now, I work with a team at the Lyric and we have every race, creed, gender and pronouns. I’m resident director on Tina the musical in the West End, which has a 90% black cast.” Certain companies still feel the need to have people of colour visible in their organisation while they only pay lip service to equity, he said. The festival takes place from 28-30 January, and a full programme will be made available soon. La Barrie said he would like audiences to take away the message that “our history as people from the African diaspora is not of pain only, but that we are joyful and magical and celebratory, and that when we get together, and we see ourselves reflected in each other, we are greater than we think that we can ever be”. Sissay said it was “wonderful to see this commitment to honour black creativity and culture and I can’t wait to be part of what promises to be a glorious festival”.I switched my energy supply from Utility Point to Orbit in May. I had a credit of £284 with Utility Point which was never repaid. It has since ceased trading. How do I recover the money? CM, London Soaring gas prices have killed off 18 small energy companies so far this year, so there will be many others in your position, especially former customers of Utility Point, which had a particularly poor record for returning overpayments. When a supplier goes bust, customers are transferred to a “supplier of last resort” appointed by the energy regulator, Ofgem, and it is this company which is responsible for repaying any credit accrued with the defunct company. It can then reclaim the cost from a scheme funded by an industry levy. Since you switched before Utility Point went under, you were not transferred to the supplier of last resort, which is EDF. However, according to Ofgem, those in your situation will still be refunded by the firm even if you are not its customer. EDF confirmed that it is contacting all Utility Point customers, past and present, who are owed money. It says: “EDF will honour any valid credit balances former or current customers have with Utility Point. We’re working hard to get refunds to customers as quickly as possible: however, this may take us a while.” SW of London has been doubly unlucky. “I was a Green customer,” he writes, “but I had just transferred to Avro when both companies went bust and Ofgem moved my account to Shell. Shell’s welcome email refers only to Green, but I have credit balances with both Green and Avro, so how do I get both back?” Ofgem confirms that Shell will pay you your dues from both. Email your.problems@observer.co.uk. Include an address and phone number. Submission and publication are subject to our terms and conditionsAustralian Baseball League club Perth Heat will pay its players in bitcoin, after partnering with a cryptocurrency payment company in a deal it claims to be a world first for professional sport. Heat players and staff will be able to be paid in bitcoin from Friday, while the club is also expected to accept bitcoin payments for sponsorships, merchandise and ballpark concessions on game days. “This is the first time a sports club has decided to go all in on a bitcoin standard,” the club’s CEO, Steven Nelkovski, told Guardian Australia. The bitcoin payments were not mandatory, Nelkovski said, but all current employees of the club were on board with the scheme. Should a player wish to opt out, they can still be paid in the traditional manner, with their salary transferred to Australian dollars and sent to their bank account as with any other direct debit process. There is also the option to be paid partially in bitcoin and traditional dollars. “We are giving the players the freedom to decide what is best for their unique situation,” Nelkovski said. “The entire process is very similar to the traditional payments process with one added variable which is how much of their salary they would like to keep in bitcoin.” Nelkovski said the deal did not need to be ratified by Baseball Australia, which has been supportive of the move. BA, the game’s national governing body, was contacted for comment. A new position of chief bitcoin officer has been created by the club – filled by Patrick O’Sullivan – to facilitate the new operation and the shift of “the corporate treasury” from dollars to cryptocurrency. “This is not a one-off purchase to hedge against future uncertainties or inflationary pressures,” said O’Sullivan. “The Perth Heat are embracing the reality that the future of money and corporate treasuries will live on the bitcoin blockchain.” In a team statement, the Heat claimed it was the first professional sports club in the world to “fully embrace bitcoin and the Lightning Network for payment acceptance and payroll for staff and players”. Several American sports stars are known to have elected to exchange a portion or all of their salary to bitcoin, but those payments were initiated by the players themselves, rather than from the top down. The Heat are one of Australian baseball’s most successful clubs and have won four ABL championships since the formation of the league in 2010. Nelkovski said he believed the sponsorship deal would enable the organisation to reach new levels of success both on and off the field. “We firmly believe that the mindset that bitcoin imparts on network participants will be felt by our players, coaches, staff, and our loyal fanbase,” Nelkovski said. The 2021-22 ABL season, which was initially scheduled to start on Thursday this week, was last month cancelled for the second straight year to due disruption caused by the Covid-19 pandemic.The NSW government will move to ban dark roofs as part of its push to deliver more sustainable housing and reach its target of net zero emissions by 2050. Speaking to the Committee for Sydney, planning minister Rob Stokes foreshadowed the policy switch to ensure all new housing has light-coloured roofing. He said recent University of NSW research commissioned by the federal government found Sydney’s ambient temperatures could be reduced by up to 2.4C if dark roofing was ditched across the city. A light coloured roof could reduce temperatures inside the home by up to 10 degrees during a heatwave. “This would have an enormous impact on the urban heat island effect in our city, and I will be asking the Department of Planning to implement this as part of our Net Zero Cities approach,” he told the Committee for Sydney on Wednesday. “There are no practical reasons why we shouldn’t be ditching dark roofing on new homes permanently to ensure that future communities of Sydney’s west don’t experience the urban heat that many communities do now,” he said. He also noted that in a new development in Wilton, in Sydney’s south west, the government had mandated back gardens be large enough to accommodate a significant tree. He said changes to design and environmental planning rules would help the state achieve net zero emissions by 2050. “A small investment now will reap enormous dividends in the future,” he said. “The cost of us not acting will be far greater.” Committee for Sydney chief executive Gabriel Metcalf welcomed the move. “Of all the things that can be done about the problem of living with extreme heat in western Sydney, the easiest is requiring light coloured roofs. This makes all the sense in the world,” he said. “Requiring developers to provide a real backyard that has room for a tree is going to make life for the future residents so much better, so we’re very happy to see that too.” Stokes’ announcement comes as Guardian Australia examines the future of Australian housing in a special series, which includes an in-depth analysis of why good planning and important infrastructure is often swamped by commercial imperatives. One of the conclusions was the need for more government intervention to encourage more sustainable housing. Stokes referred to the series in his speech and pointed to some of the changes the government was already implementing. As well as developing a strategy to deliver net zero cities in NSW, Stokes announced that the main tool used in NSW to assess the energy and water efficiency of housing, known as Basix, was being upgraded. The scheme works on a star rating which is achieved by using products such as thermal glass, insulation and solar panels, water tanks and plantings to achieve a score. “We’re proposing to raise the current requirement for new residential dwellings from 5.5 stars to 7 stars,” he said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Our proposed changes will save another 150,000 tonnes of carbon a year, helping achieve net zero by 2050,” he said. “This is equivalent to 31 wind turbines running for a year or enough electricity to power 27,000 homes.” But he said some of the best ideas for achieving a net zero city weren’t particularly new or exciting. “Exercising thrift in resource use, using trees or roof colours to regulate urban heat, designing streets to encourage active transport, and focusing density around public transport are all important strategies that will help us to achieve our goal,” he said. He rejected the argument that any increase in housing standards would lead to an increase in prices. “We’ve seen subdivisions and developments with small blocks, small apartments and high yields still result in outrageous prices for new homeowners,” he said. “If we don’t enforce strong sustainability standards for new homes, the prices will still go up regardless, along with the temperature,” he said. “We must take practical actions now so we don’t end up with a city with soaring temperatures, no shade and air-conditioners running around the clock,” he warned. Stokes said it was not just about new technologies, such as electric cars and batteries. “Too often we see myopic technological solutions that reduce the environmental impacts on one aspect of an urban system, while reinforcing the underpinning dependencies,” he said. The government’s new Design and Place State Environmental Planning policy will be exhibited later this year, he said.The police strike force investigating the disappearance of three-year-old William Tyrrell has charged a man and a woman over the alleged assault of a child. New South Wales police said information had been received about the suspected assault of a child during ongoing investigations under Strike Force Rosann, set up to investigate the disappearance of William in 2014. Court attendance notices were issued to a 56-year-old woman and a 54-year-old man on Wednesday, with the pair being charged with common assault. They will appear in Hornsby local court on Tuesday 23 November. Police refused to provide any additional detail but multiple reports said the charge did not relate to William himself. William disappeared seven years ago while wearing his Spider-Man suit at his foster grandmother’s home. The charges come on the third day of a renewed search for William’s remains, with officers combing the mid-north coast property where he was last seen. The NSW police deputy commissioner, Malcolm Lanyon, said investigators were committed to the active investigation. “The NSW police will not stop until such time as we’ve investigated every possible lead,” he told reporters on Wednesday. Police on Tuesday dug up the garden at the Kendall home, with a mechanical sift brought to the property. Officers also sprayed luminol, a chemical that detects traces of blood, during the night. In nearby bushland, volunteers cut down trees to help in the search. A grey Mazda was seized from a home in Gymea in Sydney’s south under a coronial order on 9 November. It was undergoing extensive forensic examination, which could take weeks. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Asked if police were investigating whether William died after falling from a balcony at the house, the police minister, David Elliott, said every option was being considered. “With a mysterious incident like this, every single option has to be investigated, every scenario has to be reviewed and tested,” he said on Tuesday. “Let’s hope whatever the conclusion is, (it) gives closure to the families and community.” The premier, Dominic Perrottet, said on Wednesday the signs and reporting coming from the police investigation were “very encouraging” and police were doing a “phenomenal” job. The police commissioner, Mick Fuller, confirmed there had been a significant breakthrough in the case, saying he was confident police would solve the mystery of what happened to William. “There is certainly one person in particular that we are looking closely at,” he said. The findings of a coronial inquest into William’s disappearance, which concluded last year, are yet to be handed down. A $1m reward for information on the case still stands.As a Country Road executive participated in a digital panel on ethical clothing for Melbourne Fashion Week on Wednesday, dozens of the company’s warehouse workers staged a protest outside a major department store selling the company’s clothing. Country Road Group (CRG) owns a stable of high profile fashion brands, including Country Road, Witchery, Mimco, Politix and Trenery. The company is also vocal on the subject of ethical supply chains, with the CRG website stating: “We’re committed to upholding high social, ethical and environmental standards in the supply chain, as well as empowering marginalised artisans through Mimco’s long-term partnership with the Ethical Fashion Initiative”. But employees at the company’s dispatch warehouse in the west Melbourne suburb of Truganina have accused CRG of falling short of those standards, after learning that the 150-strong, mainly female, workforce is being paid up to $10 less an hour than the predominantly male workforce doing the same job, directly across the road at the Hanes Bonds warehouse. The workers were preparing to strike on Monday, with the backing of the United Workers Union, after an earlier demonstration outside Country Road’s flagship store in Melbourne’s South Yarra on Sunday. The strike was postponed to allow all members to participate in a vote, with the union accusing the company of applying foul smelling manure to the gardens outside the warehouse on Monday morning, where the protest was scheduled to take place. On Wednesday the union issued an invitation to the public to attend a protest outside David Jones’s CBD store at 11am, the same time as a Country Road executive was scheduled to appear on a Melbourne Fashion Week panel discussing ethical fashion. The invitation suggested the public might wish to view “CountryRogue’s” latest collection, called Truth, which the warehouse workers would be “modelling” on a “pop-up runway”. The union’s logistics coordinator Mick Power, said CRG’s female workers complained they had been subjected to dismissive and intimidating tactics from management after questioning the pay gap. “Several insecure workers reported to officials that their jobs had been threatened if they participated in industrial action,” he said. “Examples include dictatorial Amazon-esque announcements made in staff meetings. “I have worked with some antagonistic bosses in the past, but the behaviour displayed towards workers at Country Road Group by managers is frankly disgraceful.” CRG sent a written statement to Guardian Australia on Wednesday, saying the company was working to deliver fair and sustainable wage growth to its distribution team and had always paid wages above the industry award rate set by the Fair Work Commission. The current offer on the table was 11% higher than the award rate set by the Fair Work Commission and provided a 2.7% annual pay increase for the next three years, the company said. “Country Road Group has strong female representation at every level of our business, including throughout our leadership and management teams. We are an equal opportunity employer, pay our team fairly and do not condone any type of discrimination based on gender or otherwise. “Regrettably, the UWU has responded to a fair and reasonable process by attempting to publicly discredit our brands and team members with false and baseless allegations. “The UWU has also engaged in activity designed to bully and intimidate team members who want to attend work. “Illegal picket lines have prevented our people from working and impacted the rights of our team. These actions are manifestly unfair to our team and we call on the UWU to respect the bargaining process.” The company said the manure incident was part of a “scheduled monthly maintenance program, that used fertiliser”. The union said CRG workers may begin legally protected action next week.Former deputy prime minister Michael McCormack has contradicted Barnaby Joyce’s claim the Nationals did not sign off on the final communique of the Glasgow climate summit. McCormack, the former Nationals leader, said any agreement the Australian government signs also covers the National party, and left open the option of the Morrison government proposing a higher emissions reduction target for 2035. Joyce earlier this week suggested the Nationals had not been a party to the final Cop26 communique that requests that countries re-examine and strengthen their 2030 targets when they return to the negotiating table next year for Cop27 in Egypt. “The Nationals did not sign it. I did not sign it,” Joyce told the ABC on Monday. But McCormack said on Wednesday any agreement the Australian government signed involved the National party, which governs in coalition with the Liberal party. “I’m not distancing myself from anything in that regard,” the former Nationals leader told the ABC. “Those questions have to be put to the current leader”. Asked whether it had been inappropriate for Joyce to distance the Nationals from what was clearly a government decision, McCormack said: “We’re in full agreement with the government and the government’s position is the government’s position we took to Glasgow”. Ahead of the Glasgow summit, Scott Morrison secured agreement from the Nationals to adopt a new emissions reduction target of net zero by 2050. The prime minister also sought agreement for an increase in the Abbott-era 2030 target, but that sortie was vetoed by Joyce. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The Morrison government supported language in the final Glasgow communique pointing to a review of the 2030 target before the next United Nations-led climate summit in Egypt. But in a statement issued in Australia shortly after Glasgow wrapped, ministers Marise Payne and Angus Taylor suggested the Coalition had no plans to ratchet up ambition. The statement said Australia’s 2030 target was “fixed”. Joyce has made it clear this week the Nationals will not support any increase in the 2030 target. On Tuesday, he said: “The Nationals have clearly stated that they aren’t changing the 2030 target”. “We’ve been honest and upfront about that … we’ve told you the truth about what our position is.” A number of Liberals had hoped Morrison would go to the looming election seeking a mandate from voters for a higher 2030 emissions reduction target, but the prime minister has ruled that out. Some Liberals are now urging Morrison to go to the election with a new emissions reduction target for 2035. McCormack left that idea open on Wednesday. He said setting a 2035 target would be “a matter for the cabinet going forward”. “We’re meeting and beating our 2030 targets,” he said. “Let’s see as we get closer to 2030 as to how well we’re doing”. “Of course, politics is ever evolving and we’re making sure that we do the responsible thing by lowering emissions but at the same time protecting the economy”. Joyce has also not directly answered questions about whether the Nationals would accept a higher emissions reduction target for 2035. He has given the impression Nationals would oppose an increase, but he has not been definitive. Asked earlier this week about the renewed 2035 push by Liberals, including Jason Falinski and Dave Sharma, Joyce said they were “great people” who represented an affluent metropolitan constituency. While avoiding a direct answer on 2035, Joyce contended the view of voters in Sydney was different to the “view you get in Singleton or Muswellbrook”. Joyce said Liberals and Nationals needed to represent their respective constituencies.Four of the 10 short stories in Huma Qureshi’s debut collection are set on holidays. In Summer, a grown-up daughter invites her mother along on a family trip to the south of France, with fraught results. In Foreign Parts, tensions arise between Mark and his wife, Amina, during a visit to Lahore. In Waterlogged, a tired mother nursing a newborn is irritated by her partner while staying at a genteel B&amp;B in Oxford. And in Small Differences, Tasneem feels alienated while holidaying with her boyfriend, Simon, and his family in Tuscany. This makes sense because holidays, whether with partners, children or extended family, can be flashpoints for conflict and realisation. When Simon wanders off with his parents, leaving Tasneem browsing at a market stall, she searches for them, alarmed, until she finally spots their golden heads, happily seated at a cafe and absorbed in conversation without her. Qureshi acutely observes how “she felt it then. Their sets of pale grey eyes upon her, innocent and uncomprehending small moons. There it was, the space wide between them. Simon and his parents on one side, and then her on the other.” On holiday, we betray otherwise carefully concealed anxieties. Perhaps it is the fatigue of travel that sparks irritability, or the discombobulation of new places that somehow more sharply illuminates faults that are usually overlooked. Whatever the case, it’s also true that short story collections, when the tales are neat and portable like Qureshi’s, are good company on travels. Things We Do Not Tell the People We Love feels like an excellent holiday book – making it a slightly odd release for autumn. Still, these are well told stories with well realised characters. Qureshi’s plots unfurl purposefully, sometimes to reveal a sting in the tale. Her concerns are domestic – first love, friendship, estranged mothers, discontented wives, families that fall apart, marriages that limp on – with the understanding that these are the things that matter most of all. She knows, too, that behind every relationship is some hidden wound, and she compels her characters to confront theirs. In Premonition, the very fine opening story, a chance meeting prompts a British Pakistani woman to remember a teenage crush. It floods her with an upswell of old feelings – lust, longing and something else more painful. It’s a story about first love, tenderly observed, which turns, just as things start to feel saccharine, into a more complicated reflection on consent and how sexual double standards can be reinforced by cultural prejudices. Qureshi’s trick is to write appealingly about teenage desire and then steer us into thinking about harder things. The book’s characters are Asian or in cross-cultural relationships, and yet race is only one aspect of their lives. Sometimes it lends a certain inflection to particular experiences. In The Jam Maker, a child is divided between Pakistani immigrant parents: her assimilated, charming and adulterous father, who works as a GP in an English village; and her betrayed mother, who longs for home. Qureshi is as interested in the emotional differences as the cultural ones, and so race is never obtrusive or overpowering in her narratives, only a true and realistic facet of the worlds in which her characters live. In The Jam Maker, what Qureshi really notices is the determined cruelty of an unhappy child and the unspoken forgiveness extended by the mother. It’s a different matter entirely for the daughter, Reem, in Summer, reluctantly holidaying with a mother who provokes guilt and fury equally. The two of them bring to the south of France a lifetime of recriminations and resentments, something perfectly ordinary but which manifests in a chillingly extraordinary way at the dramatic end of the story. You’ll need to read the shocking last paragraph again. Other stories in the collection are diligent, sometimes close to sentimental: a tale about a student friendship gone awry in adulthood and another about a couple coping with repeat miscarriages are sensitive, seem personal and yet are thinly written. Qureshi is feeling her way with this form, and it’s to her credit that so many of these stories succeed. It’s a form she clearly reveres, with the titular allusion to Raymond Carver, and there is a whiff of Alice Munro in Qureshi’s sadly estranged mothers and daughters. The most pointed clue, though, is the book that Tasneem delightedly discovers while browsing the market stall: a “nearly new copy of the Penguin Book of Italian Short Stories translated into English”. It’s a hat-tip to their editor, Jhumpa Lahiri – another writer of south Asian heritage quietly reimagining the shape of the short story. When Simon thoughtlessly leaves the volume to be soaked by rain in the garden, Tasneem feels her “heart dip like a moth falling away from a bright light”. Qureshi, like Lahiri, is a companionable and considered writer, and this is a collection you can read enjoyably, rain or shine. • Things We Do Not Tell the People We Love by Huma Qureshi is published by Sceptre (£16.99). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Just four days after landmark climate talks in Scotland in which Joe Biden vowed the US will “lead by example” in tackling dangerous global heating, the president’s own administration is providing a jarring contradiction – the largest ever sale of oil and gas drilling leases in the Gulf of Mexico. The US federal government is on Wednesday launching an auction of more than 80m acres of the gulf for fossil fuel extraction, a record sell-off that will lock in years, and potentially decades, of planet-heating emissions. The enormous size of the lease sale – covering an area that is twice as large as Florida – is a blunt repudiation of Biden’s previous promise to shut down new drilling on public lands and waters. It has stunned environmentalists who argue the auction punctures the US’s shaky credibility on the climate crisis and will make it harder to avert catastrophic impacts from soaring global heating. “Coming in the aftermath of the climate summit, this is just mind boggling. It’s hard to imagine a more hypocritical and dangerous thing for the administration to do,” said Kristen Monsell, senior attorney at the Center for Biological Diversity. “It’s incredibly reckless and we think unlawful too. It’s just immensely disappointing.” Even Biden’s Democratic allies have raised concerns. “This administration went to Scotland and told the world that America’s climate leadership is back, and now it’s about to hand over 80m acres of public waters in the Gulf of Mexico to fossil fuel companies,” said Raul Grijalva, chair of the House natural resources committee. “[The] lease sale is a step in the wrong direction, and the administration needs to do better.” There is no guarantee that all the leases will be taken up by oil and gas companies but the Department of the Interior, which oversees public lands and waters, has estimated there is as much as 1.12bn barrels of oil and 4.2tn cubic ft of gas available for extraction. A separate lease sale offered by the government in Alaska’s Cook Inlet will offer up another 192m barrels of oil and 301bn cubic ft of gas to drillers. Combined, these leases would result in nearly 600m tons of planet-heating gases if fully developed over the next four decades, which is more than the total annual emissions of the UK. The sale represents a “huge climate bomb”, according to Earthjustice, one of the green groups that has lodged a lawsuit claiming it lacks a proper environmental assessment. Biden has set a target for the US to cut its emissions in half this decade before getting to net zero emissions by 2050. Critics say a worrying pattern has emerged during Biden’s tenure, with his administration handing out drilling permits at a rate of more than 300 a month since his inauguration, a faster pace even than under Donald Trump. At the Glasgow talks, known as Cop26, the US also declined to sign on to an agreement to end coal mining, or to phase out gasoline and diesel cars. “It truly calls into question whether the Biden administration’s climate agenda is nothing but broken promises,” said Jeremy Nichols of WildEarth Guardians, an environmental group. Biden struck a defiant posture against the fossil fuel industry when campaigning for the White House, stating in a Democratic primary debate last year that there will be “no more subsidies for fossil fuel industry. No more drilling on federal lands. No more drilling, including offshore. No ability for the oil industry to continue to drill, period, ends, number one.” Once in office, Biden quickly moved to realize at least part of this vision, calling a temporary halt to the issuance of oil and gas drilling permits across America’s vast publicly owned lands and ocean territory pending a review into how they are conducted. Experts have said that the development of new oil and gas fields must stop this year if the world is to avoid more disastrous heatwaves, floods and other climate impacts, with fossil fuel production on America’s public lands causing around a quarter of the country’s overall greenhouse gas pollution. However, the oil and gas industries immediately objected to Biden’s move, claiming it imperiled jobs and risked pushing up energy prices, and a dozen states sued to lift the moratorium. In June, a federal judge in Louisiana agreed with the states and found that the government hadn’t taken the required steps to pause new leases. This courtroom setback has forced the Gulf of Mexico sale, according to the Biden administration. A spokeswoman for the Department of the Interior said it is “complying” with the court ruling while also appealing it and devising a better system to measure the emissions impact of oil and gas lease sales. Jen Psaki, Biden’s press secretary, said on Monday: “It’s a legal case and legal process, but it’s important for advocates and other people out there who are following this to understand that it’s not aligned with our view, the president’s policies, or the executive order that he signed.” But legal experts say the court decision doesn’t, in itself, prevent the administration from stopping or delaying a scheduled lease sale, or from scaling it back. “The Louisiana opinion doesn’t force the administration to move forward with any particular lease sale – the Department of Interior still has discretion over that,” said Max Sarinsky, a senior attorney at the New York University School of Law. “If they were to postpone, I’m almost certain they would be sued by oil and gas interests, but that’s another matter.” To many living on the Gulf’s coast, the huge expansion in oil drilling, reaching down through up to two miles of ocean into the seabed, raises concerns over a repeat of the numerous oil spills that have caused varying degrees of devastation to coastal communities and wildlife. “That’s a fear we live with,” said Anne Rolfes, director of the Louisiana Bucket Brigade, an environmental group based in New Orleans. “There are spills every year and nothing is done to stop it – all the technology goes into how to drill further out, not to clean up spills or pipeline repair. The industry is like a cancer, it’s just relentless growth. It’s disappointing Biden won’t take a firmer stance.” This article was amended on 17 November 2021 to correct a typo and the rate at which the Biden administration is giving out drilling permits.Inside a white-walled laboratory, an assistant dons rubber gloves and lowers a net into a water-filled tank taking up half the room. In a corner lurks a lobster. As the net approaches, the animal hurtles to the other side of the tank and back again. It evades capture for some time until it is finally caught and lifted out – only to stubbornly grip the net with its claws and plunge back into the water. “It’s a very resilient creature,” says Jean-José Filippi, an engineer at the Stella Mare laboratory. “These lobsters won’t be caught willingly. But they still need our help if they are going to survive.” Stella Mare is a marine research institute like no other. A sleek, snail-shaped facility on a peninsula jutting south from the Corsican city of Bastia, it was set up in 2011 by Corsica University and France’s National Centre for Scientific Research (CNRS) with a new idea for tackling overfishing. According to the UN’s state of world fisheries report last year, seafood populations caught at unsustainable levels have trebled – from 10% in 1974 to 34% in 2017. Efforts to cut overfishing have largely focused on tighter controls and policing, with limited success. Stella Mare has a different approach: breed species to be fished. The institute has bred sea anemones, which are delicacies in many Mediterranean countries, for three years and has distributed thousands of them in fishing zones around Corsica. Among many other species, it wants to breed European flat oysters, sea urchins, spider crabs and, of course, lobsters. Despite enforced periods of non-fishing, catch-size limits and outright bans on taking egg-bearing females, lobster numbers are still falling here. “The only next step would be a complete ban,” Filippi says. “But nobody wants that – we would kill the fishing industry. So we want to breed these species and put them back into the ocean and see if the stocks replenish.” The Mediterranean and Black Sea have the highest rate of overfished populations (62.5%), according to the UN report, and the lobster catch in Corsica fell from 300 tonnes a year in the 1950s to 61 tonnes on average over the past two years – widely seen as evidence of population declines, not of successfully reducing fishing. But despite being classified as vulnerable, fishing for Palinurus elephas, the red spiny lobster, has continued. Lobster accounts for 70% of fishing income on Corsica, worth €4m (£3.4m) a year, and experts say conservationists have alienated people making a living in the sector by failing to adequately involve them in efforts to tackle overfishing. “I don’t think there’s any doubt at all that the traditional forms of managing fisheries in terms of top-down setting of regulations and enforcement through policing is a difficult way to fight overfishing,” says Alex David Rogers, science director at the non-profit company REV Ocean and a visiting professor at Oxford University. He argues for collaboration between the authorities and fisheries representatives. Enter Stella Mare, a fisheries-oriented effort not just to restore the species, but to boost the local fishing economy. Laboratory reproduction could help make the restoration of species “easier, quicker and more durable”, argues Filippi, who leads the breeding programme, while allowing artisanal fishing – and the thousands of jobs it supports in Corsica, not to mention hundreds of millions around the world – to be done sustainably. So far, Stella Mare has received the firm backing of local fishers. “It’s a magnificent project that makes us very proud,” says Gérard Romiti, president of the Corsican fishers’ committee (CRPMEM). “The help of scientists and the University of Corsica gives us a new vision of the future.” In May Stella Mare announced a breakthrough. It had raised six juvenile spiny lobsters 83 days after the eggs hatched. An “encouraging” 50% survival rate was a “major scientific advance”, according to the institute. It had similar success with the European spider crab (Maja squinado): the institute has bred more than 1,200 juveniles this year, with more than 70% surviving. But lobster is the big prize. Building on work started in the 1980s by Japanese researchers, the Stella Mare staff are experimenting with creating ideal conditions for lobster breeding, including factors such as the form and type of tanks, the number of lobsters in each tank, the amount of sunlight and the acidity of the water. The gains could be enormous. The metabolism of the spiny lobster’s larvae is affected by temperature, so the speed of their growth can be accelerated under controlled conditions. It takes 12 months for the larvae to become juveniles in the Atlantic, five months in the Mediterranean, and just three in Stella Mare’s laboratory. Once these techniques have been honed, the institute aims to scale up the process and breed species in their millions, using specially constructed buildings to grow lobsters in tanks. It will not be easy. Previous researchers have abandoned their efforts to breed lobsters – the larvae are fragile, and lobsters have complicated dietary and sanitary needs. The major challenge is to feed the lobsters in a way that is effective and nutritious – yet cheap enough to be used on a large scale. “Everyone currently uses basically the same: standardised food made of crustaceans and plankton,” says Filippi. “But this doesn’t have the vitamins and minerals required for lobsters. It’s not suitable for them.” Others warn that breeding species outside their natural environment could limit genetic diversity in the ocean once they are eventually reintroduced. “It’s an important breakthrough and very welcoming,” says Marcelo Vasconcellos, fisheries officer at the UN’s Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO). “But there could be genetic effects of using lab-cultured or lab-grown lobsters and putting them in the natural population. You have to be very careful to not cause inbreeding effects.” Stella Mare says it is taking all necessary precautions and will study the genetics of lobster populations in Corsica before any are released. “This is a risk,” Filippi admits. “But we are specialists on this issue, and for several years have studied the question of genetics, adequate genetic mixing and monitoring of released populations.” Even then, reproduction in laboratories is only part of the picture for long-term sustainability. Alessandro Gianni, campaign director at Greenpeace Italy, points to the need for regulation on industrial fishing such as drift nets, the creation of marine reserves and conservation efforts at the regional level. “‘No fish, no fishermen’, as the old man’s saying goes. We must have these protections,” says Gianni. For Filippi, despite the obstacles, the project has the power to transform the future of sea life. “We have all this expertise that we’ve gathered about these species,” he says. “We are able to reuse this knowledge. We’re now capable of really innovating.”“Max Johnston, son of Queen of the South manager Allan Johnston, scored for the side against Raith Rovers. What other sons have scored for their dad’s teams?” asks Craig Wilson. “Blair Sturrock has scored for three different clubs that his father Paul managed,” writes Tom Aldous. “They were Plymouth Argyle, Swindon Town and Southend United. Another father-son combo would be Alex Bruce scoring for Hull in October 2015 with his dad, Steve, in charge. Meanwhile, Paolo Maldini scored three goals for Italy while his dad Cesare was in charge.” Tremendously, Paolo is now technical director at Milan, where his son Daniel Maldini opened his goalscoring account earlier this season. “Lee Johnson bagged a couple for dad Gary at Yeovil and Bristol City,” notes Chris Parsons, who also points out that “Luke Summerfield scored for Plymouth while his dad Kevin was assistant manager. Similarly, Frank Lampard scored a few while Frank Snr was assistant at West Ham.” Andrew McGill details the bizarre nature of one of Johnson’s goals at Yeovil … again involving Plymouth. “Lee knocked the ball back to their goalkeeper following an injury but accidentally scored; Gary then ordered his side to let Argyle walk the ball in. The game – a League Cup tie – finished 3-2 to Yeovil after extra time, with Lee scoring a hat-trick.” Rob Fielding takes us to Hollywood the Potteries. “Dean and Danny Glover at Port Vale. Long-serving defender Dean became the club’s manager in 2008 but it was an unhappy spell marked by fans’ protests against him. As a result, Glover Snr announced he would be stepping down at the end of the 2008-09 season. Some of the dissatisfaction in Dean was his perseverance with his son, Danny, who was proving to, ahem, be not such a lethal weapon up front. However, the pair did manage to end on a high with Glover Jnr scoring the winning goal in his dad’s final game as Vale boss – a 2-1 win over Barnet.” Jordi Gómez nominates several including Nigel Clough, who scored countless times under Brian at Nottingham Forest and Jordi Cruyff, who bagged 11 goals at Barcelona when his dad, Johan, was manager. Finally, James Morgan highlights a club-trotting father-son duo. “Charlie Stimson has been managed by his father Mark Stimson at Gillingham, Barnet, Thurrock, Waltham Abbey and AFC Hornchurch, scoring at the latter three.” Offensive footballer names (part two) As we expected you haven’t been shy in sending in more examples. Chris Greenhough writes: “In the early 1990s, J-League commentators would routinely tiptoe around using the full name of a new star signing at Grampus Eight. Unfortunately for the (very inoffensive) Gary Lineker, his first name was uncomfortably similar to the Japanese word for ‘diarrhoea’ – ‘下痢’ (pronounced ‘geh-ree’).” Yes, the connections to this are uncanny but Google Translate appears to tell us that Chris isn’t joking. “I recall when Celtic played in the 1974 semi-final of the European Cup, Atlético fielded a player called Ufarte. The wonderful commentator, Arthur Montford, insisted on pronouncing his name as Yooferty, denying us all the only hope of a smile on a grim night for football,” writes John B. A number of other readers nominate Nwankwo Kanu. “I was amazed no one had mentioned Leicester’s Austrian defender Christian Fuchs,” sniggers Mike Devlin. Meanwhile … “TV and radio broadcasters in Scotland around 1999-2000 did their utmost not to cause ‘offence’ when pronouncing the surname of Celtic’s £5m Brazilian flop Rafael Scheidt,” recalls Robbie Devine (and others). And Stig Wallerman points out a name which can offend in two languages. “Swedish commentators had trouble with a Korean player named Kuk, which is the most obscene Swedish word for the male organ. Instead they called him ‘cock’, the Swedish word for a cook.” Sacked managers of the month: an update Paul Begley has a very recent example that beats trigger-happy Watford’s dismissal of Vladimir Ivic eight days after scooping a monthly gong. “On 8 November 2021, York City’s Steve Watson was named manager of the month for October – he left five days later, with his injury-hit squad 11th in the National League North.” The official statement read “mutually agreed”, but we can include Watson here as it was widely reported as a sacking following the 0-0 draw with Curzon Ashton that included “ugly scenes” as Watson received abuse from supporters. Knowledge archive “While the Sporting B team are second in second tier, the first team is one point outside relegation zone in the top tier. What happens if unthinkable happens?” wondered Daniel Storey on Twitter in January 2013. We referred you to Annex Five, Article Seven, Subsections One, Four and Five of the Portuguese Competition Regulations, which state (roughly): i) A ‘B’ Team can never compete on the same competitive level of the club’s main team. iv) Regardless of the classification obtained by a ‘B’ Team they can never ascend to Liga I. They may, however, be relegation if their league place so determines. v) In the case of the first team of a club being relegated to Liga II, the ‘B’ Team automatically descend to the division immediately below irrespective of the points obtained during the season in question. So in the unlikely case of Sporting finishing in the bottom two in the Primera Liga, their poor B team would get booted down a division, regardless of where they finished. Can you help? “Has a team ever won the FA Cup (or another cup competition) with just 1-0 wins?” asks Alan Sheridan. “Declan Rice is now West Ham’s regular captain with a shirt number of 41. Has any other Premier League skipper had a higher squad number?” wonders Alan Fisher. “When Ipswich Town played Oldham Athletic last weekend, was it the first time that two founder members of the Premier League had met in the FA Cup first round?” muses Tim Edwards. “Italy played their 19th international of 2021 when they faced Northern Ireland. What’s the record for internationals played in a calendar year by a nation?” enquires George Jones. “In light of Ben Davies scoring his first goal for Wales in his 68th appearance, I was wondering which outfield player has the most international caps without scoring?” asks Paul. “What’s the highest level at which a team has had a completely pointless league season – no wins, no draws?” asks Charles Kaneb. “With Dean Smith newly appointed at Norwich, his first game will be at home to Southampton – two weeks after losing at St Mary’s in his final game as Aston Villa manager,” writes Simon Purkis. “Are there any other examples of a club facing back-to-back games against the same manager in charge of different teams?” Mail us your questions or tweet @TheKnowledge_GU.It was easy to see the drab 1-1 Wembley draw against Hungary in October as a turning point – or, at least, the moment when Gareth Southgate appeared more convinced than ever about how to set his team up, when he could feel clarity, a faith in his instincts. He had picked the team that most fans wanted to see – two progressive No 8s in a 4-3-3 (Phil Foden and Mason Mount) – and England were poor. By the end, Southgate had reverted to 3-4-3 with two central midfield bolts and he doubled down on the approach in this month’s ties, using it at the outset against Albania and even San Marino. It has reawakened the discussion about whether Southgate risks frittering away the attacking riches at his disposal but, to him, it is not about fantasy; it never has been. It is about stability and balance plus the ability to turn the dial in a progressive direction when required. Expect those tweaks against weaker opposition – Bukayo Saka at left-wing back, for example; Foden or Mount in central midfield. But can it win the very biggest games? Southgate is convinced it can, with the wing-backs fundamental. The talent is certainly there while the experience and ultimate pain of Euro 2020 will stand England in good stead. The excitement is palpable. DH Core Gareth Values mean double-bolt is a certainty The journey from 1-1 with Hungary to 5-0 against Albania has surely settled the way England are going to play. Gareth Southgate took a gamble in September, clanking off his trusty roundhead helmet and sending England out in a 4-3-3. This was a kind of Angry England Twitter select XI, with all the fun players on the pitch at the same time. Except, it wasn’t actually fun. England were less, not more fluent. The control Southgate craves wasn’t there. And so for Albania we went back to Core Gareth Values as England fielded a back five plus the double bolt central midfield. The attack was also the default option, Harry and Raheem +1, in this case Phil Foden. And that is surely it from here. England don’t have many more games before Qatar 2022. The Pickford-Maguire-Rice-Kane spine looks secure. England will play 3-4-3, with Reece James and Ben Chilwell the safe picks as wing-backs. And why not? Objections to Southgate’s achievements tend to be based in either personal animus, politics, or delusion. The players are good, if not obvious world beaters, but England have enjoyed a unique period of modern success. Southgate’s demeanour and methods are the key ingredients. Gareth does Gareth. This is the course. He will stick it out. BR Greenwood could be a Kane back-up England have become more technically proficient under Southgate, but they still need to be savvier against the best opponents. Ball retention remains an issue and Southgate has explored ways of improving his midfield during qualifying, although the undisciplined display during the 1-1 draw with Hungary last month was a reminder that playing all the best attacking players is not necessarily a recipe for success. England did not press well after leaving Declan Rice on his own in defensive midfield, with Mason Mount and Phil Foden as the No 8s. The lack of structure alarmed Southgate and he responded by switching from 4-3-3 to 3-4-3 against Albania last week. A back three can work with the right players. Ben Chilwell and Reece James are excellent attacking wing-backs and Albania were blown away in the first half. The worry is that the system squeezes out one of the creative players and another question will be whether it suits Harry Kane. Southgate will need alternatives if his captain is not firing. He should find space for Mason Greenwood. The good news is that England have an embarrassment of riches in attack. A lot of top forwards are going to miss out and Southgate’s task is to prove that he can come up with the right formula. JS England are serious contenders to win in Qatar England have won only 14 knockout games at major tournaments; five of those have been under Gareth Southgate. It’s a mark of his success that they can go to Qatar among the favourites. It could be that the draw is unkind or they have some atrocious luck and England go out in the group or the last 16 having played relatively well but it’s realistic for them to hope for the quarter-finals or beyond. This is not just a young and exciting squad but one that has depth in all positions with the possible exceptions of centre-forward and centre-back. As to whether England can win, that probably depends both on them being able to manage matches better if they do take the lead against big sides, and also on Southgate responding more quickly when the momentum of a game begins to turn against them. But these are not necessarily fatal flaws: they very nearly won the Euros – had Marcus Rashford’s penalty gone three inches to the right they probably would have. England are at least a serious contender and it’s a long time since that’s been true going into a World Cup. JW Manager’s choices will be under microscope for a year For the first time in a generation, perhaps more, England’s men’s team will go into a major tournament with genuine public expectations of victory. Quarter-finals are no longer enough. Semi-finals are no longer enough. That will add its own quantum of anxiety to Gareth Southgate’s team as they approach the run-in to Qatar: the knowledge that every little fissure, every selection quandary, every drab friendly victory will be scoured and scrutinised for signs that England are anything less than immaculate. The problem is that on the pitch, very little has actually changed since the summer. We already knew that England are brilliant at swatting aside weaker teams and yet curiously vulnerable against better opposition, as the draws against Hungary and Poland proved. We already knew that Southgate tends towards caution in big games, a strategy that exposes them to the vicissitudes of luck, big moments and penalties. We already knew that England lack the depth of France, the fluidity of Spain or the solidity of Brazil. But you can bet that over a giddy next 12 months, we’ll all find various ways to forget. JLWith winter approaching, it’s time to talk about the optimal Covid-19 strategy again – and for that, we need to look once more at what’s happening in South Korea. It has vaccinated 79.2% of its population with two doses, and, if it continues administering 220,000 doses a day, will have covered almost 90% of its population by the end of the year. Compare this to the UK, where 68.6% of the population has received two doses, and the US, where this figure is at 58%. If we compare deaths, the numbers are even more shocking. South Korea has suffered only 3,137 from a population of 51.8 million. For the UK, the corresponding figures are 142,945 deaths from a population of 67.2 million, while in the US there have been 783,575 deaths from a population of 329.5 million. In addition, in the first quarter of 2021, South Korea became one of the first high-income countries to see its economy recover to pre-pandemic levels, after it managed to only experience a 1% contraction in GDP in 2020 (the second-best performance behind China). How did South Korea escape the pandemic relatively unaffected economically, with deaths at such low levels, while now vaccinating at such a high level that it has protected itself from future waves of illness and harsh lockdowns? That’s the question we should all be asking, and a clear vindication of the “zero Covid” approach as the optimal short-term strategy. South Korea has attracted a lot of attention for following a specific “east Asian” playbook of maximum suppression: I wrote about this in March 2020, pushing countries to follow the “Seoul model”, and again in May 2020, laying out the key components of the strategy. This involved finding Covid cases through mass testing, tracing contacts, and supporting isolation to ensure chains of transmission were broken. This was supported by strict travel restrictions to prevent new cases being imported, and strong messaging to the public about wearing masks in public spaces, and the dangers of a new infectious disease. The government worked to protect its people (not to enrich its own interests) and the response was pre-emptive, organised like clockwork, and efficiently delivered. South Korea had experienced Mers, another coronavirus, and understood the dangers of a hands-off approach. As a short-term strategy, maximum suppression helped buy time for scientists to get to work, and therefore find a sustainable exit from the crisis. In 2020, it allowed numerous vaccines to be developed and approved, followed in 2021 by several promising therapeutics that keep people out of hospital and safer from descending into severe disease. Once these new tools became available, the medium- to longer-term strategy evolved, too. The next step after zero Covid has been a focus on vaccinating the population to a high threshold, and acquiring antivirals that can be given in outpatient care to keep the burden off healthcare services. The pivot from maximum suppression to mass vaccination was a rational and logical shift to achieve a successful transition out of the pandemic. The countries that followed this model – South Korea, Taiwan, and even their Pacific neighbours, Australia and New Zealand – are now managing to vaccinate their populations and protect both lives and livelihoods. Each person that wasn’t infected in 2020, thanks to these maximum suppression strategies, could live on into the phase we are now in: where vaccines and therapeutics are allowing people who catch Covid to survive, when they might otherwise have died. Mistakes have clearly been made in both the UK and US – in particular, a cynical fatalism that no scientific solution would emerge, that mass infection was inevitable and that there was little to be learned from other parts of the world. It’s the grim worldview that underscores the infamous words Boris Johnson is alleged to have said to his staff last year: “Let the bodies pile high.” It is never too late to learn lessons from countries such as South Korea, which pursued maximum suppression, and succeeded. Yes, there will be future outbreaks of pathogens with pandemic potential, and we are now working to prepare for these. Over the past six months I’ve been vice-chair of a National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (Nasem) commission advising the US government on how to prepare for the next pandemic, most likely flu. Our report is out next week, and looks at how we can move quickly from identifying new viruses, sequencing them, and getting testing, treatments and vaccines deployed within 100 days. A universal flu vaccine and pan-coronavirus vaccine are both on the horizon, and would mean moving even faster than that time period. Within those 100 days, all countries would hopefully focus on maximum suppression and follow the South Korean playbook of buying time for the scientific cavalry. Most of the deaths in the US and UK were preventable, and so was the economic contraction. In the UK we spent a long time debating what to do at the start of the pandemic, but it was always clear what had to be done: stop people becoming infected, without locking everyone in their homes. The challenge was how to do it, and to learn quickly from other countries that were managing to keep their economies open while keeping infection numbers low. Debate for the sake of debate costs lives and is divisive and confusing. Let us hope that next time we can agree on what needs to be done, and just get on with doing it – and that we have leaders who care enough about their people to make the effort. Prof Devi Sridhar is chair of global public health at the University of EdinburghIn Albrecht Dürer’s print The Sea Monster, a woman lies, quite happy with her lot, on the back of a bizarre beast as he swims away with her. He has a scaly body, bearded human face and antlers. Wearing nothing much but a necklace, she rests her hand on her curvaceous hip as she watches the people screaming from shore, in front of a fairytale castle on a craggy hill. It is weird and it is wonderful. It also captures exactly what the National Gallery’s foray into Dürer’s wanderlust is about – or would be if it worked. When Dürer engraved this, in about 1498, he was eagerly assimilating what he’d seen on his first visit to Italy a few years earlier. Born in Nuremberg in 1471, the son of a goldsmith, Albrecht had barely begun his career when he set off across the Alps for Venice. There, he found a sexualised culture in which courtesans played prominent roles, licensed by pagan mythology. But Dürer doesn’t just bring the Renaissance home to Germany. He wildly transforms it. The Sea Monster takes Ovid’s story of Europa and the Bull, and turns the (literally) horny male creature into a beast straight out of northern forest folklore. In a nearby woodcut, he portrays the Whore of Babylon as an actual Venetian sex worker. Not that Dürer was heteronormative. On his next, better documented, trip to Venice he admired the physique and style of soldiers. His German friends teased him for picking up the ways they attributed to Italian artists (“Florenzer”, Florentine, was a German word for a homosexual) and joked that he grew his beard to impress his apprentice. Unfortunately, not much of this comes through in Dürer’s Journeys. It sounds like a great idea – a micro-history of the Renaissance through the eyes of an artist who loved to travel, first to Italy, later to the bustling Atlantic port of Antwerp where he encountered people and artworks from beyond Europe. But it doesn’t tell that story well or let us feel the force of those piercing eyes. It is not so much a magical mystery tour as a sedate plod. It will impress traditionalists as a no-nonsense dive into art history, free from annoying wall texts that denounce the past – this show only alludes to the grotesque antisemitic caricatures in Dürer’s Christ and the Doctors by explaining that the evil scholars “were often represented as caricatures of Jewish people in this period”. Well, clearly there’s no possible modern resonance to this hatred of Jews in an artist who came from Nuremberg. For all its apparent seriousness this exhibition fails to take you to the heart of Dürer. It even made me doubt my adoration of his art. The old-fashioned fustiness – some of the rooms are painted brown and brick as if to make you feel you are in a dusty library – can’t hide a lack of clear argument. The trouble starts before Dürer even sets out. However far he travelled he always came back to his starting point, Nuremberg. Yet we don’t get much sense of what life was like there: the walled community with its prayers and festivals; the local market where Dürer wasn’t too proud to let his mother flog his woodcuts. That lack of any sense of place pervades a big room about his second trip to Venice. You have to pinch yourself to realise that Giorgione painted his provocative bare-breasted Portrait of a Young Woman (Laura), in Venice when Dürer was there in 1506, and Titian was making his bones as Giorgione’s young rival. To judge from the assortment of drab paintings you can’t tell why Dürer went there or what there was to see. For all its ostentatious scholarly air this exhibition misses the point of Dürer’s journeys to Venice completely. It was this: as well as being thrilled by the freedom and sensuality of Venice, what struck Dürer in Italy was a new idea of the artist. Leonardo da Vinci, Michelangelo and Raphael were hitting the heights as well as Giorgione. With all these geniuses around someone needed to define genius itself – to consciously portray the artist, no longer as a servile artisan like Dürer’s father, but a godlike spirit of mysterious creative powers. It was Dürer, seeing the Italian Renaissance from outside, who worked this out. He’s the first artist who was conscious of living in a Renaissance – and who explicitly advances the idea of the modern artist, the genius. That is nearly lost here. But you can see it in his print Melencolia I, lent from the Fitzwilliam, Cambridge. In this unforgettable image Dürer personifies genius as a woman with her face in shadow, resting her head on her hand as she sits paralysed among mathematical and sculptural tools. It is a deeply insightful interpretation of his Italian contemporaries Leonardo and Michelangelo who took pride in not finishing art, as it proved they were free minds, not craftsmanlike hacks. Dürer celebrates the creative melancholy of the genius awaiting inspiration. Then we’re off to Antwerp and Brussels. But the freshness and immediacy of Dürer’s own journal of his trip to the North Sea is totally drowned out by a pedantic array of drawings. And really, couldn’t the National Gallery have let its hair down to bring this long-ago age to life? I am not calling for a theme park boat trip up the Rhine but couldn’t they at least have brought in some objects to give a sense of the wonder of it all? For it was in the low lands that Dürer saw the golden, turquoise and feathered treasures of Moctezuma, sent as booty by Cortés to the new Emperor Charles V. He was amazed and humbled, writing of his admiration for “the craftsmen of distant lands”. It is the most fulsome tribute a European Renaissance artist ever paid to extra-European art. Some Aztec art from the British Museum would have set this show alight. It’s currently fashionable to attack exhibitions that pull the past uncomfortably into the present, that remind us that 18th-century Britain had a slave trade. But the past can also be killed by conservatism disguised as rigour. At times I lost sight of Dürer here. Travelling along the North Sea coast, he writes in his journal, he got trapped with other passengers on a boat that was suddenly pulled out to sea by a gale. While everyone stood paralysed, he took charge and commanded the vessel until they safely reached shore. With each exhibition that buries the excitement of the Renaissance as this one does, this dazzling age gets further away, as if Dürer had not saved that ship and we saw his strong features fade in the mist, receding not with a cancellation but a respectful whimper. Dürer’s Journeys: Travels of a Renaissance Artist is at the National Gallery, London, from 20 November to 27 February.Two months into the pandemic, Casey Harrell was diagnosed with the neurodegenerative disease amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). The 43-year-old climate activist started noticing symptoms in 2019, shortly after the birth of his daughter, Aya. At first, a doctor thought he had a muscle-twitching condition that would go away on its own. Then, he tested positive for Lyme disease, which can mimic the early symptoms of ALS. But, as the world closed down to stop the spread of Covid-19, neurologists concluded his worsening limp and cramps were the early signs of the muscle-wasting illness, for which there is no cure. He could expect to live between two and five more years. After a short break, Harrell threw himself back into his work, pushing for BlackRock, the biggest asset manager in the world, to use its financial might for the benefit of the planet. “This is an all-hands-on-deck moment in human history. Everyone that can should be fighting for a livable climate and a healthy biosphere,” says Harrell. “My ALS diagnosis has not changed that at all, it has only reinforced within me [the need] to do the work with urgency because my ALS clock may mean that I do not live as long as I had hoped I would.” BlackRock’s Big Problem (BBP), the campaign Harrell co-designed and launched in September 2018 with a coalition of NGOs, has played a key role in capitalism’s ongoing environmental reformation, pressuring the firm and its CEO founder, Larry Fink, to take the climate crisis more seriously. Although relatively unknown outside financial circles, BlackRock, together with its rivals Vanguard and State Street, are the largest shareholders in almost every major company in America – as well as being major investors in a number of non-US companies too – by virtue of managing other people’s money, from oligarchs to traditional “mom-and-pop” investors. Their votes on board members are often influential, as are their positions on social issues, from the environment to gun ownership. Through BBP, Harrell and his network targeted the apparent disconnect between Fink’s public comments on the climate and the asset manager’s actions. The 69-year-old had positioned himself as the conscience of Wall Street in the years since the financial crisis, as BlackRock has expanded at a ferocious pace. Last October, he dined with the Queen and the prime minister at the UK Global Investment Summit and attended Saudi Arabia’s flagship investment conference, often referred to as “Davos in the Desert”, a key part of Mohammed bin Salman’s rebranding of the kingdom. He also attended Cop26 in Glasgow and was a speaker at the parallel Green Horizon Summit. Fink’s annual letter to chief executives in January tries to set the tone of the year ahead and, in 2018, he told business leaders to contribute to society or risk losing BlackRock’s support, written up in the New York Times as “a watershed moment for capitalism”. Profit was no longer enough. Tariq Fancy, who was BlackRock’s chief investment officer for sustainable investing when BBP launched, said the campaign had an impact at the highest level of the company. He has recently denounced his former employer’s green credentials, insisting the sustainable investing products he used to oversee are a dangerous distraction from real action. “[BBP] challenged the narrative that had been developing since Larry’s letter in 2018 that BlackRock was on the right side as a climate crusader.” However, the asset manager continued to overwhelmingly oppose shareholder motions calling for climate action at fossil fuel companies and other major polluters. BBP – born through discussions between John Hepburn, head of The Sunrise Project, an Australian NGO, and Harrell – sought to highlight this mismatch, targeting like-minded employees at the asset manager. Three years on, the AGM season on Wall Street has become the frontline of climate campaigning. Fink has put action on global heating at the core of BlackRock’s investing operation and his annual letters have become progressively more focused on the climate. On 26 May this year, dubbed “Black Wednesday” for the oil and gas industry, BlackRock voted to oust two ExxonMobil board members in favour of candidates pushing for the company to take the climate crisis seriously. The same day, more than 60% of Chevron shareholders backed a motion for the company to cut emissions. But as BlackRock edges towards the incomprehensible milestone of $10tn assets, with sustainability now at the heart of its business strategy, Harrell is close to losing the ability to speak. The unassuming, obsessive strategist now uses a wheelchair and can no longer pick up or play with his daughter. Once known for his ability to hold a room’s attention with powerful monologues, he is sometimes inaudible and is forced to condense his thoughts into short sentences. Simple tasks have become lengthy and painful, and the fear of another loss of bodily function loss lurks. The motor neurone connection to his diaphragm has degraded to the point where he can no longer continue in a promising drug trial. A team of friends and neighbours coordinate his care via a WhatsApp group, helping him eat, write emails and condense long-winded anecdotes, which Harrell perseveres with regardless of his illness. “There’s a moment every morning before I try to move when I wake up and I forget I have ALS. It’s the best moment of the day,” says Harrell. But there is no suggestion he is going to stop campaigning. In March, BBP announced it was turning its attention to Vanguard, the second largest asset manager on Wall Street, overseeing a mere $7tn of assets, and a big investor in coal in the world. “Vanguard’s Very Big Problem” is likely to be his last campaign, devised with his colleague Diana Best, Harrell’s “all-time favourite co-conspirator”. Fink’s equivalent at Vanguard, Tim Buckley, is publicity shy and Harrell thinks he is intentionally “boring”, presenting a comfortable, uncontroversial image that they are preparing to challenge. Vanguard has said it is involved in the in the Net Zero Asset Managers initiative, adding that: “Our experience shows that engaging with boards and companies as they work through the transition to a decarbonised economy can reduce climate change risk and deliver more long-term sustainable value.” Harrell insists BBP is not done with BlackRock but he is satisfied with the firm’s direction of travel. BlackRock has said it will announce before the end of the year a 2030 net-zero policy and what percentage of assets it will cover (BPP is advocating for 100%). Any deviation would ruin Fink’s legacy, he thinks. “There’s a dominant narrative that, to create change, there’s a hero, the hero does the one thing and the one thing creates the change. That’s utter bullshit,” says Harrell’s wife, Levana, an educator and equity consultant, as well as Harrell’s primary carer. “It takes mass mobilisation, and mass mobilisation takes intense effort.” The couple and Aya moved from their home in Oakland to a flat after he started to struggle with the stairs. “As much as it hurts, I also care about the planet. I want to see him win.” *** Harrell could easily have found himself sat in the chairs of the executives he now holds to account. A valedictorian at high school, he studied at Duke University, opting against a place at Brown University and the outside chance of a career in major league baseball. Instead, he immersed himself in student activism – testifying in Congress as part of the Students Against Sweatshops campaign. In 2002, as a young Greenpeace activist, Harrell attempted a citizen’s arrest on Warren Anderson, the former CEO of Union Carbide, who, at the time, was facing homicide charges in India in connection with more than 14,000 deaths following leaks from the company’s pesticides plant in Bhopal in 1984. More recently, he co-led a campaign to get Facebook, Google and other Silicon Valley behemoths to drop coal power and use 100% renewable energy for their datacentres. They all ultimately succumbed to the campaign demands. A few weeks after his diagnosis, those closest to Harrell were asked to live with two contradictory truths: that he will somehow ride the wave of new drug discoveries, improve and recover, while also knowing his body will most likely fade away. The outlook for someone with the disease in the US, where it is known as Lou Gehrig’s disease, has not improved since Gehrig, a former New York Yankee first baseman, died from the condition in 1941. Harrell also advocates for access to drug discoveries that could slow or halt the progression of ALS and even form a bridge to a future cure. He has mapped out a series of drug trials and bureaucratic changes that he thinks could give him and others more time. He is also intensely frustrated with the US Food and Drug Administration and the ALS Association, the $100m beneficiary of the Ice Bucket challenge, for what Harrell says is their slow pace of action on the disease. “If the FDA does not change, I will likely die or become fully paralysed,” he says, pointing to the campaign started by the former Obama staffer Brian Wallach, I AM ALS, as another example of the need for change. “Groups [like the ALS Association] are not effective, are not growing, and need to either change and evolve or get out of the way.” There are currently only two therapies for ALS approved by the FDA: riluzole, which made Harrell feel sicker, and only extends life by two to four months, and Radicava (edaravone), which is not approved for use in Europe. Currently, he uses neither, and thinks there are more promising options in development. He wants the FDA to change drug trial rules to account for how quickly the disease progresses, as well as the diversity of ALS. Many patients become so sick that they are unable to take part in trials, making it hard for studies to reach FDA mandates on trial sample size. “This generation of people with ALS are not going to be content raising money for the ice bucket challenge while they are dying waiting for access to drugs that work now,” he says. “If we knew more about ALS, then we could target therapies to the subtypes. Ironically, one of the best ways to learn about these subtypes would be to approve drugs that work for some and then study why they work for some but not others with ALS. That would also be the humane thing to do.” *** One day too soon, it is likely ALS will force Harrell to stop his campaigning. At the start of our interviews in spring this year, Harrell could only speak in a staccato version of our first conversation in 2019, when his limp was starting to develop. Now, he is about to start learning to use Eyegaze – eye-tracking software – that will help him speak though a computer at a maximum of 20 words a minute. A side-effect of ALS known as PBA – pseudobulbar affect – means that Harrell sometimes loses control when he laughs or cries, frightening his daughter during quiet hugs and tender moments when the sadness breaks through. As she has gotten older, she has been better able to understand his condition and wants to help care for him. “A toddler is really good at keeping you in the moment, but we may be having a moment together and I think: ‘How many more of these might I have?’ I start to tear up and that’s confusing for her,” he says. “No kid should have to deal with that. I feel a deep sadness that, although this is unavoidable, it will certainly traumatise her. At the same time, [she is] a tremendous inspiration to live and live well.”And with that, we are going to put the blog to bed. As always a totally pleasure going through the day’s news with you. Before we bounce, let’s go through the big ones: The New South Wales town of Forbes was flooded. Labor announced its first election promise: to revamp the country’s broadband. Residential mental health facility capacity for young people to be doubled in Victoria. Daniel Andrews said “he won’t be deterred” by protesters’ threats. NSW premier Dominic Perrottet said he was hopeful of a breakthrough in the William Tyrrell case, after police seized a car. Victoria records 996 new Covid-19 cases and nine deaths, NSW records 231 new cases, no deaths, and no cases in Queensland. Many of the 12,000 people stranded interstate “are just waiting” for Queensland to scrap Covid-19 quarantine. Liberal senator Andrew Bragg has dodged questions on whether or not he went “rogue” in announcing a parliamentary inquiry into the ABC. Roger Federer to miss Australian Open as he recovers from knee surgery. We will be back tomorrow to do it all again - until then, go well. Roger Federer has announced he will not play in the Australian Open as he continues recovery from his recent knee surgery. As a Country Road executive participated in a digital panel on ethical clothing for Melbourne Fashion Week on Wednesday, dozens of the company’s warehouse workers staged a protest outside a major department store selling the company’s clothing. CRG owns a stable of high profile fashion brands, including Country Road, Witchery, Mimco, Politix and Trenery. Liberal senator Andrew Bragg has dodged questions on whether or not he went “rogue” in announcing a parliamentary inquiry into the ABC’s complaint’s process during an interview with the ABC. The Oz reported earlier this week that Bragg was “rapped over the knuckles” by the prime minister’s office for going public with the inquiry, and reported “senior coalition” figures were furious Bragg had made it a political issue. ABC Chair Ita Buttrose didn’t hold back in responding to the inquiry, saying it amounted to “political interference” with the national broadcaster, given it has announced an inquiry into the complaints process before an independent inquiry already ordered by the board returns its findings. Scott Morrison backed the inquiry when asked about it earlier this week, by saying no one was above the scrutiny of the Senate (which ignores all the ministers who have failed to produce documents as ordered by the senate, by claiming ‘cabinet in confidence’). Bragg, for his part, wouldn’t answer whether or not he had gone “rogue” when pressed on the Australian report by Patricia Karvelas this afternoon. Directly asked if he had gone rogue, Bragg said: “Well, the senate is required under the constitution to perform a review function and the senate is performing that function in relation to a range of government bodies at the moment through the legislation committees. This is a new inquiry that I think can add a great deal to this. Asked again, Bragg deflected by saying: “I’m not sure what you mean about the Senate going rogue? The Senate reviews government agencies all the time.” Asked a third time about the report in the Australian, Bragg answered: “I’m not going to go into private conversations. I don’t think you’d expect me to do that. Of course, I consult with colleagues. The Senate has a role under the Constitution to perform a review function. And I think you would generally welcome that, given it’s been able to provide scrutiny of government departments, scrutiny of government agencies and it does that on a regular basis most notably through Senate estimates. Scott Morrison’s ‘can-do capitalism’ is a hypocritical example of ‘do nothing’ leadership, writes Amy Remeikis. Human rights advocates have welcomed the inclusion of concerns about self-censorship in new guidelines against foreign interference in universities. The federal government today released a new version of guidelines developed by the university foreign interference taskforce - a body that includes government agencies and the higher education sector. The new guidelines say “attempts to inappropriately influence academic discussions or public statements made by members of the university community can lead to self-censorship, and conflicts with the principle of academic freedom”. The document says universities should put in place policies and procedures to manage the risk of foreign interference, including “harassment and intimidation that can lead to self-censorship”. Human Rights Watch - which has previously published a report on self-censorship on matters related to China - welcomed the new guidelines. The group’s Australia researcher, Sophie McNeill, said in a statement: “These new efforts to ensure universities have policies in place to counter state-backed harassment and intimidation are long overdue and have the potential to make a real positive difference on the lives of students and academics. “The Taskforce’s acknowledgement of the corrosive impact of self-censorship on Australian university campuses and the need to introduce new measures to counter that, is a welcome development. We agree that new education programs highlighting the impact of intimidation and harassment on academic freedom and freedom of speech need to be put in place by universities and we call for those to be implemented as soon as possible.” From AAP: Australia’s Human Rights Commission has issued a set of guidelines designed to stamp out racism in crowds at sporting events. Major professional sports organisations including the AFL, Cricket Australia, Tennis Australia and some of the nation’s largest stadiums have already endorsed the Spectator Racism Guidelines, and more are expected to sign on. Among the 13 guidelines released on Wednesday, players will be encouraged to report racial abuse in the crowd and even stop play to alert authorities, while there is a recommendation for culturally sensitive counselling and social support services for targets of racism. They include a number of proactive measures to prevent racism from occurring. The framework is the result of consultation hosted by the Australian Human Rights Commission with professional sporting codes, clubs, players, venue operators and anti-racism experts. Race discrimination commissioner Chin Tan said the commission spearheaded the development of these guidelines in response to numerous incidents of spectator racism over the past year. “When racist incidents happen they can have a long-lasting impact on those affected and damaging social consequences. There is no place for racism anywhere and that includes sport,” Commissioner Tan said in a statement. Victorian MP Fiona Patten has been pushing for a Minister for Loneliness since 2018 - and it looks like she’s finally got it. “A Minister for Loneliness will help address this issue at a state level and introduce an integrated approach to tackle social isolation,” she previously said. “For every policy that is introduced, we will have someone asking the questions ‘how does this impact people’s ability to connect. This is about driving action on loneliness across all parts of the community.” Warm oceans, unusual currents and strange weather patterns have coincided with an outbreak of disease that has forced the closure of South Australia’s Coffin Bay farms. Health authorities have said they would now investigate whether climate change was a factor in the spread of Vibrio parahaemolyticus in oysters, which has been linked to 45 cases of gastroenteritis since September. Undercooked shellfish and fish can carry Vibrio, which in turn can cause diarrhoea, vomiting, cramps, fever and headache. Raw oysters are often the cause of Vibrio infection. Australia’s second-biggest debt management company made threats against clients, including telling them they could go to prison if they spent money at McDonald’s, the corporate regulator has alleged. In documents filed with the federal court on Tuesday, the Australian Securities and Investments Commission accused A&amp;M Group, which trades as Debt Negotiators and promotes itself as a “reputable debt help company who uses our knowledge and expertise to help you get out of debt”, of breaking the law by harassing or coercing customers. Scientists have investigated the links between the Covid-19 pandemic and the deterioration of the world’s ecosystems and their biodiversity, discovering feedback loops that suggest a potential increase in future pandemics. Odette Lawler is collaborating with a team of students and fellows contributing to the study in the University of Queensland’s Biodiversity Research Group. Lawler said that the links between biodiversity loss, habitat degradation and zoonotic disease transfer had long been understood, but it’s taken an international pandemic to bring the issue to public attention. “Covid-19 has shown the world that human health and environmental health are intricately linked,” Lawler said. “We’ve long known that issues like land-use change, intensive livestock production, wildlife trade, and climate change drive the emergence of zoonotic diseases, as they increase human-wildlife interactions. “Now we’ve also found that these issues are being compounded by outcomes of the Covid-19 pandemic, resulting in feedback loops that are likely to promote future zoonotic disease outbreaks. “For example, research has found that rates of deforestation have substantially increased in many regions around the world over the course of the Covid-19 pandemic.” NSW health minister Brad Hazzard has hit out against suggestions he wants to implement over-reaching new pandemic powers. Hazzard, on behalf of Chief Health Officer Kerry Chant, sought to extend Covid-19 provisions on Tuesday. But Premier Dominic Perrottet scrapped the proposed changes, saying he would defer the decision on extending or changing any of the state’s emergency pandemic powers to next year. On Wednesday Hazzard defended the changes, saying: “far from granting additional powers, the powers are exactly the same as exist now and are simply tweaks on timing for two provisions in the massive Public Health Act”. We’ve got floods in NSW and now fire danger in Victoria ... all very cool and not concerning Greg Hunt has talked up the ‘safeguard mechanism’ within the Coalition government’s climate policy as a good way to get companies to cut their emissions. But on Wednesday emissions reduction minister Angus Taylor said it was never meant to force businesses to reduce their emissions. So which is it? Peter Hannam explains. From AAP: New Zealand will dismantle the hard border around Auckland in time for Christmas, allowing separated Kiwis to reunite over the holidays. However, police will fine any unvaccinated citizens who attempt to leave the country’s biggest city, undertaking random spot checks similar to drink-driving patrols to keep Covid-19 at bay. New Zealand is enduring its worst outbreak of the pandemic, with daily case numbers around 200, the majority of them in Auckland. On Wednesday, health officials announced one fatality connected to the virus - of an Auckland man in his 60s - bringing the country’s death toll to 35. McCormack has attacked Labor and the Greens for wanting to legislate net zero. “The Labor and Greens’ way, that’s to legislate these targets. They’re going to close the resource sector and many of the mines down. They don’t care about the Hunter. “They don’t care about the farmers in Forbes or elsewhere. We are there and we’ll protect not only industry and protect families, protect small business, but we’re also going to lower emissions. “That’s the responsible thing you’d expect a Coalition government and the Nationals in government to do.” Patricia Karvelas is asking Michael McCormack about Barnaby Joyce saying the Nationals didn’t sign the Cop26 climate pact. McCormack says: “The Nationals agreed to net zero. The Nationals agreed to put that in place, along with our Liberal colleagues in a Coalition government. We’re governing Australia for the future. “We’re in full agreement with the government and the government’s position is the government’s position we took to Glasgow. The farmers that we represent, for the resource industry which we proudly represent, is going to continue to be there. “May Coalition governments long continue into the future because that’s one way we will ensure we have the economic power base in the ag sector, the resource sector and not charging people through the nose through their power point.” Nationals MP Michael McCormack is talking on Afternoon Briefing now. He is in Forbes and helping with the evacuation and flood response. “We heard 47 dwellings have been evacuated. That’s 122 people,” he said. “There have been a number of people who have said that we’re going to stand here and stand our ground. “I spoke to Brian Miller who lives around here and he’s not concerned even though the water is creeping up into his backyard. He says it’s not as high as the 2016 flood which reached 10.56m. It’s about 12 centimetres below that at the moment.” And while we are on vaccines - some really, truly, very great news here. Queensland is predicted to reach 80% double dose vaccination on December 8. And we have more data on Victoria’s Covid numbers from today. AAP has a big breakdown of all the numbers you need to know: Active COVID-19 cases: 14,260, down from 17,518 on Monday Deaths reported on Wednesday: Nine people aged from their 50s to 90s Death toll across the pandemic: 1248 COVID-related patients in hospital: 357, a decrease of 37 Seven-day hospitalisation average: 402, a decrease of 16 Actively infected patients in ICU: 58 Cleared patients in ICU: 65 ICU patients on a ventilator: 35 Tests administered on Tuesday: 72,010 Vaccine doses administered at state-run hubs: 6692 This is a really lovely good news story from science reporter Donna Lu. A recent sighting of the Kangaroo Island assassin spider has given researchers new hope for the survival of the species, which was feared extinct after the 2019-2020 bushfires. According to Donna, it looks like a pelican and uses its elongated jaw to impale prey. Better than a Bunnings sausage? Sporting greats from rugby league, soccer, netball, Australian football and rugby union will be on hand to congratulate those being vaccinated at select schools during pop-up clinics across Queensland this weekend. Health minister Yvette D’Ath says it’s a great opportunity to “get a jab and an autograph”, a sentence I never thought I’d read. I’m no meteorologist, but I’m confident this is quite a downpour. The three highest totals recorded in Victoria for the week were all in Gippsland. Over in Canberra, private developers can’t provide affordable housing for low-income earners despite bringing 99% of new properties onto the market, AAP’s Alex Mitchell and Dominic Giannini report. Australian Housing and Urban Research Institute director Steven Rowley told a House of Representatives committee examining housing affordability the figure was up from around 80% in the mid-1950s. He added the country faced a “major challenge” with median income earners unable to afford a median priced home. The hearing also heard saving for a home deposit now takes 10 years on average, a sharp increase from 2001 when it took around 5.5 years. CoreLogic researcher Eliza Owen noted it took around 12 years to save for a deposit on a home in Sydney. She said conversation surrounding house prices only reached government and media when more wealthy people were affected, adding the long-term decline in ownership rates were mostly in low-income cohorts: That would suggest that you have widening wealth inequality perpetuated through Australia’s housing system. The Grattan Institute’s Brendan Coates agreed wealth inequality was continuing to grow and said that would have “very profound consequences” on society’s structure, particularly in retirement: If you own your own home in retirement you’re a very good chance of living a very comfortable retirement. If you are a renter, then given the current structure of our income support system, you are potentially in quite a lot of trouble. The committee was told just 2.5% of established properties were on the market at any time, down from 4.5% cent in 2008. Senior staff from the federal health department, tasked with responding to last year’s Covid-19 crisis at the St Basil’s aged care home in Melbourne, expressed serious concerns about a state health plan to furlough all staff, an inquest has been told. Emails tendered as evidence in the inquest into 50 Covid deaths that occurred at the home in July 2020 reveal concerns were raised about replacing the staff and the continuity of care. The director of the federal government’s aged care Covid implementation branch that managed the surge workforce, Neil Callagher, told the inquest that from mid-to-late July 2020, 10 to 12 aged care facilities were notifying the government of new cases in their home each day. His team was involved in supplying staff to over 120 aged care facilities who were losing staff due to Covid. An email from Callagher on 19 July said his team had struggled to meet the need for care staff as more and more staff refused to work at Covid positive sites. He said the Victorian department of health may need to identify residents who could be sent to hospital to reduce the number of residents in St Basil’s and improve the staff to patient ratios. Callagher told the inquest that it was often the case additional staff would be needed on top of the baseline workforce being replaced due to the additional challenges and requirements staff had responding to an outbreak at a home. The inquest continues. Protests are planned outside Western Australian parliament today over the introduction of a new bill that Aboriginal people say will continue to allow the destruction of their cultural heritage. It comes despite WA government assurances that the bill will be a “new way” of protecting heritage in the wake of the Juukan Gorge disaster. ClubsNSW has successfully restrained former employee and whistleblower Troy Stolz from making public statements that are calculated to “intimidate, harass, or otherwise bring improper pressure” on the clubs lobby as it sues him for disclosing confidential information about lax compliance with money laundering in the state’s poker machine industry. Stolz, a former ClubsNSW money laundering and counter-terror financing compliance manager, spoke to the ABC last year about what he alleged was a widespread failure to comply with money laundering and terror financing laws in the sector. ClubsNSW is now suing him for breach of confidence in the federal court. Earlier this year, ClubsNSW told the court it was victim to an “oppressive” public campaign by Stolz, who had spoken about the case to Guardian Australia and other media outlets, and in tweets, retweets and via a GoFundMe page he set up to help pay for his defence. The body said Stolz’s comments had prompted members of the public to send derogatory messages, including saying its “blood-sucking organisation is just a parasite” and accusing it of “legal thievery”. ClubsNSW said the campaign was “inflammatory and frankly misleading” and an attempt to put pressure on it during the proceedings. It said the campaign was designed to falsely imply it was suing Stolz as retribution for him blowing the whistle. The federal court earlier this year considered whether it needed to restrain Stolz using an injunction to prevent his comments from interfering in the administration of justice and causing contempt of court. Stolz’s lawyers had argued the public commentary had not interfered with the administration of justice. But Justice David Yates on Wednesday ordered Stolz be restrained. Yates said: As to injunctive relief, I’m satisfied, based on Mr Stolz’s past conduct, that [ClubsNSW] has demonstrated a real threat that Mr Stolz will, unless restrained, continue to engage in that conduct or conduct of a similar kind. The NT authorities have confirmed two new cases. That means there are eight new cases today, not the six that were announced at the press conference. That brings the total number to eight new cases. We reported earlier that Craig Thomson had been arrested but it was in the middle of the NT presser so I have this full rundown from my colleague Anne Davies: Police have intervened to protect a Channel Seven news crew, after anti-vaccination mandate protesters surrounded them and began hurling abuse. The crew was singled out by protest organisers, who stopped a street march initially to demand an interview. But many in the crowd quickly turned on the crew, some hurling abuse and chanting “tell the truth”. Police intervened when a woman, who earlier spoke to protesters about “satanic ritual treason government”, appeared to block the journalists from filming a piece to camera. NT Labor Senator Malarndirri McCarthy, who revealed yesterday her sister was the first case in the remote community of Robinson River, was talking on the ABC earlier about the spread of misinformation in remote communities and the struggle to get the vaccine messaging out to people. “As you know, we have over 100 Aboriginal languages just here in the Northern Territory. More across Australia. “The first time that First Nations media received funding was in September so there was this massive gap between February and September when there should have been messaging out there. “In the meantime, that gap was being filled by misinformation from overseas, right-wing extremists and also from the backbenchers of Scott Morrison’s government.” Most of the roughly 2000 ground-handling workers whose roles Qantas outsourced in part due to their union links want the airline to offer them their jobs back, according to a survey that will be provided as evidence to a federal court process to determine a remedy to their unlawful dismissal. The figure was revealed by the Transport Workers Union on Wednesday, who were responding to an Australian Transport Safety Bureau investigation which found worker inexperience to be the cause of an incident where a Qantas flight took off with locking pins still in place. An independently conducted survey found that 78% of Qantas workers want to return to the jobs they were sacked from when the airline outsourced almost 2000 jobs, in a move that was later ruled by the federal court to have been in part driven by the fact that many of the axed workers were union members with stronger bargaining capabilities. About 82% of the affected workers completed the survey. The TWU – which the federal court found in favour of in its legal challenge of Qantas’ outsourcing earlier this year – commissioned the survey. The union sent a letter to Qantas board members informing them of the workers’ preference, and urged the airline to offer the axed workers their jobs back. Michael Kaine, national secretary of the TWU, pleaded with Qantas to rehire the sacked workers and “reverse this enormous misstep”. The TWU suggested This survey is explicit. More than three quarters of those outsourced just want to go back to the jobs they loved. Many workers gave decades of hard work, dedication and loyalty to Qantas. Despite everything, they want to put this awful period behind them and get back to work.” Kaine said the impact of this outsourcing decision has been “colossal”, and that “marriages have broken down, families have had to leave their homes, and many have required medical help to cope with the mental and emotional toll” as a result. Qantas has previously requested a stay on the remedy proceedings while it appealed the federal court’s July decision. However Justice Michael Lee has indicated his intention to reach an outcome before the end of the year to give certainty to affected workers. Reinstatement hearings will commence on 13 December. The Qantas chief executive, Alan Joyce, was asked last month if he regretted outsourcing the workers, and said: “Not at all. We were in the middle of the biggest crisis in our history, we had to make dramatic action for us to survive. We fundamentally disagree with the ruling, we’re going to appeal it.” And that is the end of the NT presser. There are now a total of 19 cases. Anyone who has visited Robinson River since 11 November or who has left Katherine since 7 November, needs to come forward for testing. Gunner said he has spoken to people in remote communities who say they don’t need to get the vaccine because the closed border has kept Covid out. He said modelling shows people will change their minds when there is a case in their communities. “I don’t want a case to be what changes your mind. That’s when we get into the too late category.” Gunner is asked who is responsible for the low vaxx rate in the NT and if he should take some responsibility. “I am the leader. It’s my job. I want to get vax rate as high as we can everywhere. I doing everything I can to get the message across repeatedly that this is incredibly important. “There are a number of remote communities where the message hasn’t cut through. “I’ll keep working at this and doing everything I can but people have the right to make a decision and some people have made the decision to not get vaccinated and I think that’s where we are now in the vaccine rollout when you look at how long the vaccine has been available.” Gunner said if the NT population is 80% vaccinated the healthcare system should be OK - but modelling is not real life and the Territory needs to “stay on the conservative side”. “We note from the Doherty modelling, if we are double dosed 80% in the territory and have 30 to 100 cases a day in the territory, we have the low public health measures that we can handle in our current system. “It would put pressure on we could handle it.” Gunner is saying they are concerned because they don’t know how the cases are linked. “We do not know how those two outbreaks are linked and so there is a concern for seeding. “Any person who has left Katherine, Robinson River, on those dates, come forward and get tested. “We are concerned about potential seeding and that missing gap between that outbreak. There is a chance it is a separate and new incursion. But we do not have a source case if that is so. We are concerned. “We are a bit worried at the moment beyond Katherine and Robinson River.” Gunner is asked about WA closing the border, despite the fact Darwin is not in lockdown. “Leaders will do what they need to do to look after that jurisdiction and I think Mark has had a fairly consistent approach all the way through this. I am not here to criticise other leaders. “I am concerned about the nine-day gap between the fourth and 13 November.” Gunner is back and he is asked what the reality of life will be for people who do not get the vaccine. He says he wants to avoid a result where unvaccinated Territorians are separated from normal life. “I think there will be the inconvenience of the mask. “If we get to a place where Covid is endemic in the NT, this is hypothetical so I will be very careful about doing hypothetical - there is enough going on with COVID to deal with the reality is that we may have to have other public health measures. “But at the moment it is about testing rules and must mandate to reduce the risk of incursion and try to catch it as soon as possible.” Pain says the healthcare system just cannot cope with widespread community outbreak if vaccine rates are not higher. “Our system is prone to being overwhelmed if we cannot get people protected. “The modelling we have seen, if we have a widespread outbreak in the community, we cannot manage that. However, we are not there yet. And we must get vaccinated at higher levels to avoid the health system being put under unacceptable and potentially unsustainable pressure. “So I do not want to sugarcoat that. That is a significant risk we are very concerned about that. “The government is concerned about that and so, again, I would just like to appeal to people, help us now. “Your way of helping us is to prevent that is to come forward and get vaccinated.” Dr Charles Pain is up now. He is talking about how many health workers are in isolation. He says it’s “a small number.” “No one is in isolation at this point. We were able to keep people working.” He says the health system is already under strain. “We have been planning this for a very long time but I do acknowledge that we are under pressure already. “Our health system is under significant pressure all of the time. We have high demands of our system into the territory. “The important point I wish to make an appeal to community, we need your help to prevent those admissions to hospital.” Gunner is back up – he has been asked about rough sleepers – he says many people are choosing not to take up accommodations. “We had a meeting yesterday to coordinate welfare support, education, vaccination, mobile testing. “We are happy to work with anyone who wants to relocate we have discussed this in the past and obviously the solutions that we have for normal emergencies, cyclones, floods, are not appropriate during a Covid emergency. “You do not bring all people into a single spot. I will double-check the Katherine situation but we are happy to work with rough sleepers. “I want to be clear, unfortunately, it is a choice. People will (not) want to leave those circumstances ... I will mask. “In Darwin, in the past, we have had rooms available not taken up by rough sleepers. We have the offer and they choose not to take it.“ Chalker: “To all key leaders, to the strong family members out that I urge you to pull recalcitrant people in line so we can focus on saving lives in the territory. Thank you.” Chalker says there was a homicide in Darwin last night and two serious robberies. “I need to return to Darwin. Unfortunately, there was a homicide that tied up police resources, a very severe domestic violence incident where a female was lying on a mattress and her partner kick to multiple times in the face resulting in serious facial injuries. “This behaviour in the backdrop of what the NT is currently dealing with is completely unacceptable. The demands on our frontline resources, not just police but our health resources should not be impacted in this way. “It is very clear all the work we are doing is to serve and protect this community.” NT police commissioner Jamie Chalker is now talking: “Within Katherine, the compliance has been very good although behaviour could be better. “A number of residents unfortunately where it appears alcohol consumption is appearing, probably beyond the realms of what would be considered normal social interaction and that is impacting police services so to those members Katherine of the mindful of the factor that police resources are out there trying to protect people of the Katherine community.” Back to the NT – five of the new cases are in Robinson River and one is a three-week-old baby girl. There are new exposure sites and times for the NT. Gunner said people did not check-in properly at one of the key exposure sites: We know about 66 close contacts at Kirby’s Pub. However, our contact tracers have not been able to capture everyone checked in because of missing or illegible information. It’s legitimate to write details down rather than using your phone but they must be legible. The hardcopy register is illegible and we’re behind the eight ball. Instead of using our time to get in contact with close contact, we have to go through CCTV and identify everyone who walked into the pub. Gunner: I’m again making another call for anyone in the Northern Territory who is not vaccinated to get the jab. If you waited because you didn’t think Covid would get here, it’s here. If you waited because you didn’t think Covid was serious, you’re wrong. It’s killed 5.1 million people in the world. I fear it will take lives in the territory before the year is out. Please, please don’t let it be your life, the vaccine is your best defence. Gunner: I’m again making another call for anyone in the Northern Territory who is not vaccinated to get the jab. If you waited because you didn’t think Covid would get here, it’s here. If you waited because you didn’t think Covid was serious, you’re wrong. It’s killed 5.1 million people in the world. I fear it will take lives in the territory before the year is out. Please, please don’t let it be your life, the vaccine is your best defence. Gunner: The situation in Robinson River and Katherine is serious. We know how quickly Delta can spread in households and cannot be sure it hasn’t spread further in the Robinson River and Katherine communities. Today we have two new testing requirements. We are asking anyone who has been to Robinson River since 11 November to come forward, to come forward whether you are symptomatic or not and isolate until you get a negative result. We’re asking anyone who left Katherine since 7 November to come forward whether you are symptomatic or not, get tested and isolate until you get a negative result. I need everyone in the territory to treat this seriously and I believe you are. We are going to stop there because Chief Officer Micheal Gunner is talking in the NT. There are six new cases Wren: Around 34% of people on jobseeker now actually have a disability or an impairment. We have also got a lot of older women and men who have been laid off late in their working lives and, frankly, they are just waiting to claim the higher aged pension. And, of course, we have got single parents. Predominantly mothers, because, as we know, poverty is gendered, like violence, in this country, with children, with a child of the age of eight years. There is no parenting payment for those mothers, those families. It is jobseeker. Wren said we would also see the number of people who need unemployment payments is going to rise. “It is about 27% more now than before we had the bushfires and the pandemic. “But we’ve also got 2 million people who have, this year, for this lockdown, these avoidable lockdowns, have needed to claim another payment called the Covid disaster payment. “That’s gone, 2 million Australians have needed that. That payment, we still don’t know how many of them, but I don’t think all 2 million of them are going to be able to automatically snap back to their jobs or find a new job.” Wren: “We in Australia have been cushioned, really, buy a decent age pension level, but also predominantly most people who retire in Australia up until now have owned their own home. “So that is the cushioning effect of poverty in retirement. As we see this rental crisis and buying crisis go forward, we would expect to see many more people retiring without owning their own home.” Wren is now talking about the yearly data up until October: “So we still saw 30% increases in the SunshineCoast, Gold Coast, but also in places that weren’t affected as much by lockdowns, in WA some 27% increases, 21% in far north Queensland. “Sydney, 15%, Melbourne is the outlier, only 3%. But those percentages translate into higher rents that people simply can’t afford to pay.” Wren is about to go through the key three reasons why poverty will increase as we come out of the first, lockdown-y stage of the pandemic. And first up is housing affordability. “We’ve had a failure to invest in social housing over decades and increased house prices have been driving those two things, a big increase in reliance on private rental. The pandemic, despite many predictions, actually has supercharged these factors. “Prices are going up, whether you are buying or renting. In the year to June, regional rents across Australia went up by 11%. And in some parts of coastal Queensland, it was 30%.” Executive director of anti-poverty week Toni Wren is up now. She says the pandemic has exacerbated the wealth inequality of this country. She says people on the lowest incomes died at a rate four times faster than those on higher incomes. “Before we had the pandemic the highest 20% of Australians had six times the wealth of the middle, but 90 times the wealth of the lowest 20%. “That is increasing over time. So wealth inequality in Australia is getting worse. And that just doesn’t feel right in one of the wealthiest countries in the world.” Charlton: “We need to act now to ensure that the progress we have made on poverty doesn’t disappear. We need to learn the lessons of the crisis and take those forward boldly in our policy-making. “We need to make sure that the effects of mental health, education, and employment gaps don’t reappear long after the pandemic has gone. “These policies aren’t handouts, they are good economics that will make our economy stronger for everybody.” Charlton is now talking about the long-term impacts. He said because of government spending nearly half a million Australians were lifted out of poverty. He is arguing governments need to support vulnerable groups now more than ever as disadvantaged people will feel the financial and social impacts of the pandemic. “If we were smart ... right now we would be preparing a bounceback package to help vulnerable groups get back on their feet and prevent lasting damage from the pandemic to the economy. “We would be supporting schoolkids, for example, schools were closed for extended periods, we won’t know the full impact of homeschooling on the generation of children for a long time.” Charlton said the pandemic also showed us that working from home actually enhanced productivity for many people. “In many companies, productivity went up not down, people work smarter at home, they spent less time commuting, productivity didn’t go up for everyone it depended on the nature of your job, circumstances of your home office, the level of support you received, importantly, there was no suggestion that working from home was inherently less productive.” Charlton: “The pandemic helped us answer the age-old question about the generosity of social payments, taught us giving more money to low-income people as many positive benefits, both to them and the community.” Economic researcher Andrew Charlton is speaking at the National Press Club about poverty – what we learnt about it during the pandemic and “economic long Covid”. Charlton is talking about the debate on unemployment payments. “On one side many people make the point that the unemployment benefits are very low, not enough to live on, on the other side people who don’t want to increase the unemployment benefits, argue that it’s already enough, the extra money may not be well spent and it may have negative consequences for the employment.” He says the extra pandemic payment acted as an experiment to see how people spent it – with data from more than 250,000 bank accounts showing people spent the money on essentials. “Exactly what they do with the extra money, the data is clear, on that extra $550 a fortnight, the coronavirus to supplement the largest amount $85 dollars, was spent on household bills, electricity, phone, water, $70 of the extra money spent on food, $60, spent on clothing and household goods, seven – $275 saved or used to pay down debt, what we saw as for the people who received that extra money, it was life-changing. “Hundreds of thousands of people were lifted out of poverty, they didn’t spend that money on frivolous or discretionary items, they didn’t withdraw from the labour market they spent it well on the families and bills.” You can almost feel your wage packet swelling, or the digiwallet version anyway. Figures out this morning from the Australian Bureau of Statistics show the seasonally adjusted wage price index picked up in the September quarter. Salaries were up 0.6% for the quarter and 2.2% from a year earlier. It looks like you’re better off in the private sector, with wage growth reaching 2.4% from a year earlier, continuing a sequence of four quarters of a row of increases. The public sector is reporting year-on-year growth of 1.7% for the September quarter, snapping a run of quarterly falls that began in the January-March period of 2020. Given the toll on our health workers during the pandemic, it suggests a “watch this space” is in order in terms of pent-up pressures for more pay. It might also be hard for governments to say “no” to thawing the pay freeze. Interestingly, the health industry was listed as among the sectors with the largest wage gains. The professional, scientific and technical services posted a quarterly rise of 1.3% and 3.4% for the year, the most for this grouping since the December quarter of 2012. Laggards included the mining sector which posted a quarterly rise of 0.4%, while electricity, gas, water and waste services were the least on an annual basis. Their 1.2% advance on the year was the slowest since this series of data began. The RBA for one will be happy to see the pick up in wages. As Governor Philip Lowe said yesterday, the central bank is predicting the labour market to continue to tighten, with a jobless rate of 4% on the cards compared with the latest rate of 5.2%. So perhaps the wage price index is on the way up. From AAP: NSW police need to “throw the book” at anti-coal activists who have been staging controversial protests around the Port of Newcastle, Environment Minister Matt Kean says, adding the dramatic stunts are “completely out of line”. The protesters have struck again, interrupting operations at the world’s largest coal port. Two protesters on Tuesday night entered the port and attached themselves to a key piece of machinery that loads and unloads coal, shutting down the port. “Pull your heads in - get out of the way and stop hurting other people going about their lives, running their businesses,” Mr Kean told Sydney radio 2GB on Wednesday. “There are hundreds of ways to make your views known and advocate for change but risking the lives of rail workers is definitely not one of them.” Blockade Australia said the activists, named only as Zianna and Hannah, climbed to the top of machinery and suspended themselves out of reach. “As dawn broke on the coal port the sound of machinery was interrupted as the two protesters used an intricate set up of ropes to manoeuvre themselves over the edge,” the activist group said in a statement. Protests have disrupted the port and surrounding rail infrastructure in the past two weeks, prompting police to establish a strike force to crack down on the high-profile stunts. Federal Labor has announced its first major policy announcement in the lead-up to the election. The party is promising to spend $2.4bn upgrading the national broadband network to deliver faster internet speeds for millions of homes. Opposition leader Anthony Albanese was talking earlier and said: “Depending upon the lottery of where you live, some people do have access to high-speed broadband, some don’t. “And we know that during Covid, access to high-speed broadband has been so important for students getting through school, for people working from home, and we know that this isn’t a luxury. This is a part of 21st-century living.” The government acknowledged last year the system needed upgrading and committed $3.5bn to help another 2 million homes – this policy from Labor goes further. Currently, 8.3 million premises are connected to the NBN. Dr Mel Taylor of Macquarie University has researched people’s behaviour in floodwaters. She’s just put out a statement warning people that driving through floodwater and playing in floodwater are the two behaviours most associated with deaths in floods in Australia. “In our national survey (2019/20), 55 per cent of the public reported that they had driven through floodwater in the last five years. This behaviour is often normalised, with those who do it being likely to do it more than once/repeatedly,” Taylor said. Most people claim to have driven through floodwater after ‘careful consideration’ rather than it being a spur of the moment thing, also social pressure to keep going and not turn around comes into play. She said most people will comply but it was when the rain has stopped that most accidents happen. “Once the rain stops and/or water starts to recede, this is when people are likely to take risks. They are keen to ‘get on with things’ and ‘press on’– whether that’s clearing up or checking on things, or just getting back to normal. “This is often when accidents happen.” As always, thank you, Matilda for guiding us through the morning. This is Cait, and I will be with you until the evening. Let’s get this going! First up, I want to share this video from Natasha May, our rural reporter who is up in Forbes with Mike Bowers to cover the floods. With that, I shall leave you in the capable hands of Cait Kelly, who will take you through the afternoon’s news. See you tomorrow! The NSW premier has put off a call on extending the state’s emergency pandemic powers until next year, as protesters in Victoria rally over similar laws being considered by its parliament. As the state nears 95% double-dose vaccination, the NSW government this week considered a proposal for some emergency powers to be extended or amended, reports AAP. Under the Public Health Act – passed in 2010 – the health minister, Brad Hazzard, can make broad public health orders, like those during the pandemic used to restrict gatherings, limit travel or mandate masks or vaccination in some settings. It is understood Hazzard, on behalf of chief health officer Kerry Chant, this week sought changes that would make it easier for the state to force quarantine or self-isolation on people exposed to Covid-19. But premier Dominic Perrottet said in a statement on Tuesday night he would defer the decision on extending or changing any of the state’s emergency pandemic powers until 2022. Only the health provisions that need to be extended will be extended. I will be carefully considering this matter over the summer break. Hazzard on Tuesday night rejected suggestions he was seeking to drastically expand the powers given to the health minister. Far from granting additional powers, the powers are exactly the same as exist now and are simply tweaks on timing for two provisions in the massive Public Health Act. Guardian reporter Natasha May is out in Forbes today covering the flooding. Wildlife has been caught up, with wallabies braving the flood waters to reach dry land. The education minister, Alan Tudge, says the federal government’s revised religious discrimination bill will allow schools to hire on the basis of faith, but they will not be able to discriminate on other characteristics. As the government flags its intention to pass the legislation through the Senate by the end of the year, former Labor senator Jacinta Collins is also urging Labor to support the discrimination employment right for faith-based institutions. But even if Labor supports the move for faith-based schools, the revised bill’s passage through parliament is complicated by the inclusion of a controversial “statement of belief” clause that will override other state, territory and commonwealth anti-discrimination laws. The government has scrapped the contentious Folau clause, which would have protected employers from claims of indirect discrimination if they sanctioned employees for misconduct for expressing religious beliefs. But it retains a similar measure for qualifying bodies. You can read the full report from Sarah Martin and Paul Karp below: Usman Khawaja and Travis Head have been named in a 15-man Australia squad for the upcoming Ashes series, after selectors chose to leave the door open to both players in their efforts to make the final XI for next month’s first Test against England. The pair, who have been in a rich vein of form in the Sheffield Shield, are now likely fight it out in a practice match between Australia and an A team starting on 1 December to clinch the No 5 spot in Tim Paine’s side. Otherwise, the team to face England’s tourists at the Gabba on 8 December is settled, with incumbent Test opener Marcus Harris to partner David Warner at the top of the order for the opening two Test matches. At the other end, pace trio Pat Cummins, Josh Hazlewood and Mitchell Starc will only be displaced in the event of injury or fitness concerns, with Jhye Richardson the most likely quick to step in if needed. You can read the full report below: Oyster production in South Australia’s famous Coffin Bay has been temporarily halted while the state government investigates a potential disease outbreak, reports AAP. Coffin Bay, on the southern tip of Eyre Peninsula, is famous nationally for its oysters, which grace the tables of some of Australia’s top restaurants. The Department of Primary Industries said on Wednesday it had stopped oysters from leaving the area as a precaution, as it investigates a recent rise in Vibrio parahaemolyticus cases. The bacteria can cause gastrointestinal illness in humans who’ve eaten undercooked shellfish and fish. Since September, 45 Vibrio parahaemolyticus cases have been linked to eating raw oysters, compared with zero cases in 2020 and eight in 2019. Officials are trying to trace back recent cases. “Many growers had already voluntarily closed their harvesting operations,” the department’s executive director of biosecurity, Nathan Rhodes, said. The closure is likely to be in place until early next week. Over one day, the Lachlan River can be seen rising quickly just outside of Forbes in central west New South Wales. Rising floodwaters have been threatening homes and agriculture with the State Emergency Service issuing a flood evacuation order for 800 properties in low-lying areas. You can watch the video below: Queensland has recorded another Covid-19 free day, with no new local cases reported. Many of the 12,000 people stranded interstate “are just waiting” for Queensland to scrap Covid-19 quarantine, with 1,319 people successfully applying to isolate at home, the deputy police commissioner says, reports AAP’s Marty Silk. The new program allows fully vaccinated domestic travellers who test negative for the coronavirus to quarantine at home if they live within two hours’ drive from an airport and have direct, external, “fresh air” access to their dwelling. Deputy police commissioner Steve Gollschewski says 141 people have arrived since the application system went online at 5pm on Monday. He says 1,319 border passes for home quarantine have been issued, with more than 12,000 people on the waiting list to enter Queensland. The state plans to scrap quarantine for fully vaccinated domestic arrivals once 80 per cent of eligible Queenslanders are vaccinated, or December 17 at the latest. Gollschewski told ABC radio on Wednesday: We understand that a lot of people just waiting to see what happens when we get 80%, probably preferring to come in then. Figures show 82.75% of Queenslanders have had one dose of a vaccine and 71.07% are fully vaccinated. The home quarantine requirements has faced criticism, particularly the need for direct, external, “fresh air” access, which makes most apartment dwellers ineligible. Queenslanders stranded interstate with their cars on the NSW border are also upset they aren’t allowed to drive to home quarantine, even if they live within two hours’ drive of the border. The deputy commissioner said the option of home quarantine for drivers was “considered really carefully”, but the government decided it wasn’t safe. The New South Wales government’s proposed affirmative sexual consent laws contain a loophole that could allow alleged offenders to use mental ill health to escape conviction, according to a leading rape and domestic violence support service. In a letter sent on Tuesday morning to the NSW attorney general, Mark Speakman, and other MPs, Rape and Domestic Violence Services Australia urged amendments to the laws, which are to be debated in parliament this week. The service, which runs the NSW Rape Crisis Centre, says it consulted with other providers within the sector, as well as academics and psychologists, before preparing the letter. The letter says the reforms are “warmly welcomed” and congratulates Speakman for his decisiveness in bringing them before parliament. The reforms were considered the best consent laws in the country by some experts when they were unveiled in May. You can read the full report below: A minor flood warning has been issued for communities around the Namoi River in NSW. This includes Bugilbone on Thursday and Goangra on Monday. New South Wales police have seized a car as they continue to comb a mid-north coast property and surrounding bushland for the remains of missing three-year-old William Tyrrell. The renewed search for vital clues in the seven-year mystery is now in its third day as detectives returned to the property where he disappeared. William went missing wearing his Spider-Man suit while playing at his foster grandmother’s home in 2014, in a case that has attracted national attention. Police on Tuesday dug up the garden at the Kendall home, with a mechanical sift brought on to the property, and sprayed luminol, a chemical that detects traces of blood, during the night. In nearby bushland, volunteers cut down trees to help in the search. Police seized a Mazda car from a home in Gymea in Sydney’s south on 9 November. You can read the full report below: Fixing overcrowded housing in Indigenous communities is key to protecting vulnerable people from Covid-19 amid a Northern Territory outbreak fuelling a Labor senator’s “worst fears”, reports AAP’s Georgie Moore. Jab rates for Indigenous people continue to lag across every state and territory. Just under 58% of Australia’s over-16 Indigenous population is double-dosed. Labor senator Malarndirri McCarthy’s family members are at the centre of a Northern Territory outbreak infecting 11 Indigenous people across Katherine and the remote community of Robinson River. About 52% of Indigenous people are fully vaccinated in the territory, while 72% have received one dose. McCarthy told ABC TV on Wednesday: This is our worst fears realised. We’ve got to arrest this in terms of the Covid outbreak before we can actually really seriously consider when it is safe to open up. Our deepest fear here is that has spread across the territory. Her sister carried the virus into Robinson River and nine of the politician’s family members tested positive on Tuesday. She called for immediate support to fix overcrowding in remote community houses. Overcrowding is a massive issue across Australia for First Nations people. How can people isolate when they’re 15 to 20 people to a house for starters? She also said misinformation was being targeted at Indigenous communities. We have got over 100 Aboriginal languages just here in the Northern Territory, more across Australia, and the first time really that First Nations media received funding was in September. In the meantime, that gap was being filled by misinformation, from overseas rightwing extremists but also from the backbenchers of Scott Morrison’s government. People are being stopped from entering or leaving Robinson River or surrounding homelands under federal biosecurity rules. Masks are mandatory across the territory and a lockdown of Katherine will run until at least Monday. Double-dose vaccination rates among Indigenous Australians are as low as 34%. The ACT has the highest Indigenous full vaccination rate of 84%. Australia’s overall double-dose rate has surpassed 83% for people aged 16 and older. Centrelink’s decision to cancel the age pension of an 80-year-old man who lives in a nursing home with advanced dementia was “absurd and wrong”, a tribunal has found. In a judgment published this week, the administrative appeals tribunal criticised Centrelink for cancelling the man’s age pension when he did not “personally have the capacity to comprehend … a decision to suspend his pension”. The tribunal heard David Fry was living in an aged care home and his son, John, was appointed his legal guardian, after David was discovered driving on the wrong side of the road and judged to be “mentally incapacitated”. John Fry became responsible for managing his father’s dealings with Centrelink, which had been paying David the age pension since 2006. You can read the full report below: Speaking of the threats made again the Victorian premier and his family, here is what Daniel Andrews wive, Catherine Andrews, had to say about it last night: Victorian premier Daniel Andrews has been asked about the perceived threats levelled against him by protesters this week, including the display of prop gallows on the steps of the Parliament House: What I’d say is this there are some people who are threatening me, threatening my family. They are essentially attacking the safety of my family. Let me be really clear and the message is, I will not be deterred from the work I’m doing to keep every family safe. That’s the work that I’ve been given to do. That’s the job that we have to do. So there are some out there who are making threats against me and Catherine and the kids. That’s not my focus. My focus is keeping every single Victorian family safe, and I wouldn’t want that the appalling, the disgusting, and the potentially criminal behaviour of a small number of people to detract away from the amazing job that so many Victorians have done. It is so unfair for a small, ugly mob to be taking attention away from the more than 90% of Victorians who have had a first dose and will soon have had a second dose. That’s where our focus should be. I’m proud of those Victorians and I’m deeply grateful to those Victorians. Debate is fine. This disagreement is fine, that is a part of our system. What we have seen in recent days and weeks is not fine. It is awful. But it does not speak to the values the views and conduct of the vast vast majority of Victorians. Here are the details of this new Victorian mental health initiative the premier has just announced. Authorities plan to “more than double” the capacity of the state’s youth prevention and recovery care network, giving more young Victorians access to the mental health services they need closer to home. The premier’s press release read: An investment of $141 million in the Victorian Budget 2021/22 will see new 10-bed residential facilities built in Ballarat, Geelong, Shepparton, Heidelberg and Traralgon – as well as existing YPARCS in Bendigo, Dandenong and Frankston completely refurbished and modernised ... A key recommendation of immediate priority from the Royal Commission into Victoria’s Mental Health system, YPARC services provide around-the-clock clinical care on a short-to-medium term basis for people aged 16 to 25. The sites reduce pressure on hospital beds by providing early intervention care and an alternative to hospital admission with recovery-focused treatment. The facilities will be designed by NTC Architects to create a welcoming and home-like environment with private bedrooms and ensuite bathrooms. The Commonwealth Bank has kicked off market news today, releasing a miserly $2.2bn first quarter (non audited) cash profit. Income and expenses were down 1%. One takeaway is that home loan competition contributed to a thinner net interest margin, as did the shift to fixed-rate mortgages which are less profitable for the bank for now at least. With all the talk of higher official interest rates soon – which the Reserve Bank governor Philip Lowe again tried to hose down yesterday – it’s a fair bet more people will be looking to switch to fixed-rate loans before they rise further. Some of the overnight news might add to the case bond traders have been making that interest rates will rise faster than central banks are now expecting. US retail sales rose 1.7% in October, beating forecasts of a 1.4% rise. Industrial output rose 1.6% too for the month, well ahead of the 0.7% economists had been tipping. On the home front, the stat of the day will be the September quarter wage price index. As the RBA’s Lowe said yesterday, there are lots of questions over how wages and jobs will recover as Covid-related restrictions ease. A nice point he made was that for all the talk about short-term visa holders returning to fill critical job shortages, don’t forget that a lot of Australians are ready to head OS too, many of them potential employees. Lots of people have advice about the economy. One of them is deputy PM Barnaby Joyce who yesterday was making a case that a Labor government would bring “excessive mismanagement” of the economy, pushing up rates. What’s the right amount of mismanagement? Anyway, it was a chance to trip down memory lane when he once railed about government debt but has lately gone quiet on that issue. And that’s despite the extra nought be added to what we owe. Major floods are expected in the NSW central western town of Forbes after hundreds of people spent an anxious night evacuated from their homes, as slow-moving flood waters continue to rise, reports AAP. The Bureau of Meteorology expects the swollen Lachlan River to peak at 10.65 metres during Wednesday, inundating low-lying areas of the town. Forbes mayor Phyllis Miller says residents have been waiting for the flood for almost a week but waters are rising at “a snail’s pace” and she’s concerned people are becoming complacent. She told the Nine Network on Wednesday: It’s just a wait and see game. It is awful and people start to get complacent because .... there [are] no signs of flooding and of course, that makes people think that we’re crying wolf ... But our river is coming up and it will peak some time today. Every flood is different. We’re not sure what that will do inside the town or what will happen with the lake system when that water starts to join up with the river water. Yesterday morning some 1,800 residents were ordered to evacuate by the State Emergency Service, which was concerned the river levels would match or exceed major floods in 2016. SES commissioner Carlene York said 800 homes may be flooded, as she pleaded with some reluctant locals to evacuate: It’s not unusual for people who have lived in that area and lived through a number of floods to say, ‘It didn’t flood last time, I’ll take the risk and stay’ ... But every flooding is different and water flows in different ways. An evacuation centre has been set up at St Andrews Presbyterian church for those unable to get to alternative accommodation with family or friends. Moderate flooding has already occurred upstream at Cowra, and major flooding at Nanami, where the river peaked at more than 12 metres. Downstream from Forbes, major flooding is also expected at Cottons Weir and Jemalong from Thursday. The Macquarie, Paroo, Macintyre, Belubula and Snowy rivers have also flooded after parts of the state copped a month’s worth of rain in days. Labor is hoping to make Australia’s internet frustrations an election issue, promising a revamped national broadband network that will stay in public hands and allow more choice. With Australia still ranked 59th in the world for broadband speeds, and 32nd out of the 37 nations in the OECD, Labor is promising a $2.4bn boost to the nationwide broadband rollout, promising to update the already ageing network. The opposition says the funding commitment is off-budget, and will be financed through the NBN corporation itself, which Labor has committed to keeping as a public entity. The Labor promise builds on the government’s $4.5bn retrofit announcement from last year, which aimed to upgrade fibre-to-the-node, fibre-to-the-curb and cable connections for homes in designated areas. That followed years of complaints of poor speeds and connectivity. The Coalition has maintained its decision to upgrade the copper network it had previously insisted on using, was part of a “strategic review” and not because of on-going complaints. You can read the full report below: 9.30am is shaping up to be busy! A Victorian Pride Lobby survey has found the state’s lesbian, gay, bisexual, trans and gender diverse, intersex, queer and asexual community do not trust the police force. The lobby’s largest survey of attitudes towards Victoria police heard that more than 1,500 respondents had overwhelmingly negative perceptions of them, including that about 80% did not think police understood issues that impacted them, and about the same percentage did not feel safe when there was a large police presence at community events. A report released on Tuesday night also found the incidents such as the police raid on Hares and Hyenas and breach of Dani Laidley’s privacy had further eroded the community’s trust in the force: Any lack of trust between police and LGBTIQA+ community members has harmful and far-reaching consequences. LGBTIQA+ people are often discouraged from reporting victimisation due to anticipated negative outcomes. This is particularly problematic as the LGBTIQA+ community experience higher levels of victimisation, especially in regard to sex work, mental illness, homelessness and substance abuse. Victims sometimes fear they may not be taken seriously or will be treated prejudicially. The effects of harm caused by discriminatory or violent interactions with police can therefore extend beyond the event itself; they can cause a reticence to report and thus deny or delay justice for LGBTIQA+ community members. Victorian Pride Lobby co-convenor Devina Potter said Victoria police had made progress but still had a long way to go to mend the relationship with the community: Victoria’s LGBTIQA+ communities have experienced decades of harmful policing in this state, including several high profile and fraught incidents in recent years. Because of this, LGBTIQA+ people are discouraged from reaching out to the police when they experience vilification, harassment or abuse, for fear they may not be taken seriously or will be treated prejudicially. This is especially the case for members of our community with intersecting identities, like First Nations people, trans and gender diverse people, people with disabilities, sex workers, and illicit drug users. We are still waiting for confirmation on what exactly will be announced at this unusual 9.30am press conference from the Victorian premier. I’ll keep you posted. The average Australian is working 1.5 hours more unpaid overtime each week since the start of the Covid pandemic, according to a new survey. The poll, which used a nationally representative sample, found the average employed Australian is working 6.13 hours unpaid each week in 2021, up from 5.25 hours in 2020 and 4.62 hours in 2019. The findings are based on a poll of 1,600 people by the Australia Institute’s Centre for Future Work released on Tuesday to coincide with go home on time day – a campaign that urges workers to push back against unpaid overtime. By working an extra 319 hours a year unpaid in 2021, workers are doing the equivalent of an extra eight 38-hour weeks of work. Employers are benefiting from a total of $125bn of free labour, estimated to cost $461.60 a worker every fortnight. You can read the full report below: I mentioned before that the 30-year-old woman who was diagnosed with Covid-19 in the emote community of Robinson River is the sister of federal Labor senator for the NT Malarndirri McCarthy. McCarthy has just appeared on ABC RN to discuss the worrying implication of the Delta variant entering a remote Indigenous community, and the stress her family are now under: Before I went to sleep last night, family members were still quite anxious ... We’ve got five-year-old twins who have been infected with Covid. It is a very serious time ... Most of them are double-vaxxed, which I was very pleased to hear ... Some had already gone to try and get a vaccination, and this is where it’s been quite despairing. These vaccinations should’ve occurred earlier this year ... That gap in the communication strategy, I believe, has enabled the social media storm that we’ve seen, with inaccurate information and messaging that’s caused quite fearful reaction to the vaccinations. McCarthy said part of the reason misinformation on social media hadbeen able to flourish in these communities was that not enough official government advice was made available in First Nation languages: First Nations media organisations started receiving funding in September. That’s way too slow, way too late. The damage had already set in. Three out of every four video ads the United Australia party has posted on YouTube since late September have been pulled by Google for allegedly violating the tech giant’s advertising policies, according to Google’s transparency report. Since former the Liberal MP Craig Kelly joined the UAP in late August, the party has spent $2.684m on 25 ads run on YouTube, boosting the number of views on the party’s videos into the millions. The spend far outweighs the amount being spent by any other political party. The next nearest is Labor with $60,750. It is not clear from the report what the removed videos contained or which of Google’s policies they are alleged to have violated. You can read the full report below: Flooding in the regional NSW town of Forbes continues to cause havoc today. Here is a look at what some residents are dealing with: You better believe that Albanese also spoke to ABC News Breakfast. Here he was asked about reports in the Herald Sun newspaper that Labor is poised to settle on a 40% emissions reduction target by 2030. Albanese: They’re making that up. Host Michael Rowland: So it’s not true? You won’t settle on 40%? What about below or above 40%? Albanese: They’re making it up. I have no - no reason why the Herald Sun would be reporting something based upon its own guesswork. We’ll release our policy in the fullness of time. We’ll give it proper consideration. There’s been no consideration by our shadow cabinet of where we go on these issues. We only received the government’s inadequate modelling they released on Friday night. We’ll examine it in a considered way. We’ll examine in the context of the outcome of the Glasgow conference as we said we would... Rowland: So 40% is wrong. Albanese: Well, it’s based on absolutely nothing. Rowland: So we’re not going to find a situation in a couple of weeks’ time when Labor announces arguably 40% and we have to revisit this? Albanese: We’ll announce our policy and I assure you that the people who are involved in the development of the policy, no-one has spoken to the Herald Sun. The other big headline today is Labor announcing its $2.4bn plan to improve the NBN if elected. Party leader Anthony Albanese has promised more than 10m premises will have “world-class” internet speeds by 2025 under a Labor government. Basically, the plan is to go back to all the homes and businesses that only got copper to the node in the first rollout and give them the option to switch to a fibre connection to the premises. It’s estimated up to 660,000 premises in regional areas and 840,000 in the suburbs stand to benefit. Albanese has been out and about discussing this with the media this morning. Here is what he had to say to ABC radio: One of the things that people have recognised during Covid is that fibre is better than copper and that people need high-speed broadband in order to for students to study, in order for businesses to operate, in order for people to work from home. And the fact is, people would get it when this government trashed the NBN model to move to a mix of fibre and copper and depended upon luck of the draw. Some people have access to 21st-century technology, but too many households don’t ... And we know that we have a big technological repair job as a result of the negative policies of this government, who when they came to office, of course, said that high-speed fibre was a waste. They thought it was all about downloading videos. We know that it’s not. We know that it’s about healthcare, it’s about education services, it’s about businesses being able to operate in the 21st century. Good morning everyone, it’s Matilda Boseley with you here on this glorious Wednesday morning. Unfortunately, I don’t have great news to bring you. Things are looking tense up in the Northern Territory where health teams are preparing for the worst after nine Covid-19 cases were diagnosed across two Indigenous households in a single day. It’s the greatest number of cases diagnosed in the NT in a 24-hour period, bringing the total for the outbreak to 11. This is also the first time a case has been reported in a remote NT Aboriginal community, with fears it could lead to infections in dozens of other First Nations people. A 30-year-woman and a 43-year-old man tested positive on Monday. All 11 cases are household contacts and live in Katherine, about 320km south-east of Darwin. The 30-year-old is the sister of federal senator Malarndirri McCarthy. She is unvaccinated and had travelled to the remote community of Robinson River where she was diagnosed with the virus. No new cases have been found since at Robinson River, but results from the first round of testing won’t be known until Wednesday. Overcrowded housing and low vaccination rates trouble many Indigenous communities across the NT, with reports some homes in Robinson River have 20 occupants. Moving south to Victoria, protesters have spent another night camped out on the steps of Parliament House as part of a large demonstration objecting to the state government’s proposed pandemic laws. Debate on the public health and wellbeing amendment (pandemic management) bill began in the upper house on yesterday afternoon and went well into the night. It is on hold today as the chamber deals with non-government business but is expected to resume on Thursday. Despite the effort of protesters the controversial bill (which gives the premier and health minister the power to declare a pandemic and make public health orders), is all but guaranteed to pass now that the government made amendments to the bill to win over three crossbench MPs. I’ll bring you all the updates on these stories and everything else here on the blog, so grab a coffee, settle in and let’s jump into the day.In time-honoured street hawker tradition, Kaitano Kasani is using charm and persuasion to get people to sell him their tattered US banknotes. Kasani, 42, bellows through a megaphone as he walks through Glen Norah, a township in Harare, in the sweltering November heat. “Bring all your old and torn notes. I have a good rate today. There is no other better deal in town,” Kasani shouts. A woman brings a torn $20 note (£15) which Kasani inspects before handing her $15. In Zimbabwe’s beleaguered economy, buying and selling half-shredded banknotes has become the latest hustle. “Most of my clients are shocked that I actually buy such money. They love me for that,” says Kasani, showing a handful of filthy dollars which would be rejected in supermarkets or other businesses. Zimbabweans are suspicious of banks and prefer to keep their money under pillows and beds. In previous crises, hyperinflation wiped out millions in savings, particularly in 2008. Now, there is a lack of favoured banknotes as they wear out faster than replacements come into circulation. Shortages have led to the government telling banks and retailers not to reject old or worn US dollars, but many defy the order. A lack of exports means fewer new notes in circulation, and Zimbabweans are re-using increasingly grubby notes. Dealers either mend them or sell them on to others who will bribe or otherwise persuade senior bank officials to exchange large quantities. “These torn notes are more valuable to me than new ones. These old notes, when taken to the bank, will be replaced at the same value, yet we would have bought them at nearly half the original value, depending on how bad they are,” says Kasani. “All I need is the serial number and the necessary features for me to take.” Kasani sells old notes to business people and other cash dealers at 80% profit. His new business has sustained his four children after he lost his job in manufacturing two years ago. “This is quite lucrative; I actually got some assets through this business. I was one of the first people to buy such money in Banket [north-west of Harare] and other surrounding areas. It is just that the trade is now flooded, so I may have to concentrate on other things,” he says. The country decommissioned the Zimbabwean dollar after it was destabilised by protracted periods of hyperinflation. It was reintroduced in 2019 despite warnings from economists that the country did not have enough foreign reserves to sustain it. At that point transactions in US dollars were prohibited, but as cash shortages threatened business, the government backtracked to allow traders to accept the US currency again last year. Now, shortages of small US dollar denominations are leading to a boom in torn notes dealers. In central Harare, 36-year-old Munengami* keeps an eye out for plain-clothed police patrolling in a popular area for illegal trading. Dealers, some with babies strapped on their backs, endure constant run-ins with police, who have launched a campaign to remove illegal money changers. A government crackdown blames traders for a plunge in the value of the Zimbabwean dollar. Money dealers say they are being scapegoated for the government’s economic failures. “They know that we are not the problem here. We do not have the power to raise the exchange rates. Government needs to deal with those businessmen who flood the streets with local currency, which automatically reduces the value of the dollar,” says Munengami. Zimbabwe’s vice-president, Constantino Chiwenga, has warned of harsh measures against traders, with the government setting up an intelligence unit to fish out “saboteurs” and “fraudsters”. As the Zimbabwe dollar continues on a “death spiral”, losing ground against the US dollar, economists have called on the government to make the US dollar the only unit of exchange. But the finance minister, Mthuli Ncube, ruled that out. “We cannot adopt the US dollar alone as the official currency. You were there before and there were queues at banks, huge foreign currency deficits and you had deflation. That was because of the US dollar,” he says. “It is not a good idea, and it will be suicidal to do so.” Economist Clemence Machadu says the crackdown on illegal dealing is futile. “The government is firefighting, and that explains why we really haven’t seen much of a change … We should get down to brass tacks and deal with root causes, which are really rooted in supply, and not symptoms of the problem,” says Machadu. Inflation fell from 840% in July last year to 50% in August but has been sliding up again, to 54% in October according to the Zimbabwe national statistics agency (Zimstat). Carefully applying glue to a $20 note, Munengami explains how he makes a living. “I am a teacher by profession and the day I converted my salary to US dollars and got $50 [£37], I knew there was no future for me in teaching,” says Munengami. “I buy torn notes to sell to my clients. It is more profitable than forex [foreign exchange] vending since I determine the price. I sell these notes to shops and businesspeople, at 20% profit.” A few yards from Munengami, Amina Banda, 34, does a deal with a man inside a parked SUV with her baby strapped on her back. “I am always nervous that the police will arrest me, but this is how we operate on the streets. I do not trust anyone, so whenever a transaction happens, I always maintain a safe distance so I can escape. Sometimes, the police come in plain clothing disguising themselves,” she says. “I have a family to feed so I have to stick to the streets.” *Partial name used at the request of interviewee Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:When Donald Trump heard Fiona Hill was publishing a memoir, he characteristically tried to land a pre-emptive blow, dismissing his former Russia adviser as “a deep state stiff with a nice accent”. As Trumpian insults go, it was enough of a backhanded compliment for one of Hill’s friends to have it printed on a T-shirt as a gift. A lot has happened since Donald Trump’s impeachment hearings in late 2019 in which Hill gave evidence, not least a frontal assault on US democracy by his supporters. But people still remember her accent. There was something so calm and matter-of-fact in Hill’s flat County Durham vowels that was the antithesis of Trump’s bullying bravado. Her voice, that of a coalminer’s daughter from northern England describing the turmoil and corruption inside the White House, instantly raised the question: “How did she get there?” Hill’s book, There Is Nothing for You Here, is a long, thoughtful answer to that question. It takes in the story of industrial and political rot in three nations: the UK, the country of her birth; the US, the country of her choosing; and Russia, the object of her lifelong vocation. The powerful currents driving the modern history of those three states carried her on her remarkable life’s journey. The state-assisted euthanasia of the British coal industry in the early 80s drove her from her home town of Bishop Auckland, where her family had been miners for generations. The book’s title was a warning from her father, Alf, to get out while she could. He had first gone down the pit at the age of 14, but by the time Fiona was growing up, the only job he could find was as a hospital porter, the bottom of the heap with no way up. The Hill family were the archetypal victims of the post-industrial decline she would go on to study. “We were living data points,” she realised. Following her dad’s advice she worked her way out through study. She went to St Andrews University and then to the Soviet Union in time to observe its last climactic years. The expertise she gained took her to the US and Harvard as a Russia scholar with a growing reputation that ultimately brought her to the White House. Trump took his pre-publication shot at Hill because he naturally assumed her book, like a shelf-full of others by former staffers, would be all about him. But for Hill, the ex-president is just the symptom of a deeper, chronic dysfunction.There is plenty here about the craziness of life in the Trump administration and Hill has a knack for capturing the absurdities of the court of King Donald. She describes the scramble to get his attention (he had no idea who she was and on one occasion mistook her for a secretary), the relentless bullying (she was called the “Russia bitch” by her “colleagues”), and the universal fear the president would turn against them. While other Trump-era memoirs have focused almost solely on the carnival, Hill’s scope pans out to the wounded country that put him in office, and then wider still, across the Atlantic to Britain and then across Europe to Russia. What they all had in common is rapid, catastrophic deindustrialisation. In Russia, that came about through the chaotic collapse of the Soviet Union. In the US and the UK, it was inflicted by the political leadership and their economist gurus. “Margaret Thatcher and Ronald Reagan helped to drive the nail into the coffin of twentieth-century industry while ensuring that those trapped inside the casket would find it practically impossible to pry the lid off,” Hill notes. Those buried alive, in that memorable metaphor, lost their sense of community and self. Being a miner was more than a job to Alf Hill and his contemporaries, it was an identity. That is where political populism comes in, offering to fill the hole with comforting illusions. Hill points out that 61% of voters in Bishop Auckland chose Brexit even though it meant cutting off EU structural funds vital to its attempts at regeneration. It is also why American rust belt voters convinced themselves that Trump understood them. It is an analysis that has been laid out by others before, but what makes it particularly compelling here is that it is intertwined with a unique life story of a working-class English woman who ended up sitting across from, and cooly observing, the preening “strongmen” of our age. Where Hill is most provocative is in her warnings that having centuries of democratic experience will not necessarily protect us from Russia’s fate. “Russia is America’s Ghost of Christmas Future”, she argues, a harbinger of things to come if we can’t adjust and heal our political polarisation.” What if the next Trump is “less personally insecure and more capable”? And what if the next insurrectionary mob that invades the US Capitol is better prepared, Hill asks in this fascinating book. The answer? “They might just manage to hold it.” • There Is Nothing for You Here: Finding Opportunity in the Twenty-First Century is published by Mariner (£28.99). To support the Guardian and the Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.The Brexit minister, Lord Frost, has said suspending parts of the Northern Ireland protocol by triggering article 16 of the agreement with the EU is still a “very real option” but has indicated that he hopes a deal can be done by Christmas. He has also given assurances during a visit to Northern Ireland that the UK is not trying to move border checks and controls from the Irish Sea to the Irish border. Frost met the Democratic Unionist party (DUP) leader, Sir Jeffrey Donaldson, in Belfast on Tuesday night and will be meeting the Sinn Féin leader, Michelle O’Neill, on Wednesday morning. “We very much hope that we’ll be able to bring those talks to a conclusion, that’s what we would most like to do. If we can’t, if they can’t be in agreement, then obviously the famous article 16 is a very real option,” he told BBC Good Morning Ulster. Frost also criticised the EU’s threat to retaliate with sanctions that include tariffs or the termination of the UK’s entire trade deal as unhelpful. “I don’t see why it would help … for the response to that from the European Union to be sanctions, retaliation and making trade more difficult,” he said. He repeatedly said article 16 was a “perfectly legitimate option” and rejected arguments that pulling the plug on the protocol would be a hammer blow to businesses that see the special arrangement for Northern Ireland as a unique “best of both worlds” opportunity to access Great Britain as well as the EU’s single market. Business leaders also met Frost on Tuesday and reported that it was “the most positive” meeting they had had with him since the row over the protocol broke out. One of the dozen who had dinner with him in Belfast said: “We felt we were being talked with, not at, for the first time. You could even say it was congenial. We all went in there thinking this is the precursor to pulling article 16 but he doubled down on wanting a deal.” Fears have risen in recent weeks that the UK’s ultimate goal was to remove all checks on goods between Great Britain and Northern Ireland to meet demands made by the DUP, which is campaigning for the protocol to be scrapped. “We don’t see any need and I think it is one of the pieces of common ground in this whole negotiation that nobody wants to see infrastructure or checks at the border between Northern Ireland and Ireland, and there’s absolutely no need for that. And our proposals in the command paper don’t require it,” he told BBC Good Morning Ulster. Frost said the UK was not seeking to scrap the protocol altogether. “There will always have to be some sort of treaty arrangement between the UK and the EU covering Northern Ireland. But it’s got to be an arrangement that everybody can get behind.” Asked why should people in Northern Ireland should trust him to represent their interests when his position appeared to be biased towards one side of the community, he said: “I think this government always will have the best interests of everybody in Northern Ireland.”When Bank of England officials meet next month to discuss interest rates, the betting is that today’s inflation number, showing a forecast-busting 4.2% rise in October, should convince them to respond with an increase in the cost of borrowing. If they do, the decision might appear inconsistent. The highest level of annual price increases for a decade was forecast by the Bank of England’s nine-strong monetary policy committee (MPC) when it met earlier this month. The MPC said it envisaged inflation rising to 5% next year – and yet shocked investors by refusing to raise interest rates off the floor. A month, though, is a long time in world of monetary policy. There is a sense now that the Bank’s job of maintaining price stability is being undermined by an inflation rate more than double the 2% target set by parliament. A jump in the base rate in December from 0.1% to 0.25% appears to be beyond doubt. Earlier this week, the governor, Andrew Bailey, told MPs on the Commons Treasury select committee he was “very uneasy” about the rising cost of living and had come close to voting for an increase in borrowing costs. “We are in the price stability business,” he said. Previously, Bailey had hinted that “action” would be needed to calm inflation, which he believes could remain stubbornly high unless the Bank uses its main tool to restrict consumer and business spending. However, the decision remains on a knife-edge. The MPC’s collective view until now has been that the main drivers of inflation this year – higher gas and petrol prices – will prove to be temporary. While the cost of gas on international energy markets may rise further through the winter, it will fall in the spring, and by the time the cold weather returns in 2022, the expectation is that an orderly queue of gas-laden supertankers will be lining up outside Britain’s ports. Petrol and diesel prices will likewise tumble next year as Opec countries and other oil producers adjust to a post-pandemic, and hopefully a more climate friendly, level of demand. Bailey and a majority of the committee may turn this argument on its head should they conclude that the economy’s rapid return to something near its pre-pandemic level of activity is a sign that interest should return to the 0.75% in place back then. Some members have openly argued that rapidly rising prices through the winter months will convince workers to push for big wage rises, leading to the much-feared wage-price spiral. Yet there is no sign of wages increasing by the level needed to push up inflation, except in some industries affected by Brexit-related skills shortages. A rise in interest rates in the UK also has no bearing on the price of gas and petrol, so would do nothing to alter the course of rising prices. It would only give the appearance of doing something. If the MPC takes a punt on wages spiralling next year, and not just in a few industries but across most of the UK’s 32 million workers, it will be a message that Brexit has seriously damaged the labour market’s ability to respond to rising demand. If that is the reasoning, it would be more effective for the government to change course and relax visa restrictions than for the Bank of England to raise interest rates.Katy Etherington runs a website, PA Pool, that matches disabled people with personal assistants (PAs). “Last year, we had 460 PAs join from Poland, and this year we’ve only had 36,” she says. “It’s a serious problem.” Before Brexit, most of the people who worked as a personal assistant to Etherington herself were from mainland Europe. Of the current team who help her live and work independently, three are from the EU and have settled status – but if they leave, the thought of having to replace them is, she says, “terrifying”. What it means is that, for many disabled people who employ PAs, “there is a crisis. [They assist with] basic stuff, such as being able to get out of bed, get dressed, go to the loo, have something to eat and drink. And if you can’t find somebody to fill that role, what can you do? They provide such an important role – it’s life-enabling. They enable us to live, to work, not to just exist.” Without the prospect of employing people independently, many disabled people would be forced to seek residential care – but “care homes are struggling too”, says Etherington. Before Brexit, around 8% of the social care workforce came from other EU countries. Some of those people will have stayed, but leaving the EU has exacerbated the staff shortage. Professor Martin Green, chief executive of Care England, says there are 167,000 vacancies in social care across England, and a 30% staff turnover. Without adequate staffing, the number of beds in residential homes will be forced to decrease. “In learning disability services, you might have to close the service altogether,” says Green. “In home care, there’ll be a real crisis around getting enough staff to be able to support people. So it might mean, for example, that somebody is not supported for two or three hours, and that might mean that they’re in their own bed, lying in urine, rather than having had somebody to help them. Or that people are not going to get fed on time. These are the realities of what a staff shortage means in social care.” He says there is “no recognition in government that there is a real problem. All they keep doing is mouthing the platitude of ‘you’ve just got to pay workers more’. Well, people need to remember that our customer is the government, and the government has steadfastly refused to pay workers more.” Care providers are competing for staff with, for instance, supermarkets, which tend to offer higher hourly rates. “The supermarkets can transfer the cost on to their customer. We can’t do that because the government will not pay the true costs of care.” Finding enough of the right people is also challenging, because working in social care requires special skills and personalities. “It is not for everybody,” says Green. “It’s not just a question of saying, ‘there are X number of people unemployed, they can go into social care’. This requires people who’ve got the right values, and the right connection with the people who use services. It’s both emotionally and physically draining, as well as poorly paid.” Etherington agrees, and adds that being a PA – especially a live-in assistant – comes with extra challenges. “It’s a difficult career to sustain over a long period of time, because you’re literally living someone else’s life.” It tended to suit people from mainland Europe who only planned to be in the UK for a few years; some, she says, even commuted from their home countries to work in live-in positions for a few weeks at a time. For disabled people who employ live-in care – a small part of the vast social care sector, but still representing an estimated 100,000 people – there is also the issue of cost. British PAs, says Etherington, expect much higher pay than those from the EU – and these higher wages were presented as a good thing by Boris Johnson in his conference speech. Etherington stresses that carers “do deserve a decent wage”, but the many people whose care is paid for through funding “don’t get enough to be able to pay those kind of rates. European PAs are happy to work for less as the cost of living in their country is lower, so to some extent I do agree that this could have an effect on lowering UK wages, but it enabled the people on lower budgets to find the support they needed. More funding is definitely required – and do the government have the extra cash to do that right now?” As it stands, Etherington is holding on to the hope that her team of PAs “will be around for a while. I’ve always really got on well with European PAs, they’ve just been amazing,” she says. “We’ve lost that now.”The ageless Tom Brady was in town on Sunday, and it was a nice day to watch football even at a dull stadium stuck in the suburbs. The Washington Football Team were 9.5-point underdogs against Tampa Bay, but, still, only 52,128 of 82,000 tickets were sold for a game between Brady’s Bucs and the WFT, the lowest paid NFL attendance over the weekend. Brady had a bad day, and the Football Team somehow put together a 19-play, 10½-minute touchdown drive to seal a shock 29-19 victory, but the lousy turnout was not a surprise. Washington are dead last in the NFL in average home attendance this season, selling an average of 51,291 tickets to their five home games. So Sunday was actually an improvement at the gate. They have somehow managed to draw fewer fans than the winless Detroit Lions, who are averaging 52,016 per home game. Washington, fourth in average attendance in 2011 and 20th in 2019, are the only team in the NFL selling fewer than 80% of their tickets (Washington home games average 62.6% capacity, the next lowest rate in the league is the Lions’ 80.7%). To make matters worse, many of the fans who do buy tickets come to root for the other team. There are lots of reasons as to why this is, only a few of which have to do with football. Washington are 3-6, tied for last with the New York Giants for last place in the NFC East, with virtually no chance to win a division title. The quarterback, Taylor Heinicke, replaced injured veteran, Ryan Fitzpatrick, who’d been signed as a free agent to bide a year. Even the victory over Tampa Bay was smudged with the news that defensive end Chase Young, the NFL defensive rookie of the year last season, tore his right anterior cruciate ligament against the Bucs and will miss the rest of the season. “You have to rally the troops, basically,” head coach Ron Rivera said at a news conference. “That’s just the way it is.” Maybe Rivera will be able to rally his troops, but resuscitating interest in the team is proving to be a bigger challenge. The Dallas Cowboys may still be the most hated team in the NFL, but Washington, beset by one controversy after another, have to be the hardest team in the NFL for their own fans to like. Many have tuned out. The latest mess only happened in October, when the House Oversight and Reform Commission asked the NFL to provide information collected in an investigation into the WFT’s toxic workplace culture. The NFL answered Congress’s questions but did not submit documents requested. The NFL had fined the WFT $10m in July for “bullying and intimidation.” Along with accepting the fine, the franchise said Dan Snyder, the owner of the team for more than two decades, would take a lesser role in the organization. His wife, Tanya, would take over running the franchise, but many fans were disappointed that Dan Snyder, a widely disliked character, had not been kicked out for good – so the franchise, established in 1932, could launch another restart. “The last really great season they had was in 1991,” Andy Pollin, a longtime Washington sports-radio talk-show host, tells the Guardian. “Mostly since 1999 when Dan Snyder bought the team, they’ve been a disaster. His mismanagement of the team has just been a head-scratcher.” Washington are even entwined in other team’s problems. Las Vegas coach Jon Gruden resigned last month after an investigation found that he had made racist, homophobic and misogynistic comments in emails, some to Bruce Allen, Washington’s much-reviled former general manager. (Gruden has sued the NFL, claiming the league forced him out of his job.) The Fox affiliate in Washington carried a story last week in which it quoted a former fan, Shaun Taylor, as saying, “This has been happening for a long time. So yeah, I’m done. I just don’t watch the games anymore.” Fans are gravitating to the exciting Lamar Jackson and the Baltimore Ravens, a playoff contender who play only 32 miles up the road. “If you’re new to the area, which team are you going to gravitate to?” Pollin says. The Football Team can’t even get the easy stuff right. Last month the team announced there would be a ceremony during a home game to retire the No 21 jersey worn by Sean Taylor, the Washington defensive back who was murdered in November 2007 by home intruders. The announcement was made just days before the game against the Chiefs, and the lack of notice for the ceremony was blamed for another disappointing crowd – this time just 51,322. “We thought that saving the news for a game-week reveal was the best way to focus the message on Sean and his legacy,” Jason Wright, the team president, wrote in a letter to fans. “We didn’t realize that so many of you wanted to make a trip to FedEx Field to be present for this moment – a true lack of understanding of what you, the lifeblood of this franchise, needed to mourn our collective loss and celebrate Sean’s legacy.” Being that this was Dan Snyder’s team, Washington were ripped not just for appearing to have scheduled the Taylor event to distract from the off-field strife, but also for renaming a road for Taylor at the stadium … that was lined with Porta-Potties. On and on it goes. The team is in Year 2 of finding a nickname that will replace its old racist one. “Riverboat Ron” Rivera provided a touching storyline last season, his first with Washington, by leading the team to the NFC East title as he battled squamous cell carcinoma. The Football Team topped a woeful division by winning seven of 16 games, but Washington tested Tampa Bay in a playoff game, trailing by just five points late in the fourth quarter. Pollin is a third-generation Washingtonian who grew up rooting for the team partly because they were the only pro franchise in town for years when he was a kid. The NHL’s Washington Capitals, MLB’s Nationals and WNBA’s Mystics have each won championships in the last three years. Pollin describes the abandonment of the football team as a “slow drip.” There are many long-time Dallas Cowboys fans among Black DC residents because Washington were the last NFL team to integrate, in 1962. Later came the Snyder era, which only seems to have gotten worse. “Now, a 10-win season would be cause for a parade,” he says. As a result, he says of the chaos, “The shock factor is just not there with anything that happens with this team.”In a remote corner of the rolling plains that stretch across eastern Colombia from the foothills of the Andes to the Venezuelan frontier, a cluster of grain silos juts up against the pristine blue sky. Not long ago, this region was plagued by communist insurgents and rightwing paramilitaries; now it is home to an austere community of blond-haired, blue-eyed Anabaptist Christians which traces its origins to 16th-century Friesland. Children, dressed immaculately in plaid shirts and long dresses, finish Bible studies – in English, Spanish and Low German – and prepare for an afternoon’s labour in the fields; the family patriarchs fuel up huge combine harvesters, shipped especially from Mexico and the US. Their wives, who seldom work the crops outside harvest time, tend to chores in their homes. A quote from the New Testament in German at the church. ‘The blessing of the Lord makes you rich without effort.’ The first members of this Mennonite community arrived here in 2016, but their forefathers have been migrating for centuries. “The Anabaptist ancestors of the Mennonites were chased out of Europe by Catholics because they were radical reformists,” said Luca Zanetti, a Swiss photographer who recently visited Liviney. Zanetti’s interest in Mennonite settlers was first piqued by a plaque in Zurich for Felix Manz, one of the group’s founders who was martyred in the 16th century. “I wanted to know who these ancestral neighbours are that now live across the world.” The Mennonite diaspora began fleeing their homelands in northern Europe – across Holland, Switzerland and Germany – in the 16th century, to escape persecution from the Catholic church. Women are rarely seen in the fields unless it is harvesting time. Then you can see them sitting in the small car-sized John Deere cabins together with their husbands. Liviney is surrounded by patches of forest that look like islands in the sea of grass and form along rivers and creeks. Locals call them morichales because the moriche palm tree tower above the rest of the vegetation. These swamp forests are home to the jaguar, the tapir and the anaconda. Many ended up in Russia, before migrating to the prairies of the United States in the 18th and 19th centuries. Today, there are Mennonite communities across Africa and the Americas which dwarf those that remained in Europe. Most inhabitants in this settlement, known as Liviney, hold Mexican passports, and had spent most of their lives in a community of tens of thousands in the Sonoran desert. But land there was expensive and unsuited to many cash crops, rains were scarce and water sat deep underground, requiring extensive drilling. Furthermore, northern Mexico is currently the setting for a fierce drug war in which innocent bystanders frequently become victims: three years ago, cartel gunmen murdered six children and three women from a Mormon community, which like the Mennonites had settled in the country in the 19th century. European migrants in the new world have settled in areas that reminded them of the homes left behind. In the case of Liviney some residents are making an effort to introduce species of pine tree lookalike. Fifteen-year-old David Bowen and 16-year-old Martin Klause, who have both finished school to hep their parents with the farm. Eight-year-old Eva Loewen. Right: Eva Fehr, the daughter of Issak Fehr, from a family of eight children. Previous to their decision to settle in Colombia the Mennonites had been seeking assurances by government that they would be allowed to pursue their lifestyle, ie open their own schools, churches and cemeteries as well as not have to send their children to the compulsory military service which could bring them to the frontlines of the war on drugs. Colombia’s 2016 peace process, which put an end to five decades of civil war, offered the Mennonites a way to carve out a new foothold in South America. Before the deal, such a project would have been unthinkable: the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (Farc), then the largest leftist insurgency in Latin America, dominated this isolated region, imposing their own rules on the civilian population, while battling the Colombian army and its paramilitary allies. Colombian truckers like Alberto Cárdenas bring imported fertilizer south from Cartagena de Indias on the Caribbean coast 1,500km away, in a three-day journey. When the fertilizer is unloaded he fills the truck with soya beans, grain or rice. In just a few years, however, Mennonite investors have snapped up the titles for 20,000 hectares of land. Fleets of 18-wheeler trucks make regular pickups of Liviney’s biggest exports: rice, corn and soya beans, the latter sold to a pig farm owned by a former president. “The blessing of the lord makes you rich without effort,” reads an inscription in German on the wall of one of the colony’s several churches that also doubles as a school. But the growth of the settlement has not come without hard work – and plenty of investment: the Mennonites have invested more than $20m through two newly incorporated local companies. The Loewen family with father Abram, wife Eva Harms, one-year-old Ana, eight-year-old Eva and six-year-old Abram. The family had good grain and soya harvests which allowed them to buy a home off a family that returned to Mexico. Rice farmer Abram Loewen and his daughter Ana. “Here you need to throw a lot of money at the land before you gain something,” said Abram Loewen, a rice farmer. Like other senior members of the community, he employs other Mennonites who have been unable to get their own crops going. Liviney’s gleaming pickup trucks and air-conditioned homes contrast starkly with the poverty in surrounding region, which had long been neglected by the Colombian government. And unlike the rough dirt trails in neighbouring villages, Liviney’s roads are paved with fine red gravel and flanked by brand-new electricity pylons and cables. Pastor Abram Fehr speaks on a Sunday morning. Pastor Abram Fehr with his family. Abram Fehr, tall and with a pair of Arctic-blue eyes, is a pastor and also the proprietor the only hotel in town, which, before the pandemic, received Mennonite visitors from as far as Mexico, Paraguay, Bolivia and Argentina looking to buy land. Argentine Mennonites are currently the biggest buyers, said Fehr, as they are keen to escape what they see as government “meddling” in the upbringing of their children. Mennonite children study from ages six to 13, but then they are put to work – the boys work the fields, even if they can barely see over the steering wheel of the tractors, while the girls tend to the kitchens and gardens – a custom which often puts them at odds with education laws around the world. Youths go out on Sundays to play volleyball, listen to rock music, drink beers (but only the boys) and vape. In recent decades, similar tensions caused a wave of Mennonite migrants to leave Canada – “practically a communist state”, scoffed Fehr. The Mennonites have little contact with their neighbours, who refer to them as “the Germans” and comment on their “weird accents”. Some locals complain about the Mennonites’ intensive farming practices, and the community’s rapid expansion has also brought them into conflict with the indigenous Sikuani people, after the Mennonites moved on to land claimed by the tribe. Further friction has been caused by the settlers’ aggressive logging – a practice which for decades was banned by the Farc rebels. “While the Mennonites get on well with the local population, buying products in nearby towns and visiting restaurants and boosting our economy, there are some environmental issues,” one local government official said diplomatically. Escarlet’s family is from Venezuela and her partner works for Abram Loewen. Many Venezuelan migrants head to Colombia in search of a better living. When asked about the climate crisis, which is heightened by worldwide deforestation, Ramon Dick, one of Liviney’s leaders, was fatalistic. “As a Christian I do not fear death or the end of the world because I am entrusted to Christ,” he said, his broad grin revealing a set of brilliant white teeth. “I follow him, the day I die I am with him, walking on a golden pavement to a crystalline sea!” Liviney’s new cemetery. Placed flat on the ground in one corner is a small lone marble tomb stone with the inscription: ‘The baby of John Fehrn Janzen born on the 22 une 2018 and died on the 5 December 2018. He lived for 5 months and 13 days. The first person to die in the new colony.’Rightwing operatives in the US are using a huge network of fake local news sites to target crucial state elections, with the sites publishing tens of thousands of conservative-skewed articles on politically charged subjects, many of them misleading or wrong, over the past 11 months. An investigation by Popular Information, an online newsletter founded by journalist Judd Legum, found that in Virginia 28 sites, each purporting to be local news outlets and all owned by the same company, published almost 5,000 articles about critical race theory in schools. CRT is an academic discipline that examines the ways in which racism operates in US laws and society. It is not taught in Virginia schools. But the idea of CRT has become an inflammatory call to arms, or at least to the ballot box, among the right wing. The Virginia sites published the articles, many of which addressed spurious Republican claims about CRT threatening to dominate school curriculums, as the gubernatorial race in the state loomed. Glenn Youngkin, a Republican, triumphed over Terry McAuliffe in the 3 November election, after he exploited concerns over teaching about race and promised to ban CRT from classrooms. The Virginia “local news” sites, which include the Central Virginia Times and the Fredericksburg Leader, are run by Metric Media, an organization that operates more than 1,300 “community news sites” across the US and is linked to Locality Labs, both of which are overseen by Brian Timpone. In 2020 the New York Times revealed that the two companies, along with others involved in publishing the sites, “have received at least $1.7m from Republican political campaigns and conservative groups”. The Times reported that conservative organizations were able to “order” articles from news websites owned by Metric Media and its affiliates attacking Democratic political candidates. Some of the contributors to the Metric Media network have included Donors Trust, and the Illinois Opportunity Project, an investigation by the Tow Center for Digital Journalism at Columbia University revealed in October. Donors Trust pumped $90m into rightwing causes in 2019 alone, according to the Center for Media and Democracy, while the Illinois Opportunity Project has links to wealthy conservative donors. The Tow Center found that far from representing local neighborhoods and communities, Metric Media frequently ignores them. Despite having 40 news outlets based in Florida, the network published just one article on a Miami building collapse in June that made national headlines. Metric Media and Brian Timpone did not respond to requests for comment. Between January and November 2021, the 28 Virginia Metric Media sites published 4,657 articles about critical race theory in schools, Popular Information found. Many of those stories were automated, referencing an online pledge to “refuse to lie to young people about US history and current events” – described by Metric Media as a pledge by educators to teach CRT. But there is no evidence on the website for the pledge that the people who have signed it are teachers. Signatories must list their city and state, and Metric Media appears to use an automated system to generate articles based on whether anyone has signed from a town or city covered by a Metric Media news outlet. That system enables the Central Shenandoah News, which theoretically covers the area in north-west of Virginia, to run regular articles based on the same source. Last week, it ran the following two pieces: No new teachers in Harrisonburg sign pledge on Nov. 2 to teach Critical Race Theory No new teachers in Harrisonburg sign pledge on Nov. 1 to teach Critical Race Theory The Central Shenandoah News has run the same version of the Harrisonburg article since August, including almost daily since the beginning of October. It has also regurgitated the format for nearby Staunton. Timpone is an ex-journalist with a track record of operating dubious news organizations. Timpone’s predecessor to Locality Labs was a company called Journatic, which saw a licensing contract with the Chicago Tribune torn up after it published plagiarized articles and made up quotes and fake names for its writers. Popular Information found that as well as targeting Virginia with anti-CRT articles, Metric Media has also ramped up the tactic in other states with looming governor elections. News sites owned by the company have published 11,988 anti-CRT articles in Florida over the past 11 months, 10,096 articles in Texas, and 6,262 in Ohio. Sites claiming to represent New Hampshire have published 2,162 anti-CRT articles. Legum said he found no evidence that any of the Media Metric sites have significant traffic or readership: “But I don’t really think that’s the purpose,” he said. “I think that it’s more the idea of injecting something into the political conversation and giving it a more credible sheen than if you were just to put it out as an advocacy group or something like that.” After one of the “news sites” covers a candidate or political group, that person or organization can use quotes or cite favorable coverage from the related article. Quotes from an outlet like the Central Shenandoah News could be used for online ads, TV ads, or political mail-outs. In Virginia, Youngkin won the governorship by a little more than 60,000 votes. The fake news sites might not win an election by themselves, but in a tight race, every little bit helps. “I think that they could have a meaningful impact. Not because necessarily they’re going to influence that many voters, but because elections are decided at the margins,” Legum said. “So I don’t think it necessarily will reach that many people, but I do think it can make a meaningful difference, and it’s one of the things in the toolkit that could make a difference.”Halle Berry leaves it pretty late to turn on the energy for her directing debut – until the final round, in fact. But this fight movie, in which Berry herself plays a burned-out MMA fighter struggling to make a comeback, concludes with an extended showdown in which her character gets climactically in the cage with a ferocious UFC champ called Lady Killer, played by real-life martial artist Valentina Shevchenko, in front of a packed crowd eager for an ass-kicking. Berry makes it look good; she faces off with the real deal and she herself looks like a perfectly plausible deal. You’ll forgive the cliches and sentimentality that went before … just about. Berry plays Jackie Justice, a renowned fighter who was brutally beaten in her last match, as a result of being exploited by her abusive boyfriend-slash-manager Desi (Adan Canto), and slumps into depression and alcoholism. Then her own mother (Adriane Lenox), insists that Jackie starts looking after Manny (Danny Boyd Jr), her young son from a previous relationship. Moreover, a big-time MMA manager (Shamier Anderson) contacts Jackie, looking to set her up in a new fight for cynical reasons of his own. All these things combine to inspire in Jackie a new purpose, and she approaches a trainer, Bobbi (Sheila Atim) who works with grizzled veteran Pops (Stephen McKinley Henderson) – they of course see in Jackie a glimmer of the right stuff, and the only way is up. All the constituent scenes in this film, scripted by newcomer Michelle Rosenfarb, are very broad, Bobbi’s character is a little underwritten and the ending itself is broadly predictable, but Berry brings commitment and focus to the drama. She wins on points. • Bruised is released on 19 November in cinemas and on 24 November in Netflix.I thought it was brilliant, if a little incongruous, seeing the Hollywood A-listers Ryan Reynolds and Rob McElhenney turn up at Maidenhead United’s ground last month, to watch their first game as the new owners of Wrexham AFC. They surprised everyone last year when their offer to buy the north Wales club was approved. Now Covid travel rules have been relaxed, they have finally had a chance to see their beloved Red Dragons in person. As the owners of another National League club, Grimsby Town FC, Andrew Pettit and I are hoping some of that glitz and glamour will permanently rub off on us when we visit the Racecourse Ground in January. I’m personally delighted about the competitive nature of the National League this year, with a number of “big” clubs vying for promotion out of what is the fifth tier of English football. The gamble which the Deadpool and It’s Always Sunny in Philadelphia stars are taking in the National League, asking fans to “dream big” and think of the Premier League as a target, is not dissimilar to what is happening with the 24 teams in the Championship. A number of clubs are looking to benefactors to sustain financial losses while helping them win promotion – all the while knowing that only three clubs can be successful. The analogy with the Championship breaks down quickly though. No one buys into a club in the National League motivated by financial returns: it has to be about taking the club and community on a journey, and for that I admire what is happening at clubs like Wrexham and Stockport County. Both clubs have owners who are taking significant financial and reputational risks to awaken “sleeping giants”: in Stockport’s case, they were bought by property entrepreneur Mark Stott in January 2020. I believe they want the best for the clubs and communities; these are not the kind of opaque international investors who use brokers to get them through the owners’ and directors’ test on moral and financial suitability. What worries me is the growing financial inequality that is becoming embedded in English football. Grimsby Town will make a significant loss this year. While budgets at our level are not officially declared, we know we are “competitive” – and we know that four or five of our peers are spending significantly more than us to get into the Football League. While we can boast nearly full-house attendances and improved performances at Grimsby, we are investing in the long-term infrastructure and culture of the club, and as a result it’s likely our financial losses will be worse next year. The second year after you drop out of the league, you lose all support payments from the EFL. For most owners at this level there is an acceptance that the payoffs lie somewhere other than the balance sheet: most are more interested in helping our community redefine its future. That inequality should exist in football or society at large is neither controversial, nor problematic in itself. Natural endowments and capabilities mean advantages play out in all walks of life. The issue I and many others have with inequality is when it is patently unfair. While I love the excitement that glamorous owners bring to football, there needs to be strong financial parameters enforced around lower-league clubs, particularly around the pay structures and bonuses for each division. Clubs being able to underwrite big losses is a gamble that often does not pay off over time. It also creates unrealistic expectations among fans of clubs about the kinds of players they can attract, and leads to wage inflation for the whole league. This kind of market distortion is bad for the football pyramid as a whole. The free market is a myth. All systems need operating boundaries with checks and balances if we want a market to be healthy and competitive. Outside football, in recent decades we have seen companies abandon working-class communities in places like Grimsby in favour of cheaper labour overseas. In football we see a similar kind of process, as super-rich individuals use brute force to achieve success by underwriting losses. Even if those individuals are acting honourably, which many are, it distorts the market for everyone. And crucially, when it doesn’t work it leaves the kind of disastrous mess we have seen at Bury, Wigan Athletic and Macclesfield Town in recent years. This is why Grimsby Town are proud to be members of the Fair Game alliance, being led by Niall Couper from AFC Wimbledon, and I’m really looking forward to the fan-led review they are publishing soon. Even the former Conservative sports minister Tracey Crouch seemed to understand the need to rethink the value of a football club. “Football clubs are not ordinary businesses,” she said in her interim findings. “They play a critical social, civic and cultural role in their local communities. They need to be protected – sometimes from their owners, who are, after all, simply the current custodians of a community asset.” I’m hoping that we see recommendations in the fan-led review that would help cement the sustainable ownership of clubs as community assets. First, we need a massive upgrade of the evidently weak owners’ and directors’ test. There should be a legal commitment to enshrine their commitments to fans and the local community. Second, we need to incentivise responsible financial conduct throughout the football pyramid, and distribute finances based on a new fairness and sustainability index. Some of the massive amounts of revenue generated in the Premier League should go to those clubs that score highly on the index – clubs that are committed to financial sustainability, have good governance and believe in real fan and community engagement. With the profile our game has, English football could and should be showing real leadership: in how we create not only a fairer sport, but a fairer society. Jason Stockwood is a technology entrepreneur, fellow at Oxford University and chairman of Grimsby Town FCMPs should still be allowed to work about 10 to 15 hours a week in second jobs as long as they are not offering political consultancy, a cabinet minister has said. The international trade secretary, Anne-Marie Trevelyan, suggested the government could support new guidelines to put limits on the hours of outside work, as she gave a round of broadcast interviews on Wednesday morning. Trevelyan, a Brexit supporter and ally of Boris Johnson, defended MPs being able to do some work outside parliament, saying it added to the “richness” of political life. She told BBC Breakfast: “I think there is a common-sense test, which is if you probably do 40-50 hours a week doing your main job, doing 10 or 15 hours a week doing something else, whatever you choose to do in your spare time, whether that’s paid or not paid, is something that is part of the richness of what you bring as an individual to your role as an MP.” However, there was later confusion over what the government would like the limit on hours to be, as Trevelyan told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme that an MP doing 20 hours a week of work outside parliament could be considered “reasonable”. She told the broadcaster: “Let’s say two shifts, that would be 16 hours a week. Are we saying 10 to 20 hours a week outside your work as an MP and a parliamentarian? If that’s what you chose to do as your choice, that’s fine.” Earlier, on Times Radio, she had set a reasonable limit at about eight to 10 hours of work a week. Proposals for rules on MPs’ second jobs will be put forward by the standards committee, chaired by Labour’s Chris Bryant. A cross-party consensus will have to be forged after that but both main parties are indicating that they will support a prohibition on paid political consultancy, after a U-turn by Johnson. There are not likely to be large numbers of MPs who are working more than 15 hours a week at a second job. One of them would be Geoffrey Cox, the former attorney general, who has worked more than 1,000 hours on legal work during the course of a year. More MPs may be caught by a ban on paid political consultancy. Asked if Cox should reduce his hours, Trevelyan told BBC Breakfast: “That’s a question to discuss. The key is, is he doing a good job for his constituents? Do they think he’s doing a good job for them? And, from what I’ve heard, no one has stood up and said otherwise. “But that he continues to practise what is his professional skill while he is a backbench MP, for me, is perfectly acceptable because in the same way that Maria Caulfield serves in the NHS as a nurse, continues to practise her profession alongside serving her constituents is, I think, important for the NHS.” Labour had called an opposition day debate on second jobs for Wednesday with a proposal to ban political consultancy, but Johnson attempted to outflank the opposition on Tuesday by saying he would do the same. A fortnight after his botched bid to tear up the standards system to protect the Tory backbencher Owen Paterson from censure for breaking the rules on lobbying, the prime minister will claim to be the champion of parliamentary probity. Downing Street said Johnson would table an amendment to an opposition motion tabled by the Labour leader, Keir Starmer, that would ban MPs from being paid for working as parliamentary advisers. No 10 sources said the prime minister’s amendment would “toughen up” Labour’s approach by adding that MPs should be investigated and “appropriately punished” if they prioritised other jobs over their taxpayer-funded role. On Tuesday, Starmer welcomed Johnson’s acquiescence, but urged him to back Labour’s proposals “in full” and claimed the prime minister had only capitulated due to mounting pressure caused by the media attention on Tory MPs’ second jobs. Speaking at a press conference, Starmer said: “If he is accepting the motion in full, then that’s a significant victory for us in our work to clean up politics, but obviously I need to look at exactly how he’s put it.” There is widespread dissatisfaction on the Tory benches about No 10’s new willingness to curb their earnings, particularly among some of the old guard who have lucrative sideline roles. Sir Geoffrey Clifton-Brown, a member of the backbench 1922 Committee, who earns extra money from arable farming in Norfolk, told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: “Clearly the whole issue of standards and the motion tabled before the house and then a complete U-turn, and now this.” Clifton-Brown said he had “no problem” with a ban on paid consultancy work, but going further could deter people who had “good skills”. “If you go further, and some in the house do want to go further and ban all second jobs, as I say it will have the effect, as I’ve already said, of deterring people who have good skills outside who are professionals, who actually I think bring quite a lot to the house in terms of their experience,” he said. He suggested the approach could be to ensure new candidates declare outside jobs and let voters decide.The property company British Land, which owns offices and shopping centres including Sheffield’s Meadowhall, has unveiled multimillion pound plans to buy and convert car parks and empty retail centres into urban distribution hubs for online shopping and same-day grocery delivery services. The firm put the total value of its pipeline of urban logistics properties at £600m, and said it had spent £189m on assets with “urban logistics potential”, including in central London. It aims to buy more warehouses and add extra floors to existing ones to rent out to retailers wanting to deliver goods quickly to shoppers in the capital. The popularity of online shopping soared during the coronavirus lockdowns, and in recent months in UK cities there has been a flood of new ultra-fast grocery delivery firms entering the market – including Getir, Gorillas and Weezy – which promise to bring supplies to your front door in minutes and which have attracted billions from investors. As a result of the much shorter delivery times demanded by consumers, firms are having to store their stock a lot closer to their customers, requiring new “last-mile” depots. British Land said it had bought sites including an £87m warehouse at Heritage House in Enfield, close to the M25 motorway, and a £20m underground car park in Finsbury Square, central London. The FTSE 100 firm will add an extra floor to the Enfield space, which is currently fully let to tenants including the supermarket Waitrose. It will also convert the majority of a retail park on the eastern edge of the M25 at Thurrock, in Essex, into a logistics hub by building a multi-storey warehouse. The Finsbury Square car park will be divided into smaller units and transformed into a logistics hub to serve the City of London with ultra-fast grocery deliveries as well as takeaway meals prepared in so-called “dark kitchens”, which are not open to the public but used for delivery to customers through firms such as Deliveroo and Uber Eats. British Land will also revamp the green space above the car park. It is not yet clear whether any car parking spaces will be retained. Space needed for distribution centres in the capital is in short supply, according to British Land’s chief executive, Simon Carter, and the firm is looking to redevelop sites to meet this growing need. “Taking existing logistics assets and going up, making them multi-storey, has been seen a lot in other supply-constrained markets particularly across Asia, and you are seeing more in Paris, but it hasn’t been done to a huge extent in the UK,” Carter said. “Increasing expectation of delivery times, same-day delivery and in some cases 10-minute delivery is creating colossal demand for space at the same time that industrial space has shrunk in London.” British Land announced its shift in strategy towards urban logistics and away from its traditional portfolio of shopping centres and office buildings in May. If online sales continue to boom over the next five years, retailers could need an extra 12m sq ft (1.1m sq metres) of additional space for last-mile deliveries by 2025, when e-commerce could account for 30% of all retail sales, according to research by the estate agent Knight Frank. It found lack of space and growing demand were pushing rents higher for industrial units, especially in London and south-east England. British Land returned to half-year profit in the six months to 30 September as the easing of Covid restrictions at the shops and offices that occupy its buildings allowed it to collect almost all rent due from retail tenants, and 100% of office rent. It reported a £370m profit after tax for the period, compared with a loss of £730m a year earlier. Carter said companies were once again looking at renting office space as their staff return to their desks, making “occupiers more confident of committing to space”. One of its newest office developments, at 1 Broadgate in the City of London, has been fully pre-let to tenants or is under offer.Current and former players showing signs of early onset dementia after repeated head impacts have been advised by World Rugby and several leading independent experts that 11 other factors including depression, excessive alcohol consumption or unhealthy eating could explain their deteriorating brain health. World Rugby, in conjunction with the International Rugby Players association, has launched a global brain health education campaign in response to growing concerns over long-term player welfare which have prompted a legal case against the world’s governing body, the Rugby Football Union and the Welsh Rugby Union. Even the merest suggestion, however, from the game’s governing body that dementia symptoms could stem from players’ lifestyle choices rather than impacts suffered in matches or training will upset those who insist rugby is the root cause of their issues. The complication is that chronic traumatic encephalopathy, a degenerative brain condition for which the sole known cause is repeated blows to the head, can only be fully confirmed by a postmortem. Aimed at professional players past and present, the new campaign has been launched at the World Rugby medical commission conference being held in London. The global governing body says it wants “to educate and support” current and former elite players who are concerned about their wellbeing and offer free access to brain health clinics where expert consultation, clinical assessment and advice can be accessed. A video has also been released in which experts outline 12 modifiable risk factors for dementia, only one being a brain injury sustained through playing the game. These include a lack of physical activity, lack of social contact, depression, loneliness, heart disease and other “lifestyle” choices such as smoking, obesity or excessive drinking. According to Prof Craig Ritchie, chair of the psychiatry of ageing at the University of Edinburgh, there are broader medical issues to be considered. “Long-term cognitive health is extremely complex – and dementia isn’t necessarily a consequence of one factor,” he said. “It is important for those involved in the game to understand that by prioritising good brain health, it is possible to reduce the risk of developing dementia and other degenerative brain conditions. “Rugby players, past and present, can make moves, such as maintaining good health and fitness and tackling stress, anxiety and depression to help reduce certain risk factors, while the sport continues to prioritise reducing the risk of head impacts for players at all levels and stages of the game.” Another leading expert, Prof Willie Stewart, consultant neuropathologist at Queen Elizabeth University Hospital, Glasgow, is supporting the initiative. “This is incredibly important work from World Rugby that will undoubtedly benefit the global game and broader sport. While progress is being made to reduce risk for current and future players through changes to training and gameplay, it is important that the brain health of former players is not overlooked. This initiative highlights the importance of our brain health and the measures we can all take to try and reduce our risk of dementia.” The former England hooker Steve Thompson, the 33-cap Wales flanker Alix Popham and Carl Hayman, who represented the All Blacks at prop between 2001-07, are among a raft of former players who have joined the legal action described last year as a “ticking timebomb” by Richard Boardman of Rylands Law, who is representing the players. However, World Rugby’s chairman, Sir Bill Beaumont, said the game was doing all it could “to safeguard our players” and had “consistently acted on evolving science and evidence” to assist player welfare. “We care deeply about every member of our rugby family,” he said. “As a former player myself, I appreciate that some players may be worried about their brain health. We must, and are, putting those players at the heart of our welfare plans. Good brain health is much wider than what happens on the field, and we have more control over it than you would think. “At the same time, we will not sit still in evolving our game to ensure it best protects those playing it. By providing accessible video resources and high-quality care and support through the establishment of brain health clinics around the world, we can better educate members of our rugby family on what can be a complex and daunting topic.”What do your Facebook posts, who you follow on Instagram and who you interact with the most on social media say about you? According to the tech startup Voyager Labs, that information could help police figure out if you have committed or plan to commit a crime. Voyager Labs is one of dozens of US companies that have popped up in recent years with technology that purports to harness social media to help solve and predict crime. Pulling information from every part of an individual’s various social media profiles, Voyager helps police investigate and surveil people by reconstructing their entire digital lives – public and private. By relying on artificial intelligence, the company claims, its software can decipher the meaning and significance of online human behavior, and can determine whether subjects have already committed a crime, may commit a crime or adhere to certain ideologies. But new documents, obtained through public information requests by the Brennan Center, a non-profit organization, and shared with the Guardian, show that the assumptions the software relies on to draw those conclusions may run afoul of first amendment protections. In one case, Voyager indicated that it considered using an Instagram name that showed Arab pride or tweeting about Islam to be signs of a potential inclination toward extremism. The documents also reveal Voyager promotes a variety of ethically questionable strategies to access user information, including enabling police to use fake personas to gain access to groups or private social media profiles. Voyager, a nine-year-old startup registered as Bionic 8 Analytics with offices in Israel, Washington, New York and elsewhere, is a small fish in a big pond that includes companies like Palantir and Media Sonar. The Los Angeles police department trialed Voyager software in 2019, the Brennan Center documents show, and engaged in a lengthy back-and-forth with the company about a permanent contract. But experts say Voyager’s products are emblematic of a broader ecosystem of tech players answering law enforcement’s calls for advanced tools to expand their policing capabilities. For police, the appeal of such tools is clear: use technology to automatically and quickly see connections that might take officers much longer to uncover, or to detect unnoticed behaviors or leads that a human might not pick up on because of lack of sophistication or capacity. With immense pressure on departments to keep crime rates low and prevent attacks, using technology to be able to make fast and efficient law enforcement decisions is an attractive value proposition. New and existing documents show the LAPD alone has worked or considered working with companies such as PredPol, MediaSonar, Geofeedia, Dataminr, and now Voyager. But for the public, social media-informed policing can be a privacy nightmare that effectively criminalizes casual and at times protected behavior, experts who have reviewed the documents for the Guardian say. As the Guardian previously reported, police departments are often unwilling to relinquish the use of those tools even in the face of public outcry and in spite of little proof it helps to reduce crime. Experts also point out that companies like Voyager often use buzzwords such as “artificial intelligence” and “algorithms” to explain how they analyze and process information but provide little evidence that it works. A Voyager spokesperson, Lital Carter Rosenne, said the company’s software was used by a wide range of clients to enable searches through databases but said that Voyager did not build those databases on its own or supply Voyager staffers to run its software. “These are our clients’ responsibilities and decisions, in which Voyager has no involvement at all,” Rosenne said in an email. “As a company, we follow the laws of all the countries in which we do business. We also have confidence that those with whom we do business are law-abiding public and private organizations.” “Voyager is a software company,” Rosenne said in answer to questions about how the technology works. “Our products are search and analytics engines that employ artificial intelligence and machine learning with explainability.” Voyager did not respond to the detailed questions about who it has contracts with or how its software draws conclusions on a person’s support for specific ideologies. LAPD declined to respond to a request for comment. ‘A guilt-by-association system’ The way Voyager and companies like it work is not complicated, the documents show. Voyager software hoovers up all the public information available on a person or topic – including posts, connections and even emojis – analyzes and indexes it and then, in some cases, cross-references it with non-public information. Internal documents show the technology creates a topography of a person’s entire social media existence, specifically looking at users’ posts as well as their connections, and how strong each of those relationships are. The software visualizes how a person’s direct connections are connected to each other, where all of those connections work, and any “indirect connections” (people with at least four mutual friends). Voyager also detects any indirect connections between a subject and other people the customer has previously searched for. Voyager’s data collection is far reaching. If a person tracked by Voyager software deletes a friend or a post from their own profile, it remains archived in their Voyager profile. The system catalogues not only a subject’s contacts, but also any content or media those contacts posted, including status updates, pictures and geotags. And it draws in second- and third-degree friendships to “unearth previously unknown middlemen or instances of improper association”. Meredith Broussard, a New York University data journalism professor and author of Artificial Unintelligence: How Computers Misunderstand the World, said it appeared Voyager’s algorithms were making assessments about people based on their online activity and networks, using a process that resembled online ad targeting. Ad targeting systems place people in “affinity groups”, determining who is most likely to be interested in buying a new car, for example, based on their friends and connections, Broussard explained: “So instead of grouping people into buckets like ‘pet owners’, what Voyager seems to be doing is putting people into ‘buckets’ of likely criminals.” In the advertising context, many consumers have come to accept this kind of targeting, she said, but the stakes are much higher when it comes to policing. “It’s a ‘guilt by association’ system,” she said, adding that this kind of algorithm was not particularly sophisticated. A focus on ‘those most engaged in their hearts’ Voyager software applies a similar process to Facebook groups, pages and events – both public and closed – cataloging recently published content and mapping out the most active users. Documents show the company also allows users to search for posts about specific topics, pulling up all mentions of that term, as well as the location tagged in those posts. The company claims all of this information on individuals, groups and pages allows its software to conduct real-time “sentiment analysis” and find new leads when investigating “ideological solidarity”. In proposals to the LAPD, the company claimed its artificial intelligence platform was unmatched in its ability to analyze “human behavior indicators”. Voyager claims its AI can provide insights such as an individual or group’s “social whereabouts”, can uncover hidden relationships and can perform a “sentiment analysis” to determine where someone stands ideologically on various topics, including extremism. “We don’t just connect existing dots,” a Voyager promotional document read. “We create new dots. What seem like random and inconsequential interactions, behaviors or interests, suddenly become clear and comprehensible.” A service the company calls VoyagerDiscover presents social profiles of people who “most fully identify with a stance or any given topic”. The company says the system takes into account personal involvement, emotional involvement, knowledge and calls to action, according to documents. Unlike other companies, Voyager claims it doesn’t need extra time to study and process online behavior and instead can make this type of judgment “on the fly”. “This ability moves the discussion from those who are most engaged online to those most engaged in their hearts,” the documents read. In one redacted case study Voyager presented to LAPD when it was pursuing a contract with the agency, the company examined the ways in which it would have analyzed the social media profile of Adam Alsahli, who was killed last year while attempting to attack the Corpus Christi naval base in Texas. The company wrote that its software used artificial intelligence to examine whether subjects have ties to Islamic fundamentalism, and color coded these profiles as green, orange or red (orange and red seemingly indicating a proclivity toward extremism). “This provides a flag or indication for further vetting or investigation, before an incident has occurred, as part of an effort to put in place a ‘trip wire’ to indicate emerging threats,” the company wrote. In Alsahli’s case, Voyager said, the company concluded his social media activity reflected “Islamic fundamentalism and extremism” and suggested investigators could further reviews Alsahli’s accounts to “determine the strength and nature of his direct and indirect connections to other Persons of Interest”. But the documents show that many aspects of what Voyager pointed out as tripwires or signals of fundamentalism could also qualify as free speech or other protected activity. Voyager, for instance, said 29 of Alsahli’s 31 Facebook posts were pictures with Islamic themes and that one of Alsahli’s Instagram account handles, which was redacted in the documents, reflected “his pride in and identification with his Arab heritage”. When examining the list of accounts he followed and who followed him, Voyager said that “most are in Arabic” – one of the 100 languages the company said it can automatically translate – and “generally appear” to be accounts posting religious content. On his Twitter account, Voyager wrote, Alsahli mostly tweeted about Islam. The documents also implicated Alsahli’s connections, writing that three Facebook users he shared posts with could “have had other interactions with him outside social media, or been connecting in the same Islamist circles and forums”. Parts of the documents were redacted. However, the only visible mention of content that could be seen as explicitly tying Alsahli to fundamentalism consisted of tweets Voyager said he had posted in support of mujahideen. Julie Mao, the deputy director of Just Futures, a legal support group for immigrants, said she worried the color-coded risk algorithm and Voyager’s choice to study this particular case showed potential bias. “It’s always easy in hindsight to pick out someone who was violent and say ‘hey, tech works based on them,’” Mao said. “It’s incredibly opaque how Voyager arrived to this threat level (was it something more than expressing religious devotion?) and how many individuals receive similar threat levels based on innocuous conduct. So even by its own logic, it’s a flawed example of accuracy and could lead to over-policing and harassment.” It’s “basically a stop and frisk tool for police”, Mao said. Voyager’s claims that it used “cutting-edge AI-based technologies” such as “machine learning”, “cognitive computing”, and “combinatorial and statistical algorithms” were, in effect, just “word salad”, said Cathy O’Neil, a data scientist and CEO of Orcaa, a firm that audits algorithms. “They’re saying, ‘We use big math.’ It doesn’t actually say anything about what they’re doing.” In fact, O’Neil said, companies like Voyager generally provided little evidence demonstrating their algorithms had the capabilities they claim. And often, she said, police departments did not require or ask for this kind of data, and companies would be unable to provide evidence if it were requested – because their claims are frequently hyperbolic and unfounded. The problem with this kind of marketing, O’Neil added, was that it could provide cover for biased policing practices: “If they successfully get people to trust their algorithm, with zero evidence that it works, then it can be weaponized.” Melina Abdullah, a Black Lives Matter LA co-founder, said she was disturbed to learn about the conclusions Voyager’s software had made about the online activity of Muslim users. “As a Black Muslim, I’m concerned. I always know that my last name alone flags me differently than other folks, that I’m seen with heightened scrutiny, that there are assumptions made about ‘extremism’ because I’m Muslim,” she said, adding that the records left her with many unanswered questions: “Who have they been flagging and what are the justifications? … It sounds like everybody’s vulnerable to this.” Fake friends and private messages Relying on publicly available information, Voyager’s software cobbles together a fairly comprehensive and invasive picture of a person’s private life, the experts said. But the company supplements that data with non-public information it gains access to through two primary channels: warrants or subpoenas and what the company calls an “active persona”. In the first case, Voyager tech sifts through vast swaths of data law enforcement gets through various types of warrants. Such information can include subjects’ private messages, their location information or the keywords they have searched for. Voyager catalogs and analyzes these often vast troves of user data – an undertaking LAPD officers wrote in emails they would appreciate help with – and cross-references it with social and geographic maps drawn up from public information. For its Facebook-specific warrant service, Voyager software analyzes private messages to identify profiles subjects are communicating most frequently with. It then shows a subject’s public posts alongside these private messages to provide “valuable” context. “In numerous cases, its effectiveness has prompted our clients to request additional PDF warrant returns” from tech companies, the documents read. Voyager said it planned to roll out the same warrant-indexing capabilities for Instagram and Snap, which would include image processing capabilities. John Hamasaki, a criminal defense lawyer and member of San Francisco’s police commission, said he had already had concerns about how judges grant law enforcement access to people’s private online accounts, especially Black and Latino defendants accused of being in gangs: “The degree to which private information is being seized, purportedly lawfully under search warrants, is just way over-broad.” If police were additionally using software and algorithms to analyze the private data, it compounded the potential privacy and civil liberties violations, he said: “And what conclusions are they drawing from it, and what spin is an expert giving to it? Because ‘gang experts’ are notorious for coming to a conclusion that supports the prosecution.” There is less detail about the second means through which Voyager software accesses non-public information: its premium service called “active persona”. The documents indicate customers can use what Voyager calls “avatars” to “collect and analyze information that is otherwise inaccessible” on select networks. Using the active persona feature, the company said, its software was able to access and analyze information from encrypted messaging app Telegram. A 2019 product roadmap also shows plans to roll out the “active persona” mechanism for WhatsApp groups, “meaning the user will have to provide the system with an avatar with access to the group from which he wishes to collect”. A timeline Voyager provided to the LAPD shows the company also had plans to introduce a feature that enabled “Instagram private profile collection”. Experts say the “active persona” feature appears to be another name for fake profiles and an LAPD officer described the function in an email with Voyager as the ability to “log in with fake accounts that are already friended with the target subject and pulling data”. While police departments across the country have increasingly used fake social media profiles to conduct investigations, the practice may violate Facebook and other platforms’ community standards. Facebook rules require people to use “the name they go by in everyday life”. The company removes or temporarily restricts accounts that “compromise the security of other accounts” or try to impersonate others. In 2018 police in Memphis, Tennessee, used a fake account under the name Bob Smith to befriend and gather information on activists. In response, Facebook deactivated the account and others like it and told the police department it needed to “cease all activities on Facebook that involve the use of fake accounts or impersonation of others.” Facebook said everyone, including law enforcement, was required to use their real names on their profiles. “As stated in our terms of services, misrepresentations and impersonations are not allowed on our services and we take action when we find violating activity, ” a Facebook spokesperson, Sally Aldous, said in a statement. The feature also posed privacy and ethical questions, experts said. “I worry about how low the threshold is for tech companies explicitly enabling police surveillance,” said Chris Gilliard, a professor at Macomb Community College and a research fellow at the Harvard Kennedy School’s Shorenstein Center. “There’s a long history of law enforcement spying on activists – who are engaging in entirely legal activities – in efforts to intimidate people or disrupt movements. Because of this, the bar for when companies aid police surveillance should be really high.”The company called it one of the most generous industrial buyouts in history. But Sasol, the South African chemical firm, offered significantly less money to Black homeowners than white homeowners in an attempt to entice them to relocate away from an expanding chemical complex in south-west Louisiana, according to a new analysis, published for the first time by the Guardian. Worse, the project was subsequently largely abandoned, resulting in the dismantling of Mossville, a town founded by formerly enslaved African Americans in the 1790s. Former residents say the full story of how Sasol paid them to move away still hasn’t been told. “We lost our ancestral home. One of my daughters became really depressed. They were sad because I had to move,” said Nona Harris, a lifelong resident of Mossville, whose family participated in the buyout program. “It’s a loss.” Harris, who was born in Mossville and moved out of her family home in 2017, remembers when it was a thriving community. “Most of us went to the same church,” she said. Neighbors looked out for one another, creating a safe haven from the hostility and racism they faced outside the community. “We could walk the streets without being bothered by other people,” Harris said. Then chemical companies began to encroach on the town, spewing toxic emissions and contaminating groundwater. In 2012, Sasol announced plans to build a complex that would use natural gas to make liquid fuels and ethylene, a key ingredient in plastics, near Lake Charles. Today, weeds grow in vacant lots where homes once stood in the historic Black community of Mossville. Some saw the buyout as an opportunity to escape years of pollution from other nearby fossil fuel plants. Sasol bought out nearly 600 properties, including some in the predominantly white communities next door to Mossville. Sasol did not respond to requests for comments for this story. While the buyout program was touted as a way to improve the lives of a community plagued by environmental injustices, the result appears to have exacerbated existing inequalities. The new study comes as Michael Regan, the new head of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), pays a visit to Mossville on Thursday, as part of a tour of towns along the US Gulf coast suffering from environmental racism. The price paid for property transactions in Mossville was, on average, about 40% lower than those paid in the white communities, according to the analysis by researchers with the University Network for Human Rights. Ruhan Nagra, who led the study and is the director of the environmental justice initiative at the University Network for Human Rights, acknowledges that her team’s analysis does not take the square footage or the age of the houses into account. She maintains that such data should not have mattered if “ultimately the goal is to relocate people – if that’s the goal, [then] there really isn’t a justification for why some people received buyouts that enable them to relocate and others not getting that,” Nagra said. When the company began buying out properties, it gave certain property owners the power to negotiate the value of their estates. Most of the houses bought under this type of arrangement were in Westlake, a nearly 80% white city nearby. But Mossville residents weren’t offered the same deal. When Sasol approached homeowners in the predominantly Black community, they valued properties using a set formula and did not allow for negotiation. “There was serious concern that other people in predominantly white areas were able to negotiate,” Nagra said. Homes in the mostly white town of Brentwood were also bought through the non-negotiable program. But Nagra and her team found that homes there sold for about as much as homes in the areas where residents were allowed to negotiate. Property sale prices in Brentwood – which is about 90% white, according to census data – were about 88% higher on average than sale prices in Mossville. Edward Telles, a professor of sociology at the University of California, Irvine, reviewed the study for this story. He said the statistical analysis in the study was sound and noted a history of implicit bias and structural racism contributes to lower appraisals for Black homeowners. “It’s a very compelling case”, he said. “[Mossville residents] were impoverished further and [Sasol] broke up a community that existed for 300 years. Where could they buy after they sold?” The buyout program seemed unfair to Harris from the start. She wasn’t planning to sell her home and was given only about three months to make the decision, she says: “It was a very difficult and trying time. I basically had to do all the footwork, besides having a full-time job. It almost wore me down.” Homeowners were told they’d receive $100,000 and 60% of the average appraisal price. But the company deducted debts, liens and fees from the buyout amounts – meaning the final amount residents received was often much lower than what they were originally offered. More than $20,000 was deducted from the buyout amount Harris received for a forgivable federal grant she had received years before, to help repair her home after Hurricanes Katrina and Rita. “If you needed a lawyer to do something, that was $500 that [Sasol] took out of the money that you were supposed to get,” Harris said. “If people had back child support, that came out of the money. All of that subtracted from the total amount of money that you thought you were going to get.” Former Mossville resident Larry Payne also wasn’t surprised to hear that Mossville residents received significantly less for their houses than people in other communities. “It was hurtful knowing that we had to leave Mossville and then the money that we received wasn’t anything,” he said. Both Harris and Payne lived in houses they inherited and had to split their buyout amounts with family members. Payne paid for a piece of property in Lake Charles and his house was moved there. But the house was damaged in the process. The expenses incurred drained his savings account. Some residents say they weren’t trusted with their own money and that Sasol insisted on directly paying for their new living arrangements. Many of the Mossville residents who took the buyout were older and had health problems. Payne and Harris are both in their 60s. They could have used the money from the buyouts to pay for medical care, especially considering their exposure to pollution. A 1998 exposure investigation by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention found that dioxin levels in Mossville residents’ blood was on average three times higher than the general US population. Dioxin can cause cancer and reproductive and developmental problems, according to the EPA. Several industries in the area emit dioxin compounds, including Sasol. Many Mossville residents say the Sasol buyouts left them worse off and some former landowners reported resorting to renting, as they were unable to buy another property with the money they received. Others went from owning their homes outright to having a mortgage note. The Sasol project was largely abandoned when the price of oil dropped, making the project uneconomical. Some residents turned down the offer and today live in houses between the vacant lots where their neighbors once lived. Recently, the parish closed a road that some residents used to get in and out of the community. That worries Ronald Carrier, who stayed behind. “What happens if one of those people has a medical emergency? How are those people supposed to get out of there?” Carrier didn’t take the buyout because the price was too low – and it galls him that the money offered was, in some sense, his own because the project relied on taxpayer funds. Sasol received industrial property tax exemptions worth nearly $3bn and more than a $100m in grants from the state to develop the project. “That’s the taxpayers money and I am a taxpayer,” he said. “So you come back and lowball me with my own money?”The hero of Amor Towles’s previous novel, the multimillion-selling A Gentleman in Moscow, spent 480 pages cooped up in a posh hotel, unable to leave on pain of death – a luxury lockdown. For his latest, Towles has looked to the open road. Hundreds of miles roll by over the course of The Lincoln Highway, a breezy Bildungsroman meets road trip that suits the Boston-born Towles’s expansive, folksy, anecdotal style down to the ground. It is 1954, and 18-year-old Emmett Watson has just finished a spell at the Kansas work farm where he was sent after accidentally killing a bully. His father has died, and his younger brother, Billy, is keen for the two of them to head to California in search of their mother, who walked out eight years ago. But there’s a hitch: Emmett’s beloved powder-blue Studebaker has been “borrowed” by a couple of boys on the run from the work farm. Duchess and Woolly, also 18, are driving it to New York City to raid Woolly’s trust fund and settle a few scores. Duchess, though likable and quick-witted, is hopelessly untrustworthy. He leads Emmett and Billy a fine dance across the north-eastern US, with his sidekick, lost soul Woolly, simply hoping for a good meal and a safe home. Pleasingly, the boys cross paths with a varied cast of characters: clowns, hobos, out-of-work actors, panhandlers, home-makers, hucksters and just plumb ordinary folk. A crooked preacher named Pastor John is the worst of the lot, straight out of The Night of the Hunter, quoting Bible verses even as he plots to steal Billy’s collection of silver dollars. Pastor John represents the ever-present danger of placing your trust in the wrong authority, a matter Towles touches on more generally by including an atomic bomb drill that prefigured the anxiety and mistrust of the cold war. Beyond the picaresque, there are deeper questions of justice here. Duchess lives by a moral code not far off the Old Testament: an eye for an eye, a whack with a cast-iron skillet for harm done to a friend. Towles delicately links this harsh moral code to the boy’s isolation. Duchess, like the self-justifying Pastor John, is an outcast, and his remorseless debt-settling is frontier justice personified. Emmett, by contrast, grows to share in the societal code laid down not by police or presidents, but by good plain folk in the community, which Towles thoroughly approves of: “The comfort of knowing one’s sense of right and wrong was shared by another, and thus was somehow more true.” The touches of homespun wisdom, typical of Towles, seemed quirkily sage in the Tolstoy-inspired A Gentleman in Moscow. Here, they can verge on the trite. “How easily we forget,” one character muses, “that life was the point all along.” There’s also a laboured set-up whereby Billy, who happens to be reading the stories of great historical adventurers, meets a man named Ulysses who left his wife and child behind to go to war, and has been wandering ever since. Contrivances such as this detract from the more interesting interplay at the heart of the novel between Emmett, the thoughtful young man who resents the burden of responsibility on his shoulders, and Duchess, the charming chancer who appeals to the wild spirit in us all. Towles has taken a literary risk by writing Emmett’s narrative in the third person and Duchess’s in the first, so that we readers feel closer to the ne’er-do-well than to the good guy. When the full extent of Duchess’s callousness is revealed, it comes as a shock. With its down-home style and ideas about the lone hero, The Lincoln Highway is pure Americana. Reading it in any other country is like taking a vacation in the Land of the Free: a long, easy, enjoyable if at times hokey ride on a highway filled with adventure. • The image caption on this article was amended on 18 November 2021. The photo shows Salt Lake City, Utah, not Kansas City, Missouri, as an earlier version said due to an agency error. • The Lincoln Highway is published by Hutchinson Heinemann (£20). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.The Los Angeles police department pursued a contract with a controversial technology company that could enable police to use fake social media accounts to surveil civilians and claimed its algorithms can identify people who may commit crimes in the future. A cache of internal LAPD documents obtained through public records requests by the Brennan Center for Justice, a non-profit organization, and shared with the Guardian, reveal that LAPD in 2019 trialed social media surveillance software from the analytics company Voyager Labs. Like many companies in this industry, Voyager Labs’ software allows law enforcement to collect and analyze large troves of social media data to investigate crimes or monitor potential threats. But documents reveal the company takes this surveillance a step further. In its sales pitch to LAPD about a potential long-term contract, Voyager said its software could collect data on a suspect’s online network and surveil the accounts of thousands of the suspect’s “friends”. It said its artificial intelligence could discern people’s motives and beliefs and identify social media users who are most “engaged in their hearts” about their ideologies. And it suggested its tools could allow agencies to conduct undercover monitoring using fake social media profiles. The LAPD’s trial with Voyager ended in November 2019. The records show the department continued to access some of the technology after the pilot period, and that the LAPD and Voyager spent more than a year trying to finalize a formal contract. The documents show that the LAPD has had ongoing conversations this year about a continued partnership, but a police spokesperson told the Guardian on Monday that the department was not currently using Voyager. The LAPD declined to respond to detailed and repeated inquiries on its trial with Voyager and its conversations about a potential long-term contract, as well as questions about its use of social media surveillance software. The department has said in the past that social media can be critical for investigations and for “situational awareness” in monitoring major events for potential public safety issues. The city has seen large demonstrations in recent years, as well as clashes between activists over issues such as vaccination requirements. But experts who reviewed the documents for the Guardian say they raise concerns about the LAPD’s pursuit of ethically questionable software. The department’s surveillance technology could be violating civilians’ free speech and privacy rights, the experts say, while facilitating racial profiling. The full scope of the LAPD’s surveillance tech is unclear, though records suggest that the department has in recent years purchased or considered buying software from at least 10 companies that monitor social media. The department is often a trailblazer among US police departments in adopting new technologies, with a large police budget and private foundation funding that allows it to trial programs later adopted by other departments. The concerns come after the Guardian recently revealed that the LAPD has been directing officers to broadly collect social media information of civilians they stop and question, including people who are not cited or arrested, and amid growing scrutiny of the department’s surveillance and “predictive policing” practices. ‘Bigotry embedded in code’ Voyager – registered as Bionic 8 Analytics – gave the LAPD some of its products on a trial basis in the summer and fall of 2019, the records show. The documents don’t make clear what suite of tools the LAPD had access to during the trial or whether the department used some of the company’s more controversial features. But a report the company produced for the LAPD during this period says the department used the company’s software to investigate more than 500 social media profiles and to analyze thousands of messages. The redacted report said the LAPD had used the software for “real-time tactical intelligence”; “protective intelligence” for “VIPs” in local government and in the LAPD; and cases related to gangs, homicides and hate groups. An unnamed LAPD investigator was quoted in the report as saying Voyager helped the department “identify a few new targets”. In internal messages about the pilot in 2019, the LAPD said Voyager was especially helpful in analyzing social media data obtained through warrants and in investigating online networks of “street gangs”. Communications between Voyager and the LAPD after the trial ended and when the company was trying to sell the department on its products reveal more about the firm’s purported capabilities, claims experts said were bold and troubling. In the spring of 2020, while pitching a contract, Voyager provided the LAPD with case studies illustrating how the software had been used. In one example, the company said its software had been used to investigate a Muslim Brotherhood activist in New York City who allegedly made a video encouraging people to intentionally spread Covid to Egyptian government officials in March 2020. A Voyager representative told the LAPD the investigation was conducted for “federal and local agencies” but did not name the clients or specify whether the threat had turned out to be legitimate. But Voyager said its software was able to collect and analyze thousands of the activist’s social media posts and had scooped up data on 4,000 of his “friends”. Voyager also said its software was able to discern which social media users caught up in the search were “top connections” of the activist and that it could determine who was based in New York and who worked for a government agency. The company claimed the software could also discern which of the accounts showed an “affinity” for “violent, radical ideologies” based on “indirect connections” to “extremist accounts”, appearing to refer to friends of friends. In another presentation, Voyager suggested its software could not only collect large amounts of social media data but that its “artificial intelligence” could discern people’s beliefs. Voyager showed LAPD how its software could have been used to investigate an alleged terrorist attack, analyzing the case of Adam Alsahli – a man killed after he opened fire at the Corpus Christi naval base in May 2020. Pointing to the man’s social media activity, Voyager claimed its AI could ascertain people’s “affinity for Islamic fundamentalism or extremism”. The company cited the shooter’s “pictures with Islamic themes” and said his Instagram accounts showed “his pride in and identification with his Arab heritage”. The company said its AI was so effective that its results, produced in minutes, did not “require any intervention or assessments by an analyst or investigator”. In an October 2020 proposal document, Voyager also said its software could conduct a “sentiment analysis” to discern who was most emotionally invested and had the “passion needed to act on their beliefs”. Voyager’s monitoring of broad online networks, and its claims about AI, raised red flags for experts. “There’s a basic ‘guilt by association’ that Voyager seems to really endorse,” said Rachel Levinson-Waldman, a deputy director at the Brennan Center, about Voyager’s New York City case study. “This notion that you can be painted with the ideology of people that you’re not even directly connected to is really disturbing.” The naval base shooting example was deeply troubling, said Meredith Broussard, a New York University data journalism professor and expert on AI, who reviewed the records for the Guardian. “Just because you have an affinity for Islam does not mean you’re a criminal or a terrorist. That is insulting and racist. It’s religious bigotry embedded in code.” “This is hyperbolic AI marketing. The more they brag, the less I believe them,” said Cathy O’Neil, a data scientist and algorithmic auditor, arguing that the firm’s broad claims were not based in legitimate science and were unachievable: “They’re saying, ‘We can see if somebody has criminal intent.’ No, you can’t. Even people who commit crimes can’t always tell they have criminal intent.” The consequences of this pseudoscience can be dire, she added: “Claims of accuracy don’t have to actually be true for the algorithm to be used as a weapon.” Concerns about undercover spying The documents show Voyager and LAPD officers also discussed some of the company’s most controversial proposals. In an October 2020 letter to the LAPD outlining details of a potential contract, Voyager claimed its social media monitoring was “traceless”, saying that the social media companies themselves would not be able to tell that LAPD was behind the surveillance. In an earlier report to LAPD in 2019, Voyager said it was developing software to spy on WhatsApp groups using an “active persona mechanism”, or “avatar”, suggesting that police would create a fake account to collect information from a group. In one September 2019 email to a Voyager sales representative, an LAPD technology official said the feature that allows police to “log in with fake accounts that are already friended with the target subject” was a “great function”, but added that the department was not heading in the direction of using that service. It’s unclear if the LAPD ever used the fake account feature. In another September 2019 email, an LAPD official in the robbery and homicide division told Voyager that the “avatars” function was a “need-to-have” feature. And Voyager said in one document that some LAPD staffers piloting its services had requested the “active persona” feature for Facebook, Instagram and Telegram. This feature could violate the policies of Facebook, which prohibits fake accounts and has previously deactivated users that it determined were police officers impersonating civilians. A Facebook spokesperson said members of law enforcement, like all users, were required to use their real names on their profiles. “As stated in our terms of services, misrepresentations and impersonations are not allowed on our services and we take action when we find violating activity,” a Facebook spokesperson, Sally Aldous, said in a statement. Using fake accounts to monitor activists online was equivalent to undercover spying, civil rights advocates said. LAPD has policies for “online undercover activity” that establishes some restrictions for this tactic, including requiring special approval from a supervisor if police are using a fake account to communicate with someone, but there is less oversight if an account is created to examine “trends” or for “conducting research”. John Hamasaki, a criminal defense lawyer and member of the San Francisco police commission, said some police departments were updating policies to restrict the use of fake accounts in an effort to protect free speech. In San Francisco, he said, police would be barred from using a company like Voyager for broad surveillance of online networks. The type of predictive policing software that Voyager advertises is also strictly prohibited in Oakland, according to the city’s privacy commission. “The problem with these types of surveillance operations is they’re often not based on reasonable suspicion or probable cause,” he said. “Instead, it is casting a broad net.” Levinson-Waldman of the Brennan Center said it was unclear how widespread this kind of surveillance was in police departments across the US. She noted that while law enforcement departments were increasingly relying on social media in investigations, there was often little transparency. The LAPD and the New York police department have two of the largest police budgets in the country and have a long history of piloting cutting-edge technology that ends up being ineffective or harmful, said Broussard, the author of Artificial Unintelligence: How Computers Misunderstand the World. Even when the LAPD or NYPD cease using certain products, the companies end up bringing their tech elsewhere, she said: “The companies still want to sell software, so they go after smaller police forces that have even less capacity to evaluate the efficacy of these snake-oil software systems.” Recent reporting has shown how the LAPD has used surveillance technology similar to Voyager’s to monitor Black Lives Matter organizing, and the department also recently said it was pursuing this kind of technology for “information gathering” in a report about reforms since the George Floyd protests. The LAPD did not respond to questions from the Guardian about whether Voyager was used for monitoring protesters. In a report in September of this year, the department said it was “currently using” Voyager software and seeking $450,000 to purchase additional Voyager technology. But an LAPD spokesperson said this week that the department was not using the company’s software at the moment. She did not respond to questions about when LAPD ceased using the services and if the department was still pursuing a partnership. Voyager declined to comment on its work with the LAPD and did not answer specific questions about its services. A spokesperson, Lital Carter Rosenne, said its clients were responsible for building databases and running the software, adding: “As a company, we follow the laws of all the countries in which we do business. We also have confidence that those with whom we do business are law-abiding public and private organizations.” LA activists said the revelations raised serious concerns about how the tech could be used against groups that protest against the LAPD. “I’m really astounded that not only is LAPD using these companies, but that there are these tactics which feel very much like digital infiltration,” said Dr Melina Abdullah, a co-founder of Black Lives Matter LA. “It demonstrates that our fears are true.” Abdullah, who had not heard of Voyager Labs, said she was particularly disturbed to learn about potential monitoring of WhatsApp groups: “We know that our public posts are monitored. But when they’re engaging in additional digging into private posts, that is supposed to be a more secure way of communicating.”In emotional testimony to the digital, culture, media and sport select committee, Azeem Rafiq talked about his experiences of racism, bullying and “inhuman” treatment he faced at Yorkshire cricket. We would like to hear from people of of colour in the UK, particularly British Asians about what his testimony means to them. Do you feel like this is a ‘moment’? Do you think it will change anything? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below, anonymously if you wish or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact for publication before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Good morning. At least one person has been killed and several more are feared dead after a huge storm hit the Pacific north-west, destroying highways and leaving tens of thousands of people in Canada and the US without power. Canada’s largest port was cut off by flood waters, as emergency crews in British Columbia announced on Tuesday that at least 10 vehicles had been swept off a highway during a landslide. South of the border, tens of thousands of households and businesses remain without power in Washington state. Nearly 50,000 Washington state electrical customers still had no power on Tuesday. Authorities said one person was still missing near Bellingham after being seen in flood waters clinging to a tree. The Washington governor, Jay Inslee, declared a severe weather state of emergency in 14 counties. All rail access to Vancouver has been cut by floods and landslides, the port of Vancouver announced. A woman’s body was recovered from the site of the landslide during a search the previous night, the Royal Canadian Mounted police confirmed. Proud Boys leader asks for early release over jail conditions The leader of the Proud Boys far-right group has asked a judge to free him from jail in Washington DC, complaining about poor conditions. Henry “Enrique” Tarrio is serving a five-month sentence for stealing and burning a Black Lives Matter banner from a historic Black church in the capital after Donald Trump’s election defeat. On Monday, Tarrio asked a judge to release him, arguing that he has been exposed to inhumane conditions. Asking that his sentence be reduced or that he be allowed to complete it under house arrest, he claimed to have been harassed by correctional officers and said his cell regularly floods with dirty water from a toilet in a neighboring cell. Tarrio described abusive guards, smoke-filled hallways and medical neglect, saying he witnessed a prisoner have a seizure who lay for a half-hour before help arrived. What did he say during the hearing? “I’ve been to jail before and what I’ve seen here, I’ve never seen anywhere else. This place needs to be shut down immediately.” Fauci: US can get Covid under control by next year with more jabs Anthony Fauci, the top infectious diseases public official in the US, said on Tuesday that if the US further ramps up vaccination rates and those already immunized take booster shots it is feasible Covid-19 could be reduced from a pandemic emergency to endemic status next year. More than 70% of adults in the US are fully vaccinated. Fauci said if a lot more Americans take the vaccines and if the US makes boosters available for everyone, the country could get control of the virus by spring of 2022. But with his forecast Fauci was acknowledging Covid will always be present in the population to some degree, such as the flu or chickenpox. What did he say? “People will still get infected. People might still get hospitalized, but the level would be so low that we don’t think about it all the time and it doesn’t influence what we do.” What needs to happen to reach that stage? He said many more people need to take the vaccine for the first time and others need to get boosters, which are vital for reaching the point where falling infection rates allow the disease to be downgraded to endemic. Will booster shots be available to everyone? An influential US panel that advises the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) will discuss this on Friday. LAPD partnered with tech firm that enables secretive online spying The Los Angeles police department pursued a contract with a controversial technology company that could enable police to use fake social media accounts to surveil civilians and claimed its algorithms can identify people who may commit crimes in the future. A cache of internal LAPD documents obtained through public records requests by the Brennan Center for Justice, a non-profit organization, and shared with the Guardian, reveal that LAPD in 2019 trialed social media surveillance software from the analytics company Voyager Labs. Like many companies in this industry, Voyager Labs’ software allows law enforcement to collect and analyze large troves of social media data to investigate crimes or monitor potential threats. But documents reveal the company takes this surveillance a step further. In its sales pitch to LAPD about a potential long-term contract, Voyager said its software could collect data on a suspect’s online network and surveil the accounts of thousands of the suspect’s “friends”. What else does the company say it can do? By relying on artificial intelligence, it claims, its software can determine whether subjects have already committed a crime, may commit a crime or adhere to certain ideologies. In other news … There have been tense scenes outside the Kenosha county courthouse in Wisconsin as protesters – some for, some against – await the verdict of Kyle Rittenhouse’s trial, which is expected today. Former world No 1 tennis star Naomi Osaka has joined the growing calls for answers on the whereabouts of the Chinese player Peng Shuai, who has not been heard from publicly since she accused the country’s former vice-premier of sexually assaulting her. Brazil’s beef industry hopes to tempt buyers back to the Amazon region with a new deforestation-free pledge. The Brazilian president, Jair Bolsonaro, is expected to greenlight the project later this year. But critics are concerned it could effectively legalize deforestation in the region. Britney Spears has spoken out about the realities of her new freedom after her 13-year conservatorship was lifted last week. The pop star spoke about her gratitude at being able to use a debit card and possess her own car keys. “It’s the little things,” she said. Don’t miss this: how true crime conquered the world Ridley Scott’s House of Gucci stars Lady Gaga in a tale of fashion and murder, which seemed destined for the big screen from the moment it happened. So why, now that the film is actually here, does the Gucci case feel a strange fit for a movie after all? Put it down to timing. The film’s development began in entertainment prehistory: 2006. Back then, a lavish movie was still the grand prize for any news story. Now film and true crime have the air of an estranged couple. Had Maurizio Gucci been gunned down on Via Palestro last week, Netflix would already have the rights and the podcast would be on Spotify, argues Danny Leigh. … Or this: Food writer Mayukh Sen on how immigrants have shaped the way America eats Over the last five years, Mayukh Sen has been writing about figures on the margins of the American food world. His profiles act as counter-narratives to a food canon long unconcerned with the accomplishment of non-white chefs. His new book, Taste Makers: Seven Immigrant Women Who Revolutionized Food in America continues this theme by resurfacing the stories of outsider food figures, some of whom were disappeared by a ruthless restaurant economy and an indifferent media. Climate Check: US auctions off oil and gas drilling leases in Gulf of Mexico after climate talks Just four days after landmark climate talks in Scotland in which Joe Biden vowed the US will “lead by example” in tackling dangerous global heating, the president’s own administration is providing a jarring contradiction: the largest ever sale of oil and gas drilling leases in the Gulf of Mexico. The US federal government is on Wednesday launching an auction of more than 80m acres of the gulf for fossil fuel extraction, a record sell-off that will lock in years, and potentially decades, of planet-heating emissions. Want more environmental stories delivered to your inbox? Sign up to our new newsletter Down to Earth to get original and essential reporting on the climate crisis every week Last thing: ‘What was on me?’ Fox News’s Laura Ingraham flummoxed by reference to TV show You The Fox News host Laura Ingraham sparked mockery on social media after becoming confused when she believed a guest discussing the Netflix television show You was actually referring to her. “I was watching an episode of You when measles came up,” said Raymond Arroyo, a conservative commentator in the clip, which has been posted on Twitter. Looking puzzled, Ingraham interrupted. “Wait, wait, wait,” she said. “When did I mention measles?” The pair continued a dialogue that seemed to belong more to a sitcom or sketch show than primetime on a major US network. Sign up First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comThe TV presenter Melanie Sykes has announced she has been diagnosed as autistic at the age of 51. She has described it as a “life-changing” diagnosis and talked of her relief that things in her life now finally “make sense”. “This week has been truly life-changing, or rather, life-affirming,” she wrote. She said her diagnosis had come as a huge relief and was one she would be celebrating. “I now have a deeper understanding of myself, my life, and the things I have endured.” Why did you seek a diagnosis for autism late in your life? How did you feel when you were told you were autistic? How has the diagnosis changed your life? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.The men’s T20 World Cup and Cop26 drew to a close at about the same time. Australia flew home victorious after an eight-wicket thrashing of New Zealand in the final in Dubai, a tournament nicely summed up by our man in the desert Simon Burnton; delegates left Glasgow less triumphant. Here we assess how those Super 12 countries are coping in the climate emergency. Afghanistan The average Afghan produces only 0.2 metric tons of carbon dioxide per year, but the country is on the forefront of the climate crisis. Temperatures are rising twice as fast as the global average, and with horrible inevitability the population is hit by extreme weather event after extreme weather event – droughts, especially in northern Afghanistan, floods, and avalanches. Springs are becoming drier, autumns wetter. Crop loss caused by drought means that the country is missing 40% of the wheat it needs this year and the United Nations reported that 22m Afghans will suffer from “acute food insecurity” this winter. The Taliban takeover has meant a loss of international aid. Afghanistan had no official seat at Cop26. Australia Under the current government, Australia is seen as a climate dissident, the biggest exporter of fossil gas in the world and the second biggest of thermal coal, with a foot on the brake of the march to net zero. And yet, due to its geography, it is vulnerable to increasing temperatures, day and night. In 2019 there were 43 “extremely warm days,” triple the number before 2000, this in term increases the length of the bush fire season. The horrendous fires of 2019-20 affected cricket with youth and Big Bash matches postponed, and players complaining of toxic air over the SCG. Rising sea temperatures are threatening the Great Barrier Reef while reduced rainfall threatens crops and river flow. Bangladesh Densely populated and low-lying, Bangladesh was ranked the seventh most climate-vulnerable country between 2000 and 2019 by the Global Climate Risk Index. Nearly 170m people live on the delta of two of the world’s biggest rivers, the Ganges and Brahmaputra. Rising sea levels increase salinisation, polluting local wells and reducing supplies of drinking water, as well as damaging crops and soil. It is estimated that by 2050 one in seven Bangladeshis will have been displaced because of rising sea levels. England and Scotland The UK has become 0.9 degrees warmer and six per cent wetter over the last 30 years. All of the top 10 hottest years have been since 2002 and infrastructure struggles once the temperature rises, with roads melting, rail lines buckling – twice, in recent years, Lord’s has allowed members to remove their jackets because of the heat. Increased flooding has cost cricket dearly both in terms of finance – the storms of December 2015 caused more than £3.5m worth of damage across 57 cricket clubs – and in terms of games postponed and cancelled, both in the recreational and professional game. India Cricket’s big beast is on the frontline of the climate crisis, hit by erratic monsoons – with less rain but at a higher intensity – flooding, landslides and heatwaves. This summer, the Lancet Planetary Health journal estimated that there are 740,000 excess deaths a year in India due to extreme temperatures related to climate change. Nor is cricket immune: pollution stopped play in the 2017 Delhi Test between India and Sri Lanka when players were sick on the pitch and IPL matches have been switched because of lack of water. Namibia An extremely climate-vulnerable country, one of the driest south of the Sahara desert. Rainfall is increasingly unpredictable, with knock-on effects for agriculture and livestock particularly for the poorest people. Higher temperatures and extreme heat are expected to increase evaporation and therefore aridity, as well as the incidence of disease, while rising sea levels will affect numbers of fish. Even if temperature increases globally were able to be kept to 1.5 degrees over the pre-industrial baseline, Namibia’s temperature is projected to increase by two degrees. New Zealand The majority of New Zealanders live on the coast and many on flood plains. Rising sea levels and increases in extreme rainfall will increase the risk of flooding and the potential for salt water to enter the freshwater systems. Of New Zealand’s 50,000 species, half are found nowhere else in the world and changing climate conditions puts them increasingly at risk, with 70 native plants likely to be at risk of extinction by 2100. Changing ocean chemistry is already affecting marine life. Pakistan Ranked the eighth most climate-vulnerable country between 2000 and 2019, Pakistan is threatened in all directions: from extreme heat, from the melting of the Himalayan glaciers, from more intense monsoons – nine inches of rain fell in a day in Karachi last August. Deforestation – from 33% of the country in 1947 to 4% today – mostly driven by illegal logging, has left a country with little protection against flooding and storms. South Africa The Cape Town drought of 2015-18 saw the temporary cancellation of club and school cricket as the population’s water was rationed and the country counted down to Day Zero. A year later the dams were 80% full, but the threat of water shortage hangs heavy over a country where temperatures are increasing and rainfall is decreasing. Sri Lanka Nearly half of Sri Lanka’s population live in low-lying costal areas, making them extremely vulnerable to sea-level rise. The rise in the number of days of extreme heat threatens particularly the poor, and those labourers working without protection from the sun. Increasing temperatures are likely to affect rice yields and add to food insecurity. West Indies The prime minister of Barbados, Mia Motley QC, has been lauded for the most powerful speech at Cop26. “The pandemic has shown us that national solutions to global problems do not work,” she told the delegates. “What must we say to our people living on the front line in the Caribbean, in Africa, in Latin America, in the Pacific, when both ambition and regrettably some of the needed faces are not present? What excuse should we give for failure? In the words of that Caribbean icon Eddy Grant, will they mourn us on the front line?” • This is an extract from the Guardian’s weekly cricket email, The Spin. To subscribe and get the full edition, just visit this page and follow the instructions.Boobs to the right of you; phallic objects to the left of you; sexual innuendo in front of you. This, my friends, is a pretty typical subway ride in New York. The chance of your train coming on time is much smaller than the chance of coming across an in-your-face ad for breast augmentation or a trying-embarrassingly-hard-to-be-edgy poster for a dating app. I’m not complaining about this, by the way. I’m not clutching my pearls here. I don’t spend a lot of time worrying about subway ads because whenever I take the train I do what every normal person does: ignore everything around me and stare at my phone. I’m just bringing this up to provide a little context and demonstrate that the modern New York public transport system is not what anyone would describe as a puritanical environment. The Museum of Sex has had no problem advertising on Gotham buses; erectile dysfunction medication brands have had no concerns about using phallic imagery on subway ads; plastic surgery companies have had little issue papering train cars with cleavage shots. You know who has had a problem getting their ads up, though? Female-focused companies. Thinx, the period-proof underwear brand, had to fight to get ads on New York transit. Women-centred sexual health companies have also been prevented from advertising on trains. It looks as if things are changing, though. After almost three years of legal wrangling, a women-owned sex toy company called Dame has just won the right to run ads for its fancy vibrators on New York transit. Don’t get too excited: the posters are very tame and, to be honest, slightly weird. (A sample tagline: “It feels like I’m growing flowers within me.”) Still, they mark an important step towards the normalisation of female pleasure. To quote some previous Dame ad copy: “Thank you from the bottom of my vulva.” Arwa Mahdawi is a Guardian columnistAmazon has told customers that it plans to stop accepting payments made with UK-issued Visa credit cards in January. In an email to users of the site, it blamed the cost of processing the payments, telling them: “Starting 19 January 2022, we will unfortunately no longer accept Visa credit cards issued in the UK, due to the high fees Visa charges for processing credit card transactions.” The retailer said it would continue to accept Visa debit cards and other credit cards, including Mastercard, which supplies the retailer’s branded credit card, and American Express but acknowledged that the change would be “inconvenient” for some customers. Payments on cards attract a range of fees including interchange fees and other transaction charges, and it is understood that Amazon’s move has not been prompted by an increase in any of the charges in particular. In a statement, a spokesperson for the retailer said: “The cost of accepting card payments continues to be an obstacle for businesses striving to provide the best prices for customers. These costs should be going down over time, with technological advancements, but, instead, they continue to stay high or even rise. “As a result of Visa’s continued high cost of payments, we regret that Amazon.co.uk will no longer accept UK-issued Visa credit cards as of 19 January 2022.” Interchange fees are typically a percentage of the cost of the transaction and are higher for credit card transactions, and for those where purchases are made remotely, including online sales, although there are caps on payments made within the UK. In a statement, Visa said it was “very disappointed that Amazon is threatening to restrict consumer choice in the future”. It said: “When consumer choice is limited, nobody wins. We have a longstanding relationship with Amazon, and we continue to work toward a resolution, so our cardholders can use their preferred Visa credit cards at Amazon UK without Amazon-imposed restrictions come January 2022.” It added that UK shoppers could continue to use their cards at Amazon “throughout the holiday season”. Many shoppers choose to use credit cards for large purchases online because of the extra protections that are offered if things go wrong. Under section 75 of the Consumer Credit Act, if a retailer goes out of business or fails to deliver goods as promised and the items cost more than £100, the credit card provider has an obligation to refund the costs. James Andrews, from the comparison website money.co.uk, said the decision would come as a blow to the millions of UK shoppers who had Visa credit cards, including customers of Barclaycard and HSBC. “With American Express also rejected by many UK retailers, that means people looking for rewards on their spending or trying to split the cost of shopping with a 0% purchase card on Amazon will be effectively forced to choose a Mastercard,” he said. “Hopefully, Visa and Amazon work out their differences before the ban comes into force on 19 January but in the meantime it would be wise to check your cards now.” Card fees have long been an issue of contention between providers and retailers, and this month Visa and Mastercard increased their quoted fees for “card-not-present” payments on credit cards to merchants in the EU after the removal of caps post-Brexit. The British Retail Consortium said companies faced an estimated £150m increase in the cost of accepting cross-border card payments, with British retailers shouldering an extra £36.5m in fees, equivalent to £100,000 every day. The Federation of Small Businesses said its members had experienced soaring fees in recent years. Its national chairman, Mike Cherry, said: “Small businesses are almost always charged more for card terminals than big corporates – so when online giants start throwing down the gauntlet, you know the situation is becoming critical.” Visa’s shares were down 3.3% in pre-market trading in the US.Is it OK to want to escape a piece of theatre? The Drop is a curious blend of immersive theatre and escape-room experience and a large chunk of the show is spent trapped in a lift with an audience of three or four. Thrill-seekers might just love it but, for me, there’s something not hugely fun about being immersed in fear. The show has been created by Clem Garritty and Ollie Jones’s theatre company Swamp Motel – the same team who produced Isklander, a fantastic trilogy of online thrillers that emerged from lockdown. With Isklander, the sense of jeopardy was a joy: easy to submit to because, no matter how real it might have felt, it could never really reach you. The Drop is more complicated. The scares are pulled off with impressive skill and conviction, aided by some cracking sound design from Emmet O’Donnell. I spend a lot of time clutching other audience members’ hands and, at one point, even hold up a prop as protection. You’ll certainly learn a lot about how you handle fear; whether that’s something you really want to explore is, I imagine, down to individual taste. The story comes at us in fits and starts, as we try to figure out exactly what we’re meant to be doing and whose side we’re on. But the plot is really just a sideshow to the puzzles posed in each locked room and the shocks threaded into those scenarios. They’re pretty good puzzles and create just enough of a challenge to create a hot flush of triumph with each small success. Garritty’s set design grows in depth as the show progresses and includes a bombed-out back room and a strangely soothing perfume shop. They’re intriguing spaces that invite exploration but, unfortunately, we are given little time to linger. It all makes for a fitfully compelling adventure – one that creates a real impetus to escape but never fully locks you into the fantasy. The Drop is at 55 Aldgate High Street, London until 31 DecemberEver wondered what it takes to get into Harvard? Stellar grades, impressive extracurriculars and based on a recently published study, having deep pockets and a parent who either works or went there. Those last two are pretty important for Harvard’s white students because only about 57% of them were admitted to the school based on merit. In reality, 43% of Harvard’s white students are either recruited athletes, legacy students, on the dean’s interest list (meaning their parents have donated to the school) or children of faculty and staff (students admitted based on these criteria are referred to as ‘ALDCs’, which stands for ‘athletes’, ‘legacies’, ‘dean’s interest list’ and ‘children’ of Harvard employees). The kicker? Roughly three-quarters of these applicants would have been rejected if it weren’t for having rich or Harvard-connected parents or being an athlete. Here’s the thing– Harvard is insanely competitive. The admittance rate for the class of 2025 was 3.43%, the lowest rate in the school’s history, in a year that saw an unprecedented surge in applications. But as more and more comes to light about Harvard’s admissions process, it’s clear that the school’s competitiveness is not just based on academic strength or great test scores, but also whether or not your parents or grandparents have donated significantly to the school. This dynamic is inherently racialized, with almost 70% of all legacy applicants at Harvard being white. According to the study, a white person’s chances of being admitted increased seven times if they had family who donated to Harvard. Meanwhile in stark contrast, African American, Asian American and Hispanic students make up less than 16% of ALDC students. This kind of systemic favoritism of the white, wealthy and connected is not new when it comes to elite academic institutions. It’s always been a bit of a rigged game, one that overwhelmingly favors rich white people. Take the 2019 college admissions scandal for example. It’s been almost three years since the fiasco in which dozens of wealthy people attempted to pay their children’s way into legacy institutions such as Stanford and Yale. These parents paid thousands of dollars to get people to take tests for their children, bribe test administrators and bribe college coaches to identify their children as great athletes. Fifty people were ultimately charged in the scandal, including celebrities like Felicity Huffman and Lori Loughlin. With all this in mind, it’s impossible not to think about the longstanding racist pushback against affirmative action in the US. Racist white people (including the Trump administration) have long scorned the system that was designed to give historically underrepresented communities a better chance at entering institutions they have been systematically excluded from. According to its detractors, the use of affirmative action at universities amounts to reverse racism against white people and has helped Black people in particular enjoy benefits that white people are now supposedly left out of (notions like this, including the idea that Black people in America go to college for free, are entirely false). Judging by Harvard’s numbers though, it sounds to me like these people don’t actually think affirmative action is bad – they just think it should be reserved for white, rich people. And when it comes to Harvard’s revered status, these revelations about its admissions process poke gaping holes in the idea that anyone who is there has proven themselves “worthy” to be part of this elite institution. Harvard and other schools like it have long been venerated as hallowed spaces where only the best and brightest minds are granted access – and many young people still see it as such. The reality, though, is very different. These are supposed to be the biggest geniuses on the planet, yet the school halls are filled with the progeny of the privileged who wouldn’t be there if it weren’t for their connections and money. For me, that’s not a whole lot to aspire to. • This article was amended on 18 November 2021 because an earlier version misspelled Felicity Huffman’s last name as “Hoffman”. Tayo Bero is a freelance writerSalt Lake is the largest county in Utah, containing not only the state’s capital, Salt Lake City, but 40% of the state’s population. While Donald Trump carried the safely conservative state, Joe Biden defeated him in Salt Lake county, soundly, by 53% to 42.1%. Two different Democrats have captured a competitive congressional seat there over the last decade, most recently Ben McAdams, who defeated the incumbent Mia Love by fewer than 700 votes in 2018, then lost by less than a percentage point to Burgess Owens in 2020. Don’t expect a tight rematch next year. Utah’s new congressional map, approved by the state legislature this week, divides Salt Lake county into four pieces, attaching pieces to conservative rural counties hundreds of miles away. It ignores the recommendation of an independent commission established by initiative in 2018, and scatters voters here across four districts so uncompetitive and safely Republican that the non-partisan Princeton Gerrymandering Project graded it an F. It’s a similar story in Oklahoma, where the new Republican map cracks Oklahoma City into three different congressional districts, dismantling the competitive fifth district – captured in 2018 by a Democrat, Kendra Horn – and ensuring a big Republican advantage for every seat. The cartography needed to be more creative in New Hampshire, where Republicans took two competitive districts that have largely elected Democrats over the last 15 years and guaranteed themselves one by moving 75 towns and 365,000 people into a new district. The quiet evisceration of the few remaining competitive seats in conservative-leaning states has flown under the radar compared with greedier Republican gerrymanders in Texas, Ohio, North Carolina and Georgia, where the estimated net of seven to 10 Republican seats would be enough to flip the US House of Representatives in 2022 and perhaps keep it in Republican hands for the next decade. Yet Republicans could reinforce their primacy through 2031 – and cut off an important road that helped Democrats retake the House in 2018 – by turning battleground seats into safe strongholds not only in Oklahoma City and Salt Lake City, but with creative cracking and packing of Democratic voters in the suburbs of Indianapolis, Little Rock, Omaha, Louisville, Nashville, Kansas City and Spartanburg. Nebraska’s second congressional district, for example, one of just 16 remaining “crossover” districts where the vote for the US House and president diverged, becomes slightly more Trumpy, trading suburbs close to Omaha for rural counties to the west. This district has national implications, as it is one of two nationwide that award presidential electors. The subtle shift matters; Biden carried this district by fewer than 23,000 votes. In Indiana’s fifth, Republicans locked in a map giving them a 7-2 advantage by shifting Democratic suburbs in Marion county into an adjacent Democratic district – packing the liberal voters into a single Indianapolis district. By reworking that seat, the Republican party pinned Democrats into two overwhelmingly Democratic districts, eliminated the last competitive seat that might have become closer over the next decade, and assured themselves 78% of the seats in a state Trump won in 2020 with 57%. In Arkansas, where the new congressional map divides Black neighborhoods in Little Rock across multiple districts to ensure a partisan edge for Republicans, the Republican governor found the racial gerrymander so distasteful that he refused to sign it. (It became law anyway, without his signature.) Kansas has not yet introduced a new congressional map, but during the 2020 campaign, the state senate president vowed to gerrymander the state’s single Democratic member of Congress out of office if Republicans won a veto-proof supermajority in the state legislature. They did. South Carolina, meanwhile, has slow-walked new maps and pushed the process into next year, most likely to narrow the window for litigation challenging the plan. Republicans are expected to reinforce the first district seat, won by a Democrat in 2018 by 4,000 votes, and then recaptured by the Republican challenger in 2020 by 5,500 votes. Democrats have done some gerrymanders of their own this cycle. It’s just that Republicans are better equipped to make gains. Oregon Democrats claimed the state’s new seat for themselves; that pickup will be mitigated by a new conservative seat nabbed by Republicans in Montana. Illinois Democrats added one liberal seat and eliminated a conservative seat; Ohio Republicans did the opposite move. Democrats might make a move on the last conservative seat in Maryland and look to gain two or three seats in New York; but that only counters Republican pickups in North Carolina – where new Republican maps will require Democrats to win by seven percentage points to have a shot at even half of the 14 congressional seats. The maps offer no additional gains for Democrats. Republicans still net seats in Texas, Georgia, Florida, New Hampshire and Kansas, in addition to likely gains in Tennessee and Kentucky, and sandbagging competitive seats in Utah, Oklahoma, Nebraska, South Carolina and Indiana. It shrinks the map dangerously for Democrats, at a time when Republicans need to win only five seats to capture the House. And it portends a future in which an election similar to 2020 – in which Democratic US House candidates won 4.6m more votes than Republicans – could place the House under Republican rule regardless of the people’s will. This partisan free-for-all could perpetuate Republican minority rule in Congress and state legislatures for the next decade, if not longer. Much of it was made possible by the gerrymanders of a decade ago, still providing Republican advantages in states like North Carolina, Florida, Georgia, Ohio and Wisconsin. It has been enabled by the US supreme court, which closed the federal courthouses to partisan gerrymandering claims in 2019 and gave lawmakers a green light for ever more egregious redistricting schemes. These maps have been enacted by Republicans at the same time that they have blockaded congressional action on democracy reform and the Freedom to Vote Act that would end this anti-democratic behavior by all sides. And all of this could hasten a constitutional crisis in 2024 if a gerrymandered US House and gerrymandered state legislatures refuse to certify electors, or send multiple slates of electors, to Congress. When Utah’s governor refused entreaties to veto his state’s gerrymandered congressional maps, which effectively preclude competitive elections until at least 2032, he told voters that they should simply elect people who might be interested in fair maps next time around. Easy, right? Only how are they supposed to do that when the current legislators control the maps and draw themselves every advantage? Republican legislators are barricading themselves into castles of power and pulling up the drawbridge. It’s close to checkmate. Voters are running out of avenues – and time – to do anything to stop it. David Daley is the author of Ratf**ked: Why Your Vote Doesn’t Count and Unrigged: How Americans Are Battling Back to Save Democracy. He is a senior fellow at FairVoteStraight white men run the world. But in Young Jean Lee’s 2014 satirical drama, directed by Steven Kunis, none of them seem to be winning. Jake is a successful banker but a self-confessed jerk. Drew is a novelist with no current novel or girlfriend. And Matt, now in his 40s, is a once bright Harvard graduate who has lost his shine. Played by Charlie Condou as a downcast shadow of his former self, Matt has moved back into his family home with his widowed father, Ed, where they all gather for Christmas. But before the male narrative dominates, we’re greeted by disco lights, blaring rap music performed by women and people of colour and two flamboyantly costumed trans emcee figures. Brimming with charm, the duo acknowledges that some audience members might be feeling uncomfortable. “We are well aware that it can be upsetting when people create an environment that doesn’t take your needs into account,” they jest. Performed as all-knowing puppeteers by Kim Tatum and Kamari Roméo, they feel in control of the evening, despite their limited onstage presence. Within Suzu Sakai’s intricate middle-class living-room set, decorated with framed family photos and dartboards, the siblings revert back to puerile pranks and play fights. They recall fond memories from childhood – Matt was framed a hero for his righteous rewriting of the lyrics of Oklahoma! when his school cast a fully white version of the musical. But when the once favoured child begins to cry into his Chinese takeaway on Christmas Eve, he becomes the centre of the family’s concern. As they battle over the cause of the oldest brother’s outburst, we begin to question what it means to be a successful straight white man today. Is it financial stability? Is it mental clarity? Or is it just believing that everything is supposed to go your way? Whatever it is, their desperate search for understanding suggests that for those with born-right privilege, just “trying to be useful” in life is an implausible, freakish desire. Though at times too gentle in its approach, Straight White Men is a timely identity study that gives a powerful critique of 21st-century white male psychology. Straight White Mean is at Southwark Playhouse, London, until 4 DecemberWhat is going on with Amazon Prime’s characterisation of The Wheel of Time? I ask this as a fantasy fan, someone who not only adores the classy stuff (NK Jemisin, Guy Gavriel Kay etc) but has also devotedly ploughed her way through The Belgariad, most of Terry Goodkind (until it got too crazy even for me) and Simon R Green. And how many people involved with the forthcoming adaptation have actually marathoned their way through all of the books? My eyebrows were first raised back when the deal to adapt Robert Jordan’s extremely long series was announced in 2018, when head of Amazon Studios Jennifer Salke praised its “timely narrative featuring powerful women at the core”. Now, I read these books in my late teens, but my resounding memory of them was not of “powerful women”. In fact, I remember thinking Jordan’s depiction of women was pretty dismal – he might have packed in far more female characters than Tolkien ever did, but they’re constantly objectified, forever hoisting their bosoms around, adjusting their skirts – even getting spanked as punishment. Now Rosamund Pike, who is playing the character of Moiraine , has got in on the “Wheel of Time is great for women” act, telling the Radio Times that she’s received letters from fans of the books and “many of them have said that actually these women in The Wheel of Time were mentors and role models for them growing up, which I thought was very interesting.” I wasn’t sure if my memories of Jordan’s heaving bosoms and generally rather irritating women characters were exaggerated, so I decided to give the series another go. But a quick glance through book four, The Shadow Rising, proved my teenage memory correct: I found all sorts, from a “considerable amount of excellent pale bosom” to “considerable tanned cleavage”, tons of “clinging” gowns, and lots of crossing of arms beneath breasts to show determination (which I just tried; it’s uncomfortable). The bosom-count is considerably higher by book five, The Fires of Heaven (“too much bosom showed in the gap of her shawl”; “showed enough bosom to shock a tavern-maid”; “folding her arms under a massive bosom”). Bosom aside (and what a word, anyway) women are always thinking about how they look and what they’re wearing – or frequently what they’re not wearing - in Jordan’s vision. As one of the main characters puts it: “If the world is ending, a woman would want time to fix her hair.” Well – of course we would. And it’s not just behaviour that’s heavily gendered in The Wheel of Time – the magic in the books is different for men and women. The male half of the One Power, Saidin, has been poisoned long ago by mega baddie Shai’tan (the Dark One), sending all male magic practitioners mad. This means that only women can use magic in the present-day world – so far, so feminist – but their half is called saidar, and while men must master saidin to channel it, women must submit to saidar. Hmm. Adam Roberts, in his unmissable take-down in Sibilant Fricative, calls the novels’ sexual politics “offensively narrow and essentialist, to the point often of being actively gynophobic: women in fancy dress granted notional ‘powers’ by authorial fiat, set up as ‘strong women’ in order to be humbled, magically enslaved, spanked or forced to perform humiliatingly menial tasks.” *** The female sorcerers in the series are called Aes Sedai – a sort of Bene Gesserit-like organisation of which Pike’s character Moiraine is a member. Moiraine, who is actually one of Jordan’s better characters, is looking for the Dragon Reborn, a reincarnation of the male sorcerer who took on Shai’tan generations earlier. She believes he is one of three teenage boys living in the small village of Emond’s Field. It seems the adaptation won’t be quite as focused on these three teenage boys and their various paramours (one of them has three lady loves) as Jordan was; the blurb has it that Moiraine “embarks on a dangerous, world-spanning journey with five young men and women, one of whom is prophesied to be the Dragon Reborn, who will either save or destroy humanity”. Not only is Moiraine now the leading protagonist, but Egwene and Nynaeve, the teenage girls of Emond’s Field who set out with Rand, Mat and Perrin, the boys, are cited as possible Dragon Reborns. “I think what’s exciting about [the TV series] and what was exciting about [the books] in the 90s is that they opened up a conversation about gender and how gender is represented in all of these different cultures within the world of Wheel of Time,” showrunner Rafe Judkins told Gizmodo. “Because it’s not just one way you see a lot of different representations of gender, you see things that are more binary and less binary. I think that we have to lean into that in the show and continue to explore what gender means for these characters in as fresh of a context today as Robert Jordan was working in in the 90s. He was pushing the envelope a lot for the genre at the time and I think we need to do the same today.” Perhaps someone did read the books after all, and saw that Jordan’s world view – which also lacks LGBTQ+ representation – needed a bit of a shake-up. His bosom-count has also apparently been reduced – Pike told the Radio Times that: “you see many more naked men than you see naked women, which is quite pleasing, since women have been asked to expose themselves forever and a day”. The actress also called The Wheel of Time “a monumental piece of work”, adding that “it’s so magnificent what [Amazon] can achieve with it”. And sales figures would suggest that others agree: the book series, which was completed by Brandon Sanderson after Jordan’s death, has sold over 90m copies around the world. And that’s in spite of the prose, which Roberts also criticises. “It is all terribly written,” he mourns. “I don’t just mean the style, although the style is awful. I mean the whole kit-and-caboodle: the overall structure, and the narrative, the pacing and focalisation, the characterisation, the dialogue, the tone. All of it.” Some examples, as provided by Roberts: “She managed to be pretty if not beautiful despite a nose that was overbold at best.” As he writes: “At best? How would it have been if had been the worst?” And: “Her eyebrows climbed as she directed her gaze back to them, eyes black as her white-winged hair, a demanding stare of impatience so loud she might as well have shouted.” As Roberts has it: “Her eyes are black, they’re white, her eyebrows are escaping, her gaze is audible.” And my personal favourite: “He sounded like a bumblebee the size of a cat instead of a mastiff.” Incredible stuff. I’ll most likely give The Wheel of Time adaptation a try – I am overbold at best in my televisual choices. But I can’t help feeling that Amazon Prime just wanted its own Game of Thrones, so took a look at fantasy sales figures and landed on Jordan’s series. There is so much fantastic, well-written, strongly plotted fantasy out there that would have been a richer seam to mine: Robin Hobb’s adventures of Fitz and the Fool, for example, which contains magic, dragons, talking to animals, persecution, unrequited love … and bosoms all relegated to their appropriate places.Last week, you likely couldn’t flick through your Instagram stories without being inundated with pet pictures – even more than usual. The pitch was “We’ll plant 1 tree for every pet picture”, using a feature Instagram had rolled out a week before called the “Add Yours” sticker, which acts almost like a chain mail way of making viral posts on Instagram. It was the unique confluence of a new feature on Instagram, an organisation quickly jumping on something that was guaranteed to go viral (asking people to post pictures of their pets), and couch activism. It worked. By early last week, it had been shared close to 5 million times. Dalmatians, pugs, tabby cats and all variety of pets were unavoidable on Instagram all using the same sticker promising a tree would be planted. But it wasn’t clear who was behind it, or whether all of those trees would ever be planted. And surprise – we don’t know. Charity begins at Chrome A company called Plant A Tree Co claimed responsibility, saying it deleted the post within ten minutes of publishing, but the sticker continued on a life of its own, just without the source. Like any good chain mail. They said in, unsurprisingly, an Instagram story, that they can’t plant the trees, but have started a fundraiser. This is where most of the media coverage of the viral moment ended. But it is worth looking deeper into who is behind it all, and what it says about social media today. The man behind Plant A Tree Co, 23-year-old Floridian Zack Saadioui, appears to run several of these sorts of Instagram accounts, that drive engagement and follower counts through promising to donate to charity on behalf of those who follow his accounts and post stories linking to the account. According to the Plant A Tree Co website, it appears he has at least followed through with some, posting receipts, including to the New South Wales Rural Fire Service after the devastating bushfires at the start of 2020. The company also claims to have planted more than 6,500 trees through the Eden Reforestation Project, which costs $0.10 per tree planted, suggesting total donations in the range of $650. The company claims to have donated over $600,000 to different charities. This sort of social media tactic is a very easy and cheap way to improve follower counts, and get more engagement on social media. It has worked spectacularly well for Plant A Tree Co, which has over 1.1m followers. Saadioui’s main business is Prkd, which promises to be an Airbnb but for parking – you can find a space to rent through an app. Prior to this startup he was a college student and an intern, and he appears to have set up these pages while still a student. Saadioui told the Guardian he is the only Plant A Tree Co employee, and the company operates out of his home. Saadioui said he could not plant 4m trees, and the fundraiser launched for Trees for the Future will be handled entirely through Instagram, meaning he won’t receive any of the money personally. How to make a tree go viral Some have suggested Saadioui’s businesses operate as a form of drop-shipping, encouraging people to buy products through the Instagram accounts. Drop-shipping is where the seller of a product doesn’t actually stock that product. It is a way of making money easily by acting as a middle man between a large distribution company like Alibaba and the lucky buyer of a variety of necklaces, which are sold by Alibaba for tiny fractions of cents and marked up significantly by the sellers, who then market the products on social media. The infrastructure for payments is outsourced to a company like Shopify, and it’s all very easy to set up. Saadioui has a YouTube video explaining how his business works as easy “passive income”. The accounts promise to donate some of the profits to charities on whatever various hot button issue is around at the time – Australian bushfires, Black Lives Matter, or in this case climate change off the back of Cop26. Saadioui said his businesses were set up more like other Amazon businesses than traditional drop-shipping. “We have a fulfilment centre that packages the jewellery and adds labelling and branding, which comes at a cost. Then the necklace gets shipped out from the fulfilment centre,” he said. “Basically, the same process as 99% of the products on Amazon. We fulfil each necklace individually instead of buying a lot in bulk so that we don’t have to make a big investment in a lot of necklaces at once.” “100% of the profits get reinvested into the company so that we can start larger campaigns.” Gaming the gram Others have raised questions about when Plant A Tree’s content has gone viral in the past. It says a lot about where social media at right now. You have a company like Meta trying to increase engagement with a new feature that instantly takes off, but is immediately used for people who looked to be trying to make money off it, or drive their own engagement. It was relatively harmless in this instance – aside from people who may have parted way with cash for an overpriced necklace – compared to other things that Meta has had happen on its platforms in the past year, but once again shows how quickly these things can take off and have a life of their own perhaps beyond what Meta had designed it for. It also shows just how easily a lot of social media engagement can now be gamed. Even those posting their pet pics ironically had engaged with it, and to a degree it shows how little people challenge what they are presented on social media before spreading it on to others. While I would like to believe people would engage in deeper critical thought for something more serious than “pet pics to save the environment”, it’s not difficult to draw the conclusion that people who blindly posted it without thinking may be susceptible to content being shared with a more nefarious purpose in the future. People now being aware of this new Instagram feature should lessen the impact somewhat – until the next one. If you want to read the complete version of the newsletter please subscribe to receive TechScape in your inbox every Wednesday.The Pembrokeshire village of Llandudoch – or St Dogmaels – sits picturesquely on the banks of a gentle bend in the River Teifi and boasts a ruined abbey, cosy pubs, and good fishing spots. But 16-year-old Minna Elster Jones has no time for its postcard looks. “I wish this place wasn’t as pretty as it is, so Instagrammable,” she said. “This is my home and the home of my ancestors. But I feel the place – and our language – is being lost, taken away from us. We’re being exploited.” Minna is furious that the village’s pleasant aspect means that many of the homes in the village are now boltholes for rich outsiders, holiday homes or Airbnbs. “Unless I win the lottery, I wouldn’t have a chance of buying here. My culture, my ethnicity, my language is at risk.” The delicate subject of second or holiday homes and the impact they have on the Welsh culture and language is high on the political agenda in Wales. More than 1,000 Welsh-language campaigners protested at the Senedd, the Welsh parliament, in Cardiff at the weekend. A petition arguing that people being priced out of their local communities contravenes Wales’ showpiece Well-being of Future Generations Act has gathered more than 5,000 signatures. On Wednesday, the Senedd’s housing committee began to take evidence for an inquiry on second homes and the Welsh government is about to announce details of its plans to tackle what it accepts is a “crisis”, including an action plan to counter the impact on the language. Figures published by the Welsh government this week found there had been a 45% increase of second homes in Pembrokeshire since 2017-18. That means places such as Llandudoch are the frontline. Signs are appearing on residents’ gates and fences reading “second homes kill communities”, and membership of the campaign for an independent Wales, YesCymru, is growing. “You can feel the community changing around you,” said Terwyn Tomos, a retired headteacher of the village school. At the time of the 2001 census half of the villagers spoke Welsh, but by 2011 that had decreased to 44%. Tomos said it would not surprise him if it was 40% or lower now. A cruel irony is that there is a huge interest in learning Welsh but communities where it is most spoken such as Llandudoch are being ripped apart. Tomos bemoans the struggle of culturally important groups such as the Welsh-language drama society that had to move out find an audience. “A lot of people are worried,” he said. Jared and Michelle Brock, who have a newborn baby, have been served an eviction notice. Their landlord wants to sell their two-bedroom house in Llandudoch for the best part of £250,000 or rent it out as an Airbnb. “There’s no place for us to rent within a 30-minute drive,” said Jared. He pointed out that there are about 4,000 people on the social housing waiting list in Pembrokeshire – almost exactly the same number of second homes. “Something has to be done.” Ffred Ffransis, a leading member of the pressure group Cymdeithas yr Iaith Gymraeg (the Welsh Language Society), said the problem was being turbo-charged by the “flight” from cities caused by Covid, while Brexit was prompting people who might have bought second homes in France or Spain to plump for Wales instead. Ffransis said: “All these trends have wiped out the housing market for local people in many areas and we are witnessing population shifts at a level probably never seen anywhere in peacetime. There is growing evidence that no Welsh-speaking communities will be left within a decade. It is cultural genocide by bank transfer.” Cymdeithas yr Iaith wants the Welsh government to give local authorities more control over the housing market, such as the power to set tighter planning rules that make it harder for houses and flats to be turned into second homes and the ability to set a cap on the number of them. Minna’s mother, Helen Elster Jones, said she found it upsetting to walk down the high street and hear much more English than Welsh. “It’s painful. I don’t want to feel angry with new people, I’m not a dragon hogging Wales, but it rankles.”Calcutta is the city of my parents. It was from there that my father set sail for Britain and for Glasgow, in what I can only imagine was a quest for the coldest, wettest place he could find to raise a family. Calcutta … I should call it Kolkata, and I do when speaking Bangla, but in English I will always call it Calcutta, as did my father and as does pretty much every Calcuttan I know. I set my Wyndham and Banerjee novels there because it’s a place dear to my heart, and because no city better symbolised British India in the 1920s than the paradox that was Calcutta. Few places embody the culture of an entire people in the way this city does. To Bengalis, it is an intrinsic part of their cultural identity, much as Jerusalem is to both Jews and Palestinians. To delve into Calcutta is to delve into the souls of its people, its inhabitants and also the many thousands of its children who, like my parents, travelled the globe in search of a better life. Indeed, some of the best books about Calcutta are stories written of and by its diaspora, of their heartbreak and longing for this wretched yet wondrous city which circumstance forced them to leave. 1. City of Joy by Dominique Lapierre Set in the slum of Anand Nagar, City of Joy follows the tribulations of a young European missionary and an impoverished Indian rickshaw puller. Based on the true story of a Swiss nurse who devoted his life to improving the welfare of slum dwellers, it was later turned into a film starring Patrick Swayze. Written in the 1980s, the book skirts pretty close to a white saviour narrative but is redeemed by its willingness to examine the other Calcutta – one steeped in culture – at a time when most western narratives looked solely at the poverty. 2. Afternoon Raag by Amit Chaudhuri As much an extended prose poem as a novel, this is the account of a young Bengali man studying at Oxford and caught in a complicated love triangle. His loneliness and melancholy sharpen his memories of his upbringing in Bombay and his holidays spent at the ancestral home in Calcutta, memories that come back to haunt him in vivid, sensory detail. Intensely moving, superbly written, this is a novel about belonging; of new worlds and old homes. 3. The Lives of Others by Neel Mukherjee Breathtaking in scope, The Lives of Others tells the story of three generations of the Ghosh family, all living together in an upmarket suburb of Calcutta. Unnoticed by his family, Supratik has become dangerously involved in extremist political activism. Compelled by an idealistic desire to change his life and the world around him, he leaves Calcutta to join the Naxalite revolutionaries fighting against the Indian state. Meanwhile the ageing patriarch and matriarch of his family preside over their large household, unaware that beneath the barely ruffled surface of their lives the sands are shifting. The story of a family unravelling as the society around it fractures. 4. The Byomkesh Bakshi Stories by Saradindu Bandopadhyay Bengalis have always been fans of crime fiction but in Calcutta, Holmes and Poirot have to compete with the city’s homegrown hero, Byomkesh Bakshi. In the 1930s, Byomkesh made an unobtrusive entry into Bengali fiction. He called himself a satyanveshi, a seeker of truth, and, courtesy of his cerebral skills and the devilish predicaments he found himself in, quickly became a household name. He’s accompanied by his slightly obtuse friend, Ajit – Watson to his Holmes – and while the plots are firmly of their time, Bandopadhyay’s real gift is to provide us with a glimpse of colonial Calcutta society from the point of view of the Indians. In that they represent a fascinating insight into the world of the colonised. 5. The Namesake by Jhumpa Lahiri The story of the Ganguli family, their emigration from tradition-bound life in Calcutta and their fraught transformation into Americans. Soon after their arranged marriage, Ashoke and Ashima Ganguli settle together in Cambridge, Massachusetts. Ashoke adapts far less warily than his wife, who pines for her family in Calcutta. When their son is born, the task of naming him betrays the vexed results of bringing old ways to a new world. Named for the Russian writer by his Indian parents in memory of a catastrophe years before, Gogol Ganguli suffers the burden of his heritage as well as his odd name. Lahiri brings great empathy to Gogol as he stumbles along the first-generation path, dealing with the clash of cultures, conflicts of assimilation and the tangled ties between generations. 6. First Promise by Ashapurna Devi Set in pre-partition India, and split between Calcutta and rural Bengal, First Promise (Pratham Pratishruti in Bengali) tells the story of Satyabati, a girl married off at the age of eight and forced to live under strict brahmanical regulations. The novel narrates her struggle against familial control and social prejudices in a fiercely patriarchal society. Written in 1964, it’s considered to be Devi’s magnum opus. 7. The Sleeping Dictionary by Sujata Massey The first of the Daughters of Bengal series by the American writer this follows the story of Pom, a young peasant girl who survives a catastrophic cyclone and travels across Bengal to survive, finally arriving in Calcutta. Her journey takes her from an orphanage to a brothel and finally to working as a librarian in an Englishman’s house in Calcutta. Her odyssey through colonial Bengal also tells the story of Indian independence. Eloquent and thoughtful, the book provides the reader with a unique take on the city. 8. The Middleman by Sankar (Mani Shankar Mukherjee) As with The Lives of Others, The Middleman is set in the Calcutta of the 1970s. The city is teeming with thousands of young men vainly searching for work. Somnath Banerjee spends his days queuing up at the employment exchange. Unable to find a job despite his qualifications, Somnath decides to go into the order–supply business as a middleman. His ambition drives him to prostitute a girl for a contract that will secure the future of his business. As he transforms from an idealistic young man into a corrupt businessman, the novel examines the price that Calcutta extracts from its youth. Stark and disquieting, it exposes the decaying values and rampant corruption of a metropolis built on broken dreams and morbid reality. 9. The Epic City: The World on the Streets of Calcutta by Kushanava Choudhury After graduating from Princeton, Choudhury moved back to Calcutta and the world his immigrant parents had abandoned. Working as a journalist, he sifts through the chaos for the stories that never make the papers, and paints a soulful, compelling portrait of the everyday lives that make Calcutta. It’s a portrait of the end of an era in a city that is a world unto itself. 10. The Bengalis: A Portrait of a Community by Sudeep Chakravarti Understanding Calcutta is impossible without an understanding of the Bengalis, its largest ethnic group. From their ranks have come Nobel laureates, scientists, revolutionaries, movie stars, directors and an unending stream of writers, philosophers, painters, poets and musicians. But just who are the Bengalis? Chakravarti delves deep into the culture, literature, history and social mores of these people. He writes with acuity about the many strengths of the community but does not flinch from its dark and tormented history. With wit and empathy, this tome of a book attempts to capture the essence of what it means to be Bengali. The Shadows of Men by Abir Mukherjee is published by Vintage. To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Jane Campion’s first feature film in more than 10 years is a western gothic psychodrama: mysterious, malicious, with a lethal ending that creeps up behind you like a thief. Campion devotees will enjoy the scenes in which a large piano is carried into an uncivilised wilderness; eight philistine cowboys are required to heave this into the ranch-owner’s parlour, the culture totem in the desert. And it is on this that the new lady of the house, played by Kirsten Dunst, attempts to master Strauss’s Radetzky March, while her jeeringly malign new brother-in-law (played by Benedict Cumberbatch) deliberately puts her off by playing it as well on his banjo – thus disconcertingly revealing that for all his rough ways he is actually rather more talented musically than she is. It’s the most menacing five-string banjo picking since Deliverance. The setting is 1920s Montana, where two brothers run a profitable ranch: charismatic but boorish Phil Burbank (Cumberbatch) and George (Jesse Plemons), who affects a fancier style of clothing and millinery than sweaty Phil and aspires to the high social standing of his elderly parents who evidently staked them in the business. Phil, an instinctive bully, calls his brother “fatso”, encourages his men to mock him, and is obsessed with the fact that George is parasitically reliant on Phil’s tough competence, which he learned from a charismatic rancher called ‘Bronco’ Henry that he once idolised and who taught him the trade. But lonely, dysfunctional Phil is in fact emotionally reliant on his quiet, dignified brother and these grown men share a bedroom in their big house like kids. So Phil is outraged when George marries a widow from the town: this is Rose (an excellent performance from Dunst), a former cinema piano-player now running a cafe, with a sensitive teenage son called Peter (Kodi Smit-McPhee) who waits tables for which he creates intricate paper flowers, to much sneering homophobic abuse from Phil. And yet Phil is oddly transfixed by Peter’s delicate papery fronds, a visual echo with the strips of rawhide from which he later makes a menacing rope. Once Rose moves into the home, Phil makes it his business to harass and abuse her, as she descends into depression and alcoholism, but then appears to take a strange fatherly interest in Peter himself, offering to teach him to ride and take him out into the remote hills to school him in the rancher ways, just as ‘Bronco’ once apparently did to him. Campion has adapted a 1967 novel by Thomas Savage, much admired by E Annie Proulx, and she has created something over which an air of tragedy, dysfunction and horror hangs. It is like something from Ibsen, especially in the excruciating scene in which George invites his parents and their political friends over for a formal black-tie dinner, and poor, miserable Rose is psychologically unable to play the piano for them. Occasionally, it is even a little like George Stevens’s Giant from 1956 (and maybe if things had been different the Peter role might have interested James Dean) – but Smit-McPhee brings something inscrutably complex and reserved to his character’s behaviour, an opaque quality which after the big reveal delivers a retrospective mule-kick of significance. The audience has to piece together its meaning after the closing credits, going right back to the opening narrative voiceover. Campion is great at furnishing her movie with queasy touches: poor Rose stumbles into the kitchen to talk to the cook Mrs Lewis (Geneviève Lemon) and maid Lola (Thomasin McKenzie) and gets regaled with weird gossip and urban myths, including one about a dead woman, whose hair continued to grow after her death, filling the coffin. You can almost feel Rose’s frisson of fear and fellow-feeling, imagining herself to be like this woman right now. The Power of the Dog is a made with artistry and command: it is one of Jane Campion’s best. • The Power of the Dog is released on 19 November in cinemas, and on 1 December on Netflix.Is there any culinary pleasure like a creamy, carby dish of dauphinoise potatoes? Well, perhaps a mound of buttery mash, a fluffy jacket potato with melted cheese or a big pile of chips with rich, yellow mayonnaise – consider this the fancy French dinner party version of all of the above. That said, you don’t need to use guests as an excuse; I’d eat it straight from the dish in my pyjamas. Prep 35 min Cook 40 min Serves 4 750g waxy potatoes (see step 1) 250ml double cream 100ml whole milk 2 garlic cloves Nutmeg Butter, to grease 50g gruyere, grated (optional) 1 Choose your spuds wisely A waxy variety is preferable here, because they keep their shape once cooked; flourier spuds of the kind usually sold for mash or chips will still be delicious (indeed, some chefs seem to prefer them), but they’re likely to disintegrate, which I think turns the dish a bit stodgy. Charlottes, desiree, estima and maris peer are all widely available and good for dauphinois. 2 Peel and slice the potatoes Peel and cut the potatoes into thin slices – you can do this by hand, if you’re a glutton for punishment, but I’d recommend using a food processor or, better still, a basic mandoline (if you go for that last option, though, please do use the guard; the first time I made this dish, I got all gung-ho and sliced off the end of my finger). 3 Blanch the potatoes in hot cream and milk Put the cream and milk into a large, wide pan. Peel and crush the garlic into the pan, add a good grating of nutmeg, season generously and bring to a simmer. Add the potatoes, turn down the heat and leave to cook gently for about 10 minutes, until they’re slightly softened but not cooked through; the exact time will depend on the thickness of the potato slices, so keep an eye on them. 4 Bake the potatoes Take an oven dish that’s just big enough to hold all the potatoes and grease it with butter. Heat the oven to 180C (160C fan)/350F/gas 4. Pour the potato and dairy mixture into the greaseed dish and spread out to fill it evenly. Cover with foil, and bake for 30 minutes. 5 Add the cheese Lift off the foil and sprinkle the cheese, if using, over the top – though it’s not very French, you could substitute the gruyere for parmesan (in which case, use a little less) or even a mild cheddar, if you prefer. Either way, bake uncovered for a further 10-15 minutes, until browned and bubbling. Remove and leave to cool slightly before serving. 6 Other flavourings For me, the creamy blandness is one of the chief pleasures of gratin dauphinois, but if you fancy more assertive flavours, add some sprigs of woody herbs – thyme, rosemary or bay – to the milk in step 3; or, an idea from chef Stevie Parle, mash in four anchovies (I’d do this in the greased dish, then stir in a little of the hot cream before pouring in the potatoes and the rest of the dairy mixture). 7 Alternatives for the potatoes Try replacing half the potatoes with peeled and thinly sliced celeriac, squash or sweet potato. For a more substantial meal, chuck in some bacon lardons; or do as Nigel Slater does and tuck smoked mackerel chunks between the layers of potato; or keep it meat-free by melting a whole (vegetarian) camembert or goat’s cheese on top. Whatever you do, serve with a sharply dressed green salad. 8 And to get ahead … This can be made in advance. Cook it up to the point when you add the potatoes to the dish, then leave to cool, cover and refrigerate until you’re ready to bake – don’t worry if the potatoes on top slightly discolour where they’ve been exposed to the air, because that won’t show in the finished dish. Bring back to room temperature before cooking as above. 9 Or make boulangère potatoes instead Replace the milk and cream with 350ml vegetable or chicken stock, and scatter a peeled and thinly sliced onion between the layers of potato. You can easily make this vegan by greasing the dish with oil instead of butter, and replacing the cheese in step 5 with breadcrumbs tossed in olive oil and salt. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from OcadoVanessa Van Durme walks falteringly to the mic, shoulders stooped. But then the 73 year old lifts her chin just enough as if to say, I’m still here. And she sings Over the Rainbow in a growl to rival Tom Waits. A decade ago there was a stage show inspired by a film, Yo Soy Así, about the closing of a drag cabaret in Barcelona, and the ageing performers there. That show was Gardenia, created by directors Frank Van Laecke and Alain Platel of Belgian dance-theatre collective Les Ballets C de la B, with a group of its own ageing gay and trans performers. Now Gardenia returns with eight of the original cast (the ninth, Andrea De Laet, died in 2016). These performers must have some stories to tell, but this is not that show. Gardenia is a much more impressionistic view of that final night backstage, wigs on the dressing table, a rail of sparkly dresses. At the opening, they wear suits – a different kind of drag. There’s a dissonance between the arrival of Rudy Suwyns, looking like a disgruntled chair of the Rotary Club, and being told “she’s the queen of blowjobs!” We see constant dressing and undressing, identities in flux, floral dresses nestling under men’s jackets (and a fabulous Liza Minnelli look). The performers and performance are slow-moving. The mood is sparse, fragments of voices in the air like theatre ghosts. It feels frail, in a way – what’s holding it together is unclear – but there is time just to witness these bodies, these humans, if you can get into its zone. Then the light joviality suddenly evaporates to leave pain and fear, a whiff of the characters’ inner struggles. There are some moments of real theatrical grace: a lip sync to Caetano Veloso’s Cucurrucucú Paloma (as seen in Almodóvar’s Talk to Her); Ravel’s Bolero underlining a slow crescendo of dressing up; the final moving number not so much a big finish as an inevitable slipping away. This, incidentally, is to be 64-year-old director Platel’s final show. It’s a piece about fragility and endurance, and how even the brightest lights must fade. At Sadler’s Wells, London on 17 NovemberA car rented by Bedfordshire police was the subject of a bomb scare after it was parked outside an event in central London that was due to be attended by the Israeli ambassador. The vehicle had five of its windows smashed in by a specialist team from the Metropolitan police before officers realised it was being used by another force. It is believed the Bedfordshire force had rented the black Nissan Qashqai but failed to display a police logbook in the window to show the vehicle was safe. The car had been parked outside Westminster Central Hall on Tuesday morning before the Israeli ambassador, Tzipi Hotovely, was due to attend an event. Other guests included the Labour shadow ministers Wes Streeting and David Lammy and the Labour peer Lord Levy. A Met spokesperson confirmed officers smashed windows on the vehicle, but denied a control explosion had taken place. He said: “The car was a rental vehicle [and] did not belong to the Metropolitan police service.” He said officers believe it was operated by Bedfordshire police. He added: “Police were made aware of a suspicious vehicle on Matthew Parker Street, SW1, shortly after 12pm on Tuesday 16 November. Specialist officers attended and the vehicle was examined.” A Bedfordshire police spokesperson said the force used the car as part of an operation mainly conducted in London. Police were unable to verify with the car hire company that Bedfordshire police had rented out the vehicle in time to prevent the windows being smashed. The bomb scare came a day after the terrorist threat level was increased from “substantial” to “severe”, after an explosion in a taxi outside a women’s hospital in Liverpool. The new level means an attack is judged to be “highly likely”. Tuesday’s incident is not the first bomb scare caused by a police blunder. In 2017 a bomb squad carried out controlled explosion outside a police station in Workington, Cumbria, on a car that had been parked there by a colleague. Officers were unaware that the car had been parked outside the station by an officer who had helped its owner, who had been taken ill. In 2014, part of Wolverhampton Wanderers football stadium had to be evacuated after police officers mistakenly left an imitation explosive device in an executive box during an earlier training exercise. • This article was amended on 17 November 2021. The taxi explosion was outside a women’s hospital in Liverpool, not Birmingham as stated in an earlier version.What did you do with all that spare time when Covid forced us indoors, back in the spring of 2020? It’s common to admit to having squandered it. Television’s biggest contributor to that mass squandering was Tiger King: Murder, Madness and Mayhem, a lockdown phenomenon watched by millions, despite belonging to a burgeoning category of Netflix documentary that is more human circus than true crime. Nobody came out of it well, including viewers who stuck with it. By the end of the original Tiger King (yes, I stuck with it) we had learned how Joe Exotic, an Oklahoma tiger park owner, YouTuber and failed presidential candidate, had been sentenced to 22 years in federal prison for plotting to kill his nemesis, Carole Baskin, a Florida tiger park owner and animal rights activist. We heard the story of Exotic’s aggressively eccentric life, each episode revealing another horrifying incident that illustrated the chaos within America’s seemingly lawless big cat community: the staff member who lost half an arm; the business associate who used cute tigers to lure women into threesomes with his wife; the day Exotic’s much younger husband accidentally shot himself and died. The twist was that Baskin was also the sort of oddball that shows like this feed on. Tearful and floaty, in contrast to Exotic’s foul-mouthed showboating, she was a self-regarding kook whose first husband, Don Lewis, vanished in 1997 and has never been found. Tiger King 2, the five-part follow-up, has a problem that often dogs the sequels to hit documentaries: it is trying to scoop up confetti after the parade has already passed through. Exotic is in prison, so there are no fresh shots of him with his snaggly grin and straggly mane. Episode one gets round this by delving into his early life, positing that his narcissism was brought on by a family bereavement and the experience of growing up gay in the rural South. Baskin has refused to participate further, a decision slightly undermined by the fact that she has uploaded hours of footage of her reading from her diaries to YouTube. These clips form her appearances in episodes two and three, which re-investigate Don Lewis’s disappearance. Did he siphon money out of his businesses, away from his wife, and into a new life in Costa Rica? Did Baskin, as Joe Exotic and his followers assume, kill Don and feed him to the tigers? (She points out she has “never even been a person of interest, according to the sheriff’s department”.) Or is there another, equally wild explanation? In what is now the established Tiger King style, the analysis descends into an exhausting swamp of vulgar hearsay, one gaudy character after another making unverifiable claims about private planes, gangland grudges or vans full of guns. The last two instalments return to Joe Exotic, and whether his conviction for conspiring to murder Baskin is sound. The ideal result for Tiger King, if its makers hope to return for a third season of twists that would be deemed too crass for the trashiest soap opera, would be exoneration for Exotic. This would leave him free to wrestle with leopards as he did in the good old days, with the awful bonus of having finally achieved the global notoriety he has always craved. His army of fans maintain that he should be released on the grounds that Baskin is a contemptible liar – they phrase it differently – and there is something here about the radicalisation of modern culture, where once a person has picked a team, they advocate for it regardless of the facts. (The campaign to get Exotic out of prison focused for a time on trying to convince Donald Trump to issue a presidential pardon, and it seems he almost did.) Tiger King is more an indulgence of that impulse than a comment on it, since much of it boils down to watching people pursue beefs for their own sake, like trolls in an online war sprung to hideous life. But it turns out that the folk with the “Free Joe Exotic” tattoos and Cadillacs custom-sprayed in tiger stripes unknowingly have a point: the new series records key moments when alleged co-conspirators begin to change their stories. Ending on that bombshell means that Tiger King 2, which always teeters on the chicken-wire fence between proper factual telly and exploitative waste of everyone’s time, just about comes down on the right side.Xavi Hernández’s time as head coach of Al Sadd in Qatar can be described as utter dominance and entertainment at home coupled with disappointment abroad. At the moment, Barcelona would probably take that. This has been a marriage arranged for some time, with the Spanish club waiting for their former player, who is on record as saying that he was looking for experience before making the big move back home. On Saturday he will be in charge of the club for the first time. Whether 30 months in Doha is adequate preparation for Barcelona is debatable given the differences: the leagues, the clubs, the countries, the owners, the fans, the media, the pressure – pretty much everything. Even in the middle of a genuine title race, Qatar offers a relatively laidback football environment. Coaches can come and go quickly but this owes more to the whims of owners rather than any overwhelming groundswell of discontent from media or fans. In Xavi’s case, media and fans have been largely happy with his presence as a player from 2015, when he helped lift Al Sadd’s attendances towards five figures at times, and then, from May 2019, as coach. Since then the 41-year-old has won everything there is to win in Qatar but then that is expected at a club with close to 60 trophies in the cabinet. There were a number of cups lifted (the plethora of knockout competitions is partly down to a short 22-game season) and the 2020-21 league won by 13 points. The football was good, especially after the first year or so, with a commitment to playing out from the back and attacking at every opportunity – last season’s goal difference of +63 is testament to that. This season has been just as impressive. The first eight games were won and their 3-3 draw with their biggest rivals Al Duhail at the beginning of November, watched by representatives from Barcelona, marked the first points dropped. It also took the unbeaten league run to 36 games, stretching back to March 2020. It is impressive but then Al Sadd have most of the stars in the Qatar Stars League. A fair amount of the Qatar team that won the Asian Cup in 2019 is there, stalwarts such as that year’s Asian Player of the Year, Akram Afif, Hassan al-Haydos, Ró-Ró, Abdelkarim Hassan and Tarek Salman. Encouragingly for Barcelona, these players have noticeably improved under Xavi. The imports made a difference. The long-serving South Korea internationals Nam Tae-hee (now at Al Duhail) and Jung Woo-young are underrated, though Baghdad Bounedjah, who has averaged more than a goal a game since arriving in 2015, obviously is not. The Algerian striker is the focal point of the attack but there are goals from elsewhere such as André Ayew, who arrived from Swansea in July. The crucial signings came in the summer of 2020 however and took Al Sadd to the next level. Even with the goals of Bounedjah, Santi Cazorla has been the best attacker in the country and the Brazilian defensive midfielder Guilherme the linchpin, holding it all together. Whereas the domestic record has been perfect, his record overseas is not so stellar. Xavi has made little impact on the AFC Champions League, a tournament that Al Sadd won in 2011 with a team nowhere near as strong. In September 2020 Al Sadd reached the second round but were defeated 1-0 by Persepolis (if Xavi really wanted to prepare for the Camp Nou then taking over this Iranian club with big crowds, bigger media pressure and plenty of politics and skulduggery behind the scenes would have been perfect). The well-organised Tehran team, despite a budget many times smaller, gave Al Sadd little time or space, sat back when needed and were deserved winners. Al Sadd were poor and this led to the first serious criticisms of the coach. With Cazorla and Guilherme just getting settled, however, there was confidence that the 2021 tournament would be more fruitful. It was worse. Only three of the six games were won, two against Al Wehdat, the Jordanian team making their Champions League debut, and the other against Foolad of Iran. Al Sadd needed a draw against Saudi Arabia’s Al Nassr in the final game to progress but lost to the Riyadh club for the second time in the group stage. Al Nassr are no minnows, with plenty of cash, but despite rumours of problems inside the dressing room and mixed performances at home, they were too good, or just too clever, leaving Xavi complaining about referees and playing surfaces – a classic combination used by coaches throughout the ages. Asian fortunes could well have been different at the third time of asking but we will never know because now it is all about Europe. Whatever happens, Xavi will be missed in Qatar but if he brings Pep Guardiola levels of success back to Barcelona then Al Sadd will be happy to have been the start of that journey.In Al Smith’s ambitious and cynical new play, everybody has a price and kindness is only ever part of a deal. At the centre of Rare Earth Mettle is the huge expanse of lithium under the Bolivian salt flats where Kimsa (Carlo Albán) lives with his sick daughter. Bartering for the land is a billionaire CEO played by Arthur Darvill. The play caused controversy before it reached the stage when the original naming of Darvill’s character, as Hershel Fink, was criticised for perpetuating antisemitic stereotypes. More investigation needs to be done but the theatre has apologised for “unconscious bias” and the name of the character – who is not Jewish – has been changed to Henry Finn. Finn, very obviously a fictionalised Elon Musk, is desperate to use the mineral to revolutionise electric cars but comes up against a determined-although-ethically-dodgy doctor who believes it should be used medicinally (Genevieve O’Reilly). Both challenging and clever, the highly researched script features huge and varied philosophical debates about power and ownership, as Kimsa and the local indigenous communities claim a right over their lithium-laden land. Jaye Griffiths is elegantly ruthless as local politician Nayra, wanting to do the best for her community while having her sights set on greater leadership. Where the play loses its grip on us is in the lack of tangible impact from all their intellectual entanglements and complex political motivations. In this play, everything is plot, a quick-spinning cycle of secret deals and wordy debates. We speed through gigantic change, including literal edits to history, with little time to feel the repercussions. And Kimsa’s daughter as the key emotional hook is barely used. But it’s funny, Darvill particularly, who is wonderfully spry as the narcissistic, egomaniacal tech mogul. He dances around the stage in expensive tracksuits, manipulating people, geography and grief for his own gain, too rich to care about anything, even as his empire begins to crumble around him. Smith’s script also contains some brilliant comedy in the way it plays with language and miscommunication. Rare Earth Mettle has enormous scope, but it tries to do too much. There’s a moment, very near the end, where a suggestion of a single action is like a jackhammer, and the emotional impact of that makes you realise how it’s been lacking elsewhere. It’s incredibly smart, but there’s not quite enough heart. Rare Earth Mettle is at the Royal Court, London until 18 December.People are divided more deeply by identity than by issues, according to a survey that suggests culture wars are fuelled mostly by partisanship and that voters have more in common than many think. The YouGov-Cambridge Globalism Project found that in particularly polarised countries including the US and UK, political clans that profess mutual loathing often align on the substance of debates, even in highly charged areas such as sexism and racism. The findings confirm a growing phenomenon known as affective polarisation – a “them versus us” mentality that places animosity towards political opponents above almost all other considerations – that is alarming political scientists. Experts have argued that the phenomenon can eventually lead voters to support corrupt politicians who violate democratic norms, simply because they believe it preferable to the opposition winning an election. Political scientists and psychologists also fear that affective polarisation, ably exploited by some politicians to maximise differences and motivate their voters, can make political compromise impossible. The annual survey of more than 27,000 people in 27 countries began by asking respondents how they felt about various political affiliations and labels. The results revealed voters fractured into bitterly opposed camps. In the UK, 88% of Labour voters said they disliked Conservative politicians and 73% said they disliked Conservative supporters. Similarly, 74% of Tory supporters said they disliked Labour politicians and 45% disliked Labour voters. Hostility was even stronger in the US, where 93% of Trump supporters said they disliked Democratic politicians and 90% of Biden voters said the same of Republican politicians. Antipathy towards the other camp’s voters was at similar levels. The survey found the same divides around defining culture war labels: asked if they considered themselves a feminist, for example, 64% of Conservative voters in the UK and 85% of Trump supporters in the US said no, while 53% of Labour supporters and 58% of Biden voters said yes. But when asked about their attitudes to some of the issues underlying the label “feminist”, people appeared considerably less polarised. One question asked whether three jobs – cleaner, nurse and politician – were more suited to women or men, or equally suited to all genders. Large majorities – generally between 75% and 90% – of both Conservative and Labour voters in the UK, and of Trump and Biden supporters in the US, responded that they considered all three jobs were equally suited to all genders. The survey also found majorities in both tribes in the US and UK felt it was unacceptable for a man to “whistle in the street at a woman he does not know” and that “promoting equality for women” should be a priority for society. Only small percentages disagreed. The phenomenon was replicated in other countries. In France, 69% of supporters of President Emmanuel Macron (69%) and 55% of backers of the far-right leader Marine Le Pen expressed dislike for each other, but many held overlapping views on equality for women, with 80% of Macron voters and 71% of Le Pen voters saying it should be a high or medium priority. The pattern was broadly the same among supporters of Germany’s Green party and Alternative für Deutschland, the ruling national-conservative Law &amp; Justice (PiS) party and the Left in Poland, the far-right Vox party and leftwing Podemos in Spain, and New Democracy and Syriza in Greece. Other hot-button topics showed the same picture in the US, UK and elsewhere. Clear majorities of Labour (66%) and Biden (72%) supporters declared themselves very or fairly favourable towards the anti-racism organisation Black Lives Matter, with while only 5% of Trump supporters and 17% of Tory voters shared the same opinion. But when asked how important “combating racisms of all kinds” should be for their country, clear majorities of Conservative (80%), Labour (94%) and Biden (92%) voters said it should be a high or medium priority, along with 47% of Trump voters. In the UK, attitudes towards Extinction Rebellion were a similarly poor reflection of people’s feelings about the underlying issue of climate change. About 63% of Conservative voters and 23% of Labour voters expressed an unfavourable view of about the environmental campaign group. Majorities in both camps, however, shared broadly the same views on substantive environmental issues, with 72% of Tory supporters and 90% of Labour supporters saying that “moving away from carbon-intensive industries towards greener alternatives” should be a high or medium priority for their country. “None of this is to say that significant divides do not exist in political and social attitudes,” said the authors of the survey, carried out in August and September, adding that the findings supported the emerging theory that people are more influenced by identity than issues. “The point is that when we compare people by their attitudes to specifics of issues, rather than by markers of identity, we find [most] are not cleaved into separate, polarised clusters, or ranged against each other with clashing visions.” The authors identified two other notable findings: in several countries, supporters of leftwing parties were more likely to be antipathetic towards supporters of rightwing parties than the reverse; and in the UK, Brexit remains a more significant marker of political identity than party affiliation. In the US, 86% of Biden supporters said they disliked Trump voters, compared with 73% the other way round. The pattern also held in France for Macron and Le Pen voters (69% v 55%), in Poland for the Left and PiS (85% v 48%), and in Greece for Syriza and New Democracy (70% v 60%). In the UK, only half of Tory and Liberal Democrat voters, and 64% of Labour voters, said they felt a common sense of identity with people who voted with them in the 2019 general election. Asked how strongly they identified with those who voted the same way in the referendum, the figure was 80% for remainers and 72% for leavers.The value of trade between Northern Ireland and Ireland has rocketed since Brexit with cross-border business increasing in both directions, official data shows. Figures released on Wednesday by the Central Statistics Office (CSO) in Dublin show that the value of imports from Northern Ireland surged by 60% in the first nine months of 2021 and are now valued at €2.8bn (£2.37bn). Trade in the other direction has also increased, with a 48% rise in exports to Northern Ireland from the republic, bringing the total value of trade to €2.57bn for January to September 2021. Comparative figures are not available to show any changes in trade between Northern Ireland and Great Britain since January as the Northern Ireland Statistics and Research Agency does not collect such data. However, the CSO figures alone will bolster the arguments by the Brexit minister, Lord Frost, that the UK’s departure from the EU has damaged trade between Great Britain and Northern Ireland but boosted traffic with the republic. He is currently in Northern Ireland for talks with business and political party leaders and told BBC Radio Ulster on Wednesday that the trade links between the region and Great Britain were being “worn away”. “I think in aggregate, the trade links with Great Britain and Northern Ireland are about three times as big as those with Ireland and the single market. So in aggregate those links in Great Britain are incredibly important. So it’s those [links] that are being sort of worn away by the way the protocol is working, and that’s why it’s so important to deal with them,” he said. While the trade flows between the republic and Northern Ireland are increasing, the CSO figures show they also represent a fraction of the country’s overall business, accounting for just 2% of exports and 4% of imports. They also show the negative impact of Brexit on trade between the republic and Great Britain, once its single biggest trading partner. Although exports were up by 36% to Great Britain, where no Brexit checks yet apply, imports almost flatlined, rising just 2%. September figures from the CSO showed a 32% year-on-year drop in exports from GB to Ireland in the first seven months of the year, with notable declines in food and live animals, all now subjected to documentary and physical checks on arrival in the republic. The 2% rise in exports from Great Britain in September compared with the same month in 2020 suggests the decline has been arrested with the overall value of imports for the first nine months down by 21%. Business leaders have blamed the Brexit checks and controls that now exist at Irish ports and airports, with paperwork and health certification required for all imports from Britain. Data collected by the CSO is a valuable measure of the impact of Brexit. From January the statistics agency separated out all trade to Northern Ireland in its data to produce monthly reports to account for Brexit.On 4 November 2020 the world was occupied with the results of the US election. For myself and many others with family and friends in the Tigray region of Ethiopia, however, that day marked the beginning of a year-long nightmare. And it’s one which the world has, for the most part, ignored. When on that day the Ethiopian prime minister, Abiy Ahmed, a Nobel peace prizewinner, announced a military offensive in Tigray, it was hard to predict the scale of the human suffering that would ensue. But almost instantly Tigray, a region in the far north of the country that is home to more than 7 million people, was cut off from the world: phone lines were shut down, the internet was cut off, banks were closed and journalists were barred from the region. For many with family in Tigray, including myself, we braced ourselves, waiting to hear what had become of our family and friends. Now, a year on, we have a manmade humanitarian catastrophe that USAID has called “one of the worst humanitarian crises in the world”. UN relief chief Martin Griffiths said last week that “Tigray is probably the worst place to live in the world right now”. In the first two months of the war, more than 56,000 Tigrayan refugees fled to Sudan – bringing with them harrowing memories of massacres at the hands of armed militia, Ethiopian soldiers, and troops from Eritrea (which lies to the north of Tigray). Ethiopian soldiers subsequently closed the border, reducing the number of refugees who could flee. From a personal perspective, the war has had a huge impact. Those of us in the Tigrayan disapora live each day not knowing if our family members are alive; news of each massacre, air attack, and mass arrest brings a sense of impending doom, that our family or friends could be among the victims. Friends in the west have taken to the internet to announce the deaths of mothers, siblings, grandparents and friends. Just three weeks ago there were multiple bombings in Tigray’s capital, Mekelle, which resulted in heavy civilian casualties. There have been reports of concentration camps controlled by Ethiopian forces housing ethnic Tigrayans including infants as young as two years old, as well as pregnant women and children. This week we heard of a wave of mass arrests of Tigrayans across the capital Addis Ababa, their only crime being their ethnicity. While writing this article, I discovered that a family member of mine is one of the many Tigrayans arrested. The war on Tigray has disturbingly seen girls as young as eight become the victims of sexual violence, with multiple reports of women being abducted and gang-raped at the hands of Ethiopian troops, Eritrean soldiers and armed militia. Earlier this year, the UN Population Fund (UNFPA) projected that around 22,500 victims of sexual violence during the conflict will need medical care this year. Due to the government-enforced media blockade, these reports are probably only the tip of the iceberg. The breadth of the destruction has led to Tigray’s healthcare system all but collapsing. Médecins Sans Frontières reported that 70% of health facilities were looted by Ethiopian and Eritrean soldiers. The reports coming out of the region also include the destruction of churches and mosques, the murder of humanitarian workers, mass displacement, as well as journalists being assaulted and arrested by government forces. The war has also brought with it a ghoul of Ethiopia’s past – a manmade famine. Starvation is a word we often hear but what is perhaps not stressed enough is the deeply horrible way it kills its victims: the cells in a malnourished body essentially begin consuming themselves. Within Tigray right now, more than 5 million people are suffering from critical food insecurity. “There is famine in Ethiopia right now,” United Nations aid chief Mark Lowcock said in June this year. With the region still under a “de facto humanitarian blockade” by the Ethiopian government, the crisis is set to get worse. A year on, the war has now spilled over into other regions in the country, namely Amhara and Afar, where civilians are now facing severe food insecurity and mass displacement. During the last conversation I had with my family in Mekelle, before the phone lines were cut once more, my aunt asked me to pray for the people of Tigray and for an end to their suffering. My younger cousin, who up until the war started was a university student with dreams of becoming an engineer, made me promise that I would share what the people of Tigray have endured. It has been a while since I have spoken to them, and like many people with family in Tigray, I don’t know when I’ll hear from them again. I can’t even be sure they are still alive. The scope of suffering in Tigray begs the question: why do so few people know about their plight? For the most part, the print and broadcast media has given the human suffering relatively little prominent coverage. Frighteningly, due to the blockade in Tigray, the full scope of civilian suffering is still not known. When attempting to comprehend the brutality the civilians of Tigray have been subjected to, it’s hard to imagine how they will be effectively rehabilitated, how many families have been torn apart and how such trauma will impact young people? What we do know is that the people of Tigray have suffered gravely. They are crying out for help, and they need someone to hear them. • Magdalene Abraha is a writer and publisher. She runs the A Quick Ting On seriesThe US will qualify for the World Cup This is not the nightmare from the previous qualifying cycle. For one thing, the challenges are more or less the exact opposite. Then: reliance on a core of fading, dyspeptic veterans under an experienced coach on a rescue mission with a shallow talent pool. Now: abundant experimentation from a younger tactician with the time to winnow a wide array of improving and perky up-and-comers. The trip to somewhere in Canada – Toronto? Vancouver? Nunavut? – on 30 January looms large, but this team are showing they can collect points on the road (albeit with a slice of fortune against Jamaica on Tuesday) and win at home. More than halfway through the Octagonal only two points separate the top four nations, with unbeaten Canada top, a point ahead of the US in second. There is no rational basis to think the Americans won’t finish in the top three and reach Qatar automatically, while the idea this group of players could miss out on the top four is preposterous. The USMNT are not great, at least not yet, but they are good enough and trending in the right direction. The jury still out on Berhalter How good is the head coach, though? With Gregg Berhalter still arranging the puzzle pieces 43 matches into the job, watching the US is like the moment in Tetris when the game accelerates and the screen blurs with blocks. Do you end up with a coherent and logical fit, or a colourful mess? Berhalter has an impressive record (30 victories) but continues to look like a man overseeing a long and involved internship program. After all, he has handed qualifying debuts to 26 players since September. Oddly, and borderline worryingly, in eight qualifiers his team have scored just twice in the first 45 minutes but 10 times in the second halves. In total this year the US have scored 16 goals in the first period and 29 afterwards. Berhalter’s in-game adjustments seem to be more effective than his pre-match preparations – he’s a man with a plan, as long as it’s Plan B. The prime example was the trip to Honduras in September, when the line-up and formation were misjudged and the team were a goal down at the break before a turnaround inspired by the debutant Ricardo Pepi led to a 4-1 win. Also notable was the cohesion and confidence in the excellent second half against Mexico last week after the US were outplayed in the opening period. Against Jamaica the US did begin well and took the lead, only to be disrupted – for the rest of the night, it transpired – by Michail Antonio’s stunning equaliser. Weston McKennie is indispensable This was confirmed by his presence against Mexico and absence against Jamaica. The US looked their age after the equaliser in Kingston – the starting XI averaged 22 years 341 days, second-youngest in UMSNT World Cup qualifying history, according to US Soccer. McKennie, who scored in the 2-0 win over Mexico, missed Tuesday’s game through suspension. Without the 23-year-old, the midfield exuded energy but lacked authority. The rough pitch did not help, but it’s hard to believe the US would have been so dominated physically or looked so harried in possession if the Juventus man had been available and played instead of the invisible Gianluca Busio. Meanwhile, with continued uncertainty over who should be the first-choice goalkeeper, a solid pair of performances from Walker Zimmerman is a boost for the team’s central defensive depth. Canada are legitimate contenders to win the group John Herdman’s side are the only remaining undefeated team in Octagonal Winter Olymp… sorry, World Cup qualifying, and the 2-1 win over Mexico at the Edmonton “Iceteca” delivered a couple of iconic sights: players celebrating by leaping into piled-up snow, and local hero Alphonso Davies running across the pitch waving a flag after the final whistle (sensibly clad in a puffer jacket). Home advantage is holding a game in temperatures around -9C (16F) on artificial turf with gridiron markings. The visitors, smarting from their 2-0 loss to the US in Cincinnati last Friday, duly looked uncomfortable from the start as Canada outhustled them in a hectic clash, led by 38-year-old Atiba Hutchinson, who broke the CanMNT cap record with his 90th appearance. It was the first Canadian victory over Mexico in a World Cup qualifier since 1976, and they have a seven-point cushion over Costa Rica in fifth place as they aim to reach their first finals since 1986. And, like the US, this Canadian team have plenty of excellent young players, led by Davies, a sign that they will stay a force in Concacaf for a while yet. North America now has a true three-way rivalry. VAR is coming Original refereeing is one of the quirks of Concacaf, but the governing body is reportedly introducing VAR for the remaining Octagonal games – adding the system mid-campaign, like Uefa. It felt like an aberration that Concacaf used VAR in the Nations League and Gold Cup but not its key competition, and Berhalter called that absence “an error” in September. He was probably not too upset on Tuesday, though, given the dubious 84th-minute foul given against Damion Lowe that potentially cost Jamaica a win. Considering the number of brutal challenges that go unpunished or under-punished in Concacaf fixtures, with Tuesday’s games no exception, red cards as well as disallowed goals might have an impact on which teams reach Qatar next year.Beef, palm oil, cocoa and other products linked to deforestation will be banned from entering the European Union under landmark legal proposals that attempt to help prevent the felling of the world’s great forests. Two weeks after world leaders signed a plan at Cop26 to reverse deforestation at Cop26, the EU executive on Wednesday outlined a draft law requiring companies to prove that agricultural commodities destined for the bloc’s 450 million consumers were not linked to deforestation. Beef, wood, palm oil, soy, coffee and cocoa are covered by the proposals but not rubber, an exclusion that has been criticised by environmentalists. Nevertheless green groups have welcomed the plans, as for the first time the EU will attempt to regulate products linked to all – and not just illegal – deforestation. Environmentalists say this is an important step, as some large forested countries, such as Brazil, have whittled away legal protections. “What we propose is a pioneering initiative,” Virginijus Sinkevičius, the EU environment commissioner, said. “EU action alone will not solve the problem. We also need major markets like the US and China to clean up their supply chain and we need producers to step up protection of the forests, but we stand ready to help.” Nico Muzi, the Europe director of the Mighty Earth campaign group, said the law was “a major leap forward” in the fight to protect the world’s endangered forests. He said: “The EU is sending a clear message to major supermarkets and retailers: one of the largest economies in the world simply won’t accept agricultural products linked to deforestation.” However, the EU’s proposals “pointlessly left out” fragile ecosystems, he said, such as Brazil’s Cerrado savannah and peatlands in south-east Asia, both rich stores of carbon, plant and animal life. The group has also criticised the exclusion of rubber, which it said caused 5m hectares of deforestation in recent years. Sinkevičius said more commodities could be included if there was evidence of a problem, as the draft law allowed the EU to “quickly react … to changing deforestation patterns”. He also defended the commission’s number-crunching, after scientists whose work was cited by EU officials criticised Brussels’ use of their data. “I think we didn’t get it wrong,” said Sinkevičius, who added the regulation was targeted at commodities where European consumption contributes the most to deforestation. The Lithuanian former economy minister also highlighted the inclusion of some derived products in the draft law: leather, chocolate and furniture. Companies will face a due diligence requirement to ensure they are not selling products that have caused deforestation or forest degradation, which will mean monitoring land in countries of origin via satellites and geolocation tracking. Between 1990 and 2008, EU consumption led to 10% of global deforestation, according to a commission estimate. The proposals are likely to be amended in negotiations between member states and the European parliament before they become law. Separately, the commission announced its intention to revive an attempt to protect European soils through legislation. About 70% of European soils are deemed not healthy as a result of farming, pollution and urban sprawl, while 1bn tonnes are washed away each year through erosion, an amount equivalent to 1-metre deep of soil across Berlin. The commission, which regulates air and water quality, said it would publish the legal proposals in 2023 with the aim of achieving good soil health across the EU by 2050. In the meantime, EU governments are being urged to set targets to minimise development on agricultural land and the natural environment, with more focus on redeveloping urban areas where the earth is already sealed under pavements and tarmac. More than a decade ago, big EU member states, including the UK and Germany, thwarted plans for an EU soil protection law. Sinkevičius said Brexit “doesn’t make much difference”, as previously reluctant member states seemed more supportive.Two American tourists have been fined after breaking into the Colosseum, reportedly to experience the pleasure of having a beer inside the ancient Roman amphitheatre. The pair, aged 24 and 25, climbed on to the second tier of the monument in the early hours of Monday morning. They were spotted at about 5.30am, chatting over their drinks, by a passerby who alerted police. It is unclear how they managed to enter the monument, which closes to the public at 4.30pm. The intruders told police they were “just having a beer”, the Italian press reported, but officers fined them €800 (£670) for illegally entering the archaeological site. No damage was caused. Italy gets its fair share of tourists behaving badly, with the Colosseum often a target for those who want to leave their mark. Defacing the 2,000-year-old structure is strictly forbidden, an instruction reinforced by the signs around the monument, and punishable by up to a year in jail and a fine of about €2,000. But not every tourist takes note. In September last year, a 32-year-old man from Ireland was caught using a metal point to carve his initials into a pillar on the first level, while a German girl of 14 was caught doing the same thing a month later. Such transgressions were more frequent before the coronavirus pandemic, when the Colosseum, completed under Emperor Titus in AD80, would welcome about 6 million visitors a year. Venice has similar problems, with police in the lagoon city renewing their crackdown on uncouth behaviour as tourists returned with the lifting of coronavirus restrictions. In June, a French visitor was fined €150 for paddling along the Grand Canal on his standup paddleboard, and two German women had to pay €250 each for sunbathing in bikinis by San Stae church.SSE has rebuffed calls to break itself up, and announced a multi-billion pound plan to boost investment across its renewable energy and electricity networks businesses. The FTSE 100 energy firm faces pressure from Elliott Management, an aggressive activist hedge fund, to split off its fast-growing renewable energy business. Elliott has built up a stake in the company this year. Instead, SSE will expand its investment plan for the next five years to £12.5bn, from its previous target of £7.5bn, across its business in the areas which will help the UK reach its net zero climate targets. By the end of the decade SSE plans to run a quarter of the UK’s offshore windfarms, alongside its electricity grid networks in the north of Scotland and parts of England, and its planned fleet of flexible “low carbon” power plants. Forty per cent of the extra £1bn of green investments every year to 2026 will go to its renewable energy business, 40% to its networks business, while the remaining 20% will be for the rest of the SSE business. The spending spree strengthens the company’s existing strategy in defiance of Elliot’s calls to break up the company by splitting off its renewables business to increase the value of the group. The rationale is backed by industry analysts, including Bernstein which claims SSE is undervalued in the market. SSE said it had “carefully considered a wide range of available strategic options”, including the separation of its renewables division, but had concluded it would “not be the best route for growth, execution and value creation and was not therefore in the long-term interests of its stakeholders”. Alistair Phillips-Davies, the chief executive of SSE, said it had held robust discussions with its shareholders in which it had made a clear case that keeping the company together was central to the strategy it had set out until 2026. He added that the scale of the business – across renewable energy, networks, and thermal power generation – was key to its ability to finance the large-scale project needed to meet the climate challenge. Phillips-Davies said scales was important in being able “to tackle the biggest, most difficult projects this world” needed. “If you’re half the size, you’ll only get half the funding,” he added. However, SSE’s share price plunged by 5% after the firm set out its plans, which include a surprise dividend cut of about 30% from the 2023-24 financial year to 60p a share, alongside plans to sell off a quarter of its electricity networks businesses, in order to fund the green spending. Phillips-Davies said he looked forward to continued conversations with shareholders over the coming weeks about the company’s strategy. The Perthshire-based energy group, which sold off its energy supply business to Ovo Energy shortly before Covid-19 pandemic, reported a doubling of profits for the first half of the year compared with the year before despite a slowdown in wind speeds, which dented its renewable energy generation. On a pre-tax basis SSE’s half-year profits grew by 116% to £1.69bn. The slowdown in wind speeds earlier this year, which has cut revenues for many major renewable energy companies, was “more than offset” by higher revenues in SSE’s networks businesses with a further boost from other energy assets such as gas storage.Azeem Rafiq says his damning revelations about racism in the game may have cost him his career in cricket but hopes his painful experiences will serve as a “watershed moment for the future”. Rafiq’s testimony in front of the digital, culture, media and sport select committee on Tuesday shone an uncomfortable light on institutions and individuals within the game and, speaking on Wednesday, the former Yorkshire all-rounder told the BBC: “It’s really important the game and wider society listens to my experiences and we don’t let this moment go and we try to use this as a watershed moment for the future. “I have no doubts that racism cost me my career but I believe in Allah and that everything happens for a reason. What I’ve been able to do and hopefully what we’ll all be able to do moving forward will be more powerful than any runs and wickets or Ashes and World Cups.” Rafiq also revealed he had received death threats since claiming that “institutional racism” at Yorkshire left him close to taking his own life. “We’ve had threats throughout, different types, but it comes with the territory,” he said. “You’ve got a lot of people in denial and it’s sad but hopefully we can get through it.” He also believes “hundreds and thousands” of cricketers could follow his lead by sharing experiences of racism in the game and warned Yorkshire cannot move forward until Andrew Gale and Martyn Moxon have left the club. He told Sky Sports News: “I think you’re going to get it into the hundreds and thousands, possibly. I do feel it’s going to be a little bit of ‘floodgates’ and a lot of victims of abuse are going to come forward.” Rafiq, who battled tears on several occasions during Tuesday’s testimony as he outlined how he fought depression and thoughts of suicide, said he felt an element of “closure” after his appearance, but the same may not be true for those he has accused. He now wants more departures at Yorkshire, following that of former chair Roger Hutton, whose showing at the DCMS committee was described by Rafiq as “very weak”, and chief executive Mark Arthur. Rafiq specifically believes Gale, who is currently suspended as head coach pending investigation over a historic tweet, and director of cricket Moxon, who is signed off work with a stress-related illness, are in untenable positions. Both featured heavily in his allegations, with Gale accused of constant racial abuse and Moxon of systematic bullying, including on Rafiq’s first day back after the stillbirth of his son. “I don’t think Martyn and Andrew can [continue],” said Rafiq. “I don’t think it’s possible for Yorkshire to move forward with them in there, with them knowing full well what role they played in that institution.” Neither man took up the chance to give their own evidence in Westminster, with Rafiq concluding: “They had an opportunity yesterday to come down here under parliamentary privilege to get their side of the story across and they didn’t.” Meanwhile, Sayeeda Warsi, the first British Muslim cabinet minister and now serving in the House of Lords, has called on the England and Wales Cricket Board to lead a period of change. Apparently unimpressed by the select committee appearance of an ECB delegation, led by the chief executive Tom Harrison, she told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: “What was disappointing for me yesterday was the way in which the ECB felt they could step aside in the past because the clubs accused of racism wanted to mark their own homework. “So it is time for the ECB to be involved with a full inquiry which includes a truth and reconciliation process that allows anonymity because that is what players want. What happened to Azeem was the tip of the iceberg in Yorkshire and what we are seeing happening in Yorkshire is the tip of the iceberg as to what is happening in English cricket. I have spoken, as has Azeem and others, to many young and talented players – players who have now given up cricket because of what they have faced in other counties and clubs up and down the country and this is an endemic issue.” The former Essex player Zoheb Sharif revisited his own recent allegations of racism at Essex, calling on the club, and others, to act decisively. He told Good Morning Britain: “It is really sad that it still goes on and hopefully now with Azeem talking, and a few others talking, we can put an end to this once and for all. I don’t think Essex have formally launched an investigation yet. I spoke a little bit to the chairman at Essex. I hope they are [taking it seriously], especially with Azeem’s case. It is not just me, there are others at Essex who have come out, too.” Essex’s chief executive, John Stephenson, has acknowledged Sharif’s claims, declaring himself “shocked and saddened” and outlining a “zero tolerance policy towards racism” at the club.Inflation has barely stirred for most of the 14 years since the start of the global financial crisis. Yet the coronavirus pandemic has disrupted almost every aspect of the global economy, and businesses are having to face up to what to many feels like an unusual phenomenon: rapidly rising prices. It has taken those who watch the economy by surprise. A year ago independent economists polled by the UK Treasury expected consumer price index inflation to reach only 1.9% by the fourth quarter of this year. On Wednesday, the Office for National Statistics reported CPI had risen 4.2% over the year to October – almost double the Bank of England’s 2% target and the highest in a decade. The squeeze is being felt by businesses across the economy, who are caught between rising costs and potentially putting off customers. Here is how some of those businesses are faring. Agriculture – Jonathan Huntley, sheep and cattle farmer The lambs born in the spring on Jonathan Huntley’s farm in the Welsh valleys are selling well to other farmers, who will fatten them up in the run-up to the new year. But it is scant consolation at a time when he and other food producers are facing a wave of rising costs. “Diesel and fertiliser are going to have a massive impact next year. Fertiliser is the biggest worry,” Huntley says, adding that the cost of animal feed has also been climbing. “I have been quoted £400 per tonne for cattle feed; it usually would be £250 or £280 perhaps.” At the family-run farm in the hills above Pontypridd, thoughts are already turning to whether they will be able afford essential products next spring. Huntley usually buys fertiliser shortly after Christmas, ready for growing the spring grass that is vital for feeding his sheep. The price has almost doubled since his last purchase, and recently touched £700 a tonne, leaving him and other farmers in a tough position. “We can’t buy at that price, and we will have to a make decision whether to buy half as much as we have bought in the past and stretch it out,” he says. “It will have a knock-on effect and we are not 100% sure how it will pan out.” Hospitality – Lee Worsley, publican Pubs and restaurants have been among the businesses hit hardest during the coronavirus lockdowns. Now inflation is hindering their ability to catch up. “We’re seeing almost overnight changes in some items – some in the 20% to 30% region,” says Lee Worsley, who runs three pubs, including the Kings Arms in Portesham, near Dorset’s famous Jurassic Coast. Bakery products such as bread and burger buns, along with potatoes and British meat and fish are among the products that now cost more. Sometimes shortages are the problem: New Zealand sauvignon wine supplies were dented by a combination of a bad grape harvest and the weeks-long blockage of the Suez canal earlier in the summer. Inflation pressures are adding to other difficulties such as the return of VAT to the 12.5% level, after a reduction to 5% allowed by the chancellor during the pandemic, and the return of business rates payments, Worsley says. Rising energy prices will hit soon when contracts come to an end, and one pub that relies on liquid petroleum gas deliveries has seen prices rise from 35p a litre to 44p a litre. Worsley and his wife and co-owner, Joanna, check invoices daily to try to plan around their rising costs. “It may be we have to reprint our menus every two or three weeks,” he says, adding that prices could also go down if pressures ease. Transport – Hassan Haji, private hire car driver Hassan Haji, 40, is a private hire car driver from Camden, London, working primarily for Uber and Bolt. “Everything’s going up but Uber has been bringing the fares we earn down. Now in London, they’ve just put fares up 10% but they actually lowered it during Covid, by bringing in fixed fares. It doesn’t matter if you’re stuck in traffic. The system generates its own fares – it shocks you, the mileage, the money you’ll get, maybe £15 for 12 miles across London. I was working during Covid, taking doctors and nurses, risking my life, there was no thanks from Uber – they put the commission up by 5% to 25%. “Meanwhile, petrol, insurance, it’s all going up. I drive a hybrid – and even with that I’m struggling. The people on just petrol and diesel, I feel sorry for them. I saw fuel hit £1.60 a litre in one place – that’s almost 30p more than it was. £20 of fuel used to last me two days, but I’m filling up much more than before. Driving a hybrid should be saving me a lot of money but at the moment I’m feeling the pinch. “The price of the carwash has gone up as well … it used to be £10 and now it seems to be £15, £18 everyone. You wash it at least once a week, it’s got to be clean.” Manufacturing – Brett Bateman of Somerset Toiletry Company Price rises are “everywhere”, says Brett Bateman, the chief executive of the Somerset Toiletry Company. From raw materials to shipping to labour costs, manufacturers are feeling the squeeze. “There literally is nothing that hasn’t gone up,” he says. The company manufactures soap in Clutton, a village between Bristol and Bath, as well as subcontracting to other factories around the UK. Price rises are evident across its supply chain, from the liquid that goes into hand soap and exotic ingredients that are used for fragrances to recycled plastic bottles from China, which have risen by 40%. Even prices for standard cardboard boxes for shipping abroad have gone up by 60%. Prices for shipping from China, the world’s biggest factory economy, have gone “absolutely crazy”, he says. Shipping containers have risen as high as £22,000 and are unlikely to ever return to pre-Covid levels between £6,000 and £7,000. That has added about £300,000 a year in costs – a big deal for a company with 42 employees and annual revenues of about £10m. The remorseless logic of inflation means that companies can only endure cost rises for so long before they bump up their own prices. Bateman has so far resisted, meaning he has had to accept lower profit margins. However, he will be forced to raise his prices in January, meaning consumers will feel the pinch. “There’s going to be an enormous knock-on effect into the next year,” Bateman says. “I don’t think we’ve seen the end of inflationary pressures on the high street.” Retail – Adam Black of bed and mattress seller Button &amp; Sprung Button &amp; Sprung put its prices up for the first time in four years in April and expects to put them up again in the spring as it struggles to deal with significant costs in raw materials and labour. Sales have soared for the company, which sells online and has a showroom in Fulham, west London, with people spending more on their homes during lockdown and turning to online specialists while physical retailers were forced to close their doors. However, its costs have also increased because the price of wood and metal, key materials in its bespoke beds, have risen more than 200% at some points in the past year and its suppliers have struggled to source wood at all at times because of high demand across the world. Suppliers have also had to put up pay for upholsterers because of a shortage of labour partly as a result of Brexit, which has made it more difficult for skilled workers to come to the UK. “In my time doing this, I have never not been able to get hold of wood before. There has been a dislocation of the supply chain,” says Black, who co-founded Button &amp; Sprung in 2014 after leaving Feather &amp; Black, the furniture retailer he also founded just over a decade before. He said the company had absorbed significant cost rises over the summer and expected more in January. “We will have to pass some of that on,” he says.The Premier League has confirmed that Gary Hoffman is to step down as its chair. The move stems from the controversy over the Saudi-led takeover of Newcastle. Hoffman will leave at the end of January, after 18 months in the job. He was the subject of an unofficial vote of confidence by Premier League chairmen last week, with more than half calling for his removal. “It has been a privilege to lead the Premier League through the last two seasons – when the spirit of English football has been more important than ever,” he said. “Now, I have decided the time is right for me to stand aside to allow new leadership to steer the league through its next exciting phase.” Hoffman has become the focus of clubs’ fury over the way the Newcastle deal was approved. Clubs complained they had not been properly consulted over a decision to allow the Saudi sovereign wealth fund to buy the club, having been notified of the outcome by email and only after reports had been published in the media. The 61-year-old wrote the emails and the messages were seen by clubs – particularly those outside the top six – to have been a final straw for their trust in the chair. A highly respected banker who ran Northern Rock after it was nationalised during the financial crisis, Hoffman’s role at the Premier League is in a non-executive capacity. His short tenure not only coincided with Covid but with the aborted breakaway plans of Project Big Picture and the European Super League, plots that incensed many of the clubs that eventually wanted him out. While Richard Masters, the league’s chief executive, is still believed to hold the confidence of most club owners, Hoffman became the object of intense ire at an emergency Premier League board meeting last month and pressure was put on him to stand down. Last week, club owners met again informally and held a vote of no confidence in Hoffman that the chair, unknown to him, failed. The league thanked Hoffman for his service. “He has led the league during the most challenging period in its history and leaves it in a stronger position than ever. The process of appointing a new chair will begin immediately.” The opposition to the Newcastle takeover was demonstrated in middle of last month when the clubs voted through temporary legislation designed to prevent the Saudis from striking lucrative sponsorship deals. Eighteen of the clubs supported the proposal to block related party transactions – commercial arrangements that involve pre-existing business relationships – with the fear being that Newcastle could conclude deals in the oil-rich kingdom that could give them an advantage. Manchester City abstained. The moratorium expires at the end of the month but the clubs are to meet on 30 November to vote in a permanent rule change. It has been proposed after the discussions of a specially convened working party – which included Newcastle – that any major commercial deal will have to be pre-approved by the Premier League board, which will consider whether it involves a related party and, crucially, represents fair market value. The board will be helped by independent assessors. The proposal was discussed at a meeting of all 20 clubs last Thursday and was supported in principal by the majority. It is being fine-tuned by lawyers and will need 14 votes to be carried, which is expected to happen.Labour has asked the Conservatives what checks the party has made on donations received from Russian-linked individuals – and if it could be sure that no cash received came from the Kremlin or others hostile to the UK. The questions follow revelations about a group of wealthy donors who have given money to the Conservatives and have business links to Russia or other wealthy Russians. Labour’s Conor McGinn, the shadow security minister, said it was “deeply worrying to see revealed potential financial links between senior donors and Putin’s Russia” and asked about “the adequacy of the processes” by which donors are vetted. Donors who have made money from Russia or Russians have given £1.93m to either the Conservative party or individual constituency associations since Boris Johnson took power in July 2019, according to calculations made by Labour based on disclosures to the Electoral Commission. Their ranks include the financier Lubov Chernukhin, the industrialist Alexander Temerko and an energy company he part-owns, Aquind, plus the businessman Mohamed Amersi. They have donated £700,000, £357,000 and £258,000 respectively, either directly or through linked companies, since Johnson became prime minister, a total of £1.3m. Other donors with business interests in Russia take the total to £1.93m. Both the Pandora papers, based on leaked documents from offshore financial institutions, published by the Guardian and others last month, and other reporting over the past 12 months have revealed greater Russian links than previously known. “What checks have been completed on the financial origins of the donations themselves and were any links to hostile state actors discovered?” McGinn asked in a letter addressed to his opposite number, the security minister, Damian Hinds. The Labour MP also asked whether MI5 had raised any concerns. “Have officials in the Home Office at any point issued internal concerns about the potential implications for the UK’s national security?” Chernukhin, a Briton since 2011, has donated £700,000 to the Conservative party and is married to Vladimir Chernukhin, a former deputy finance minister under Putin. Documents published in the Pandora papers in October suggest he was allowed to leave Russia in 2004 with assets worth about $500m (£366m) and retain Russian business connections. The Chernukhins’ lawyers said it was not accepted that any of Lubov Chernukhin’s political donations had been funded by improper means or affected by the influence of anyone else. Vladimir had not accumulated any of his wealth in a corrupt manner, they added. Amersi advised on a lucrative telecom deal in Russia in 2005 with a company that a Swiss tribunal subsequently found to be controlled by an associate of the Russian president, Vladimir Putin. Amersi told the Financial Times in July he had made $7m in the country, but only prior to 2008. “Not a penny that I earned in Russia …  has even remotely come close to being invested in the UK political system,” he said. Temerko is a minority shareholder and co-owner of Aquind, a company that wants to build an electricity interconnector to France. Its majority investor, the Russian-born oil tycoon Viktor Fedotov, secretly co-owned a company once accused of participating in a massive corruption scheme relating to a Russian pipeline. Lawyers for Fedotov have denied the accusations, while Aquind’s lawyers said the allegations against the Russian company co-owned by Fedotov came from a wholly unreliable report and were completely false. Aquind has also stressed that Fedotov did not personally donate to the Conservative party, was not involved in the management of the company and had “no influence” over the company’s donations. No accusations were made against Temerko. In the run-up to the last general election, Downing Street refused to release the Russia report compiled by parliament’s intelligence and security committee (ISC), taking advantage of a procedural loophole to prevent it being released. When it was finally published, seven months after Johnson’s landslide win, it concluded that Britain’s intelligence agencies had taken their “eye off the ball” when it came to Russia and had made no serious attempt to examine whether the Kremlin had sought to interfere with the Brexit referendum result. “Fifteen months after the ISC’s report was published, the government’s continued complacency and inaction on the need to face down hostile state threats is simply staggering,” McGinn wrote. The Conservative party said: “If a British citizen is able to vote in an election for a political party, they also have the democratic right to donate to a political party. “All donations are properly and transparently declared to the Electoral Commission, published by them, and comply fully with the law. It would be wrong to suggest malign motive on behalf of individuals simply because of the country of their birth.”There is a sense in which 2021’s biggest single – 84.9m streams in a week on one platform alone; straight to No 1 in 25 countries; a song that received more first-week plays on US radio than any other song ever – wasn’t so much a comeback as an act of global reassurance. The world may recently have lurched from one unimaginable crisis to another, but Adele’s Easy on Me brought with it the message that at least one thing hasn’t changed: Adele Adkins is still heartbroken and belting it out over a gentle piano and tasteful orchestration. Romantic despair became her global brand from the moment she stopped the show at the 2011 Brit awards with her tearful performance of Someone Like You. It catapulted her from the massed ranks of soul-influenced singers filling a gap created by Amy Winehouse’s inability to follow up Back to Black, to mind-boggling levels of success. There’s always the chance that millions of people might flock to an upbeat Adele album that depicts her full of the joys of spring, but clearly she wasn’t taking any chances last time around: for want of new unhappiness, 2015’s 25 returned to the same failed relationships that inspired its record-breaking predecessor 21. No matter – it sold 22m copies. No such problem six years on. Adele’s divorce from her husband is a topic that swallows 30 entirely. The first words you hear her sing are “I’ll be taking flowers to the cemetery of my heart”; the last are “the feelings flood me to the heights of no compromise”. In between, there are tracks called Cry Your Heart Out, Love Is a Game, To Be Loved and – fabulously – I Drink Wine, the latter, alas, not followed by songs such as I Listen to I Will Survive 32 Times and I Ring My BFF and Spend the Entire Call Sobbing Incomprehensibly. There are audio verité recordings of her discussing her divorce with her nine-year-old young son – “mummy’s been having a lot of big feelings” – and crying during “a bad day”; “I feel very paranoid … I feel lonely”. You could view the latter as bold no-holds barred wound-showing along the lines of primal scream-era John Lennon howling for his dead mother, or an artist underlining their everyday relatability in the teeth of vast fame and wealth, a glamorous new image and a host of glitzy celebrity pals. Either way, they make for profoundly uncomfortable listening. In fact, the topic of divorce is so all-consuming that any listener who doesn’t count themselves among the millions pre-emptively rubbing their hands at the prospect of an hour of fresh woe to wallow in might find themselves wishing she’d occasionally give it a rest about how hard she tried and how much she’s cried, not least during To Be Loved. A stark piano ballad that proceeds at the pace of a 12-mile tailback on the M62, it feels as if it lasts for about six weeks, an extraordinary, rasping vocal at its climax notwithstanding. But the subject matter isn’t the whole story of 30. Easy on Me suggested the album would deal exclusively in more of the same musically and lyrically. There are other moments like that – Hold On, the Carole King-ish I Drink Wine, the acoustic guitar-led Woman Like Me – but there are also moments where, sonically at least, Adele seems to be pushing gently at the boundaries of what people expect. Oh My God offers a rawer take on the stomping rhythm of Rolling in the Deep’s verses, tricked out with speeded-up vocal samples. Strangers By Nature and All Night Parking are rooted in pre-rock’n’roll balladry, and far more subtly and successfully than much of this century’s raft of boilerplate swing-inspired pop: the former bolstered by a swooning chorus, the latter set to samples of late jazz pianist Erroll Garner’s arpeggios. Likewise the album’s excursions into 60s soul, which swerve the usual retro cliches. Bedecked with high-drama key changes and Hollywood strings, the closing Love Is a Game feels closer to the classy easy-listening soul of Dionne Warwick than bog-standard Motown homage. The brilliant Cry Your Heart Out, meanwhile, pairs northern soul tropes – among them a skipping beat that, in Wigan Casino terms, make it a floater rather than a stomper – with a dubby reggae undertow that seems to gradually swell and consume the track as it goes on. Producing an album that’s different from its predecessors, without being different enough to scare anyone off, is a not-unimpressive feat, particularly under the circumstances. Given their sales figures, you couldn’t blame Adele for declining to even tinker with a formula that clearly ain’t broke. But she does, and it makes for 30’s highlights. This week Alexis listened to Steve Cobby - Pick Flowers Brewmaster The annual joy of discovering something you missed via someone else’s best-of-2021 list, in this case beautiful, calming, soundtrack-y atmospherics from the former Fila Brazillia alumnus.David Cameron has quit his role at the software company Afiniti after a 23-year-old former employee accused the firm’s multimillionaire founder of sexual assault. The former UK prime minister announced on Wednesday he was immediately standing down as chair of its advisory board after Tatiana Spottiswoode detailed a string of allegations against the chief executive, Zia Chishti, to members of Congress in the US on Tuesday. Cameron, whose post-political career was previously tarnished by his role at the collapsed bank Greensill, said he had “absolutely no knowledge” of the allegations against Chishti before the hearing and he had resigned as chair of the company’s advisory board with immediate effect. “The alleged events took place before David Cameron started working for Afiniti and he had absolutely no knowledge of them until just before yesterday’s congressional hearing,” the former prime minister’s spokesperson said. “Mr Cameron understands that the allegations are disputed but disagrees with the approach being taken by the company in responding to the matter. He made this view clear to Mr Chishti yesterday.” Chishti, 50, is accused of beating Spottiswoode while having sex with her on a work trip to Brazil in 2017. She also told the US House of Representatives’s judiciary committee that Chishti had told her “he should have had sex with me when I was 13 years old”. The committee released images on Wednesday allegedly showing neck injuries sustained by Spottiswoode. Afiniti, which also employs Princess Beatrice, said Chishti “strongly disputes all accusations against him” and said her claims were “erroneous”. “We take any allegations of this nature extremely seriously,” a spokesperson said. “Afiniti has investigated Ms Spottiswoode’s claims with independent counsel and concluded that the arbitral decision she references was erroneous. Afiniti’s CEO and chair Zia Chishti strongly disputes all accusations against him.” Cameron joined Afiniti, which provides call centre technology to companies including Virgin Media and Sky, in 2019 as chair of its advisory board, providing strategic guidance to the company’s management and board members. At the time of his appointment, he said he would help “transform the future of customer service and interpersonal communications”. Spottiswoode, who joined the company in 2016, told the committee her contract included an arbitration agreement with a “strong confidentiality clause” that had prevented her from speaking out about the alleged assaults. She was giving testimony to a hearing into how forced arbitration clauses have been used to prevent survivors of sexual harassment and sexual violence from pursuing cases through the courts. Jerry Nadler, the chair of the judiciary committee, is preparing legislation that would ban the use of forced arbitration in cases of alleged sexual violence and harassment. Spottiswoode, a Columbia University law student and friend of Chishti’s daughter, told members of Congress that Chishti pressured her into having sex in order to keep her job. She accused him of “not [being] willing to treat me like an employee”. She added: “Instead, over the next 18 months he oscillated between pressuring me for sex and punishing me. When I rebuffed him he humiliated me in front of co-workers and then ignored me completely, causing me to fear for my job.” She said on the work trip to Brazil she “began to worry that, in addition to wanting sex, Chishti wanted to hurt me and punish me for rejecting him”. “I felt completely trapped and hopeless. I was 23 and very far from home,” she told the committee. “I didn’t want to lose my job, I didn’t want him to get any angrier, I did not feel that anyone would protect me and I was too tired to argue with him any more. I went to his room where he beat me while having sex with me. “I told him he was hurting me, he said: ‘Good’. He told me he should have had sex with me when we first met, when I was 13 years old.” Spottiswoode said her body was “covered with scratches, cuts and contusions”. “I had bruises around my neck that looked like I had been strangled, a large bump on my head, and a black eye. A nurse at the hospital said I had the symptoms of a concussion.” Cameron’s career since leaving Downing Street in 2016 has been tarnished by his role lobbying on behalf of collapsed bank Greensill. He was told by MPs on the Treasury select committee that his persistent lobbying to have Greensill included in a government-backed Covid-19 loans scheme had “demeaned” the position of the prime minister and left his “reputation in tatters”. The former PM was forced to deny that his text message and WhatsApp lobbying campaign on behalf of Greensill was driven by fears that an “opportunity to make a large amount of money was at risk”.Few TV series have been more eagerly awaited than series three of Succession. Jesse Armstrong’s drama about the odious Roy dynasty and its savage power grab returned last month after a two-year absence – partly owing to pandemic-related delays – with the show’s fanbase only growing during its hiatus. Some devotees started “no context Succession” accounts. Others made like Logan Roy and got entrepreneurial by selling unofficial Waystar merch. And 50,000 superfans found themselves down the rabbit hole of Reddit’s TV forums, joining their fellow Succession heads for some forensic speculation. Over the years, TV series have begun to attract increasingly detailed – and sometimes far-fetched – theories from viewers. Among them: Tony Soprano is not dead; Malcolm in the Middle grew up to be Walter White in Breaking Bad; and Friends was all a figment of a homeless Phoebe’s imagination. No split-second look or throwaway line goes unnoticed, as fans analyse episodes to back up their outlandish ideas. However, with more time on our hands during the pandemic, fan theories seem to be more popular and compelling than ever, as viewers catch up on cult programmes and play fantasy scriptwriter online. Twenty six-year-old Kevin Jones from London started watching Succession nine months ago and was quickly hooked. “I have a few friends who watch it,” he says, “but they have a limit with how much they want to talk about it. In the Reddit group, I can geek out endlessly.” Indeed, the show’s Reddit forum is packed full of crumbs of info and illicit photos from filming (in a recent Guardian interview, the show’s writers noted that someone had even posted their lunch menu to the site). “All the rumours and theories about the new series allowed the show to continue while it wasn’t on air,” Jones says. “As well as Twitter, there’s an Instagram account called Deuxmoi – which is basically a real-life New York Gossip Girl – and there were lots of scoops on the show on there.” Jones believes that such platforms are “definitely changing how we watch TV. Part of the excitement now is the discussion during and after a show airs.” As well as trying to piece together the plot from online gossip, Jones and other fans use the forum to speculate about the twists and turns that could lie ahead. Along with many other viewers, Jones believes that Cousin Greg (Nicholas Braun) could somehow rise to the top, usurping his power-hungry relatives to become CEO of Waystar. “There’s loads of love for Greg and his potential plots at the moment,” he says. “He’s killing it.” Titbits of information posted by Braun (including an Instagram photo captioned “I am an employee of this company and that’s all I can say about that!”) are like catnip to the fans, giving them even more “evidence” to support their guesswork. How will Jones feel if his months of conjecture prove to be correct – or fail to materialise? “It’s difficult,” he says. “I think there’s a possibility I might see my predictions come true. But equally, I also don’t want this to be a TV show that I can predict. That’ll be no fun, and it would be sad if it didn’t live up to our hype. “I have hope, though. Jesse Armstrong is a great writer. If it can sustain [its quality], then it will deserve its place in the pantheon of great TV.” Earlier this year, we saw the fallout caused when the script of one series failed to live up to viewers’ fan-fic fantasies. Oliver Richards, 23, from Sydney, Australia, is a member of the Line of Duty Reddit group. “I enjoy seeing what other people are saying about the show and whether people reach similar conclusions to me,” he says. “It’s really nice to have that shared excitement and passion for something with people all around the world.” That said, “none of my own theories came true”, he laughs. The elaborate musings on how series six of Line of Duty might have played out never came to fruition. There was no bombastic “urgent exit required” finale, rather more of a damp squib leading to some fans feeling short-changed. “There was a massive movement with everyone analysing everything and playing armchair detective, building to the trailer for the finale that said: ‘Every investigation has led to this,’” says Richards. “It seemed to advertise a blockbuster, only for the finale to be a reasonably sedate affair. It felt a bit odd. “Now that I think about it, the theories might actually be why the ‘realistic ending’ didn’t go over so well with a lot of the fans. We had been using it as an escape from reality, only for it to swing around and hit us in the face in the finale.” As with the much-maligned climax of Game of Thrones, perhaps all of this over-analysing has started to impact on our enjoyment of popular shows. However, Richards doesn’t regret the many hours spent poring over the plot online. “Everything is so crap right now, so it was nice to step back from reality and invest yourself in a series.” Elsewhere on Reddit, long-running shows such as Killing Eve, The Walking Dead and Peaky Blinders have also attracted much speculation. Jamie Glazebrook, executive producer of Peaky Blinders at Caryn Mandabach Productions says it’s “interesting to see what people are responding to – good and bad. The wildest theory I’ve read online has been that a certain character who was shot in series three is still alive and will make a surprise re-appearance. I think that’s down to the fact she didn’t actually die on screen and we never showed her funeral. “But I never feed back to [creator] Steven Knight, or let it directly influence the series, be it a compliment or a criticism,” says Glazebrook. “The danger is that a creative endeavour starts to feel like it’s run by a focus group. Plus, because Peaky Blinders is driven by character rather than plot, there’s not so much pressure to pull a rabbit out of that hat at the end. It’s less ‘whodunnit’ and more: ‘What’s going to happen to Tommy Shelby?’” Executive producer for Death in Paradise and Sanditon and joint MD of Red Planet Pictures, Belinda Campbell, says jokingly that she “lives in fear’” of seeing fan storylines online that are better than the real ones. “For that reason, I don’t tend to read fan fiction, although I love to know that it’s going on.” That fan theories often fail to materialise on screen, Campbell points out, is because they “don’t have any of the problems of budget, artist availabilities or schedules that can sometimes limit our ambitions”. But for screenwriters, the online theories are proof that their fictional worlds and characters have connected with the audience. “My approach is always that we have to create 3D characters who resonate with audiences and who, regardless of the period, could be real people living their lives,” she says. “That emotional verisimilitude is really important. I feel enormously heartened that people love our shows and the characters enough to create new narratives for them.” We will know in a few episodes’ time whether Succession season three has lived up to fans’ expectations. But even if the “wrong” Roy ends up on top, these viewer-led spaces give a voice to the fandom – and the chance to come up with an ending that may even be more entertaining than the real thing. Succession airs on Sky Atlantic/Now in the UK and HBO in the US.“If I want to smoke, I’ll smoke. If I want to drink, I’ll drink,” the legendary Brazilian singer Zeca Pagodinho proclaims in one of his best-known sambas. Coronavirus robbed Zeca of an even greater pleasure: performing the songs that have made him one of Brazil’s most successful and universally adored stars. “This is my life, and I thought it would never return. I thought I’d never hear applause again,” said Zeca, who has sold millions of records during his four-decade career and is regarded as the roguish epitome of Brazilian joie de vivre. Now, Zeca is back as a Covid catastrophe that has killed more than 610,000 Brazilians finally relents thanks to one of the largest vaccination campaigns on Earth. “Thank God, things are looking up,” the doubled-jabbed sambista – one of more than 125 million Brazilians who are now fully vaccinated – said last week as Covid restrictions were rolled back and he prepared for his first major show since the pandemic began. “It’s a relief,” said Maria Rita, another revered Brazilian singer who was paying Zeca a pre-concert visit in his vast presidential suite 22 floors above the streets of São Paulo. “We artists need to be out there so our souls can capture things. Otherwise we can’t create … and our souls wither.” Zeca’s comeback was in São Paulo, where 97.8% of adults have been fully vaccinated, compared with 80% in New York, but his roots are in Rio where he was born, appropriately, on the Saturday of carnival, 1959. As a child, the artist, whose real name is Jessé Gomes da Silva Filho, remembers writing poetry and the freestyle samba lyricising known as partido alto. As a cash-strapped youth, he developed a parallel affection for bohemia and booze, slinking between samba parties with his four-string cavaquinho stashed in a plastic supermarket bag. “I was a wild one … I don’t know where we found the money to drink as much as we did,” Zeca chuckled over a mid-afternoon glass of Bordeaux, recalling how friends had predicted he would be dead by 30. Zeca defied those expectations and instead became one of Brazil’s biggest celebrities. His 1986 debut album sold more than 1m copies and catapulted him into the pantheon of samba greats, alongside icons such as Noel Rosa, Martinho da Vila and Clara Nunes. Since then, the 62-year-old artist has recorded more than 20 albums, won four Grammys and composed hundreds of songs – several of which he admits have vanished into a vortex of beer-induced oblivion. “Bloody alcoholic amnesia,” he laughed. Zeca had just released his latest album, Mais Feliz, when Covid gripped Brazil in early 2020, forcing him into isolation on his ranch outside Rio. “It was just me, the bonfire and the moon,” the singer-songwriter remembered of his 15-month rural quarantine, deprived of social interaction, samba sessions and the ability to compose. “What was I going to write about? I like to write about when I go to a party and something happens, or when someone tells me they’re in love and all the rest of it,” Zeca said of his creative hiatus. Far worse was Covid’s impact on Zeca’s family and friends, among them cherished sambistas. “I lost my father-in-law, neighbours … Sometimes I even thought maybe I should just catch this shit and die and get it over with,” said the composer, who threw his celebrity behind efforts to encourage face masks and vaccination and was filmed receiving the Oxford/AstraZeneca shot. “You could see the lack of hope in everyone’s face. It was as if the world had ended – like someone had thrown a bomb and half of us had died … Damn, it was strange,” Zeca said. In August Zeca caught Covid himself and spent five days in hospital, sparking a nationwide outpouring of concern. Three months later he plays down the experience, joking about asking nurses to smuggle him beer, but admits feeling rattled. “It’s like it’s closing in on you. Everyone else is departing. I thought: soon it’ll be me too.” For all Zeca’s enthusiasm about performing again, he voiced disillusionment with the state of his nation, where violence, corruption, hunger and poverty have been compounded by the pandemic and a toxic squabble between friends and foes of the president, Jair Bolsonaro, who critics believe catastrophically mishandled Covid. “I can’t say: ‘Oh everything’s great! Brazil’s wonderful!’ It bloody well isn’t,” said Zeca, adding he was relieved to be sending his daughter to study overseas. “I don’t believe in anything any more … every day I wake up feeling sadder.” The sambista doubted next year’s election – which polls suggest Bolsonaro will lose heavily to the former leftist president Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva – would change much. Asked for his thoughts on those two rivals, Zeca said he preferred to stay out of politics and had “bugger all” to say about the election, but voiced affection for Lula, a former metalworker like his father. “Lula’s my fan and I’m his fan too … I like Lula because he’s a man of the people … He goes to the favelas … He speaks our language. He likes a drink.” And Bolsonaro? “I don’t know him. I really don’t know him,” Zeca answered laconically. “But would you like to get to know him?” Maria Rita prodded her friend with a laugh. “No,” Zeca replied. With that the conversation shifted back to less contentious terrain, as the two artists pondered the cultural renaissance under way as Covid infections and deaths plunged to levels unseen since Zeca’s last show. Maria Rita said she had begun searching for the costume in which she hoped to lead the Cordão da Bola Preta carnival group through Rio next year. “Rio de Janeiro without carnival is like the end of the world,” Zeca said of his hopes Brazil’s vaccination campaign – the world’s fourth largest after China, India and the US – would allow the world’s biggest samba party to return in 2022. Rio’s health secretary, Daniel Soranz, said he was confident that would happen with restrictions being scaled back as vaccination advanced and hospitalisations hit record lows. “Right now Covid is under control … We’ve been through moments of such sadness. This is a moment of hope,” he said. As they shot the breeze in Zeca’s palatial hotel room – once host to Lady Gaga, Mick Jagger and Silvio Berlusconi – Maria Rita began singing a samba he had gifted her pre-pandemic, featuring a lyric that encapsulated Brazil’s nascent revival. “With each new dawn, hope’s reborn,” its chorus says. Zeca howled as he half-remembered composing those words of optimism during a knees-up in west Rio. “That’s one of the songs I forgot. I was off my head in the favela that day. Out of my mind,” the sambista chortled, before throwing on a leather jacket and heading downstairs to the bar, glass in hand.Individuals could be stripped of their British citizenship without warning under a proposed rule change quietly added to the nationality and borders bill. Clause 9 – “Notice of decision to deprive a person of citizenship” – of the bill, which was updated earlier this month, exempts the government from having to give notice if it is not “reasonably practicable” to do so, or in the interests of national security, diplomatic relations or otherwise in the public interest. Critics say removing citizenship, as in the case of Shamima Begum, who fled Britain as a schoolgirl to join Islamic State in Syria, is already a contentious power, and scrapping the requirement for notice would make the home secretary’s powers even more draconian. Frances Webber, the vice-chair of the Institute of Race Relations, said: “This amendment sends the message that certain citizens, despite being born and brought up in the UK and having no other home, remain migrants in this country. Their citizenship, and therefore all their rights, are precarious and contingent. “It builds on previous measures to strip British-born dual nationals (who are mostly from ethnic minorities) of citizenship and to do it while they are abroad, measures used mainly against British Muslims. It unapologetically flouts international human rights obligations and basic norms of fairness.” Home Office powers to strip British nationals of their citizenship were introduced after the 2005 London bombings but their use increased under Theresa May’s tenure as home secretary from 2010, and they were broadened in 2014. The requirement to give notice had already been weakened in 2018, allowing the Home Office to serve notice by putting a copy of it on a person’s file – but only in cases where their whereabouts were unknown. The new clause would remove the need for notification altogether in a range of circumstances. It would also appear to be capable of being applied retrospectively to cases where an individual was stripped of citizenship without notice before the clause became law, raising questions about their ability to appeal. Maya Foa, the director of Reprieve, said: “This clause would give Priti Patel unprecedented power to remove your citizenship in secret, without even having to tell you, and effectively deny you an appeal. Under this regime, a person accused of speeding would be afforded more rights than someone at risk of being deprived of their British nationality. This once again shows how little regard this government has for the rule of law. “The US government has condemned citizenship-stripping as a dangerous denial of responsibility for your own nationals. Ministers should listen to our closest security ally rather than doubling down on this deeply misguided and morally abhorrent policy.” Other proposed rule changes in the bill have already attracted criticism, including rendering claims from anyone arriving in the UK by an illegal route inadmissible, while criminalising them and anyone who seeks to save their lives, and giving Border Force staff immunity from prosecution if people die in the Channel during “pushback” operations. The Home Office said: “British citizenship is a privilege, not a right. Deprivation of citizenship on conducive grounds is rightly reserved for those who pose a threat to the UK or whose conduct involves very high harm. The nationality and borders bill will amend the law so citizenship can be deprived where it is not practicable to give notice, for example if there is no way of communicating with the person.”Keir Starmer has labelled Boris Johnson “a coward, not a leader” in refusing to apologise for seeking to overturn Commons rules to save Owen Paterson from punishment, as the pair had a particularly bad-tempered Commons clash over Tory sleaze. In a noisy prime minister’s questions, Lindsay Hoyle, the Speaker, cut Johnson off a number of times as the prime minister sought to avoid answering Starmer’s questions by asking about the Labour leader’s additional work as a lawyer. “I don’t think this has done this house any good today,” Hoyle said after Johnson and Starmer ended their exchanges, adding that the Commons needed to “gain respect” from the watching public. After PMQs was over, following a point of order raised by Tory MP Michael Fabricant, Hoyle also ruled that Starmer should not have called Johnson a coward, and asked he withdraw it. Starmer then said: “I withdraw it – but he’s not a leader.” Ahead of a debate later on Wednesday about Johnson’s hastily announced plans to ban MPs from having paid political consultancies, or working too many hours in second jobs, Starmer focused his questions on the subject, and what he said was a wider issue of Johnson’s untrustworthiness. Noting that a series of other government figures had apologised for the abortive attempt to save Paterson, the Tory MP who has now resigned, from punishment for breaking lobbying rules by replacing the entire disciplinary system, Starmer said Johnson had not yet done so. “So will he do the decent thing and just say sorry for trying to give the green light to corruption?” he asked. The prime minister declined to apologise, saying: “As I have said before, it certainly was a mistake to conflate the case of an individual member, no matter how sad, with the point of principle at stake.” Starmer replied: “That’s not an apology. Everybody else has apologised for him, but he won’t apologise for himself. A coward, not a leader. “Weeks defending corruption. Yesterday, a screeching, last-minute U-turn to avoid defeat on Labour’s plan to ban MPs from dodgy second contracts. But waving one white flag won’t be enough to restore trust. There are plenty of opposition days to come, and we won’t let the prime minister water down the proposals or pretend it’s job done.” Several times, Johnson tried to ask Starmer about his outside work as a lawyer he has previously declared while being an MP, including for the law firm Mishcon de Reya. Three times, Hoyle interrupted to tell Johnson it was up to him to answer questions, not ask them. On the final occasion, Hoyle appeared notably angry, saying: “Prime minister, sit down. I’m not going to be challenged. You may be the prime minister of this county, but in this house I’m in charge.” Starmer returned to the attack, having used earlier questions to ask Johnson if a new rail plan, to be unveiled on Thursday, would ditch previous commitments on having HS2 go to Leeds, and building a new, high-speed Manchester-Leeds rail line. “He has been investigated by every organisation he’s ever been elected to. That’s the difference,” Starmer said. “The prime minister somehow expects us to believe that he’s the man to clean up Westminster. He led his troops through the sewers to cover up corruption, and he can’t even say sorry. “At the same time his government is engulfed in sleaze. They are rowing back on the promises they made to the north. And it’s working people who are paying the price. Is it any wonder that people are beginning to think that the joke isn’t funny any more?” Johnson replied by saying Starmer “seeks to criticise this government while refusing to explain his own position”, adding, “but his own mish-conduct is absolutely clear to everybody,” a pun on Mishcon de Reya. Hoyle, believing Johnson had said “misconduct”, intervened to object: “We cannot accuse anybody of misconduct.” Johnson clarified what he had said, bringing the lament from Hoyle about the tone of PMQs.Éric Zemmour, the far-right TV pundit who is preparing to run for French president claiming that Islam and immigration are destroying France, has gone on trial in Paris on charges of incitement to racial hatred. The case relates to remarks the 63-year-old polemicist made on television last year when he called unaccompanied child migrants “thieves, killers and rapists”. Zemmour – who has two previous hate speech convictions but who has risen in opinion polls to be seen as a potential challenger to Emmanuel Macron in spring’s election – is being tried for “public insult” and “incitement to hatred or violence” against a group of people because of their ethnic, national, racial or religious origin. He made the comments during a debate in September 2020, on the French news broadcaster CNews. He said of children who migrate to France without parents or guardians: “They’re thieves, they’re murderers, they’re rapists, that’s all they are. We must send them back.” If found guilty, he faces a sentence of up to a year in prison and a €45,000 fine. Zemmour was not present on Wednesday at the court. His lawyer, Olivier Pardo, said the charges were unfounded and Zemmour’s opponents were seeking to stir up a “trial by public opinion”. “He’s wanted for ‘racial hate’ but as far as I know an unaccompanied minor is neither a race, nor a nation, nor an ethnicity,” Pardo told RMC radio. He said Zemmour would not attend the trial because he did not want the court to become a “political arena”. Several anti-racism and rights groups, including SOS Racisme, filed a complaint against Zemmour. They are joined as civil plaintiffs by numerous local councils in charge of handling child welfare and care for unaccompanied minors. The council for the Seine-Saint-Denis department, north of Paris, said: “We won’t let these comments be trivialised”. The council complained about the targeting of “foreign non-accompanied minors who come to seek protection in France, as well as all those who work to help them”. Germinal Peiro, the Socialist head of the Dordogne department, told France Inter radio: “We’re responsible for these children and we’re here to defend their interests … This man made xenophobic and racist comments which are unacceptable in French democracy.” Zemmour was previously convicted of incitement to racial hatred after justifying discrimination against Black and Arab people in 2010, and of incitement to religious hatred for anti-Islam comments in 2016. He has been tried in several other cases where he was acquitted. A Paris court in February acquitted Zemmour on a charge of contesting crimes against humanity – which is illegal in France – for arguing in a 2019 television debate that Philippe Pétain, the head of Vichy’s collaborationist government during the second world war, saved France’s Jews from the Holocaust. In its verdict, the court said Zemmour’s comments negated Pétain’s role in the extermination. But in acquitting Zemmour, the court said he had spoken in the heat of the moment. Yet Zemmour in recent weeks has repeated similar comments, and lawyers contesting his acquittal plan to cite that point as evidence when their appeal is heard in January. The verdict in Wednesday’s case is expected to be delivered at a later date.An influential Conservative environmental group has distanced itself from Stanley Johnson after allegations made against the prime minister’s father by a senior MP and a political journalists. It came as another political journalist, Isabel Oakeshott, described Johnson as “handsy” but said she did not deem it worthy of a criminal investigation. The Conservative Environment Network (CEN), for which Stanley Johnson acts as international ambassador, said it was concerned about the the allegations, made by the former cabinet minister Caroline Nokes and the New Statesman journalist Ailbhe Rea. The group said in a statement: “We take all allegations of inappropriate behaviour very seriously. We have clear internal processes for managing allegations of this nature, and these are currently being followed. The alleged behaviour is not acceptable to CEN.” The group is chaired by Ben Goldsmith, a close friend of the prime minister’s wife, Carrie Johnson, who also acts as a non-executive board member of the Department for the Environment, Food and Rural Affairs. Stanley Johnson remains listed on the group’s website as part of its steering group. The group acts as a parliamentary caucus for more than 100 MPs and peers, with influential members of its board including Rachel Wolf, the former No 10 adviser who authored the 2019 manifesto. The Labour leader, Keir Starmer, called for the Conservative party to investigate Johnson. Nokes said Johnson had smacked her on the bottom in 2003, while he was in the race for a parliamentary seat, and Rea said he had groped her during the 2019 Tory conference. “They now need to be fully investigated, either by the Conservative party or by the criminal authorities,” Starmer said. Oakeshott, the former Mail on Sunday journalist who now presents on GB News, tweeted a picture of herself with Johnson, saying: “The charming Stanley Johnson can be a little over-friendly – indeed handsy – but I don’t believe this is one for the police. Officers should focus their limited resources on investigating real crimes.” Stanley Johnson told the Sun: “I have no recollection of Caroline Nokes, and no idea what she was talking about. Had I been asked about the allegation made by the journalist of the New Statesman, I would have said the same thing.” Boris Johnson’s spokesperson said he could not comment on individual cases, but that Downing Street would encourage anyone who had experienced harassment to report it. “I’m not going to be drawn into specific allegations against a private individual,” he said. “Of course, we would want anyone in any circumstances who feels they have been a victim of any kind of harassment to be free to come forward and report it to the appropriate authorities.” After Nokes talked about her experience on Sky News, she later shared on Twitter an offensive email from a member of the public which referred to her as a “filthy Tory whore” because she had spoken out. Nokes said: “That is the level of discourse women MPs have to deal with, every single day.”The Ghostbusters franchise now gets a pointless and ill-suited sequel-iteration, co-written and directed by Jason Reitman (son of Ivan Reitman, who directed the original) that never quite acknowledges the tonal confusion created by introducing a new type of nice, non-bustable ghost. In an obtuse way, this film takes the story out of the big city (where ghosts swarmed excitingly and hilariously like rats), moves it out to smalltown Oklahoma, and tries to reinvent the whole thing as a sub-Spielbergian fantasy adventure with an adorable bunch of teens and tweens in the ghostbusting forefront. It is here where original ghostbuster Dr Egon Spengler (once played by the late Harold Ramis) lived in reclusive retirement, worried about a mighty devil-spirit lurking in a nearby abandoned mine. He has left his tumbledown mansion to his grownup daughter, hard-up single mom Callie (Carrie Coon) and her two children Trevor (Finn Wolfhard) and Phoebe (Mckenna Grace), who are puzzled by what seems to be a big old car the size of a hearse under a tarp in the garage. They meet up with local kids Podcast (Logan Kim) and Lucky (Celeste O’Connor), on whom Trevor has a major crush. Meanwhile, Callie finds herself having feelings for the schoolteacher Mr Grooberson, played by Paul Rudd, who sadly isn’t in the movie much. The ghost eruption kicks off in this much less exciting and interesting non-city habitat. The only Ghostbusters sequel that made any sort of sense was the spiky gender-switch reboot of 2016 with Melissa McCarthy, Kate McKinnon and Leslie Jones – a film which understood that, like the original, it was supposed to be a comedy. That is airbrushed out of existence by this new, defanged and child-oriented Night-at-the-Museum approach, in which the keynote is vanilla blandness. • Ghostbusters: Afterlife is released on 18 November in cinemas.It was when the police knocked on Aatifa Farooqui’s* door and threatened to send her to prison that she first realised suicide was illegal in Pakistan. Farooqui’s father pleaded with the officers to be lenient, explaining that his daughter was just 19 and had made a mistake, but quickly realised the police had other motives for dropping by. “I already felt guilty and stupid for attempting suicide,” says Farooqui. “What made it worse was the way the police dealt with it. When they arrived, they said they had been told by the hospital that suicide had been attempted by someone in the house and it wasn’t ‘allowed’ in Pakistan.” She said the police threatened her father, saying: “‘Either your daughter is going to jail or you are.’ My dad finally gave in and bribed them 10,000 rupees [£42.00].” The police took the bribe and didn’t pursue the case. Legislation criminalising suicide has been on the statute books since the days of British rule. Section 325 of the Pakistan penal code makes an attempt punishable by a year’s imprisonment, a fine, or both. Suicide was decriminalised in England, Wales and Northern Ireland in the 60s (having never been criminalised in Scotland) but remains a crime in 20 countries around the world. The World Health Organization estimated that in 2019 there were 19,331 suicides in Pakistan, with a rate of 8.9% per 100,000. The WHO also estimates that, globally, for one death there are between 10 and 20 attempts. Based on these numbers, there may be between 130,000 and 260,000 suicide attempts annually in the country. However, there are no official statistics, and many doctors and academics say the criminalisation of suicide makes it difficult to get a clear picture of its prevalence and of wider incidences of mental health issues. There is also no data on the number of criminal convictions, although it is suspected to be very few. The police, as well as hospital workers, mostly use the little-known law to extort money from survivors and their families. Now, however, a bill to repeal section 325 and decriminalise suicide has been passed by the senate and is due to be debated in the National Assembly. If passed it will be presented to the president for assent and become law. The bill faces some opposition, mainly from the interior ministry, responsible for the police, which claims the current law acts as a deterrent. But Taha Sabri, founder of Taskeen, a mental health organisation in Pakistan, says: “We suspect suicide is a huge cash cow for the police. There is opposition to getting it decriminalised because they would lose a significant revenue source.” Anyone who attempts suicide is supposed to be referred to a designated medico-legal centre, says Dr Murad Moosa Khan, professor emeritus of psychiatry at Aga Khan University and former president of the International Association for Suicide Prevention. These centres are for medical cases with criminal implications – for example, a traffic collision, assault or rape. Often doctors in hospital emergency departments will declare attempts accidental out of compassion, according to Sabri. They cannot always do this, however, and so a medico-legal officer gets involved who is duty-bound to report any case to the police. The police visit the survivor’s house, notifying them that a case must be registered because the law is suspected to have been broken. The stigma is such that any mention of mental illness within a family may deter potential marriage suitors and lead to the whole family being ostracised, says Khan. “In order not to have the case registered, that’s where the element of bribery comes in. I have a lot of anecdotal evidence that this is happening.” It is almost always the poor who are the most vulnerable to extortion, he adds. Those with money can go to private facilities for treatment where staff will be discreet. Dr Summaiya Syed is head of the medico-legal department at Jinnah postgraduate medical centre in Karachi, one of the country’s largest hospitals. “I have seen how suicide attempts are downplayed and made to appear ‘accidental’, or how an attempt can lead to harassment with the obvious motive of making some easy cash,” she says. “Something has to be done regarding decriminalisation.” People who attempt suicide need support, she adds. “Instead of answering their cry for help, we are punishing them. Rather than sending them to a psychologist, we are sending them to the wolves. Why are we doing this?” Syed believes the system is “a mess”. “The key thing at play is social taboo,” she says. “What prompts people to not report suicide? It’s better to make it look like an accident … People are ostracised and shunned … If you don’t change the thinking of the people, you don’t change the systems.” If section 325 is repealed, it will allow healthcare professionals to report attempted suicide without risking prosecution for their patients. It may also allow survivors to seek mental health support, says Sabri. Attitudes are beginning to change, and the discussions in parliament reflect this. Tabri says: “It is the first time suicide has been spoken about on such a level … There’s a lot of hope for the future if parties can pass this law.” Farooqui is now married and is open about what happened with her husband and close friends. Her extended family were never told, she says. “They would have mocked me … and questioned my upbringing or called me insane. Suicide attempts shouldn’t be criminalised. The person attempting should be given help and comfort, rather than [the police] making them feel more horrible.” *Name has been changed to protect identity • In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is at 800-273-8255 or chat for support. You can also text HOME to 741741 to connect with a crisis text line counselor. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.orgAs Covid-19 cases in the US begin to rise once more and health agencies consider booster shots for all adults, some states and cities are taking matters into their own hands and urging additional shots, advice that goes beyond current federal guidelines. Leaders in Colorado, California, New Mexico, Arkansas, West Virginia, and New York City recommend that residents older than 18 seek an additional shot six months after their initial immunization. These states and cities have little in common, except their health systems have been stretched to a breaking point before during the pandemic – and one-third or more of their population is still unvaccinated. Cases are rising sharply in New Mexico, Arkansas, New York City and Colorado, but they are falling in California and West Virginia. Even so, the officials, fearing a winter wave hitting the US, are opening up additional shots for all adults in their jurisdictions before scientists and regulators with the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the Food and Drug Administration have weighed in – though the FDA could make a move as soon as Thursday. Boosters are already available for those who say they qualify, with no documentation required – and nearly 90% of vaccinated American adults fall under the CDC’s existing recommendations. But opponents say officially endorsing booster shots for a wider swath of the population, before regulators have examined the data, could undermine trust in the scientific process – already an issue for those who believed the vaccines were authorized too quickly. “We’ve subverted the process,” said Paul Offit, director of the Vaccine Education Center at Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia and a member of the FDA’s independent advisory committee. Federal agencies serve as a firewall between Americans and the pharmaceutical industry, for instance, “to make sure that the American public is protected and only gets the vaccines, in this case, that are well-studied and go through a rigorous process before we give them to millions and tens of millions and hundreds of millions of people,” he said. Joe Biden announced a plan in August to offer boosters on 20 September, sparking a debate over interference in the regulatory process. Two senior vaccine experts at the FDA, Marion Gruber and Phil Krause, resigned and penned a commentary on the lack of evidence around the necessity of boosting. On 21 October the CDC’s director, Rochelle Walensky, announced expanded eligibility for anyone over the age of 65, as well as those over the age of 18 who have underlying medical conditions, including asthma and depression, who live in care facilities, and who work or live in high-risk settings, like hospitals or schools. This guidance applies to those who received mRNA vaccines more than six months ago. Anyone over 18 is also eligible for Johnson &amp; Johnson boosters two months after the first dose, effectively making the vaccine a two-dose series. Pfizer-BioNTech asked the FDA on 9 November to consider expanding their booster to all adults, which the agency may do without convening its panel of independent advisers, as it has done for previous vaccine decisions. But Walensky has emphasized the vaccines’ effectiveness at preventing severe disease and death, instead of all infections, as boosters for younger people may do. “We will not boost our way out of this pandemic,” Walensky said in September. When asked on 10 November about Colorado’s widening eligibility, Walensky said states should focus instead on vaccinating those who haven’t received any shots yet, including kids, as well as giving boosters to the vulnerable according to CDC guidelines. Reaching those who aren’t yet vaccinated is challenging, though, and leaders are still looking for ways to change minds. “Boy, if I had a good answer to that, we wouldn’t still be in the middle of a pandemic,” said Clay Marsh, a critical care physician and leader of West Virginia’s Covid response. It’s been especially difficult given misinformation and disinformation campaigns targeting the vaccines. “I just think people are confused,” he said. “There’s distrust with the vaccines. The fact that these ended up being a line in the sand is just so sad.” The virus’s reproduction rate and the state’s test positivity rate are both increasing once more in West Virginia, leading officials like Marsh to try anything that might reduce transmission in the state. West Virginia has the third-oldest population, and many residents are chronically ill and live in rural areas, putting them at higher risk of worse outcomes from Covid. “We know that younger people are certainly a reservoir of exchange and transmission of the virus,” he said. “We feel like the risk/benefit [analysis] is in favor of boosting for that population as well.” “Our two priorities are to save lives and try to maintain our hospital capacity,” Marsh said. The benefits for boosting older adults are clear: boosters were highly effective at reducing hospitalization and death for those over the age of 50, several studies have found. But the benefits of boosting for younger, healthier adults at this point are less clear; a recent study from Israeli data couldn’t calculate the benefits for adults between the ages of 18 and 39 because so few were included in the trial. A Pfizer study found that protection against infection waned to about 53% after four months, but protection against hospitalization and death stayed strong for the first six months. Recommending boosters to all adults in order to cut down on transmission may be asking too much from the vaccines, Offit said. “The goal now is, we’re not just trying to prevent serious illness, we’re trying to prevent any illness – even mild illness, even asymptomatic infection,” he said – and no vaccine accomplishes that. “It’s not a reasonable goal,” he said. The risk of a very rare side effect, like myocarditis, is worth it as long as there is a clear benefit, Offit said. “The risk is rare, very rare, but it’s real. So then the question becomes, is a third dose clearly a benefit to that age group?” “Because right now, all the epidemiological data is that they are protected against serious illness, which is the goal of the vaccine,” Offit said. As more evidence accumulates, it’s possible an additional shot will become a standard part of Covid vaccination. ”I was disappointed when the FDA and CDC committees did not recommend universal third immunizations,” said Peter Hotez, dean for the National School of Tropical Medicine at Baylor College of Medicine. “I didn’t understand that at all, but hopefully now it looks like that might be corrected.” However, that doesn’t mean boosters will continue every six months. “It’s important for people to understand that just because we’re going to recommend a third immunization does not necessarily mean we’re going to have to boost in perpetuity,” said Hotez. “It’s not one and done and two and done – it could be three and done.” In West Virginia, the next challenge is getting vaccinated people to get the boosters. “We’re not seeing the uptake that we had hoped that we would see,” he said. “Many people on the receiving end apparently still don’t feel good enough to take the boosters.” In response to a lackluster booster rollout, he is urging every West Virginian to look at the FDA and CDC criteria and “identify the area that puts them in that position to be eligible”. “We believe that every West Virginian will qualify under that approach,” Marsh said. Additional reporting by Jessica Glenza.Matthieu Blazy is the latest behind-the-scenes fashion designer to land a top job at a luxury brand. After waiting in the wings at Bottega Veneta since joining last year, he has been announced as the new creative director. The appointment, effective immediately, follows news last week that English designer Daniel Lee had quit in the middle of a hugely successful turnaround, with sales boosted and Bottega Veneta setting the fashion agenda as never before. Blazy’s name is not well known outside the fashion industry, but he has extensive experience. A graduate of La Cambre School of Art and Design in Brussels, and a protégé of Raf Simons for whom he worked on Simons’ own label and at Calvin Klein, Blazy went on to work with Phoebe Philo at Celine where he overlapped with Lee. He may not be used to the limelight but Blazy has first-hand experience of the pressures of the top job. Under the shroud of anonymity it offered its designers, he headed up Maison Margiela’s ready-to-wear and artisanal line. His identity was revealed by Suzy Menkes in 2014, with the critic declaring, “you can’t keep such talent under wraps”. Blazy’s partner, Pieter Mulier, the long-time right-hand man of Raf Simons and recently appointed creative director of Alaïa, is following the same career trajectory. It was once standard practice for fashion bosses to seek out the starriest name they could find to fill a vacant creative director post (and then give free rein to reinvent the house) but businesses are increasingly looking in-house when the time comes to begin a new chapter. It’s an approach that has worked well for Kering, the French multinational that owns multiple luxury brands: Gucci’s Alessandro Michele, arguably the world’s most influential designer, for example, started out there designing handbags before working his way up to the top spot. However, given the similarities between Blazy and his predecessor’s career trajectory (think sleek, exacting minimalism, not unlike the aesthetic Lee has pioneered at Bottega), the new appointment is unlikely to herald a seismic shift for the brand. Certainly, insiders are not predicting an overhaul of Michele scale and proportion. Instead, fans of Lee’s bestselling pouch bags and stomping Tire boots can expect more of the same. Undoubtedly, there is a sense that Kering has prioritised a need for continuity and a desire to hang on tight to the new customers acquired during his tenure. It’s an approach that has worked well for Saint Laurent which, under Anthony Vaccarello, follows a path that isn’t worlds apart from the one laid by Hedi Slimane during his overhaul of the house. Blazy’s appointment has been well received by the industry who congratulated him with a stream of emojis, posted on his Instagram feed. The New York Times fashion director, Vanessa Friedman, took to Twitter to express approval. “It’s about time he [Blazy] got a brand. This is going to be interesting,” she wrote.I had been to Belfast several times. I was a freelance photographer and all my work came from the Sunday Times ringing me up and saying: “Are you interested in going to such and such a place?” They would send me abroad for a couple of weeks with a pocket full of expenses and complete freedom. But I had married a woman from Northern Ireland so had a special interest in the area. This was taken in August 1976 on a trip to Belfast with the writer David Blundy, who was later killed by a sniper in El Salvador. It was a horrendous week but it was a significant one, because the events – and this picture – helped start the peace movement. On our first day, Sunday the 8th, there were riots in the street and I got some dramatic pictures of soldiers silhouetted against the barricades. On Monday, I was on the Falls Road, a well-known Republican area, and took a picture of children playing on the wreckage of a lorry that had been hijacked and burned. Tuesday saw a really horrible incident. The army were chasing Provisional IRA volunteers who were driving a stolen car, and shot the driver, Daniel Lennon, killing him. The car went careering off the road into railings as a family were walking past. Anne Maguire and three of her children were crushed by the car. Two of the children died instantly; the third died in hospital the next day. I photographed the crash: the mashed-up pram and a baby’s bottle. There were more incidents on Wednesday: burning vehicles, hijackings. On Thursday, the IRA held a funeral for Lennon, and the Maguire children’s funeral took place on the Friday. This photograph is of that, and their father. Thousands lined the procession route, both Catholics and Protestants. People were saying: “We can’t go on like this.” And that’s what started the peace movement. Maguire’s sister, Mairead Corrigan, helped organise a peace rally of 10,000 women for the day after the funeral. The following year, Corrigan and Betty Williams, co-founders of the Peace People, were awarded the Nobel peace prize. In this picture, there’s a woman giving me quite a stare and I felt I was obviously intruding, but I had to get the pictures. There was no other way around it: I couldn’t do it from down the road or somewhere. And the photograph was important in driving the peace movement. In those days, most photojournalists shot in black and white, but the Sunday Times and Observer magazines required colour, which added another aspect to this. The white coffin, the red flower on top, just gave it another edge. The very Irish-looking sky, very Irish-looking faces – as a documentary photographer, you have to record these things in such a way that the pictures tell the story. The test is: if you take the caption away, could you still get the gist? Unlike with digital photography, you couldn’t spend your evenings looking over the pictures you’d taken, then send them to the picture desk at the touch of a button. I think it was better, less distracting. Blundy and I went to Elvis’s funeral in 1977, which was very weird, but we weren’t there long because I had to get the film to the airport and send it back by air freight. We weren’t given any special training or protection for jobs like this, but the press were pretty well respected. The first time I was in Belfast, in 1972, we were shot at, but it was only because we were standing next to the army. There was an unfortunate schoolgirl walking behind who got a shot in the thigh. They said to me: “Get down!” You’ve never seen anyone get down so fast. The biggest problem I found working on the streets of Belfast was getting stones thrown at you, because they could knock you out or kill you. I knew a BBC journalist who got hit on the side of the head, and he lost his hearing on one side. The army would be firing rubber bullets, too. We didn’t have helmets like they do now in dangerous situations. We just ducked. The Republicans recognised very early on the value of having the press around. The loyalists were deeply suspicious but eventually did realise that journalists were important for images and telling people what was going on, and even for expressing their views. Sometimes, little old ladies would offer you shelter. They’d come out of their houses and say: “Would you like a cup of tea, dear?” They were lonely and afraid. A lot of people were getting assassinated. You had undercover agents running around and informers. It was a vicious war. • See Alain Le Garsmeur’s work at galerieprints.com. Alain Le Garsmeur’s CV Born: 1943, France, then lived in Jersey, Channel Islands. Trained: Ealing School of Photography, Ealing Tech. Then as an assistant for Donald Silverstein in England, and Guy Bourdin and Helmut Newton in Paris. Influences: Guy Bourdin, William Eggleston and documentary film-maker Ken Burns. High point: “Photo London 2021; and World Press award 1986 – first prize in the Daily Life section for a photo taken in China.” Low point: “Realising that the editorial colour magazines I had worked for had become lifestyle and cookery mags.” Top tip: “Keep a low profile whenever possible.”The estimated number of drug overdose deaths in the US during a 12-month period ending in April rose by 28.5% compared with the same period the year before, according to new provisional data released Wednesday by the CDC’s National Center for Health Statistics. There were an estimated 100,306 drug overdose deaths across the country during a 12-month period ending in April, compared with 78,056 deaths reported during the same period the year before. The data also reveals that estimated overdose deaths caused by opioids jumped from 56,064 in the previous year to 75,673. Overdose deaths caused by synthetic opioids – primarily fentanyl – and psychostimulants including methamphetamine also increased during the 12-month period. Before 2016, more Americans died annually from heroin overdoses than from synthetic opioids such as fentanyl. However, with fentanyl becoming increasingly mixed into other illegal drugs such as heroin and cocaine, often without the user’s knowledge, the number of fatal overdoses from synthetic opioids has increased dramatically. In the past year, fentanyl was involved in more than 60% of the overdose deaths. Fentanyl is 50 times stronger than morphine and heroin, and is often sold illegally for its heroin-like effects, including euphoria. According to the CDC, it also takes very little to produce a high with fentanyl, thus making it a much cheaper option for drug dealers and users. Cocaine deaths, in addition to deaths as a result of natural and semi-synthetic opioids such as prescription pain medication, also increased throughout the 12-month period. As fatal overdoses soar, communities of color in particular have witnessed a significant increase in drug overdose deaths. In a 2019 report from the Minnesota department of health, African Americans were two times more likely to die of drug overdoses than white people, while Native Americans were seven times more likely to die of drug overdoses than white people. Overall, opioids are the leading cause of fatal overdoses among whites, African Americans and Native Americans. With the country facing an unprecedented rise in opioid overdoses, many harm reduction groups are witnessing severe shortages in naloxone, a typically affordable and simple medication that reverses the effects of overdoses. Harm reduction groups previously bought naloxone from Pfizer to create kits that cost about $2.50 each. Now they have to pay $37 for a different generic medication or $75 for Narcan. “To put it in stark terms, you could be saving one life or you could be saving 10 lives for the same price,” said Leo Beletsky, a professor of law and health sciences at Northeastern University. “This is a symptom of broader dysfunction in the US pharmaceutical industry, where public health concerns are secondary to financial concerns,” he added. In the US, SAMHSA’s National Helpline is at 800-662-4357. In the UK, Action on Addiction is available on 0300 330 0659. In Australia, the National Alcohol and Other Drug Hotline is at 1800 250 015 and the Opioid Treatment Line is at 1800 642 428; families and friends can seek help at Family Drug Support Australia at 1300 368 186.A handful of times in the opening stages of Bridget Christie’s new show, she stumbles over or forgets her lines. The critic sharpens his pen: is Christie under-rehearsed or – perish the thought! – might her supreme comic powers be on the wane? But not for the last time tonight, the comedian is a step ahead of the crowd. This show is about life as “a 50-year-old menopausal woman”, and hesitation, forgetfulness – and hot flushes – are all part of its carefully worked-out modus operandi. Even aside from its underexposure as a topic for public conversation – a point she makes most emphatically – could there be a topic better suited to Christie’s style of comedy than the menopause? Once again, this is a show that perfectly marries blustery campaigning material with blithering clown comedy – the indignities, the scattiness and the sudden, ahem, “power surges” of that midlife experience all perfect fodder for an act whose comedy already worked to scatty, surging rhythms. Which isn’t to say Christie is cruising along in her comfort zone. Far from it: one routine after another finds her making us laugh in surprising ways, and the climactic section – about a flasher – is a mini-masterpiece, flowering from inauspicious beginnings into a routine that calls back to jokes, motifs and arguments from the whole preceding hour. Before that, there’s just so much to enjoy. One section on the invisibility of women over 50 rejoices in the comedy of cartoon fury while still lending weight to the original complaint – a classic Christie trick. Another compares the bad-faith comedy of Dave Chappelle and Ricky Gervais to Christie’s mother’s experience of giving birth to Bridget – not an analogy you can imagine any other comedian making, and all the funnier for it. There’s also a tart aside about Fleabag, and a sublime setpiece about Christie’s current failure to remember the most basic words. She dramatises this fraying connection between her brain and the tip of her tongue as a frenetic dialogue between herself and her alarmed kids, a device deployed again in tirades about Tupperware and an incident in a Homebase car park – both hilariously overblown, with Christie waggling about, arms everywhere, like an inflatable tube man. That she’s behaving like this while mothering just multiplies the comedy. Even the show’s relative weaknesses reveal themselves to be part of the larger plan. The Charles II bit feels like recycling from a previous show – but that does serve Christie’s point about crumbling menopause memory. A gag about Boris Johnson’s lying feels a bit obvious, but she keeps reapplying it, to different iterations of male entitlement, with a greater comic (and ideological) yield each time. Then there’s the stunt with which she opens the set, which doesn’t really fly – until you realise that its lack of impact is integral to the joke Christie keeps telling, ever more amusingly, for the first 10 minutes of the show. She is, in short, wise to us, even when we think otherwise – and it’s a keen pleasure to be in the company of an act in such control over her rich, playful material. And all in the service not only of great silliness and self-mockery, but of Christie’s liberating public-information agenda. The menopause needn’t be anything to fear, it may even be liberating – and, on the evidence of Who Am I? it in no way hinders the creation of joyous, fervent and complex comedy shows. Bridget Christie is at Folkestone Quarterhouse on 2 December; then Leicester Square theatre, London, 14-18 December.Under a cold, moonlit sky in south London’s Horniman Museum conservatory, Nala Sinephro is cradling her pedal harp like a child softly resting on her shoulder. With her eyes closed behind her wire-rimmed glasses, she begins to delicately pull her hands along its strings, creating enveloping glissandos that fill the candlelit room. In the corner of her eye a tear glistens. This is the first full-band gig Sinephro has played since the release of her highly acclaimed debut album Space 1.8 (“a benchmark in ambient jazz … less like a player seated at her instrument than a source of light”, rhapsodised Pitchfork). “These were tears of happiness I was trying to hide, since that was my favourite show I’ve ever done. I could feel the presence of everyone surrounding me,” Sinephro says a few days after the event. “I was crying because I couldn’t believe the record is out and that I am living the gift of being able to make my music. Playing the harp is a form of therapy for me. I close my eyes, my hands work and I process the emotions I’m feeling without needing to say anything.” We meet in a Hoxton bakery near the record store Sinephro works at. Speaking so softly as to almost be inaudible, she channels the similarly soothing and melodic presence of her performance. At only 25, she has had a circuitous journey to the harp. Raised in Belgium by her pianist mother, Sinephro developed her ear for instrumentation early, beginning on the piano before moving to fiddle, violin and even the bagpipes. At high school, the room she would practise music in housed a fellow student’s harp, which soon piqued her curiosity. “I was always fascinated by it, so I decided to secretly open its case up one day,” she says, smiling. “When I did, it was like seeing an elephant or a giraffe – it’s an instrument that comes from another time.” There followed two years of clandestine explorations with the borrowed instrument, as she found her way around its fiendishly complicated architecture by feeling and sound. “It was all very organic, and playing felt like refreshing an old memory, or a reincarnation,” she says. “Maybe I have a Celtic harpist in my ancestry who played in medieval times!” Yet Sinephro refrained from learning the instrument formally, opting to move to London in 2017 to study composition instead. Arriving in the city and swiftly dropping out of her university course after three weeks – “as a person of colour, I didn’t feel like there was enough space for me and for what I wanted to make in that school,” she explains – Sinephro soon found her own like-minded musical community via a network of jazz jam nights. Opportune timing meant her arrival coincided with increasing recognition of the new jazz scene that was emerging in London, and she fell in with one of its key players, saxophonist Nubya Garcia, as well as the collective Steam Down. “It was so open-hearted when I got here, I felt like I was heard and had a place to grow,” she says. “I was supported by a community and it ultimately made for a perfect setting for this album.” Sinephro soon wrote the first composition of Space 1.8: Space 4 – a collaboration with Garcia, who creates a swirling downtempo saxophone melody that gently builds over whispering synth work. The harp is notably absent, since Sinephro still saw herself primarily as a composer and producer. “It was a very exciting time, full of youthful, optimistic energy that ultimately produced an entire album of work that sounded like Space 4,” Sinephro says. “But in April 2018, I lost the hard drive with the compositions on it. I was distraught.” It was a horrifying setback that proved instrumental in shaping the record that was to come. By the time she had gathered enough energy to try again, she reframed her priorities. “I asked myself, what is the one thing I regret not doing? And it was playing the harp,” she says. A quick Google saw a hired harp delivered to her bedroom two days later. “Losing that first album was the universe telling me to start again,” she says. “I’m composing all the time and it made me think of my work as a memory of my life – an authentic experience that others can immerse themselves in too.” Holding several recording sessions from August to November 2018, Sinephro approached the dates as purely collaborative, improvisational experiences, channeling the feelings and conversations she would have with the other musicians into eight intuitive compositions that became the “spaces” of the record’s title. The result is an impressionistic album whose every track evokes an imaginative response in the listener; from the warm meditative glow of Space 1, filled with a soundworld of plucked strings and birdsong, to the pulsating modular synths and rhythmic force of Space 3 – cut from a three-hour jam session – to the ambient, devotional textures of the percussion-less Space 7. “When I produce this type of music, I have to be very open and surrender to the sound,” Sinephro says. “I reach a trance-inducing state where I might play a note for 10 minutes straight, if that’s what I’m feeling. While my hands are doing their job, I’m almost sleepwalking.” It is a compositional state comparable to the spiritual jazz processes of harpist Alice Coltrane. Yet, Sinephro only came across her music after she had begun work on the album. She was creating from a deeper, less referential place. “This was a sonic world created out of necessity, since I felt like there wasn’t a place for me to have self-care outside of my own home,” she says. “I felt so happy and comfortable there and so I wanted to reflect that pleasure in my music.” The album’s subsequent release, following a delay caused by the coronavirus pandemic, is appropriately healing for listeners after the turmoil of the past 18 months. One even wrote to Sinephro to say that the frequencies she uses are helping ease his tinnitus. “I wanted it to be something that could be used in even 20 years to make listeners feel good,” she says. Live, that effect is particularly palpable. Back in the conservatory, as Sinephro moves from her harp to a synth and drummer Eddie Hick kicks up a gear, she beams a wide smile to the other band members, signalling them to come in. Around the room, we are all smiling too, joined in another of the spaces she creates.The convenience shop chain McColl’s has warned that annual profits will be as much as £7m lower than expected as it struggles to source enough snacks, wine and beer. The 1,200-store group, which runs more than 100 Morrisons Daily outlets as well as the McColl’s and Martin’s shop chains, said sales were “significantly lower” than initially anticipated, owing to shortages of delivery drivers, warehouse workers, and key products including highly profitable branded items such as crisps and alcoholic beverages. Its shares sank 35% to a new low of 11.58p before recovering to 15p, still down nearly 17%, as it said underlying annual profits were expected to be as low as £20m, down from the £27m previously predicted. Jonathan Miller, the chief executive of McColl’s Retail Group, said: “It is disappointing to see supply chain issues worsen through the second half, but external factors have not eased and continue to impact much of the UK economy. We are working collaboratively with our wholesale partner Morrisons to restore in-store product availability as quickly as possible.” He said that sales at shops converted to the Morrisons Daily format were seeing a “stepchange in performance”, with customers spending more and visiting more often. The group is accelerating its plans for conversions as a result. McColl’s expects to have 150 Morrisons Daily stores open by the end of the month and be reaching its target of 350 well ahead of its original deadline of November 2022. Nick Bubb, an independent retail analyst, suggested other grocery businesses did not appear to be experiencing these issues as much as McColl’s, which had this year called on investors to help revive the business. Bubb said: “McColl’s Morrisons Daily stores continue to deliver strong performance post-rollout, fortunately, and the company’s banks remain ‘supportive’, but shareholders who stumped up £30m-£35m in emergency funding back in August may not be so happy.” Big supermarkets, including Tesco and Sainsbury’s, have recently reported rising sales despite acknowledging supply chain problems. This year the industry has seen a consumer shift back towards shopping in large supermarkets and away from convenience shops, which had benefited last year during lockdowns when many families chose to buy food close to home.Given the extreme complexity of the art form, remasters of decades-old games can be … variable. But when a publisher applies the label “definitive edition” to newly packaged versions of three landmark open-world crime games, games that loom so large in collective pop-cultural memory, it is reasonable to expect more than unstable rereleases with a graphical update. These versions of Grand Theft Auto III (2001), Vice City (2002) and San Andreas (2004) are in no way definitive. Seeing them like this is more than a disappointment. It is infuriating. Graphical glitches, irritating controls and random crashes were, to be fair, all part of gaming in the 00s, before the days of online patches that allowed developers to fix things bit by bit. We put up with it then. But why are we putting up with it now, and paying for it? These remasters feel less stable than the PlayStation 2 originals. Within a couple of hours of starting GTA III – the oldest and least interesting of these three games, an astonishing step forward for gaming in 2001 that feels a little sterile now – I had reached a mission that I couldn’t complete, because the character I was chasing kept falling through the world. Once, my car randomly exploded. I ran through collectibles that I could not pick up. In San Andreas, the colour balancing is so bad that in order to see what’s going on under fictional California’s sunset skies, I had to turn the contrast down as far as it would go. I could hardly make out characters’ faces, or pick out coloured blips on the map, or see purple graffiti tags on red brick. There has, objectively, been a graphical upgrade to these games, in that they don’t look as foggy and fuzzy as they did – but honestly, I’m not sure I would say that they look better than previous re-releases. The rain effects, particularly, are so ugly that they obscure your view; you’d better hope it’s not raining if your mission involves seeing where you’re going. Where characters were blocky and low-resolution, now they are … weirdly plastic. Their proportions are all off, especially in Vice City. I don’t want to spend too long itemising the many imperfections to be found in these remasters. Now that the games have been out for nearly a week there are thousands of YouTube videos and Twitter posts cataloguing them. Shop names are, somehow, misspelled. Puns have been ruined by erroneously remastering a nut into a wheel. You can walk through walls or fences only to find invisible walls just beyond. And, embarrassingly for Rockstar, the games were temporarily pulled from sale on PC because they were released with hidden and superfluous notes and files from the original code, reportedly including the abandoned Hot Coffee sex mini-game that caused an industry-shaking legal meltdown in 2005. Here’s why this stings: Rockstar is notorious for its perfectionism. This is a company that most recently spent the best part of a decade painstakingly recreating the old west for Red Dead Redemption 2, down to horse sweat and grime on gunmen’s revolvers. The level of craft in Grand Theft Auto games has always been exceptional and astonishing. I don’t want to use the word careless, because I can only presume that nobody who worked on these remasters intended them to be substandard. But whatever the reasons behind it, the lack of care and attention to detail evident undermines the entire character of these games. We have seen, with Bluepoint’s remakes of older PlayStation games such as Demon’s Souls and Shadow of the Colossus, the peak of what can be achieved with a remaster: a full-on overhaul that modernises every aspect. If any other company has the resources to achieve this, it’s surely Rockstar and its parent Take-Two Interactive. Grand Theft Auto has made billions. For me, it is bizarre that more of that money has not been reinvested in Rockstar’s legacy. In the best part of two decades since these games came out, modders have achieved far better than this – and of course, they have all now been shut down by Take-Two’s lawyers. It is a tribute to the magic of these games – particularly San Andreas, for me – that it’s still possible to sink into them, despite all the technical hitches. Within an hour of starting it up I was right back there in Grove Street with protagonist CJ and his old crew, listening to them screw around and trash-talk each other and occasionally share a truth that hit home, and marvelling at how even with the limited technological tools available at the time, Rockstar managed to create something so strangely believable. The radio stations, despite missing tracks that presumably disappeared because of licensing issues, still transported me right into these games’ satirically ultracapitalist, nihilistic and irreverent headspace. Much of the incidental audio is horribly compressed or unbalanced and sounds awful, but thank God the radio still works. GTA is a series known for its violence but man, it’s about more than that; it’s a world, it’s a place, it’s a story, about the characters you meet and inhabit and about what you do in the giant, anarchic playground that it gives you. These are huge games; not everything in them is in good taste, not all of the dialogue has aged well. But they are still worth replaying, and worth preserving. Just not in this state. • Grand Theft Auto: The Trilogy – The Definitive Edition is out now; £54.99.Denmark has accused the UK of breaching the post-Brexit fisheries deal over plans to ban destructive bottom trawling in a North Sea conservation zone. The UK announced in February that it wanted to ban bottom trawling at the Dogger Bank conservation zone in the North Sea, a move hailed by environmentalists hopeful of seeing a resurgence of halibut, sharks and skate in the once marine life rich sandbank. In an interview with the Guardian, Denmark’s fisheries minister, Rasmus Prehn, said such plans were not in line with the post-Brexit deal. “The Brexit agreement ensures full access [for EU vessels] to fish in UK waters until 2026. And therefore, of course, it is a very big problem for us if the British government is going to change that. We find that unacceptable and it’s a breach of our agreement,” he said. The charge opens a new front for the UK government, which is already embroiled in a rancorous dispute with France over fishing rights, against a wider backdrop of post-Brexit tensions with the EU. Dogger Bank, a large shallow sandbank about 90 miles north-east of the Humber estuary, has been fished by Danish boats for centuries and is among the country’s most important fishing grounds, according to the Danish government. Under the Brexit trade and cooperation agreement struck between the EU and the UK last Christmas Eve, EU fishers can continue to access UK waters as before until 30 June 2026, a transition to delay the blow of reduced fishing rights in future. The deal also commits both sides to “promoting the long-term sustainability” of the 70 common fish in the shared waters. Prehn said Danish fishers “are already in a very difficult situation due to Brexit so this would be even more difficult for them and we can’t really accept that”. While he said it was premature to discuss potential retaliation, he revealed his disappointment over how relations between the UK and Denmark had deteriorated since Brexit. “It’s really difficult to make an agreement and just one year after we have these problems with one part; that is not really acceptable, that is not how we usually make agreements. With the UK we used to have a very good relationship,” Prehn said. He was speaking from Brussels as the UK and EU embark on the final sprint of negotiations to set catch limits for fishing in 2022, ahead of a 10 December deadline. Denmark and the UK entered the then European Economic Community together in 1973, but arrived too late to influence the first version of the common fisheries policy, leaving a lingering sense of resentment for British officials. Between 2013 and 2020, Danish fishers landed catches worth 27m DKK (£3.05m) a year from bottom trawling in Dogger Bank, mostly sand eel, which is used on fish farms but is also an important source of food for puffins, kittiwakes and seals. Germany and the Netherlands also have fishing interests in Dogger Bank, which environmentalists say has been overworked by trawls and dredges, causing a drastic decline in fish. Bottom trawling involves dragging weighted nets across the sea floor. Environmentalists have welcomed the government’s decision to protect Dogger Bank, but said the UK needed to show the same efforts when it came to protecting fish targeted by British fishers. “The UK is proposing a brave and good deal on the Dogger Bank,” said Irene Kingma, a Dutch marine biologist. “It’s also very easy … when it’s not your fisheries that you’re impacting.” “The UK is being very progressive on all environmental issues as long as it’s not interfering with their own fishing interest,” she added. “They are good at [protecting] Dogger Bank, because its flatfish are fished by the Dutch, and they are good at the industrial fisheries [sandeel] because that’s fished by the Danish. But they are very much not willing to move on cod when it’s the Scottish fishing boats.” The UK government rejects the claim it is in breach of the TCA, arguing it allows both sides to decide on regulatory measures. A spokesperson for the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs said: “The UK is a global leader in the fight to protect our seas. As an independent coastal state the UK can decide on the regulatory measures which apply to fishing in our waters, which includes taking measures to follow scientific advice and protect our marine environment.”A British F-35 pilot flying from the Queen Elizabeth aircraft carrier had to eject during a routine operation over the Mediterranean, the Ministry of Defence (MoD) has said. The pilot was picked up but the £100m stealth jet crashed into the sea during the incident, which took place at about 10am UK time. No other vessels or aircraft were involved, defence sources said. The accident took place shortly after the F-35 took off, the defence secretary, Ben Wallace, said, but despite the incident other operational and training flights involving the jets were carrying on for the moment. An MoD spokesperson said: “A British F-35 pilot from HMS Queen Elizabeth ejected during routine flying operations in the Mediterranean this morning. The pilot has been safely returned to the ship and an investigation has begun, so it would be inappropriate to comment further at this time.” An immediate priority is recovery of the wreckage, with the UK keen to ensure the lost aircraft does not end up in the hands of a hostile state such as Russia. HMS Queen Elizabeth is returning to the UK after a long deployment that has taken it through the Indian Ocean to the Pacific and back. Eight British and 10 US F-35Bs were deployed onboard before Wednesday. Britain agreed to buy 48 F-35Bs from the US military company Lockheed Martin, at a cost of £6bn by 2025. Of those, 24 have been delivered. It is the first accident involving an RAF F-35B, although there have been a handful of previous accidents involving the fighter jets in the past three years. The most similar crash happened in September 2018, involving an F-35B, when the pilot, a US Marine, had to eject in South Carolina. Faulty engine tubes were blamed. Jets from HMS Queen Elizabeth previously participated in strikes against the remnants of Islamic State in Iraq and Syria. The crash will be investigated by the Defence Accident Investigation Branch, which usually takes several weeks before producing an initial report. A final report typically takes about a year to complete.Unexpected friendships spanning four – and sometimes five – generations have sprung up between volunteers engaged in “crisis campaigning” during the pandemic. Experts said the unusual bonding between those in their 60s and older, and those in their early 20s and younger, has been partly galvanised by the enforced separation of the generations during lockdown, leading the age groups to value each other in a way they had not previously. Sam Mountfield, 12, and Tony Openshaw, 66, from Greater Manchester, began working together on issues around education during the pandemic as part of the This Is What an Activist Looks Like campaign. “Tony has campaigned for so many things in his life and it is inspirational,” said Mountfield. “I have learned a lot from him, especially about not giving up if you really care about something.” Openshaw said: “Young people and older people are two sets of people who are often stereotyped and ignored. It’s fantastic to work alongside young people like Sam and share a passion for change.” Cecilia Allison, seven, was inspired by volunteering alongside Chris Barnes, 66, to develop the back lane where she lives in Manchester into a public garden. “I love all the different plants in Chris’s garden,” she said. “I like learning from older people like Chris who know lots of things.” Barnes said Allison “reminds me that you should never stop learning”, adding, “She takes my breath away on a regular basis with her questions.” Ruth Leonard, the chair of the Association of Volunteer Managers and head of volunteering development at Macmillan Cancer Support, said the two groups at either end of the age spectrum could be bonding because both feel disfranchised by the government’s response to Covid. “The pandemic has presented these age groups with very specific challenges and they feel they’ve been left alone to deal with those,” she said. The UK Civil Society Almanac 2021 found that during the pandemic, the ages that were volunteering at least once a month were most likely to be those aged 18 to 24, and those aged 65 and over. Becki Meakin, the general manager of the national charity Shaping Our Lives, said a change in volunteering patterns had led to the generations mixing more than in usual times. “Some older people stepped back slightly from their volunteering roles during the pandemic and younger people stepped up,” she said. “The two age groups found themselves working together and friendships grew from there.” Eve Taylor, 17, from Brighton met Hazel Mason, 72, at the start of the pandemic after Mason set up a Zoom group, the Listening Space, where different generations could talk. “We wanted to offer ourselves as listening ears to younger people because there can be a very special bond between people from very different generations,” said Mason. “Intergenerational ideas broaden the mind and the friendship that has grown up between Eve and myself helps keep me young.” “I’ve learned so much from Hazel,” said Taylor. “Having such a big age gap provides huge scope for discussion because you’ve had such different life experiences.” Cosmo Lupton, 21, and Bob Illingworth, 74, met while campaigning for the Liberal Democrats in Cambridge. “It’s fascinating to talk to Bob about campaigning for gay rights decades before I was even born,” said Lupton. “It has made me think about things I take for granted as a young, bisexual man.” Illingworth said he is constantly learning from Lupton. “It’s the enthusiasm that comes from youth that I’d forgotten. Perhaps I was once a bit like that but I’m relearning now from Cosmo.” Oska Shaw, 24, and Anita Bennett, 65-plus, became friends during the campaign to save the M32 Maple trees and Baltic Wharf in Bristol in 2019. “My campaigning relationship with Anita has been wonderful and has definitely become a real friendship,” said Shaw. “Anita’s friendship has given me a supportive, calm space to gather myself together in.” Bennett said she has learned from Shaw’s fearlessness. “We elders have more time and can bring certain practical things to the partnership but young people haven’t learned to be afraid of things and that brings with it a kind of wisdom,” she said. “Oska is impressive and tremendous fun. Our friendship has created another dimension to my life.” Dr Jurgen Grotz, director of the Institute for Volunteering Research, said “volunteering across the ages can break down negative stereotypes that are borne of restricted opportunities for generations to understand and get to know each other”. Peter Beresford OBE, emeritus professor of social policy at Brunel University London and the former director of the Centre for Citizen Participation, said there is a “natural alliance between much older and much younger people that isn’t talked about enough”. “The bond comes from those generations sharing the fact that they’re not necessarily tied to the day to day and are able to be much more liberatory,” he said.An official Chinese newspaper has weighed in on an alleged spat between the British foreign secretary and the UK’s ambassador to China, suggesting Liz Truss was “a radical populist” and quoting Chinese internet users calling the UK “Little Britain”. The alleged row between Truss and Caroline Wilson, the British ambassador to China, was first reported by the Times early this month. A Truss ally reportedly recalled a conversation last year between her and Wilson who, according to the source, asked why the UK could not treat China “like we treat the French”. “Because the French aren’t committing genocide,” responded Truss, a reference to China’s treatment of the Uyghur population in its far-west region of Xinjiang. On Saturday, the Mail on Sunday alleged that Wilson had sent letters to ministers who attended national security council (NSC) meetings to “effectively argue for the appeasement of China”. The article said the move “risks putting Dame Caroline at odds with foreign secretary Liz Truss, one of the most hawkish members of the cabinet”. The allegation prompted some critics of China in the UK to call for Wilson to resign. However, her colleagues and friends told the Guardian it was “wrong to suggest she’s pro-Beijing”. One said: “She won’t sacrifice British interests as a diplomat. She’s a China expert, but she’s definitely not a ‘panda-hugger’”. The Foreign Office said: “We don’t comment on leaks. Ultimately decisions at NSC are made by those ministers attending, not officials.” It added that ministers received letters from ambassadors updating on the situation in their countries regularly, and “this is normal practice ahead of the NSC”. When Truss was an education minister in 2014, she visited Shanghai to learn about how Chinese pupils studied mathematics. She also oversaw the signing of a memorandum of understanding between the UCL Institute of Education and Hanban, the Beijing-based Confucius Institute headquarters. In June that year, she gave a speech at the Confucius Institute, saying that the Chinese-linked programme and its network of Confucius classrooms “will put in place a strong infrastructure for Mandarin” in the UK. Last year, as trade secretary, Truss backed plans to give the British courts a role in determining whether genocide was happening in Xinjiang, a move reportedly opposed by the Foreign Office. This week, in response to the Foreign Affairs Committee’s report on Xinjiang, the government said that it is its longstanding policy “not to make determinations in relation to genocide”. The alleged rift between Truss and Wilson was quickly noticed by Chinese media. “Wilson, as British ambassador, no doubt stands for British interests,” the nationalist Global Times wrote in an opinion piece early this week. “In a bid to slander China, the UK’s hawkish politicians represented by Truss turn black to white,” it added. Wilson, a fluent Mandarin speaker, has been a notable figure in the China-focused social media sphere. Since her appointment as the British ambassador to China last year, she has been using her linguistic skills to impress her Chinese audience, posting vlogs and travel photos in Chinese language on Weibo to promote Sino-British collaboration. She has 36,000 Chinese followers on the Chinese social media platform. After Beijing expelled a number of foreign journalists in March, Wilson wrote an article in Chinese defending the principle of press freedom and its value in a well-functioning society. The article did not go down well in her host country and she was summoned to the Chinese foreign ministry and accused by a senior Chinese diplomats of “ideological prejudice and double-standards”. The Global Times also quoted the director of the institute of international affairs at the prestigious Renmin University in Beijing saying that the appointment of Truss as the foreign secretary shows that “in Britain, a hardline stance against China is its political correctness, rather than practical cooperation and attempts to achieve a win-win result. “Chinese netizens jokingly said this is not Great Britain; this is Little Britain. The Wilson-Truss spat shows that Britain could come up with a more reckless China policy,” the Global Times said.Stephen Colbert Stephen Colbert checked in on the pandemic on Tuesday’s Late Show, as cases spiked among the unvaccinated in states such as New Hampshire and Vermont. “So Covid won’t go away, but the pandemic might,” he said, as the global goal is now to reach what experts call Covid endemicity – the point where Covid becomes just another disease, like the flu, that people control with medications and vaccines. “So it looks like we’re never really getting rid of Covid,” said Colbert. “It’s like Mel Gibson – he ebbs and flows and because of a few idiots out there, we’re stuck with some form of him forever.” The host also touched on yet another damning revelation from the latest Trump tell-all book, this one by ABC News’s Jonathan Karl. In Betrayal, Karl details how the ex-president “was interested in staging a classic coup”, Colbert summarized, as his allies pressed the defense department to overturn the election. “Some of these efforts were what military historians call coup-coup-banana-cakes,” he added, such as the one put forth by Trump lawyer and Big Lie conspiracist Sidney Powell. After the election, Powell contacted a Pentagon official to promote the lie that the then-CIA director had been taken into custody in Germany while on a secret mission to destroy evidence of voter fraud – “information” from a false conspiracy that had gained steam among QAnon followers. “Oh yeah, that theory is definitely steaming,” said Colbert. Furthermore, former Trump official and convicted criminal Michael Flynn urged a defense official to use the military to stop Biden from taking office by seizing ballots and taking “extraordinary measures” to stop Democrats. “Remember, this was a former general! Making a call to the military demanding that they support a fascist coup!” said Colbert. “What is wrong with him? It’s 2021 – just text!” Jimmy Kimmel Jimmy Kimmel also sifted through the information offered in Betrayal, in which Karl claimed that in the wake of the Capitol attack on 6 January, Trump cabinet members Mike Pompeo and Steve Mnuchin explored invoking the 25th amendment to remove him from office. “You know things are going south when even Mike Pompeo considers doing the right thing,” said Kimmel. “He reportedly asked for an analysis of the 25th amendment and how it would work,” he continued. “Very careful about it, went to the White House legal department like ‘hey I have this friend … you don’t know him, anyway he was thinking about invoking the 25th amendment? And he was wondering, like, how that all works? And would his name be on it?’” Kimmel then added Betrayal to a tower of the Trump tell-all books, which promptly toppled over. Trevor Noah And on the Daily Show, Trevor Noah checked in on two lightning rod trials for white vigilantes. Arguments wrapped on Monday at the trial of Kyle Rittenhouse, who shot and killed two racial justice protesters in Kenosha, Wisconsin, in August 2020. “Now the jury has to decide whether he will go to prison, or become Trump’s running mate in 2024,” Noah quipped. And in Georgia, the murder trial began for the three men charged with chasing down and killing Ahmaud Arbery in February 2020. Kevin Gough, defense attorney for William Bryan, immediately stoked outrage by trying to limit the number of black pastors in the courtroom, including the Reverend Jesse Jackson. “Which pastor is next? Is the Reverend Raphael Warnock going to be the next person appearing this afternoon?” Gough said, referring to the Senator from Georgia. “We don’t know … with all due respect your honor, the seats in the public gallery of a courtroom are not like court-side seats at a Lakers game.” “First of all, of course this trial is not like a Lakers game,” said Noah. “The jury has 11 white people and one black guy, that’s basically the opposite of any basketball team.” “And secondly,” he continued, “I’m not saying that this guy is racist, but when you’re representing a guy who killed a black man just for jogging in the wrong neighborhood, it’s not a great look to be pointing into the gallery and going, ‘hey, this black guy doesn’t belong here, we should do something about that!’”As temperatures plummet on the European Union’s eastern frontier, thousands of Middle Eastern migrants remain stranded in the no man’s land between Poland and Belarus. It’s now clear they were assisted in their arrival by Alexander Lukashenko, Belarus’s despotic leader, for use as human pawns in a cruel political game. Yet, instead of forcing the EU to drop sanctions against his regime as he had evidently hoped, Lukashenko has merely triggered a further round of tougher measures to come. Andrew Roth, Lorenzo Tondo and Martin Chulov survey the backdrop to this complex situation and the dire conditions at the border, while Kenan Malik outlines the hypocrisy at the heart of Fortress Europe’s migration strategy that has served to encourage Lukashenko. Cop26 ended with views divided over whether the global climate conference was a success or a failure. The unsatisfactory answer appeared to be both, with many experts leaning to the latter view. Fiona Harvey tells the story of a fraught fortnight in Glasgow and outlines the key points of the agreed text, while on our Opinion pages, George Monbiot argues that regardless of disappointment over Cop, a societal tipping point on climate action is near. Our Culture pages feature Olivia Colman, the down-to-earth English actor who went from cult TV sitcoms to global stardom. We also go behind the scenes with foley artists, the people who recreate sound effects for our favourite shows, while our Books pages include a review of a Nobel laureate’s visionary epic. Get the magazine delivered to your home addressThou shalt not pass; thou shalt not squeeze in. The instant we realise that up ahead on the road to hell, three lanes are to become two, those of us drivers with good intentions do the honourable thing and vacate the soon-to-be-closed lane. Glowing with virtue, we crawl along, glowering at the sinners steaming past us along the now empty lane intent on pushing in as late as they possibly can. When they get to that point we will not let them in. This will necessitate driving dangerously close to the car in front to deny the sinners any space to drive into. I have been doing this for all the years I’ve been driving, assuming I was on the side of the angels. Once an oil tanker ahead of me moved across a little to straddle the middle and the fast lane, which was about to run out. He did so with the specific purpose of stopping the sinners from steaming past us. I considered this act so heroic that I followed him into the next services to praise him. He was pleased. We both cursed the sinners a bit, swore a lot, and then went on our way. Then I heard tell of something called “merging like a zip”: a practice in New Zealand, and not uncommon in the US. This rule dictates that, whenever two lanes become one, you drive right up to that point and then take it in turns to proceed. You know, like a zip. Wow! Years of righteous indignation rippled guiltily behind me. Of course, if we do this then everything will flow more easily and there will be so much less upset. I resolved to start merging like a zip for all I was worth. And I have been disappointed to find that it has won me very few fans in the middle lane. They hate me with all the passion I had before I saw the light. I forgive them: they know not what they should do, even though I was staggered to discover that merging like a zip is effectively advised in the Highway Code. Rule 134, since you ask. “Merging in turn is recommended but only if safe and appropriate when vehicles are travelling at a very low speed, eg when approaching road works or a road traffic incident.” Steve Fowler, the editor in chief of Auto Express, says: “If everyone knew what to do and where to do it, we’d see reduced congestion, which means reduced pollution, and also less road rage. Drivers get really rattled by people perceived to be pushing in, when in reality all they are doing is what the Highway Code tells them to do. Perhaps zip-merging signs will solve the problem.” It is a bit like mask-wearing and vaccine-taking in that it only works properly if we all do it. It is depressing how many people couldn’t see the point of masks because they didn’t protect the wearer so much as those standing around the wearer. But I suspect the non-take-up of zip-merging is less about selfishness than an outcome of an unresolved conflict between two very British urges. “Take it in turns!” is hollered at us from a young age and surely is hard-wired. But so is the idea of forming an orderly queue and that, for the moment, is winning out on the roads and jamming them up. Things must change. Never mind smart motorways; just get the zip-merging signs up. For my part, it’s no more Mr Nice Guy: I am ordering a T-shirt I found on the internet bearing the legend: Merge Like A Zip, Not Like A C*nt. I’m not sure this would be the best approach for a public information campaign, but it’s a start. Adrian Chiles is a Guardian columnistThe number of people who have been sent back to Europe after travelling to the UK across the Channel in small boats has plummeted since Brexit, an immigration minister has admitted to MPs. Just five people who made the perilous journey from northern Europe have been returned so far this year, the home affairs select committee was told. In the previous year, when the UK was part of an EU returns deal, 289 such arrivals were deported, the minister said. Tom Pursglove, a minister for the Home Office and the Ministry of Justice, told the Commons home affairs committee on Wednesday that there had been “difficulties securing returns”. Yvette Cooper, the committee’s chair, had asked “how many asylum seekers or how many people arriving” had been returned to any EU country since January. Pursglove replied: “On returns related to small boat arrivals … the answer in this year is five.” Later he added: “There is not a returns agreement with the European Union in place at the moment.” Before Brexit, the UK was part of an EU returns deal known as the Dublin agreement which the committee heard had allowed several hundred people to be returned in previous years. When Cooper suggested returns were “substantially worse” since losing the agreement, Pursglove said the pandemic had also been a factor. “You will appreciate that there have been some difficulties around securing returns, not least as a consequence of Covid,” he said. He insisted the “ambition remains to secure successful returns arrangements with our European friends and neighbours. And potentially with the European Union.” More than 23,000 people have arrived in the UK this year after crossing the Channel in small boats. This is almost three times the total of about 8,500 in 2020. There were 31,115 asylum claims made in the year ending in June, 4% fewer than in the previous year, Pursglove said. He said small boats were becoming the transport of choice for “evil criminal gangs” – an expression he repeated on at least five occasions. “The smugglers are becoming more audacious. We are seeing riskier behaviours. We are seeing bigger boats deployed. We are seeing a wider array of crossings originating from a wider stretch of coastline,” he said. Pursglove said previously boats were being launched from about 30 miles of French coastline but now it was from a 120-mile stretch, and he described this as “troubling”. Asked why repeated pledges by the home secretary, Priti Patel, that she would get the numbers under control had not been met, Pursglove said there had been “most definitely an improvement” in the prevention of small boat crossings. “Clearly, the fact that we’ve had a fivefold increase in clandestine arrivals this summer compared with 2018 is completely unacceptable. We’ve got to do better on this. And I will not rest until we get to a far better place on this issue,” he said. The Conservative MP Tim Loughton, a member of the committee, said there had been “similar undertakings” previously from politicians but the “situation has not improved”. Pursglove reiterated plans to “render the route unviable” and said there was “not one single solution to this problem”.Mark Morriss, frontman of Britpop band the Bluetones, has been accused of physical and emotional abuse by his ex-wife, Anna Wharton. In an essay published on Substack, Wharton said that Morriss was abusive to her on more than one occasion. She said police had previously visited the household but that Morriss told them she was lying about her allegations. He was “finally” cautioned for “throttling” her when she showed police a photograph that appeared to show eight finger markings around her neck. “What a thing you should have to think of straight after an act of violence like that, but otherwise I would never have been believed,” she wrote. She said she had sought support from a domestic abuse charity. Morriss told the Guardian: “I may have been thoughtless and selfish in some of the dealings in my personal life of late, but these allegations of abuse and gaslighting are wholly untrue, and I refute them completely.” He added that his personal life had “certainly gotten into a hell of a tangle, people have undoubtedly been hurt because of me” and that “in many ways, all this coming to light is a great relief”. He said: “I am sincerely sorry for everything to anyone caught up here.” Wharton said she met Morriss in August 2011. He allegedly wanted to have a child but told her to have an abortion when she became pregnant. She continued the pregnancy, during which she heard of another woman who had recently been in a relationship with Morriss. He had told this woman that Wharton had shown up six months pregnant saying he was the father, she claims. Wharton said that his “constant cheating” meant their relationship was always on and off. She said that his infidelities often took place with fans – including one six weeks after their marriage – to whom he repeated the line about being tricked into fatherhood. When she attempted to address his cheating, she said he told her: “You knew what my job was when you met me.” She described Morriss as a “tyrant” who frequently checked their house “to catch me out”, including accusing her of lying about cleaning. “It got to the point where I would polish the back of the front door so he’d smell the scent before he crossed the threshold,” she wrote. “But cleaning wasn’t the point, control was.” Wharton accused Morriss of “telling people that I am crazy, and lying about me”, “gaslighting women to believe what he wanted them to, convincing them not to put the dots together and realise what a narcissistic, pathological liar and serial predator he is”. She claimed that he also told his mother that she tricked him into the pregnancy and lied that she was bipolar. Wharton wrote of her shame at rekindling the relationship with Morriss last year. She and their now nine-year-old daughter lived in a separate house to him. When they visited one morning in June 2020, she said that he was “forced to confess he had another woman in his bed”. Hours earlier, she wrote, he had sent her a text message saying that Wharton’s suspicion that he was cheating “absolutely destroys me” and that “I don’t want anybody else”. She says she subsequently discovered that Morriss appeared to have been living a double life, carrying on intimate relationships with two other women, both single mothers, during 2020. The two women found each other, and subsequently Wharton. Morriss told the Guardian that the last 18 months “undoubtedly had an adverse effect” on his mental health and decision-making. “But the last thing I wanted to do was hurt people who have been kind to me during this difficulty.” He said he had a “very strong and healthy co-parenting relationship” with the mother of his son – whom he did not identify – and wished for the same in his relationship with Wharton and their daughter. He expressed regret that the matter becoming public could negatively affect the lives of the children involved. The musician the Anchoress, AKA Catherine Anne Davies, said she would be severing her collaboration with the group the Helicopter of the Holy Ghost, of which Morriss is a member, after she provided vocals on their 2021 single A Little Longer. Davies said she had never met Morriss “but I certainly don’t want to be involved in anything that perpetuates the power and status that has allowed these things to happen”. Morriss, 50, was born in Hounslow, Middlesex. The Bluetones formed in 1993, releasing singles on Fierce Panda Records before signing to A&amp;M Records and reaching No 1 with their debut album, Expecting to Fly, released in 1996. The follow-up, Return to the Last Chance Saloon, reached No 10 in the UK albums chart. Releasing three more albums – the last, A New Athens, in 2010 – the band have remained active on the UK touring circuit. They parted ways in 2011, but re-formed for a Britpop-themed tour in 2017. Morriss has released four solo albums and is a member of comedian and jazz musician Matt Berry’s live band, the Maypoles.Joe Biden announced a deal last month to establish around-the-clock operations at the Port of Los Angeles to break an unprecedented container ship traffic jam blamed for driving up consumer prices. But that hasn’t happened yet. Gene Seroka, the Port of Los Angeles executive director, said in an online briefing on Tuesday that the sprawling complex has “24/7 capability”, but a shortage of truck drivers and nighttime warehouse workers poses problems in establishing a nonstop schedule, along with getting importers to embrace expanded hours. “It’s an effort to try to get this entire orchestra of supply chain players to get on the same calendar,” he said. Among thousands of importers, “we’ve had very few takers to date.” US ports have been inundated with cargo since the pandemic shifted spending. Covid-19 reduced labor needed to keep goods flowing smoothly. Ageing truckers retired early, while infection control measures limited dock and warehouse staffing. Facing full warehouses at home, companies delayed picking up goods at the port. With container ships stranded at ports and unloaded goods waiting for trucks, the White House hoped the longer workday at the port would help loosen the bottleneck and reduce shipping delays for everything from cars to toasters to sneakers. On Tuesday, the backlog remained significant, but there were signs of progress. Eighty-four container ships were waiting to enter the Los Angeles–Long Beach port complex, slightly down from some recent days when the number topped 100. As for moving cargo, Seroka said the port had witnessed a 25% drop in the number of import containers on the docks since 24 October, from 95,000 to to 71,000. During the same time, cargo sitting nine days or longer dropped by 29%, he said. To speed up the clearance of containers, the port earlier this month had announced a new fee that would hit imports destined for truck removal after nine days or more on docks, and would start after six days for rail-bound cargo. Ports would charge ocean carriers escalating fees for overstaying container – with a $100 charge for the first day, $200 for the second, and so on. The progress allowed executives to delay imposing the fee by one week to 22 November, they said. Seroka acknowledged “there’s much more work to be done,” but said there had been “great progress by our dock workers, shipping lines, truckers, marine terminal operators and railroad partners”. The US transportation secretary, Pete Buttigieg, said that going to a 24-hour-a-day schedule at the busiest port in the western hemisphere “is, of course, not flipping the switch”. “There are so many players, even just on the grounds of port,” he added.I spent some of the past summer at the Lord’s and Oval cricket grounds watching my beloved England and Pakistan play. When both teams play each other, I’m never going to be on the losing side. As is the case for many working-class British Asians, cricket has been part of my life since childhood, and a personal barometer for racism, classism, Islamophobia, identity and belonging. Remember Norman Tebbit’s infamous “cricket test”? In July, while waiting for a friend at Lord’s, known as “the home of cricket”, a security guard looked me up and down while walking towards me: “You’re standing at the wrong gate. You’re here to work? You need to go through another entrance.” He tried to shoo me away. Up until this point, this man and I had not exchanged a word. However, he assumed that a brown, hijab-wearing woman could only be at Lord’s to work in hospitality. I told the security guard he need not worry, I was at the right gate. He looked stunned. Cricket is riddled with class, race and gendered inequalities at every level. That incident was yet another reminder that the establishment and “polite” English society demands that people of colour, people like me, know our place. I have spent my entire life as an anti-racist campaigner, refusing to know my place, because my place is everywhere. If anyone has a problem with that, then it’s just that – their problem, not mine. It has taken years of me internalising painful experiences of racism, Islamophobia and misogyny. Coping with workplace cultures of silencing, denial and the minimising of racism, and the many harms it has caused to me and my career, has led me to this point. A recent study shows that English cricket is increasingly dominated by privilege. Two in five of England’s Test cricketers last year were privately educated, six times more than the national average. This is such a stark contrast with football, where 87% of the England team are state educated. Even though Asians have a minimal presence in professional football, the Three Lions football team is far more representative in terms of class and race than is cricket. According to the England and Wales Cricket Board (ECB) there are approximately a million South Asian cricket fans across the country. The ECB has created a South Asian action plan – an 11-point strategy presented on its website under an image of two beaming young brown women of colour, one of whom is wearing a hijab. Like many people of colour, I watched the former Yorkshire cricketer Azeem Rafiq give evidence to the parliamentary inquiry into racism in cricket with my stomach churning and my chest feeling tight. Supremely dignified and courageous, Rafiq’s testimony was triggering for so many who have been subjected to racism and Islamophobia in our places of work. Yet, unlike many of my white friends, I wasn’t shocked by his devastating testimony. His story of dealing with institutional racism isn’t exceptional. What marks him out is the fact he is finally being listened to and believed: by MPs, the cricketing authorities and the media. When I was growing up, the P-word was used frequently against me, my family members and my friends; it was often followed up by violence. Over the past two decades, aided by the “war on terror”, the P-slur has been replaced with open and mainstream anti-Muslim hate. This is likely to be part of Rafiq’s experiences. It needs to be recognised that Islamophobia is a form of racism. Rafiq told parliament that he wouldn’t want his son involved in the sport. It makes me mourn for the massive potential waste of talent, the future England stars who could be lost to the game; but Rafiq is right to say what he has said. Until English cricket tackles institutional racism and Islamophobia at all levels, the rest of us must do everything in our power to protect those at risk of racism from the mental anguish Rafiq is still enduring. He has gone on record to say the bullying led to him contemplating taking his own life. For anyone, let alone a practising Muslim, to disclose this publicly, is horrifying. Rafiq’s account is a bodyblow for the ECB and its attempts to diversify the sport; it should also be a watershed moment for English cricket and wider society, including every workplace. • Shaista Aziz is a journalist, writer, comedian, and Labour councillor for Oxford city councilPaul McCartney has shared the secrets of how his perfect sandwich comes together – a Marmite, hummus, cheese and honey mustard bagel in which the fillings are separated by protective layers of lettuce. Speaking to the comedian Romesh Ranganathan, the former Beatle revealed the meticulous process he uses to make the snack during a conversation about new cookbook Linda McCartney’s Family Kitchen. He said: “I do a very good sandwich. I take a bagel, I cut it in three. Often you have two bagels, so now you cut it into six. So you’ve got a top and a bottom, a top and a bottom, and two middles. You can get three sandwiches out of that.” McCartney then explained how he adds protective layers to preserve the bagel’s structural integrity. “So the bottom layer I put Marmite on and then I would put a little bit of lettuce, because I’m going to put hummus on but it’s going to go through the hole if I don’t put lettuce on. You might get a little sliced cheese on there, you might have one slice of tomato, then you might have a little pickle or two. Then you go back to your lettuce barrier, because there’s another hole on the top remember, so you’ve got to protect it from that. Then I put on honey mustard.” His daughter, Mary McCartney, a photographer, filmmaker and food writer, added: “In a McCartney sandwich we are not afraid of a condiment.” Paul McCartney was joined by his other daughter, the fashion designer Stella, to promote the recently published cookbook of family recipes.PROCLAIM CANADA In a week where the big hitters – Brazil, Spain, Englandyestherewesaidit – stamped their tickets to the Human Rights World Cup, more unlikely contenders were edging their way towards the heat of Qatar from the wintry wilds of North America. Those – and we have to make very clear that The Fiver very definitely, absolutely, without a shadow of a doubt isn’t one of these people, of course not, how dare you – whose knowledge of Canadian football extends to little more than hazy memories of Frank Yallop, Paul Peschisolido and Carlo Corazzin (plus an occasional sprinkling of Tomasz Radzinski) might be surprised to learn that Canada may have something of a golden generation on their hands. Or should that be frozen generation? Tuesday’s crucial qualifier against Mexico was played in -9C temperatures at Edmonton’s Brick Field Stadium (more usually home to the CFL’s Edmonton Elks), with snow scooped away into drifts at the side of the pitch. Those drifts set the stage for the night’s most memorable moment when left-back Sam Adekugbe responded to Cyle Larin’s second goal in the 2-1 win by jumping into a snowdrift, a celebration that could not have been more Canadian had he been holding a [Snip! – Fiver Lazy Stereotype Ed] in one hand and a plate of [Snip! Snip! – Fiver Lazy Stereotype Ed] in the other while his teammates smothered him in [Snip! Snip! Snipetty Snip! – Fiver Lazy Stereotype Ed]. The victory at the “Iceteca” was Canada’s first over Mexico in a World Cup qualifier since 1976 and puts them top of the eight-team Concacaf World Cup qualifying group, the first three of whom qualify automatically. Led by Bayern Munich’s brilliant Alphonso Davies and Jonathan David, a Ligue 1 champion with Lille last season, the green shoots of potential have been poking through this year. At the summer’s not-exactly-known-for-its-competitiveness Concacaf Gold Cup (won by either Mexico or USA! USA!! USA!!! for the past 11 editions), they reached the semi-finals, which may not sound particularly impressive given (rather confusingly) Qatar went out at the same stage, but it was the first time Canada had been to the last four in 14 years. The men’s team have qualified for a World Cup only once, in 1986, and it didn’t go all that well, Hungary, France and the Soviet Union dishing out defeats as the Canadians slumped out in the group stage without scoring a goal. Their current manager John Herdman, though, is no stranger to the biggest stage having been to three Women’s World Cups with Canada and New Zealand. And with some talented youngsters progressing rapidly in the youth ranks, momentum is clearly building. Feel free to add your own snow-based metaphor here. LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE! Join John from 8pm GMT for MBM coverage of Arsenal 8-0 HB Koge in their Women’s Big Cup group clash. QUOTE OF THE DAY “I’m even more handsome now than when I left. If you remember the last time that I took this microphone, it was to say that I didn’t know when my dream would end. I’m here again, still living the dream. You make me feel special, like one of you. This is something that is never going to change. Long live Barça, long live Catalunya, long live the mothers who gave birth to you all” – a barefooted Dani Alves, 78, perhaps getting a tad more excited about his Camp Nou return than some of the club’s fans. FIVER LETTERS “As to the results of one young Dubliner hugging Cristiano Ronaldo in Dublin (yesterday’s Fiver letters), the grim look of her father as she was lauded on a Friday night TV chat show and presented with a trip to see Arsenal (her favourite team) play at home must have melted by now. I look forward to parents now pushing their children on to the pitch at future Irish international games in the hope of getting a trip to a Premier League match. No word on the outcome for the adult who was brought down by stewards as he charged Ronaldo. He may have got the offer of a shorter trip within our legal system” – John Hillery. “Re: yesterday’s Fiver. Subtle work by Roberto Mancini to try and not qualify for the HR World Cup. As the kids say these days: ‘Tell me you don’t support Qatari human rights abuses without telling me you don’t support Qatari human rights abuses’” – Chris Beck. “I must be misreading the Championship standings. On -3, it looks like Derby are leading the tournament – they’re the only team under par” – Mike Wilner. “Following on from ‘Hadda, Weah and Scheidt’ (yesterday’s letters), back in the 90s Birmingham signed Peter Ndlovu. I wanted them to also sign Mike Phelan so that, when they both moved on, we could sing: ‘We’ve lost Ndlovu an’ Phelan’” – Haydn Pyatt. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Chris Beck. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS Reading are to be deducted six points for breaking the Football League’s financial regulations. Still nothing for this, mind. Exeter City’s place in the FA Cup second round is under threat after they made an illegal sixth substitution during their 3-0 extra-time win over Bradford. “We seemed to have a little extra in our legs and that little extra bit of quality,” parped Grecians boss Matt Taylor. Former yellow-card magnet Gareth Barry is still attracting disciplinary action even after retiring. The FA has charged the 40-year-old with allegedly breaching regulations related to “the ownership and/or funding of Swindon Town”. Premier League chair Gary Hoffman has flung himself through the door marked Do One after clubs complained he waved the Newcastle takeover through without due consideration. “I have decided the time is right for me to stand aside,” he yelped, while sidestepping flying fruit. Championship Manager legend and current Cheltenham boss Michael Duff has enlisted a professor of sleep to come in and talk to his squad about the importance of proper shuteye. “You spend 38% of your life sleeping but only 19 of your life working so why would you spend all this time on 19% but nothing on the 38?” he yawned. And Barnsley have brought in former Sweden U-21 head coach Poya Asbaghi as their new manager. RECOMMENDED BOOKING No Christmas party again this year? Then you’re cordially invited to Football Weekly’s very own one on … checks notes … 30 November. Tickets are available now. STILL WANT MORE? Martin Laurence ranks the top 10 contenders for the HRWC so you don’t have to. Xavi won gongs and trophies galore as a manager in Qatar but did he really succeed, asks John Duerden. It took five Big Website writers to pen this piece on what we can expect from England in Qatar, so get reading it. Which sons have scored for teams managed by their dads? The Knowledge knows this and more. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! WELL, OBVIOUSLYThough the Brazilian pianist Nelson Freire, who has died aged 77, was a musician of the highest calibre, it took several decades before his talent was widely appreciated. He made his debut in London and other European capitals as early as 1968, and went on to record with leading orchestras under such conductors as Kurt Masur and David Zinman. Those recordings culminated in the two Brahms piano concertos with the Leipzig Gewandhaus Orchestra under Riccardo Chailly (2006) for Decca. His belated BBC Proms debut had come the previous year in the second concerto, with the BBC Scottish Symphony Orchestra under Ilan Volkov. However, it took till 2014, and Freire’s 70th birthday, for many listeners to realise what they had been missing, when a compilation of radio tapes – six works for piano and orchestra, including Chopin’s first concerto and Rachmaninov’s third – was issued on two CDs for Decca. The same occasion prompted the reissue of his Columbia LP performances on seven Sony CDs. In 2019 he was honoured for his lifetime achievement at the International Classical Music Awards. Many became aware of Freire’s exceptional artistry through his partnership with another South American pianist, the Argentinian Martha Argerich, with whom he toured extensively and recorded over many years, including a live recital from the Salzburg Festival in 2009. Freire was 15 when they met – Argerich a few years older – and the two became lifelong friends. To hear these two geniuses of the keyboard weaving their magic together in the piano duo repertory was an experience not easily forgotten. Rachmaninov’s Second Suite for Two Pianos, Brahms’ St Anthony Variations, Ravel’s La Valse and Lutoslawski’s Variations on a Theme by Paganini were among the works to which they brought their combined talents. Freire’s reluctance to publicise himself undoubtedly resulted in a less stellar career than he might otherwise have enjoyed. But that was the nature of the man: humble, self-questioning, introspective. His style of playing was unobtrusive yet utterly distinctive. While he was prepared to take a certain amount of latitude with rhythms (especially in Chopin) it was never to attention-seeking effect. His tone was soft-grained but luminous; capable of extraordinary delicacy in, say, a Chopin Nocturne, he was equally able to throw off Liszt’s Totentanz with thrilling bravura and an amplitude of sonority all the more exhilarating for its unexpectedness. In Brahms’ Piano Sonata No 3 in F minor, the spaciousness and depth of tone could almost persuade the listener that four hands were in play, but as in the more virtuoso Chopin Etudes, harmonies cascaded with an uncanny blend of potency and intimacy. The award-winning Brahms with Chailly, and indeed other big-boned concertos such as those of Liszt or Rachmaninov, were never the clangorous, barn-storming affairs they can so easily be in other hands: rather, Freire was concerned to explore their inner world. Freire, the youngest of five children, was born in Boa Esperança in the state of Minas Gerais. His mother was a teacher and his father a pharmacist who changed professions to work in a bank in Rio de Janeiro, in order to allow Nelson to study there with Nise Obino, a student of the well-known teacher Lucia Branco, who had in turn been trained by a pupil of Liszt. Having given his first public performance at the age of four, he came seventh in the International Competition in Rio de Janeiro at the age of 13, a success that enabled him to study with Bruno Seidlhofer in Vienna. He subsequently won the Vianna da Motta Prize in Lisbon and the Dinu Lipatti medal in London. After his 1968 European debuts he went on to the US in 1969 – playing with the New York Philharmonic and on a Royal Philharmonic tour under Rudolf Kempe – and from there to Israel in 1970 and the following year in Japan. His career firmly established, he played all over the world with orchestras including the Berlin Philharmonic, the Royal Concertgebouw, Amsterdam, the Bavarian Radio Symphony Orchestra and the London Symphony Orchestra. Initially he recorded for CBS, Philips and Deutsche Grammophon. From 2001 he recorded exclusively for Decca in repertory that included Beethoven, Chopin, Bach, Schumann, Debussy and Liszt, as well as the Brahms concertos. In 2010 he recorded the complete Chopin Nocturnes and a recital album for them. The following year, in celebration of Liszt’s bicentenary, he made a recital album entitled Harmonies du Soir. For Decca he also recorded a disc of music by his compatriot Heitor Villa-Lobos and other Brazilian composers. For his recording producer, Dominic Fyfe, Freire was “the consummate recording artist, more meticulously prepared for the studio than almost any artist I have encountered and his recordings among the least edited”. Notwithstanding the intense concentration and refinement of his pianism, Freire had other enthusiasms in life. Cinema he described as his “second passion”, with a particular interest in film noir of the 1940s and 50s. Alfred Hitchcock and Fritz Lang were among his favourite directors. He also had a penchant for jazz, to which he was introduced by Argerich, indulging a special fascination for Ella Fitzgerald, and admiring the joy displayed at the piano by Errol Garner. He is survived by a brother, Nirval. • Nelson José Pinto Freire, pianist, born 8 October 1944; died 1 November 2021Hydrogen produced by fossil fuels is more expensive, will release more greenhouse gas emissions and comes with a greater risk of creating stranded assets, according to new research from the Australian National University. In the paper, published in the peer-reviewed engineering journal Applied Energy, researchers compared the emissions and financial cost of producing hydrogen using fossil fuels or renewable energy. “Blue hydrogen” is produced using natural gas while “green hydrogen” is made by running an electric current through water using an electrolyser powered by renewable energy such as wind or solar. “Clean hydrogen” is the term used for when carbon capture and storage is used to capture carbon dioxide emissions during the production process, similar to proposals for “clean coal”. Hydrogen has become central to the Australian government’s current proposal to reach net zero, and blue hydrogen was endorsed by Australia’s former chief scientist Dr Alan Finkel as a way to build industrial capability. But the ANU researchers found emissions from hydrogen made from fossil fuels would still be “substantial”. Researchers found current emissions estimates of CCS fail to account for fugitive emissions such as methane – a potent greenhouse gas that leaks into the atmosphere during the extraction of natural gas. These emissions are not caught by CCS and because creating hydrogen from natural gas is not totally efficient – it takes more gas to make hydrogen for energy than it would to simply burn the gas – methane emissions will continue to grow with the rate of extraction. As the rate of extraction grows to supply export markets, so will these emissions. The researchers also found the financial cost of creating blue hydrogen using CCS becomes more expensive as a plant gets closer to capturing 90% of emissions. This is because it becomes harder to capture CO2 as concentrations begin to fall. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Dr Fiona Beck, a co-author of the report and an engineer with the ANU Institute for Climate, Energy and Disaster Solutions, said CCS requires an expensive “bespoke solution for every plant” which adds to the risk these projects may become stranded assets. “Green hydrogen is more expensive right now but it has the capacity to very quickly reduce in cost,” Beck said. “Unless we have some form of incentive for people to apply CCS, it’s never going to make sense to make blue hydrogen.” “It does beg the question who’s going to invest in blue hydrogen?” With high capture rates the researchers put the cost of producing blue hydrogen at $2.87 (US$2.09) a kilogram per tonne of CO2, while the cost of producing green hydrogen is $4.99 (US$3.64) with projections that it may come down to $2.55 (US$1.86). As the technology to create blue hydrogen has already been around for some time, it’s unlikely there will be a significant technological advance that would drive down price, as has happened with the production of solar panels. A CSIRO database tracking new hydrogen projects that have been announced or are under development records at least 65 new green hydrogen projects in Australia, compared to just three trying to create hydrogen from fossil fuels and CCS. The ANU research report is supported by other worldwide studies such as one published in September by researchers working for French energy giant Engie who found that it was already possible to produce green hydrogen for similar prices to blue hydrogen. That study found the cost of producing hydrogen from fossil fuels was between $1.34 and $2.40 a kilogram per tonne of CO2, while it was already possible in some operations to produce hydrogen made from solar power at $2.36 a kilogram. Scott Hamilton, a senior adviser to the Smart Energy Council and Hydrogen Australia, said the industry is a “long, long way” from achieving these costs across the board but it was up to the Australian government to actively support the develop of green hydrogen. “The Australian government needs to do more than have hopes and prayers and magical thinking in their modelling,” Hamilton said. “They need proper targets, proper policy actions to bring these emerging technologies to market, as they did with wind and solar 20 years ago.” Hamilton said the government was currently under-pricing blue hydrogen in its net zero modelling by assuming the price of hydrogen produced with fossil fuels to be $1.80 a kilogram, with hydrogen produced through renewable energy only becoming cost-competitive in 2030 – despite the price of natural gas growing steadily since 2015. Dr Madeline Taylor, a senior lecturer at Macquarie University’s school of law and a climate councillor at the Climate Council of Australia, said the ANU research “confirmed the business case, the commercial viability case and the policy case” for green hydrogen. “There’s a lot of money to be made but there’s also a lot of risk if we don’t do it right. If we don’t invest in the right technologies or send the right signals,” Taylor said. “If we don’t think carefully, we could be left with stranded assets. We could be left producing a product the world doesn’t want. We could be left with infrastructure that is going to fall upon the taxpayer to dismantle.”One in 10 employees in the federal government department responsible for implementing gender equality laws and protections against sexual harassment say they have experienced some form of sexual harassment in the workplace. A further 43 of the 565 attorney general department staff who responded to the survey, said they were unsure if they had experienced sexual harassment at work. The survey, undertaken in April 2021 – shortly after the then attorney general Christian Porter, outed himself as the subject of a program on the ABC that alleged a cabinet minister had raped a fellow debater in the 1980s – was provided to Guardian Australia following a freedom of information request. Porter has strenuously denied the allegations and sued the ABC for defamation. The case was later settled. There had also been further allegations about incidents in parliament house, including the alleged rape of a Liberal staffer, Brittany Higgins by a colleague. The survey, in which a quarter of the staff took part, revealed: 16% of staff reported hearing sexually suggestive comments or jokes 10% reported intrusive questions about their private life 10% reported intrusive comments or jokes about their physical appearance, and 5.9% reported inappropriate and unwelcome touching. The department has a high proportion of female staff, with about three-quarters of the survey respondents being women. The survey found that while 81.14% of respondents had not experienced sexual harassment at the department, 67 said they had, although some said it occurred in a previous workplace, and a further 43 said they were unsure. In a letter to staff, Sarah Chidgey, chair of the department’s sexual harassment review steering committee said: “These numbers are much higher than the number of reports we receive through human resources, which is in line with trends around underreporting.” Of those who reported experiencing sexual harassment, more than three-quarters said it had occurred in the last five years. Almost half said they told a colleague and 20% said they reported it to their manager. But despite working in the department responsible for Australia’s sexual harassment laws, 40% said they did not report it. Of the 34 who said they did report it, nine said there was informal management of the complaint, three said they made a formal complaint, three said the department suggested they move and another three said they were asked to move to a new work area. Only 17% said they were satisfied with the department’s policies and procedures, while 32% said they were unsatisfied and 51% said they were somewhat satisfied. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The department is now drafting a new policy and considering how it will address and prevent sexual harassment. Guardian Australia also asked a number of other departments for any surveys they had done to determine the prevalence of sexual harassment. None had undertaken the detailed type of surveys that attorney general’s department did. Treasury said it had responded to an annual survey by the Australian Public Sector Commission, which asked about unacceptable behaviour in the department. Under the heading, bullying and harassment, 7% of staff said they had been subjected to bullying or harassment in the department and a further 5% were unsure. But this included a much wider range of workplace behaviours and the questions did not focus on sexual harassment. Sixty-five per cent said they did not report the behaviour. The department of Home Affairs and the department of Education said they had no records of any surveys by their departments on sexual harassment undertaken in 2021. Comment has been sought from the attorney general’s department. •In Australia, support is available at 1800Respect (1800 737 732). In the UK, Supportline can be reached on 01708 765200. In the US, Rainn offers support on 800-656-4673. Other international helplines can be found at ibiblio.org/rcip/internl.htmlThe Glasgow climate summit ended early on Sunday morning, but before the clock had struck noon the Morrison government had already said it would be ignoring one of its key outcomes. More than 190 nations at the summit – including Australia – signed a pact requesting countries “revisit and strengthen” their 2030 targets to cut greenhouse gas emissions at the Cop27 climate summit in Egypt next year. Hours later, the Morrison government said its target to cut emissions by 26% to 28% by 2030, based on levels in 2005, was already fixed. There will be no revision. But the request at Cop26 to improve those targets next year included an important clause. Those targets should “align with the Paris Agreement temperature goal” of keeping global warming to well below 2C and “pursue efforts” towards a 1.5C limit. In an attempt to push back against criticism over their reluctance to set a new 2030 target, both prime minister Scott Morrison and emissions reduction minister Angus Taylor have instead held up projections of the country’s emissions. During his speech to the summit, Morrison said – without qualification – that Australia’s emissions in 2030 would be 35% below 2005 levels. So if Australia did actually reduce emissions by this amount, would that align with the Paris temperature goals? ‘A huge mess’ After the conference, Taylor told the ABC that “what really counts here” was getting to the overall global outcome. “We absolutely support the Paris agreement goals which is to come in below 2 degrees,” Taylor said. “And seek, make best efforts to get to 1.5 degrees. I mean, that is how Paris is framed.” Does the government’s projection of a 35% emissions reduction “support the Paris agreement goals” as Taylor claims? “Absolutely not,” says Bill Hare, the chief executive of Climate Analytics – a respected group of analysts that helps produce the global Climate Action Tracker. Hare said: “Australia would need to make 60% or more reductions by 2030 to be in line with the Paris agreement and to be consistent with what the European Union and the UK are doing. “If all other countries followed a similar level of emissions reduction to Australia compared to their economic circumstances, then the world would warm by about 3C. “The IPCC has been very clear that, on the objective science, by the time you get to 2.5C and 3C warming, we are facing catastrophic consequences for natural and human systems.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Hare says the Great Barrier Reef would be “well and truly dead” with warming of 3C, with food and water supplies around the world “in a lot of trouble”. “It’s a huge mess. There’s every reason to avoid that,” says Hare. Morrison’s assessment of a 35% reduction in emissions is far rosier. “That’s what we’re going to achieve and that’s what actually matters. What matters is what you actually achieve,” he said. High school denial Despite running a campaign ahead of Glasgow that was nominally supportive of a target to reach net zero greenhouse gas emissions by 2050, the climate science denialism of many of News Corp Australia’s key commentators continues. On Monday, Andrew Bolt screamed the “global warming scare is based on lies.” On Sunday, longtime denialist Piers Akerman raised a furry old chestnut of the climate science denial movement and gave it new life in his column. Because the greenhouse gas CO2 is a small percentage of the atmosphere, we apparently shouldn’t worry about it. Akerman wrote: “Activists ignore the science which shows that CO2, which is demonised, makes up 0.04 per cent by volume of the atmosphere and 95 per cent of it comes from natural sources, such as volcanoes and the oceans.” Akerman is playing a lame and dishonest trick on his readers that is undone with any high school understanding of the greenhouse effect. Most of the atmosphere is made up of gases that don’t contribute to the greenhouse effect (nitrogen, oxygen and a bit of argon) and aren’t relevant here. Natural sources of CO2 are also irrelevant. The problem comes when you take CO2 that has been locked away for tens of millions of years in the form of coal, oil and gas, and then burn it – adding that CO2 to the atmosphere. What are relevant are the changes to the amount of greenhouse gases which actually make up less than 1% of the atmosphere. But even then, percentages are much less relevant because the gases don’t warm the planet at the same rate (for example, methane is more potent than carbon dioxide, but it doesn’t stay in the atmosphere for as long). The amount of CO2 in the atmosphere has gone up by about 20% in the last 20 years. We are now at about 420 ppm (parts per million) – levels not seen on Earth for at least four million years. If Akerman thinks a tiny percentage of something means it’s not relevant, then consider that raising your blood alcohol level from zero to 500ppm means you can’t legally drive a car.Strong opioids might not provide better pain relief than milder painkillers after surgery to treat bone fractures, new research suggests. An Australian study of 120 patients undergoing surgery for orthopaedic fractures compared pain relief in the first week after patients were discharged from hospital. The patients had all undergone orthopaedic surgery at a Sydney hospital to treat one or more fractures, such as in bones of the hip or leg. The study found prescription oxycodone hydrochloride tablets did not provide superior pain relief compared with a combination of paracetamol and codeine, “despite a six-fold higher dose of opioid being delivered”. The researchers concluded that “ongoing strong opioid use after discharge from the hospital should not be supported”. The study’s lead author, Dr Deanne Jenkin of the Daffodil Centre – a joint venture of Cancer Council New South Wales and the University of Sydney – said: “Patients with surgically managed fractures are commonly, if not routinely, discharged home from hospital with a strong opioid prescription in Australia.” Patients discharged from hospital with strong opioids reported an average pain score of 4.04 out of 10, where 10 represented the worst pain imaginable. Those discharged on paracetamol and codeine had a score of 4.54 – a difference the study’s authors found was not statistically significant. “Clinicians should consider a less-is-more-approach for pain management upon hospital discharge following fracture surgery,” Jenkin said. “It makes good sense to avoid medications that can cause harm if they provide no greater benefit as was the case here – no better pain outcomes for the strong opioid group.” Dr Mick Vagg, dean of the faculty of pain medicine at the Australian and New Zealand College of Anaesthetists, who was not involved in the study, said: “It may well be possible to get people just as good pain relief without having to use strong opioids for all that long after the surgery.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Vagg, who is also an associate professor at Deakin University, added: “One of the reasons why this study is important … is because the transition from in-hospital to out-of-hospital care is emerging as a key time when people may slip through the cracks and not be taken off [an] opioid when it’s not particularly helpful any more.” “In Australia, it’s something like a quarter of people who are long-term prescription opioid users … they came into hospital for an operation, not on opioids, and they left [on a prescription] and never came off them.” The prescription of opioids has increased significantly in Australia in recent decades. Close to 15.5 million opioid prescriptions were dispensed through the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme in 2016-17 – a figure not including codeine, which was available over the counter until 2018. According to the Therapeutic Goods Administration, prescription opioids are now “responsible for far more deaths and poisoning hospitalisations in Australia than illegal opioids such as heroin”, with an estimated 150 hospitalisations daily. Dr Pene Wood, an adjunct lecturer of pharmacy at Latrobe University, said there were no standardised statewide guidelines for how to manage hospital patients being discharged with opioids after surgery. “It would be nice for the state or a pain society … to provide something like that so it’s universal across the health sector.” In Wood’s experience, some patients have been discharged on higher doses of opioids than they were taking while in hospital. Vagg said the research highlighted the importance of tailoring post-operative pain relief. “The old box of 20 Endone [a brand name for oxycodone hydrochloride] as you’re going out the door really doesn’t tend to be a very well targeted way of managing people’s pain.” Wood agreed: “I think we need to really assess it on an individual basis.” One limitation of the study, Vagg said, was the comparison of oxycodone with codeine, “which they call a mild opioid. I would have some disagreement with that characterisation. “Codeine is a problematic opioid from a number of points of view,” he said. Once ingested, codeine is metabolised into morphine, which acts on μ-opioid receptors to relieve pain. But there are significant genetic differences in how people’s bodies metabolise the drug. “In about 10% of the Australian population … none of that codeine gets turned into morphine and they don’t get pain relief at all,” Vagg said. On the other end of the spectrum, there are ultra-rapid metabolisers who can experience intense side-effects from the drug. “Only about 50% of the individuals in the Australian population have average metabolism of codeine,” Vagg said. The research was published in the peer-reviewed journal JAMA Network Open.The past year has seen the strongest private sector wages growth for nearly seven years as construction and professional industries deal with the lack of labour due to pandemic restrictions and the government housing stimulus. But far from being a sign of a coming wages boom, wages continue to struggle to keep up with inflation. It says something that the latest wages growth figures released on Wednesday by the bureau of statistics showed private sector wages grew faster than they have since 2014 and yet at 2.4% they remain more than a percentage point below the RBA’s target of around 3.5%: If the graph does not display please click here Overall public and private sector wages combined grew 2.2% over the past year – the same as they grew in the last 12-month period before the pandemic hit. But the underlying picture is rather different now than it was in March 2020. Back then private sector wages grew 2.2% compared to the current rate of 2.4%, while public sector wages were growing at 2.4% compared to the current rate of 1.7%. Government policy to cap public service wages during the pandemic has seen wages growth in that sector plummet. But in the September quarter the freeze was largely over and public sector wages grew by a fairly typical 0.5%: If the graph does not display please click here And while the growth of wages over the past year has been strong, so too has been the growth of prices. The consumer price index rose by 3.0% in the same period, meaning real wages fell. I tend to avoid using the CPI because it can be a bit bouncy. The reserve bank’s underlying inflation measure of the trimmed mean grew 2.1% in the 12 months to September, meaning there was an ever-so-slight increase in real wages (ignoring the impact of taxes and government support). While for public sector workers, real wages have fallen dramatically. If the graph does not display click here Conservative commentators, politicians and business leaders tend to get overly excited whenever workers have the temerity to get a pay rise, but the weak real-wages growth really puts any arguments that there is some kind of wages boom to rest: If the graph does not display please click here As it is, wages are growing at the level they would be expected given the current unemployment rate – but that level remains well below what it once was: If the graph does not display please click here And while notionally we are back at pre-pandemic wages growth, the pandemic remains the major driver of those wages. The government’s various housing stimulus programs, such as homebuilder, have led to a surge in housing construction that has clearly put pressure on construction wages as builders seek workers. After a surprisingly slow growth of construction wages in the first half of this year, in the September quarter they shot up 1.1% – the quickest one quarter jump since 2011. Not surprisingly wages in real estate also increased the strongest they have for two years. The professional, scientific and technical services industry is also scrambling for workers – not so much due to a surge in demand but because the border closures have kept foreigners from being able to come to Australia. September is often a big wage growth quarter for that industry, but even still the 1.3% growth in the sector is the fastest since 2012 and comes off the back of an unusually strong growth of wages in the last three months of 2020: If the graph does not display please click here Similarly while accommodation and food services workers got a smaller than usual September wages boost, they had had an unusually big jump in wages in the first three months of this year. All up there is very little here that suggests anyone need fret that wages are about to explode. The annual growth of 2.4% wages only looks strong because the past decade has been so weak. The particularly strong growth in sectors facing labour shortages shows that wages are doing what they should – reacting to demand and supply. But once the borders open and those shortages become less acute you would expect wages in those particular industries to moderate. While we are back at pre-pandemic wages growth levels, we also remain stuck with the pre-pandemic mindset that wages growth needs to be tempered and we continue to have an industrial relations system that has kept real wages growth at minimal levels for most of the past decade. Greg Jericho writes on economics for Guardian AustraliaTuba Guy could not possibly have known. That he – and his prominently placed brass instrument – would be yanked from the privacy of his bedroom (we think) and onto the screens of all watching January’s A-League Women game between Adelaide United and Melbourne Victory. He could not have known that his unwitting cameo would make the Australian senate, where Sarah Hanson-Young accused Fox Sports of doing “a half-arsed job” with women’s sport. Mostly, though, the poor fellow could never have understood the significance of his hilariously unexpected on-air cameo, that he would become a symbol for everything off key about Australian football’s relationship with its now-former broadcaster. For viewers, that 30 seconds of voyeurism doubled as a moment of devastating lucidity. As Tuba Guy – he was named as such by the Twitterverse – quietly worked, either as a television producer or Tetris enthusiast, the Fox Sports watermark in the top corner of the screen bore the motto “Every Moment Counts”. Incidentally, every moment really does count when staring for half a minute at a musical instrument not even being played instead of the football match for which you pay a monthly subscription. When all this went down at the end of January, Football Australia and the now-in-charge Australian Professional Leagues’ partnership with Fox Sports had decayed miserably. They were no longer on the rocks; the relationship was over, and the broadcast quality had dropped off the cliff with it. At that point the Network 10 deal was nowhere near done, and there was genuine concern the A-League Men and Women competitions may be left to languish even longer in the graveyard, with a reduced number of match-day cameras and complete disappearance of pre-match shows and advertising. Now here we are, almost 10 months later, fashioning yet another season preview about Australian football’s “new dawn” and hoping it doesn’t all blow up in our faces like it did every other year in recent history. The A-Leagues clubs, to use their own terminology, finally have the keys to the car. To enlighten those with less niche football-news-monitoring tendencies, the clubs have been saying this since the Great Congress War ended in late 2018. They were given the keys, but weren’t legally allowed to drive. Then they were, but bickered among themselves over who should take the wheel. Now those keys are in the proverbial ignition. And if you haven’t yet had enough of that analogy, “the handbrake is off”. It all sounds mighty boring, mainly because it is. Football is about football, not keys and cars and new dawns. It is there to be watched and enjoyed. The caveat is that neither of these things can happen unless there is a platform on which to watch and enjoy it. More specifically, one with mainstream visibility and emotional investment and no Tuba Guy. The clubs, notwithstanding the above lack of linguistic versatility, have shrewdly engineered a deal with ViacomCBS to broadcast A-League Men and Women games on Ten and its streaming platform Paramount+. Based on the evidence so far, it promises to end the journalists’ pre-season preview conundrum once and for all. Already Network 10 has demonstrated a willingness to bring the game on board in its totality, signing well-known talent and rolling out about as much advertising as Fox managed across its 16 years of coverage. Cross-pollination with the network’s other programs has also worked a treat, with The Project last month interviewing Josh Cavallo after the Adelaide United utility came out as gay. In international football, the Matildas’ friendlies with Brazil and the Socceroos’ World Cup qualifier against Saudi Arabia all rated strongly, suggesting a broad appetite for the sport waiting to be transferred to the domestic competitions. In terms of A-League Men, which starts this week, this is unsurprising. On the field, last season was a delight – round after round of unadulterated entertainment. Covid-enforced cost-cutting may have contributed to clubs’ tendency to field young players but the result was the breakthrough of a fresh generation who produced high-scoring, free-flowing matches and more than a few screamers. Whether 2021-22 heralds a post-pandemic rejuvenation on the terraces remains to be seen, but this season does feature additional drawcards for the casual fan such as former Liverpool striker Daniel Sturridge, who has successfully concluded his Perth-wide search for an appropriate barber and will presumably also find some match fitness with the Glory. “It’s about taking it day by day and not putting any timeframes or time limits on how long it’s going to take or how quickly I need to be right,” the 32-year-old said this week. “It’s about whenever the manager feels I’m ready to perform – that’s when I’ll be involved.” Just like the current-day Sturridge, peripheral A-League Men viewers should not anticipate Premier League quality but, tune in without expectation, and they might find themselves pleasantly surprised. The upshot is that if one was to take last season and insert it into the new broadcast infrastructure, the game in Australia would thrive. Combine both this season, and it just might.Farmers along the Lachlan River are seeing devastating crop losses just on the cusp of what was to be a bumper harvest, due to flooding. While the town of Forbes has seen the floodwaters come in lower than the expected peak, farmers on properties in the surrounding area say the floodwaters were the highest levels they’ve seen – and the consequent damage done to their crops and properties is significant. Ed Fagan, a farmer from Cowra has seen a fifth of his lucerne, wheat and barley crops inundated by flooding. Because the richest soil is on the river, he says “our best crops are the ones that have been hit”. What’s more, due to the high costs of fertiliser and fuel, he said the growing costs had been substantially higher. “It was an expensive year to get the crop to harvest, but we thought we had the potential for a big crop,” Fagan said. “Economically it’s a double whammy”, as he’s not only lost the winter crop but the floodwaters will affect the following crop as well. Gavin Tom, the chair of NSW Farmers Parkes-Forbes branch, says “the worst cases will be farmers who lose cropping from the flooding, as once it’s been underwater for more than a certain number of days it can’t be recovered”. However Tom highlights that the weather conditions have been affecting the bumper crop more widely than just the current flood-affected areas, as recent rainfall has meant many crops have lost weight and been downgraded, meaning they could be worth $250 a ton instead of $350. Phyllis Miller, the mayor of Forbes, says “it’s horrendous what’s happening to the farmers”. Miller said out to the Bedgerabong “there are enormously beautiful bumper crops that are going to be inundated”. She said the economic cost would be in “millions and millions of dollars”. Rawson Leach, a farmer 20km outside Forbes, says there have been “huge losses in the valley, from Cowra to Lake Angelica – everywhere on the flood plain”. “We’ve been here 26 years, this is the biggest flood we’ve experienced,” Leach said. “Flood is good after a drought, but not at this time of year.” Leach said coverage of floods is often centred on towns but the damage to the rural infrastructure had been significant. In addition to the crop losses, he said there has been massive damage to irrigation infrastructure as well as to fences and roads. Tess Herbert, the owner of a mixed cattle, sheep and cropping farm said farmers in the area didn’t see the damage coming. “When we were looking at how good this season was going to be, in the back of your mind, you’re thinking what could go wrong at this stage? It could be hailstorm, it could be mice come back. We didn’t think about flood. I haven’t spoken to anyone who thought that was a possibility.” She said farmers in the area first heard of potential flooding a week ago, but it was too early to strip the crops, and recent rain meant the ground was quite boggy and farmers were unable to get headers onto paddocks even if the crop had been ripe. The flooding is bittersweet for Herbert who says “we’ll lose this cut of lucerne but that moisture profile, that will last for four years. There’ll be good lucerne plantings after the flood has gone through.” But it’s a different story for her neighbour who has cereal crops, which the floodwaters will rot and leave long-term damage. Leach estimated the damage to his and Herbert’s shared neighbour was 2,000 acres of crop underwater. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Of the three floods Herbert has seen in the 20 years she’s been living on the property, she says this one has been the biggest. “But again, we know we own river country and we know it floods … it comes with the territory. “As farmers we’re thinking about climate and how climate changes,” Herbert says. She is working on modelling and forecasting as part of a pilot program with CSIRO and she says it “shows we will have more extreme events”. “Already the rainfall patterns are changing. It used to be more winter rainfall and it’s changing through the year more to summer rainfall. “It means you have to be prepared,” Herbert says which might involve changing enterprise or production decisions. Sign up for the Rural Network email newsletter Join the Rural Network group on Facebook to be part of the communityThe attorney general, Michaelia Cash, has requested “detailed drafting” from the Australian Law Reform Commission to ensure children are not discriminated against in faith-based schools, as the government pushes ahead with its revised religious discrimination laws. But as the crossbench reveals they will either oppose the revamped bill or seek to reinstate the ability for doctors to refuse patients on religious grounds, the government looks likely to need Labor’s support to pass the legislation before the election. All government legislation faces difficulty in the final sitting fortnight, with two of its own senators, Gerard Rennick and Alex Antic, vowing to withhold their votes in protest against vaccine mandates and One Nation also promising “so much mayhem” in the Senate. The government expects its proposal for institutions such as schools to discriminate in hiring in favour of members of their own faith will pose a test for Labor, but the opposition is waiting to see the full legislation before declaring its hand. In a letter sent to the ALRC on Wednesday, Cash said the government’s bill, which will be introduced to parliament in the forthcoming sitting fortnight, would require the ALRC to report into the framework of religious exemptions in anti-discrimination legislation 12 months after the bill is passed. “It is … the government’s position that no child should be suspended or expelled from school on the basis of their sexuality or gender identity,” Cash says in the letter to Justice Sarah Derrington. “In my consultations to finalise development of the Religious Discrimination Bill, I have heard from a wide range of stakeholders across Australia and there is strong support for this position.” Cash said that while the government recognised the need for schools to “maintain conduct and teaching in accordance with their faith”, it needed to strike a balance to also prevent discrimination. The letter asks that as part of its review, the ALRC provides “detailed drafting” to give effect to the government’s desire to prevent discrimination against children. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Equality Australia is concerned that the bill will be passed before legal protections are in place to protect LGBTQ+ students, and will be lobbying government and Labor MPs to make further changes to the bill. On Wednesday the shadow communications minister, Michelle Rowland, said it was important to listen to people of faith and “Labor’s tone going into the last election … needed improvement”. But Rowland told Sky News it “remains to be seen” whether the government had got the balance right of protecting religion and other rights, adding that religious voters felt “betrayed” because it had taken the Morrison government two years to attempt to legislate. Rowland noted there was “dissent within the government’s own ranks”. The Liberal MP Katie Allen said she was “pleased with modifications” made by Cash removing the controversial Folau clause and medical conscientious objection, but still held concerns. Allen and Trent Zimmerman have reserved the right to cross the floor, as has the Nationals MP George Christensen who believes the bill does not do enough to entrench religious freedom. The independent MP Bob Katter told Guardian Australia he would be “guided by Christensen” on the bill but the decision to remove protections for employees’ religious speech and the right of doctors to refuse patients were examples of “religious persecution”. The United Australia party MP, Craig Kelly, a former Liberal, said he thought “doctors should have the ability to maintain the Hippocratic oath as they see fit” and was concerned provisions allowing a doctor to “decline a request for medical intervention” had been removed. Kelly said it was “fair enough” institutions should be able to pick employees who share their faith but “sporting organisations or businesses shouldn’t be able to not employ someone before of the expression of their religious belief”. “Sometimes you’ve got to grab some things you agree with,” he said. “But at the moment I’m concerned doctors will have no ability to conscientiously object and I will consider amendments.” It is still unclear whether the government will introduce the bill in the House of Representatives or Senate, where it faces likely referral to a committee inquiry and has also met resistance. The Centre Alliance senator, Stirling Griff, told Guardian Australia: “I see no reason for it, I never have seen a reason for it and I won’t be supporting it.” The independent senator Jacqui Lambie has also questioned the need for the bill and senator Rex Patrick has suggested conservative and moderate demands pulling in opposite directions will probably scuttle it. On Wednesday Rennick said the government had yet to address his concerns on vaccine mandates and he still intended to withhold his vote or vote against legislation including on national cabinet secrecy and the clean energy finance corporate rule changes. On the religious discrimination bill, Rennick said: “I won’t be turning up on that one.” With the hardest edges of the bill preventing employers sanctioning employees for religious speech and the ability for doctors to refuse patients removed, Labor faces a difficult decision on the remaining provisions. The bill still provides that statements of belief do not infringe anti-discrimination laws, which could override protections in Tasmanian law against offending, insulting or humiliating people based on other attributes; allows faith-based institutions to positively discriminate; and bans professional bodies from regulating religious speech. Labor’s review of its 2019 election found that people of faith “did not desert Labor, but Labor lost some support among Christian voters”, leading to calls by some rightwingers including Chris Bowen and Deborah O’Neill to reconnect with religious voters. The shadow attorney general, Mark Dreyfus, said “Labor believes all Australians should be able to go about their lives free from discrimination”. “We are ready to work with the government on a religious discrimination bill. “We are still to be shown any legislation, and will wait for the government to introduce an actual bill into the parliament before determining our position.”The internet has slowly reshaped my sense of humour, and if you ask any young person they’ll probably say the same thing. Given that my job and podcast essentially pay me to have a screen addiction, I think I’m in too deep to tell you whether this is a good or bad thing. What I can say is that this means it’s slowly getting harder to simply show someone a funny thing you found online. We now all have our own curated algorithms that build up months of context and inside jokes tailored to our specific viewing experience. There’s a unique heartbreak that comes with showing someone a post you thought was universally funny only to realise it only makes sense because of the 19 hours of specific scrolling you’ve done that week. I am not trying to get heartbroken here, so here’s some stuff that’s made me actually laugh out loud at some point which hopefully isn’t too niche. 1. r/kidsarefuckingstupid No offence to any kids reading this on their iPad covered in a mysterious thin layer of grime inside a fluoro green shockproof case that has handles on it, but you guys have some catching up to do man. Go to this subreddit and sort by “top of all time”. 2. patiasfantasyworld This is THE Instagram account. Here’s one recent post that’s not rated R. 3. Kid trying to turn into Super Saiyan I’m too scared to try this for myself. Skip to 3:12. 4. Trending Houses: Pike – Florida State University This isn’t supposed to be funny … which is why it’s so funny. 5. Well, that was a reaction Screaming is too underrated for my liking. 6. SLAAAAAAMMIN’!!!!!!! In 2016 the big thing on YouTube was being a full-grown man and filming obviously fake pranks and dubious “social experiments”. One notorious duo at the time were Moe and ET, who in this prank haven’t bothered to edit the video to make them look cool or in control. Even a bit of music would help them in this case. I love it because I think sometimes as a society we forget that this is what all pranks would look like without editing or actors. No huge reactions. No wild twists or turns. Just a room full of confused people staring, or even better, just not giving a shit at all. 7. 101 Ways to Say NO to Sex In particular: 16 and 27. 8. Don’t Fucking Vape on the Pizza I don’t know why this made me laugh so hard when it first came out, but I had to show it respect by including it in this list. 9. Complex News The pop culture references here have obviously aged but Jack Wagner and Cam Tang hit the nail on the head when it comes to media outlets trying to sell youth culture to young people. Complex News eventually brought them in to their studio to film one of these for real except their viewers didn’t know it was a joke and got VERY angry in the comments. So litty. 10. Andrew Curtis on TikTok This guy is so smart. I’ve got a soft spot for videos that blur the line between satire and reality and the comments section on this is a whole novel. His entire account just leans into the fact that so many people think he’s being serious, which is really funny to me. This was the video that really got people talking about him, but I’m mainly including him in this list so that you go and scroll through his whole account and absorb the whole experience. The more time you spend watching and scrolling comments, the more you get out of it. It’s almost like the people that don’t get it make him grow more powerful. Bryce Mills is a presenter, comedian, content creator, performer and host of the Triple J Breakfast show, Bryce &amp; Ebony. You can also find him on Instagram and listen to his podcast, God is Dead, with Campbell Walker AKA Struthless.Australian universities have converted as few as 1% of their casual staff to permanent roles six months after the labour laws changed, leaving “shocking” levels of insecurity in an industry already hard hit by Covid-triggered job losses. Earlier this week, staff at the University of Newcastle conducted a 12-hour digital “sit-in” to protest after having just five of 2,300 casual staff converted to full-time work. The National Tertiary Education Union (NTEU) described the conversion rate as “abysmal across the sector”. In March, the federal government amended the Fair Work Act to mandate that casual staff who meet two criteria be offered full-time or permanent part-time positions. To be eligible, they must have been employed for at least 12 months and had worked a regular pattern of hours for at least the six previous of those months. Since many university staff are on short-term rolling contracts with semester or summer breaks, few have been eligible to make the conversion from casual roles. For instance, out of 11,300 staff at the University of Melbourne, just 112 have been offered permanent roles, according to the NTEU. Within the law school and the school of engineering, there were no conversions at all. For Jessica Marian, a casual employee at the university and an NTEU delegate, the initial rejection was made worse because she was among dozens who received a form letter that omitted the reason for the refusal. It read: “The university has assessed the hours that you have worked for us over the last 12 months and has determined that you meet the eligibility criteria for conversion, … However  the university has determined that this is reasonable grounds (in accordance with the legislation) not to offer to convert your role to a permanent position.” “I felt like just a loser,” said Marian, a part-time teacher of English literature and an administrator at the university. “It was just shocking, and I was upset.” Four hours later, “the follow-up letter was just as heartless”, telling her she was not even eligible for conversion, she said: “It’s not just what’s legal – it’s about what’s conscionable about the treatment of casuals.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning According to Alison Barnes, NTEU national president, well over 50% of undergraduate teaching is done by people with no employment security, nor sick or holiday pay. “Universities have really run on the backs of poorly paid, insecure workers for decades,” she said. Details of the poor conversion rates come as eight university vice chancellors are scheduled to join a Commonwealth Economic Development of Australia (CEDA) panel on Thursday in Sydney. “Australia’s higher education sector is vital to the nation’s future workforce needs and economic prosperity,” CEDA said. “There is not a sector, industry or business which is not impacted by, and dependent on, the success of universities.” Stuart Andrews, executive director of Australian Higher Education Industrial Association representing 32 universities, including Melbourne university, said casual staff were “an integral and very important component of any university workforce”. “Many have intermittent or short-term employment, they don’t have an ongoing regular pattern of hours, and don’t fit the profile for permanent jobs,” he said. “The vast majority of the university casual staff workforce therefore don’t qualify for conversion to permanency under the Fair Work Act.” The issue, which Andrews described as “not surprising” given many teachers are PhD students who work while studying or have permanent jobs elsewhere, will be “further explored” during bargaining talks between unions and university across the country. ACTU secretary Sally McManus said the low conversion rate demonstrates “the Morrison government’s proposed solution for rampant casualisation was laughable from the start”. “The new casual conversion laws allow bosses almost limitless discretion in denying long-term casual workers the right to convert to permanent roles,” she said. The ACTU is preparing details from its union members on conversion rates in other sectors of the economy.With the federal government dragging its feet on legislating to reduce carbon emissions, many Australians are decreasing their individual carbon footprints, changing their lifestyles and even their homes to become more sustainable. Installing solar panels, solar hot water systems and rain tanks is relatively straightforward on detached houses, but the increasing number of apartment dwellers is posing new challenges for sustainable living. Peter Newman, professor of sustainability at Curtin University, says making apartment buildings sustainable is now “an issue of how, rather than why … It’s something we have to do. It’s no longer a choice.” Individual apartment dwellers could use more energy-efficient appliances and heat-reflecting window films to reduce their environmental footprint, Newman says, but the biggest changes would come from modifying the building to add solar power or insulation. “Both those things need the strata title group to work on it as a shared decision by the whole community rather than just individuals. They are fundamental to being more sustainable and they depend on the group working together.” Newman says the time has come for apartment owners to think of the big picture. “They have to see that their money is being put to use not just for them but … the whole planet.” In Western Australia, a group of unit owners are retrofitting solar panels to their 21-year-old apartment complex and setting up a renewable energy trading system. Owner David Beard, together with fellow owner Henry Christie, has convinced the body corporate to install solar panels on the four-storey building in West Perth. Christie had wanted to install solar for years, but said he put it into the too-hard basket until Beard joined his campaign. Together they looked at power bills for running joint equipment such as lifts and pool pumps and calculated likely solar savings. Beard says that with 14 apartments and two commercial offices in the complex, he had to convince the owners of the benefits: “I think there was a fair degree of ‘We should be doing this to be environmentally friendly’, but the economics still had to stack up.” The owners had a lump sum ready to spend on the project, diverting their reserve fund from a new lift to install 30KW of solar. “We worked out that the savings to individuals and to the strata company itself would help get the reserve fund back up to the amount required by law … it was going to pay for itself within five years,” Beard says. Using a blockchain system developed by energy trading software company Powerledger, the strata receives 10% of the generated power to run common property, while owners are allocated a share of the solar power according to their strata investment, and can trade unused power with each other. Beard says the project took about 12 months to research and set up, despite pandemic-related delays. Now that permission has been granted to switch from individual meters to a single shared meter, the panels should be installed next month. His advice: “Do your homework and think of all the things people might object to … We were fortunate that we had the money in our strata already so there was no initial bill … The fact that we had the money made it painless.” Some councils, including the City of Melbourne and Waverley in Sydney, now offer rebate and incentive schemes to retrofit apartment blocks with solar panels. Researching and learning about schemes that are available in your area could be a good way to kick-start conversations with fellow members of the owners’ corporation. However, the path to a more sustainable apartment complex is not always straightforward. Mark Skrzypek has been trying for years to create a rooftop garden for his small apartment complex in Melbourne’s South Yarra neighbourhood. He says the green roof was the final flourish in a campaign to make the complex more community minded and environmentally friendly. “We’d done everything we could. We’d redone the gardens. We’d made them more communal and enticing. We put in a worm farm out the back … We ran workshops and taught everyone how to use them.” Skrzypek’s three-storey, art deco, double-brick apartment building has 12 units and a sensational river view from the unused roof. Over the past six years he has worked with several other owners to research how to add a green roof, and convince every owner to go ahead with the project. The process has been complicated. “It’s all those things about weight and weight bearing: the weight of soil and the types of plants that will survive,” Skrzypek says. “We have mirrored walls from neighbouring buildings and it’s astronomically hot up here.” Inspired by a similar project at 38 Westbury Street in East St Kilda, Skrzypek conceived of the South Yarra project as a true green roof, with grass and plantings to reduce the heat-island effect. He says the engineering involved meant the project was not cheap. “It’s a hell of a lot of money – in excess of $100,000 – and we’re aware that we’re playing with other people’s money so you want it to be right and you want it to be a success … There were lots of meetings, lots of talk over several AGMs about what it would mean to their tenants and their investment.” With owners reluctant to raise a levy, Skrzypek says they made a long-term plan to save the funds. However, pandemic lockdowns and inflated building costs have added complications. “Particularly with the second lockdown, prices went through the roof. I think it went up by 30%. We realised we no longer had the money to do it.” Instead, the original concept has been traded for shared garden boxes, but even that has been complicated. “No one is an expert in the field so we found it fraught with surprises,” Skrzypek says. Lockdown delays allowing, he is hoping for a garden by Christmas. Despite all the hurdles, he says he would do it again. “We all want to be more connected with nature … I think this is the way forward for cities.”We are excited about hosting a family Christmas gathering and looking forward to sharing and meeting with family and friends. We have a dilemma. Two younger immediate family members are not, and refuse to be, Covid vaccinated. Others protest and want us to un-invite them (unless they get vaccinated soon). We have interstate visitors and the concern is that the unvaccinated may be infected by Covid. What do we do? We love these two. We dearly want to see them on Xmas day. Eleanor says: What you’ve got here is a problem about how to handle disagreement. One option is to try persuasion. Since you said these people “refuse” to be vaccinated, I assume they’re moved by ideological reasons (they don’t want a vaccine) instead of immunological ones (they can’t have one). If there’s even the remotest hope of persuading them to get vaccinated, I do think you ought to try. Vaccines are safe, vital, and quite literally the least we can do to keep each other safe. Friends and family are far more effective at changing minds than fact sheets or the internet, and by taking a real swing at persuading these relatives you’d be keeping them safe, too. Who knows, you might discover their commitment to their position isn’t that strong after all. Perhaps they’ve refused to get vaccinated so far because it’s been largely up to them and the social costs are pretty slim (people disapprove silently, from a distance). Maybe their refusal would buckle if they knew what a problem it posed to you, their immediate family and hosts; or if they understood what their stance looks like through other people’s eyes. Some “anti-vaccine” people get vaccinated if things they care about are on the line, like work, or an important event. You won’t know how unshakeable their position is if you don’t put one big effort into trying to shake it. But suppose your persuasive efforts exhaust, and these people just cannot be moved to get vaccinated. Perhaps, then, they could be moved at a higher level – on the question of which rules should triumph given the disagreement. What rule do they think other people should respect? Presumably it’s something about risk imposition. “Why should I have to do something I think is risky, just because other people don’t think it is?”. Strikingly, this is exactly what the ultimatum-issuing guests are saying, too: “Why should they get to expose me to a risk I’m not comfortable with, just because they don’t see it that way?” This is an exploitable symmetry. Even if you can’t communicate the arguments for a jab, these relatives should more than understand the idea that people get to decide what risk they’re comfortable with – and that others don’t get to trample on that just because they disagree with the facts. After all, isn’t that their whole position? Maybe if you can’t get them to be vaccinated, you can at least ask them to be consistent: to say “fair enough” instead of “how dare they” when they hear others would rather stay away. You could offer to see them separately, say the day after. You could ask the other guests how they’d feel about being outside, if you’re in the southern hemisphere; or if a negative test from each guest would be enough. These are all attempts to reconcile everyone’s level of comfort with risk. But ultimately, if everyone can’t agree, the decision is yours – if you do invite these young people, anyone can choose not to come. *** Ask us a question Do you have a conflict, crossroads or dilemma you need help with? Eleanor Gordon-Smith will help you think through life’s questions and puzzles, big and small. Questions can be anonymous. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service hereBoris Johnson has said it was “a total mistake” to try to defend Owen Paterson from punishment for repeatedly breaking lobbying rules, adding that he fully accepted that what his former Conservative colleague had done was wrong. In a sometimes uncomfortable appearance before the Commons liaison committee, Johnson said his brief attempt unilaterally to replace the existing disciplinary system for MPs with a new, Tory-majority committee, had happened after unnamed “colleagues” told him it would have cross-party support. “I believed that there would be cross-party support for the idea,” Johnson told Chris Bryant, the Labour MP who chairs the Commons standards committee, who reminded the prime minister that this had turned out not to be the case. “So it would seem,” Johnson replied. Asked why he believed other parties would back the plan, Johnson said: “It was put to me by colleagues.” In his most thorough admission of error since sparking two weeks of intense focus on paid lobbying and other secondary employment by MPs in trying to rewrite the disciplinary rules, a plan reversed a day later amid an outcry, Johnson said he had also been influenced by the personal circumstances of Paterson, whose wife had killed herself last year. “Yes, I think it was a total mistake not to see that the former member for North Shropshire’s breach of the rules made any discussion about anything else impossible. And I totally accept that,” Johnson told the liaison committee, a super-committee comprising the chairs of subject-specific select committees, which is tasked with questioning the prime minister three times a year. “I think it was a very sad case, but I think there’s no question that he had fallen foul of the rules on paid advocacy, as far as I could see from the report,” Johnson said. “I think the question that people wanted to establish was whether or not, given the particularly tragic circumstances, he’d had a fair right to appeal.” Challenged on the idea Paterson had not had a proper appeal by Bryant, whose committee had heard the appeal, Johnson backed down. He said: “In forming the impression that the former member for North Shropshire had not had a fair process, I may well have been mistaken, but that was certainly the impression that many people seemed to have.” Separately, Johnson indicated it was he who had ordered Kwasi Kwarteng to apologise to Kathryn Stone, the parliamentary commissioner for standards, for suggesting in an interview she should resign after a government-led Commons vote had briefly overturned her sanction against Paterson. Saying the apology was “something that was generated in the course of consultation between me and Lord Geidt”, his adviser on ministerial interests, Johnson emphasised that it was not Geidt who had ordered the apology. Johnson also resisted calls from several MPs on the committee, including the chair, the Tory MP Bernard Jenkin, for Geidt to be given the independent right to begin investigations into ministerial wrongdoing, rather than needing prime ministerial approval. “I think it’s highly unlikely that I would in any circumstances disagree with him,” Johnson said. Asked why, then, he would not give Geidt independent powers, Johnson replied: “I think the system that we have is the one that I inherited and it seems to work pretty well.” Questioned by Yvette Cooper, the Labour MP who chairs the home affairs committee, Johnson said he fully accepted that Paterson had done wrong, answering: “Yes, I do.” He also accepted error in being pictured not wearing a mask during a visit to a hospital in Northumberland last week, while telling Cooper that this had been brief. “As for not wearing a mask in Hexham hospital, which you wrap up into my general litany of crime, can I just say that actually, it was barely 30 seconds when I wasn’t wearing a mask,” he said. “I walked out of a room, mistakenly not wearing it, I then put it on as soon as I realised I’d made that mistake. I apologise for it, but most pictures of my visit to the hospital will show that I was duly masked throughout the remainder of the visit.”He went viral after filming himself drumming to the BBC News theme tune during lockdown and raised a record-breaking £3m for charity, but the weather presenter Owain Wyn Evans says none of this would have been possible if he had listened those who advised him to tone down his personality earlier in his career. Evans’ “drumathon” became Children in Need’s most successful 24-hour challenge on Saturday. The BBC weather presenter was joined by a chorus of 50 drummers as he played for an entire day and night, with five-minute breaks every hour. The challenge featured appearances from some of the world’s best drummers, including Iron Maiden’s Nicko McBrain, Simple Minds’ Cherisse Osei and Blondie’s Clem Burke – who even gave Evans a drum kit to use. Dave Grohl sent a message wishing him good luck and calling him his hero. It was a long way away from Evans’ youth playing drums to Foo Fighters songs in rugby clubs across the Swansea valley. “When I was in school I was called names because I was an effeminate child,” Evans said. “So I used the drums in a way to deflect the heat. No one wants to be picked on, and when you’re a child or a teenager you probably don’t have the tools to be able to deal with it in a mature way.” Despite the bullying, Evans said he always resisted putting “a lid on it at all”. Though earlier in his career people told him to tone it down, he realised the most important thing was to be himself, and that was the key decision that had led him here. “There’s a great Dolly Parton quote where she says find out who you are and do that on purpose. One of the things I really wanted to do was change the perception of who can be a drummer. You don’t have to be a muscly man who loves rock music. I wanted to start with Celine Dion and end with Britney Spears, and that’s fine.” Evans’ viral video in April last year put a smile on many faces at a time when the news was overwhelmingly dark and negative. “It was a really scary time,” he said. “I thought that maybe it would be at least a little bit of light in what was quite a dark period as far as the news was concerned. And I couldn’t believe the response, it was absolutely overwhelming.” Since then, drumming has played much more of an active role in his life, and it’s safe to say today he’s as well known for playing the drums as he is for predicting the weather. He wants to use the attention as a positive force, especially as someone who suffers from anxiety and has found drumming a helpful therapeutic tool. “It takes my mind to somewhere else. I hope this will inspire young people who think the instrument isn’t for them because it can be great for your mental health.” Being in public life is complicated, and alongside the positive reinforcement there usually come negative, and sometimes abusive, messages. “Over the years I’ve received a lot of homophobic abuse on social media. Unfortunately, when you have any kind of profile – and I have a tiny profile compared to a lot of famous people – you get it. Not everybody will like you. Not everybody will accept you.” He deals with it mostly by embracing his own personality and virtues. “I can’t change that and I don’t want to change it. When I was younger I thought my life would be easier if I wasn’t gay. But I want everybody who feels they don’t want to be themselves to know that they’ve got it wrong – you are you and that’s to be celebrated. We’re all different.” Though he has yet to be approached for a record contract, if one were to pop up in his inbox it would be very welcome. “I thought once the drumathon ended I’d want to throw my drums into the skip and burn them. But in reality it’s made me love it more. I love music, I love presenting, so maybe there’ll be a way that those things can be combined … If I was approached to play the drums on some amazing pop songs with some amazing pop stars, oh, I’d absolutely do that.” On Wednesday Sophie Ellis-Bextor’s 24-hour dance marathon also raised more than £1m for Children in Need.House of Fraser is to close its flagship store on London’s Oxford Street in January, in the latest blow to the UK’s prime high street. The department store chain, which is owned by Mike Ashley’s Frasers Group, said it was being forced to exit the building after being served notice by its landlord. The announcement comes just days after the building’s owners, understood to be the German Conle family, won planning permission to redevelop the site into six floors of offices with retail on the ground floor, a pool and gym in the basement, and a rooftop restaurant. Work is understood to have already begun on the project, which is expected to take two years. The changes mark the latest shift away from retail on Oxford Street after Marks &amp; Spencer and John Lewis said they would seek planning permission to turn part of their retail outlets into offices. A spokesperson for Frasers, which also owns the Sports Direct and Flannels clothing chains, said: “It is with regret that we have been served notice by the landlord to close House of Fraser, Oxford Street – following planning permission being granted to redevelop the site. “Since acquiring [House of Fraser] in 2018, despite challenges faced, we have worked collaboratively with the landlord to keep the store trading three years longer than what was initially proposed by the previous owner.” It is understood House of Fraser could go back into a smaller part of the building once the redevelopment is complete. House of Fraser had 59 stores when it was bought out of administration by Ashley’s retail group. It now has 43 stores, but that number will decrease to 41 by the end of January after the closure of the Oxford Street store and another in Swindon, which is scheduled to shut in December. The chain has dwindled as some landlords have sought higher paying tenants or new uses for their buildings. Frasers has also closed outlets as part of efforts to reduce costs as department stores face heavy competition from online shopping and specialist rivals. House of Fraser is not alone in closing stores. Rival department store Debenhams exited the high street entirely this year, after it went bust and was bought by the online specialist Boohoo. Beales now trades from just a handful of stores after entering administration last year, while John Lewis has closed 16 outlets in the last two years. The House of Fraser store at 318 Oxford Street began as D H Evans, an extension of a Drapers store founded by Welshman Dan Harries Evans in the 1800s. The present building was constructed in 1937. It traded under the DH Evans name until 2001 when it switched to House of Fraser, the parent group which has owned the store since the 1950s. Frasers suggested more stores were under threat without a change in the government’s property tax policy. “As a business, who is continuing to invest significantly into the British high street, we feel it’s only fair to recognise and request an urgent review of the current archaic business rates, which continue to be astonishingly outdated. If business rates were reviewed it would support the future of House of Fraser. Without this, further store closures are inevitable.” Jace Tyrrell, the chief executive of New West End, the trade body that represents more than 600 central London retailers, restaurants and other consumer businesses, said the transformation of the House of Fraser site was part of a necessary reinvention of Oxford Street, one in which offices would take over the upper floors of many retail sites. “We need less retail and more of a mix,” he said. “That is the only way that Oxford Street can survive in the future. Offices will provide customers for retailers, food and beverage [providers] and leisure.”I salute the open-access science journal Acta Psychologica for publishing a paper entitled The influence of duration, arm-crossing style, gender and emotional closeness on hugging behaviour. The top lines for you: hugs lasting one second were rated as less pleasant and less under control than five- and 10-second hugs. There’s also something I didn’t really understand about men being more likely to hug other men in a different arm-crossing style than women. I’m not quite sure what to do with this information. I’m looking for someone to hug to see what kind of duration I generally roll with. This will be difficult to determine as, unless I get the use of a dummy in a shop window, I wouldn’t be in sole control of the duration. It takes two to hug, after all. This issue is doubtless addressed in the main body of the paper but I’m afraid the scientific language became impenetrable as soon as I got past the abstract. Actually, on reflection, it is an entirely passive event for my daughters when I give them a hug, as I sense they’d really prefer I didn’t. I just tend to cling on until they free themselves. I doubt I’ve ever got them past the 10-second mark. In any case, can you ever change your hugging technique and timings? I believe you get stuck in your own groove until such time as someone suggests you try something different. I chanced my luck during a sub-five-second hug with my younger daughter, when I dropped her at a station on Saturday. I asked her not to twist her head away so much, as if she was trying to avoid picking up a strong smell. She released me immediately, told me I was a freak – in the nicest possible way – and went off to get her train. Adrian Chiles is a Guardian columnistWanda Dench’s 2016 text about Thanksgiving dinner at her home in Mesa, Arizona, was intended for her grandson. But she messaged the wrong number, and Jamal Hinton – then a student at Desert Vista high school – responded instead. “You not my grandma,” he wrote back then. “Can I still get a plate tho?” “Of course you can,” Dench replied warmly. “That’s what grandma’s do … feed every one.” The text exchange ignited a fast friendship between Dench and Hinton, who have now made it a tradition to celebrate Thanksgiving together each year. With the holiday fast approaching, Hinton took to social media to share the invite “Grandma Wanda” sent him for 2021’s festivities – the sixth Thanksgiving dinner they’ll share. Dench asked him, his girlfriend Mikaela and his family to join her on 25 November “to share good food and great conversation”. She signed her text, “your friend always”. In a series of replies, Hinton eagerly accepted and nailed down the logistics. “We are all set for year 6!” he tweeted on Sunday. The duo’s heartwarming story has gone viral as a much-needed reminder that goodness, generosity and connection are still essential to humanity. They’ve been the focus of online celebrity, but they’re also there for each other in real life when the going gets tough. After Dench’s husband Lonnie died from Covid-19 last year, Hinton supported her. In an especially touching gesture, he assembled a care package that included recordings of people from around the world who wanted to send Dench a message of condolence. In July 2020, Hinton filmed a video with Dench, where she talked about the importance of mask wearing. “Do what you can, not just for yourself but for all your loved ones as well,” she said. During last Thanksgiving’s celebration – the first since Dench lost her husband – Hinton shared a picture of them holding a framed photo of Lonnie. “This Thanksgiving along with all the holidays coming up aren’t going to be the same as past ones but we will make the best of it,” Hinton wrote on Instagram last year. “Rest In Peace to Lonnie and everyone else we lost this year. “We will miss you greatly. Thank you for being in our lives.”Migrants from low- and middle-income countries are expected to send almost £600bn to support friends and relatives by the end of the year, after global economic growth spurred a 7.3% rebound in remittance payments. The increase in cross-border payments, especially from migrants based in Europe and the US, reversed a 1.7% fall in remittance payments last year, the World Bank said. Eighteen months ago the bank, based in Washington DC, feared that the pandemic would send remittance payments plunging by about 20% over the next two years. However, the rapid recovery during 2020 and 2021 meant the scale of payments to these countries from former residents working overseas surpassed the sum of overseas aid and foreign direct investment from richer nations. The World Bank said its annual survey of foreign exchange transactions, excluding those for China, showed remittances would grow to $589bn in 2021. “This underscores the importance of remittances in providing a critical lifeline by supporting household spending on essential items such as food, health and education during periods of economic hardship in migrants’ countries of origin,” it said. Latin American and Caribbean countries were the biggest beneficiaries of remittances, mostly from family members based in the US. Flows to these regions increased by 21% over the last year. Countries in sub-Saharan Africa were among the least supported by former residents, which the World Bank partly blamed on high transaction charges. The cost of sending $200 across international borders averaged 6.4% of the amount transferred, in the first quarter of 2021, the development bank said. This was more than double the 2030 Sustainable Development Goals target of 3%, but below the 8% it costs to send the benchmark sum to sub-Saharan Africa. “Costs tend to be higher when remittances are sent through banks rather than through digital channels or through money transmitters offering cash-to-cash services,” the World Bank said. Michal Rutkowski, the World Bank’s global director for social protection and jobs, said: “Remittance flows from migrants have greatly complemented government cash transfer [programmes] to support families suffering economic hardships during the Covid-19 crisis. “Facilitating the flow of remittances to provide relief to strained household budgets should be a key component of government policies to support a global recovery from the pandemic.” The report found that the strong growth in remittances was due to “migrants’ determination to support their families in times of need, aided by economic recovery in Europe and the US, which in turn was supported by the fiscal stimulus and employment support [programmes]”. Remittances are projected to grow by 2.6% in 2022, in line with the World Bank’s forecasts for a gentle expansion of the global economy that year.The archbishop of Canterbury has apologised for saying there was a “significant cloud” over the name of one of the most venerated figures in the Church of England who was accused of sexual abuse. In a move that may end a protracted and acrimonious battle within the C of E over the reputation of George Bell, a bishop of Chichester and a leading 20th-century figure, Justin Welby issued a personal statement admitting his earlier position had been wrong. In a remarkable volte-face, Welby said a statue commemorating Bell as “one of the most courageous, distinguished Anglican bishops of the past century” would be erected at Canterbury Cathedral. In 2015, 57 years after Bell’s death, the C of E paid compensation and issued a formal apology to a woman who alleged that Bell had sexually abused her when she was a child. Under pressure from Bell’s admirers, the C of E commissioned an independent review of its handling of the case, which concluded there had been a “rush to judgment” and that Bell had been “hung out to dry”. At the time, Welby rejected calls to restore Bell’s reputation, saying a “significant cloud” was left over his name. A second investigation by an ecclesiastical lawyer into further abuse allegations said they were unfounded. In January 2019 the C of E apologised for the hurt caused by making the abuse allegations public and for its failures in relation to the case. Welby said he took full responsibility. In a new statement on Wednesday, he said: “What I say today that is new and should have been said sooner is this: I do not consider there to be a ‘significant cloud’ over Bishop George Bell’s name. “Previously I refused to retract that statement and I was wrong to do so … I apologise for the hurt that my refusal to retract that statement has caused to Bishop Bell’s surviving relatives, colleagues and longstanding supporters.” Bell “was and remains one of the most courageous, distinguished Anglican bishops of the past century” and “the debt owed to him extends far beyond the church that he served and is one that we share as a society”, he said. A statue of Bell would be erected on the west front of Canterbury Cathedral as soon as maintenance works were complete, Welby said. For six years, Bell’s supporters have said the church condemned him as a paedophile on flimsy evidence. Bell was regarded as a hero for his criticism of the RAF bombing of German civilians in the second world war and his role in organising the Kindertransport rescue of Jewish children from the Nazis.Name: Pulp Fiction. Age: 27. Appearance: Much less fungible than you remember. I’m sorry, I don’t know what fungible means. It means the opposite of whatever an NFT is. NFT stands for “non-fungible token”. I don’t know what an NFT is either. Then, sadly, Quentin Tarantino is way ahead of you. Now that he’s starting to wind up his directing career, he appears to be embarking on a new adventure in crypto-art. I’m none the wiser. He’s selling Pulp Fiction NFTs. OK, I have heard of Pulp Fiction! There we go. Tarantino wants to sell seven unique Pulp Fiction collectibles as NFTs. If you ever wanted to own a digital recording of the “Royale with Cheese” scene, or a recording of Tarantino revealing secrets about the project, this is your chance. Right, so these are basically DVD extras? Sort of, except there will only ever be one copy of each and they will probably cost hundreds of thousands of dollars. Well, good for him. Wait, that’s not the whole story. Miramax, the movie studio that released Pulp Fiction, is suing Tarantino to stop this from happening. Why? According to Miramax, Tarantino signed away his rights to the film when it was being developed. Basically, he is accused of not owning the things he is trying to sell. Uh-huh. Except Tarantino says that, in the negotiation, he was careful not to give away reserved rights to print publication of the script. And the NFT is basically a print publication of the script. Right. Except Miramax says that selling some of the script once for an enormous amount of money is a different thing to printing the whole script as a book. What you seem to be saying is that the contract signed by Tarantino and Miramax three decades ago didn’t accurately predict the rise of unregulated moneymaking schemes that operate on the blockchain, and that its now-vague wording has allowed for two different readings that may prevent the other party from making money. Yes, that’s exactly what I’m saying. Either way, I guess the world might never get to see a Pulp Fiction NFT. Quite the opposite. Now that everyone knows there’s money to be made, it seems certain that there will be Pulp Fiction NFTs soon. If Miramax wins, it will release them itself, along with NFTs of the rest of its film library. So there will be Jersey Girl NFTs? Steady on, people won’t buy any old rubbish. Do say: “Quentin Tarantino has realised that the future of commerce lies in NFTs.” Don’t say: “Look out for his new film, Django Unblockchained.”I was a refugee as a child, towed along by family as we escaped war in Sri Lanka. My memory of the whole ordeal is vague. There were stops that lasted weeks and months, as we were left in limbo in Hong Kong, Tokyo and Vancouver, before finding a home in Toronto. You meet a lot of people throughout such journeys, fellow migrants you live with for a time at refugee camps or shared apartments. They come in and out, leaving behind disjointed and scattered stories, memories of transit without a beginning or end. Simple As Water, a mosaic-like HBO documentary about Syrian refugees, affectively evokes that sensation. Megan Mylan’s film gently breathes in the scope of the Syrian refugee crisis by moving from family to family who are landed or stranded temporarily in places like Greece, Turkey and the United States. Like a collection of short stories, the film spends a little bit of time with each family, focusing on the protective bond between parents and their children, capturing fragments of their lives before moving on to the next. “It’s not a cohesive or linear experience,” Mylan tells the Guardian on a Zoom call from her New York apartment. “It’s constant upheaval and repositioning. I wanted the film structure to echo the reality of the people in it and not give a tidiness that wasn’t true to that experience.” Mylan is the Oscar-winning film-maker behind Smile Pinki and Lost Boys of Sudan. The latter film, which she co-directed with Jon Shenk, was a story about young refugees making the journey to the US and acclimatizing to their new home. That experience documenting a migration story didn’t immediately compel Mylan to make a film about the Syrian refugee crisis. She considered for a time that she may have exhausted everything she could say on the matter. But she followed the news attentively: the headlines and footage of migrants crossing barbed wire or riding on smuggler boats from Turkey to Greece. She was latching onto images of parents cradling their children during these perilous journeys. Mylan has a child who was three years old as the crisis was unfolding. “As a newish mother, it was so primal,” she says. “The way I was experiencing the world was all through his eyes; both its joys and its injustices. And I just kept thinking, what would I do in that situation?” And like so many people in the western world, Mylan stood to attention when she saw devastating photos of Alan Kurdi, the three-year-old Syrian boy whose lifeless body washed ashore in Turkey, after the inflatable boat his family boarded to get to Greece capsized. “I remember that morning I had also taught my son to close the Velcro ties on his shoes. And that little boy had socks and little Velcro closures. Someone put those socks and shoes on him. His father had survived. I just kept thinking of that pain of having not been able to protect. It felt like a valid point of entry that I hadn’t seen.” Simple As Water gathers a diverse set of parents, or parental figures, and the people they look after, like Yasmin who lives in a portside refugee encampment in Athens with her four kids while coping with the “Kafkaesque” bureaucracy of transit. Her husband, Safwan, escaped separately to Germany, spending years in touch with his family strictly through iPhone. Samra works as a field hand in Turkey while her 12-year-old son steps up to become the man of the house, taking care of his four siblings. Omar works as an appliance delivery man in Pennsylvania trying to secure a future for his kid brother, an amputee named Abdulrahman. You might have seen the latter on CNN as an 11-year-old, recalling the rocket blast in Syria that claimed his leg. Diaa’s story stands apart from the rest. The elderly mother remains in Syria, after half the population fled. She affectionately takes care of a grown, developmentally delayed son, while worrying over another son who – as we learn through drips of information – has been disappeared. Her life, captured with an anonymous crew in Syria, is a different kind of purgatory. Living under the assumption that her son was abducted by Isis, she scans Facebook pages and makes WhatsApp calls, trying to learn his fate. There are details to this story that I only learn from Mylan. The missing son was a citizen journalist. Most would assume he was abducted by Bashar al-Assad’s regime, which was the more common narrative at the time. But witnesses saw him and his girlfriend taken from their cars by men who they thought appeared more like Isis. We don’t hear these things in the film because the film-makers never compel their subjects to explain or narrate for the audience. They opted instead for an unobtrusive fly-on-the-wall approach, an observational style where the people in the documentary choose what they want to reveal at any given moment. Mylan says the film has “the scaffolding of journalism”, but is guided by humanity. “We wanted to get the right stuff on the screen. But we wanted to get to it the right way, too.” And in Diaa’s case, the withheld details don’t take away from a story about a mother overcome by a “terrifying helplessness” not knowing her son’s fate. The unobtrusive approach and spare details are heartbreakingly effective in Yasmin and Safwan’s story. They have four children. We slowly gather that there was a fifth: a young child seen briefly as the remaining kids watch old home videos on a phone. His fate is never explained. All we learn is that he’s gone. The film-makers never coax an explanation for the camera. Mylan knows that an audience would immediately fill in the gaps with everything we know about the Syrian refugee crisis, whether we learned it from previous documentaries, news footage or those galvanizing photos of Alan Kurdi. “If you’ve had your ears open at all – and if you’re going to come to this film, you likely have – we felt like we didn’t have to do all of that ‘catch you up’.” “Part of what I love about documentary is the puzzle of it,” Mylan adds. “Here’s what they chose to give me. Here are the layers of their experience that they shared. And together with my editor, I have to figure out how to piece that together to give you enough that you feel like you understand.” Simple As Water is now available on HBO and HBO Max with a UK date to be announcedThe billionaire hedge fund manager Bill Ackman has been told to revise his plan for a penthouse apartment on top of a historic Manhattan building after his neighbours complained that it looked like “a Malibu beach house that got blown on to our New York roof”. Ackman, who has built up an estimated $3.3bn (£2.5bn) from his hedge fund Pershing Square Capital Management, failed to convince New York’s Landmarks Preservation Commission to approve the Norman Foster-designed two-storey penthouse atop an Upper West Side building overlooking Central Park. Sarah Carroll, the chair of the commission, told Ackman that the design had provoked such strong feelings from local residents – who described it as looking like a “flying saucer” or “temple to a titan” – that he must take it back to the drawing board. She said the commission would not approve or deny the penthouse plan, and instead called on Ackman and Foster to reduce the size and scope of the project. “We ask the applicants to continue to study this project,” Carroll said at the end of a community meeting on Tuesday night. “You are in the right direction, [but continue] thinking about how you can fulfil the design intent of this glass house on the roof by sinking it down, lowering it, maintain a more sort of horizontal quality.” She did not set a deadline for Ackman to resubmit his plans. The decision came after a string of local residents and conservation experts spoke out against the design of the penthouse at 6-16 West 77th Street. Mary Breasted, a novelist who has lived in the building for 14 years, said the apartment looked “shockingly out of place … like a Malibu beach house that got blown on to our New York roof”. Christabel Gough, the secretary of the Society for the Architecture of the City, told the Zoom meeting of the preservation commission that she could understand the appeal of the rooftop apartment for Ackman and his wife, Neri Oxman, but asked the commissioners to think about the effect on the rest of the city’s residents. “Looking from the inside out, this item would undoubtedly be pleasing to those who Tom Wolfe dubbed ‘master of the universe’, but looking from the outside up [at it] this rooftop addition is problematic,” said Gough, who has attended almost every meeting of the commission for 37 years. She said the “gigantic glass walls [providing] unobstructed view that make the outlook so desirable to the private owner” would turn the penthouse into a “dazzling beacon” seen from across the city and even by passengers flying into JFK airport. Foster, the three-times Stirling prize-winning architect who designed London’s Millennium bridge and Gherkin tower, and Berlin’s Reichstag parliament, compared the plans to Philip Johnson’s glass house in Connecticut. He told the committee that the penthouse was designed to be “very gentle” and “very respectful” to the original 1927 building. Ackman, who bought the building’s existing pink stucco penthouse for $22.5m in 2017, said the current structure was decrepit and needed to be demolished. He promised the commission that the Foster-designed apartment would be a “great asset for New York City”. Ackman said he wanted to ensure the apartment fitted into the environment, and said he had withdrawn a previous design because the second storey was “too visible”. “The last thing we wanted to do here was barge in and build something on someone else’s building disrespectfully,” he said. The apartment was previously owned by the feminist and gender politics author Nancy Friday. The author, who died in 2017, had over the years bought four neighbouring units in the building and cobbled them together to create the unusual 13 room apartment.The Syrian musician Omar Souleyman, who has performed at festivals around the world, has been arrested in Turkey on terrorism charges related to alleged membership of the Kurdistan Workers’ party (PKK). The singer and DJ was taken into custody by officers who searched his home in the south-eastern province of Şanlıurfa, his son Muhammad told a Syrian news outlet on Wednesday. An official in the Şanlıurfa governor’s office confirmed the arrest to the Guardian. Souleyman, 55, is an Arab Syrian from the majority-Kurdish Hasekeh province, on the border with Turkey. The self-taught musician became famous in his homeland as a prolific wedding performer, and has recorded more than 500 albums in Arabic and Kurdish blending traditional dabke – Middle Eastern folk music – with thumping electronica. He left Syria after the civil war broke out, after which his freewheeling and gritty love songs turned him into an international star. The 2013 track Warni Warni has had nearly 95m views on YouTube. Souleyman has worked with Björk, Four Tet, Damon Albarn and Diplo, and has performed at the 2013 Nobel peace prize ceremony and at major festivals across the globe in his trademark dark sunglasses, red chequered keffiyeh and dishdasha. Souleyman’s son denied the terrorism charges, saying his father had no political affiliations and that a “malicious report” had been filed against him. Souleyman and his assistant could not be reached for comment. A neighbour of the family told the Guardian by phone on Wednesday evening that the musician had not yet returned home. Tens of thousands of people across Turkey have been detained in recent years on terrorism charges in president Recep Tayyip Erdoğan’s crackdown on alleged followers of cleric Fethullah Gülen, whom Ankara blames for a 2016 coup attempt, and the PKK, which is regarded as a terrorist organisation by Turkey, the UK, EU and US. Souleyman’s manager told Agence France-Presse that the musician was being questioned over reports that he had recently travelled back to an area of Syria controlled by the PKK’s Syrian affiliate, the YPG. The YPG has served as the west’s key partner in the battle against Islamic State in Syria, complicating relations with Turkey, a Nato ally. The Turkish news agency iHA reported that the musician underwent a health check at a hospital in his home town of Karaköprü before being taken for questioning at the local gendarmerie command. Along with about 3.6 million more Syrian refugees over the last decade, Souleyman and his family settled in Turkey. He opened a free bakery in the border town of Akçakale serving needy Turkish and Syrian families, and frequently gives talks on life in Syria before and after the war.The Bank of England is under mounting pressure to increase interest rates next month after inflation rose to the highest level in a decade in October amid the squeeze on living standards from soaring household energy bills. A sharp increase in gas and electricity prices pushed inflation as measured by the consumer prices index to 4.2% in October, up from 3.1% in September, according to the Office for National Statistics – the highest rate since November 2011. In a sign of the rising pressure on household budgets before what could be a difficult winter, the figure was higher than was forecast by City economists, and more than double the 2% target set by the government for the Bank of England. It comes after the energy regulator Ofgem lifted its consumer price cap after wholesale gas prices soared to record levels as economies around the world emerged from lockdown and supplies of Russian gas to Europe failed to meet demand. Grant Fitzner, the chief economist at the ONS, said it was clear there would be further inflationary pressures in the coming months after the German government suspended its approval process for the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline, triggering an increase in wholesale energy prices. “You will see gas prices have gone up in the last day or two following the announcement from the German government on the Nord pipeline. It’s not clear that energy prices have peaked yet,” he said. The jump in the annual inflation rate was also driven by higher prices in restaurants and hotels after a partial removal of a VAT cut for the hospitality sector, as well as soaring prices for secondhand cars. Much of the increase reflected depressed price levels a year ago as the coronavirus pandemic dragged down economic activity around the world, including the worst recession in Britain for 300 years. Inflation is based on the annual change in price for a basket of goods and services, meaning a temporary fall 12 months earlier can push up the headline rate. Economists expect that the inflation rate should ease as these factors drop out of the calculation. However, the costs of raw materials, wages and transportation have risen sharply since economies reopened and the latest CPI numbers suggest businesses have started passing those increases on to their customers. Threadneedle Street unexpectedly held back from raising rates this month, confounding financial market expectations. The Bank forecasts inflation will peak at close to 5% next year, in what it predicts will be a temporary increase, before gradually fading back towards its 2% target as disruption caused by the pandemic recedes. Economists said the higher inflation rate and robust employment figures published on Tuesday would give the green light for a rise in interest rates in December from the current level of 0.1%, most likely to 0.25%. Sterling rose to a 21-month high against the euro on the currency markets, hitting €1.19 amid anticipation of a rate rise. However, other analysts said there was little that higher rates would do to curtail inflation caused by severe supply bottlenecks, while warning that Britain’s economic recovery from Covid-19 remained incomplete. Suren Thiru, the head of economics at the British Chambers of Commerce, said: “The Bank of England are facing a tricky trade-off between surging inflation and a stalling recovery. However, with the UK economy facing mounting headwinds, raising interest rates too early should be resisted to avoid damaging business and consumer confidence.” The chancellor, Rishi Sunak, said several countries were experiencing higher inflation after the easing of lockdown restrictions. “We’re helping people get into work, progress and keep more of what they earn, through our plan for jobs and by effectively cutting taxes for workers receiving universal credit,” he said. The UK is in the middle of the pack among the G7 group of leading economies, with inflation higher than in France and Italy but lower than in the US and Germany. US inflation has hit the highest level in 31 years, at 6.2%, amid severe disruption to supply chains. The UK government has faced intense criticism for scrapping the £20-a-week uplift in universal credit in the biggest ever overnight benefit cut, as well as planning manifesto-busting tax increases and suspending the pensions triple lock. Rachel Reeves, the shadow chancellor, said households would be left more than £1,000 worse off next year owing to higher levels of inflation. “Instead of taking action, the government are looking the other way, blaming ‘global problems’ while they trap us in a high-tax, low-growth cycle,” she said. Jack Leslie, a senior economist at the Resolution Foundation, said the rate of inflation had increased at its fastest rate over the past year since at least 1989 – a shift that meant real wages were already falling and were likely to continue to do so for the next six months. “We could be set for a sustained period of shrinking pay packets,” he said.Time to wrap up.... here’s today’s main stories; Goodnight. GW The pound is also up half a cent against the dollar tonight at $1.349. iles Coghlan, chief analyst at HYCM, says this week’s inflation and unemployment data could tip the Bank of England to raise rates next week: “For months, market commentators and economists have been suggesting that an interest rate hike from the Bank of England (BoE) is not far off. Up until now, these forecasts have not come to fruition – but today’s CPI reading for October at 4.2%, coupled with strong employment data, will likely be the tipping point for the BoE. As UK labour data has shown a positive surprise with 247,000 jobs added – when only 185,000 were expected – such figures surely make the case, ‘if not now, when?’ for the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC). “Although there are still a number of MPC members who take the position that inflation is transitory, the cards now seem stacked in favour of a hawkish turn from the central bank in December, given that employment and inflation were the two main factors preventing a rate hike at the last BoE meeting The UK stock market has closed lower, as the surge in inflation weighs on the City. The FTSE 100 index of blue-chip shares has ended the day down 36 points or 0.5% at 7291 points, a one-week low. Multinational stocks were pulled down by the stronger pound, which remains at a 21-month high against the euro tonight over €1.19. The London Stock Exchange Group (-6%) led the fallers, with energy group SSE ending 4.2% lower after it announced a dividend cut to fund a larger investment in wind power. European markets hit fresh record highs again, closing higher for the sixth day in a row on hopes of economic recovery and loose monetary policy. Music news. The Financial Times is reporting that Warner Music is in talks to acquire David Bowie’s songwriting catalogue. The record label is raising $535m in debt to support the potential acquisition and others, according to people familiar with the matter. Here’s the details: Bowie’s estate has been looking to sell his catalogue and has attracted bids of about $200m, the Financial Times reported last month. Warner Music is in advanced talks to buy it, although no deal has been agreed, according to people close to the situation. The record label behind singers Lizzo and Dua Lipa on Wednesday said it was offering $535m in debt for “potential acquisitions of certain music and music-related assets”. The Bowie catalogue is one of these acquisitions, according to people familiar with the matter. John Coldham, IP partner at law firm, Gowling WLG, says: There is nothing new about rights to creative works being bought and sold, but it is interesting that, as the world evolves into digital streaming, there has been a spate of such high profile sales recently. The sale also demonstrates the value of intellectual property - ensuring its ownership is properly documented will assist in realising that value later. Bowie’s intellectual property is particularly interesting, of course, as the late musical genius once issued bonds which used royalties from his albums as the underlying collateral (there’s a good write-up here). Families face a double-whammy to their finances, with inflation and taxes both eating into incomes. The Institute for Fiscal Studies has calculated that an average worker would need a pay rise of over 7% just to maintain their standard of living, because the Consumer Prices Index is due to hit 5% next spring. They say: This morning the ONS announced that CPI inflation rose to 4.2% in the year to October. This is much higher than the previous month’s figure of 3.1%, and is at a level not seen since December 2011. The Bank of England expects inflation to rise further still to 5% in the spring. When combined with the effects of recent tax changes (including the new social care levy and freeze in the personal allowance), price increases of this magnitude have significant implications for living standards. To take an example, an individual with a salary income of £30,000 in April 2021 (and post-tax income of £24,060) would need to see nominal wage growth of 7.1% to April 2022 to maintain the same standard of living given the forecast 5% annual inflation rate. The high rate of inflation has been driven by several factors. Demand has increased rapidly following the lifting of Covid-19 restrictions not only in the UK but in other countries as well. At the same time, supply has been constrained by production bottlenecks, staff shortages and, in the UK, new trade barriers following Brexit. Bank of England interest rate setter Catherine Mann says the public are confident that the central bank has inflation under control..... ... even though prices are currently running over twice as fast as its target. Reuters has the details: British households, businesses and financial markets all remain confident that the Bank of England will return inflation to its 2% target, BoE policymaker Catherine Mann said on Wednesday, after official data showed inflation hit a 10-year high. “We feel confident that they believe that the Bank of England can and will - those are important ingredients right, can and will - undertake the appropriate policies response to bring inflation back to 2%,” Mann told an online discussion hosted by J.P. Morgan Asset Management. Mann voted this month to keep the BoE’s main interest rate on hold at 0.1% but was in a minority calling for an early end to the BoE’s £875bn government bond purchase programme. Louise Rubin, head of policy at disability equality charity Scope, has warned that the surge in UK inflation will hit disabled households hardest: “We’re hurtling towards a cost of living crisis, but yet again disabled people are being abandoned by Government. “Disabled people already face extra costs of £583 a month on average, and this is set to soar over the coming weeks and months. “Sky-high inflation and spiralling energy costs will hit disabled households hardest. “More than 4 in 10 (42%) disabled people who rely on benefits live in poverty. Many disabled people have had to drain any savings they had to get by. Yet we’ve heard nothing from Government about how they are going to stop this inequality. “Levelling up means nothing if disabled people are left behind.” The surge in raw materials and energy prices are hurting UK businesses this year. My colleagues have spoken to several, including Jonathan Huntley, sheep and cattle farmer in the Welsh valleys, who faces a wave of rising costs. “Diesel and fertiliser are going to have a massive impact next year. Fertiliser is the biggest worry,” Huntley says, adding that the cost of animal feed has also been climbing. “I have been quoted £400 per tonne for cattle feed; it usually would be £250 or £280 perhaps.” At the family-run farm in the hills above Pontypridd, thoughts are already turning to whether they will be able afford essential products next spring. Huntley usually buys fertiliser shortly after Christmas, ready for growing the spring grass that is vital for feeding his sheep. The price has almost doubled since his last purchase, and recently touched £700 a tonne, leaving Huntley and other farmers in a tough position. He says: “We can’t buy at that price, and we will have to a make decision whether to buy half as much as we have bought in the past and stretch it out. It will have a knock-on effect and we are not 100% sure how it will pan out.” Those in the pub trade, taxi driving, retail and manufacturing are also struggling under inflationary pressures..... more here. Britain’s Unite union is planning to develop its own ‘bargaining index’ to track the UK’s rising prices, to ensure wage deals keep pace with inflation. Unite point out that Consumer Price Inflation, at 4.2%, is lagging the Retail Prices Index which surged by 6% over the last 12 months. And they argue that if wage settlements are based on CPI, then workers won’t be protected from the full impact of the cost of living crisis. Unite’s Sharon Graham says the union will continue to base claims on the RPI figure rather than CPI, which it fears could be “a hidden tax on workers’ wages”. Graham says: The RPI, which includes housing costs, is a more accurate cost of living index than the CPI, which is always lower as it does not include housing and related costs. Employers favour the CPI as it creates a lower base rate for inflation as an element in possible wage claims. In that respect, the CPI is a hidden tax on workers’ wages if it is used as a base for cost calculations. That’s why in future Unite is going to produce its own calculations of price inflation - in what might be determined a Unite Bargaining Index - so that the base level for wage bargaining is much more accurate.” RPI lost its status as a “national statistic” back in 2013, after the Office for National Statistics concluded that it was not a good measure of inflation (partly due to the mathematical formula it used, which made it volatile). Instead, the ONS produced the CPIH index which also includes housing costs. It rose by 3.8% per year in October, slower than CPI. Although RPI is being phased out, it’s still used for many calculations, including the interest rate on student loans and the increase in rail fares. The UK advertising watchdog has launched an investigation into a London bus and underground ad campaign for Floki Inu, a meme coin named after a dog owned by Elon Musk, as pressure rises to ban cryptocurrency marketing on public transport networks. The Advertising Standards Authority launched the investigation after receiving complaints about Floki’s latest campaign. The poster campaign encourages the public to invest in the cryptocurrency craze, appealing for them to look to Floki if they were not quick enough to buy into other popular cryptocurrencies, such as Doge, early enough. “Missed Doge? Get Floki”, runs one strapline. The campaign, which ran for three weeks last month, also uses the company’s cartoon dog logo. On Wednesday, a spokesman for the ASA said: “While I can’t go into specifics at this time, I can confirm that we are currently investigating Floki Inu.” More here: Shortages of materials and workers are weighing on America’s homebuilding sector. Housing starts fell unexpectedly last month, by 0.7%, to an annual rate of 1.520 million units. Economists had expected a rebound to 1.576m. September’s data was revised lower, from 1.555m to a 1.53m rate. Hurricane Ida disrupted house construction in the South of the US, and the Northeast, as flooding and high winds forced builders to down tools, and also caused delays to supply chains. Permits for future homebuilding did rise, though, up 4.0% to a rate of 1.650 million units in October. But mortgage applications fell by 2.8% last week, suggesting rising rates deterred people from refinancing or taking out a new loan. Inflation in Canada has jumped to its highest level in 18 years. Canada’s annual inflation rate rose to 4.7% in October, new data from Statistics Canada shows. That’s the highest since February 2003, up from 4.4% in September. Prices rose in all eight major components over the last year, driven by rising energy and transport costs. Consumers paid 41.7% more for gasoline than a year ago, while fuel oil and other fuels jumped over 48%, following the rise in crude oil prices. Car prices jumped 6.1%, amid the global shortage of semiconductor chips, while meat products prices rose 9.9%. Shares in Visa are down over 3% in pre-market Wall Street trading, following Amazon’s decision to stop accepting payments using UK-issued Visa credit cards (see earlier post) Victoria Scholar, head of investment at interactive investor, has the details: Amazon’s decision to stop accepting UK Visa credit cards, deals a blow to Visa, with shares down more than 3% pre-market. Visa described it as a threat to consumer choice, while Amazon blamed high transaction fees. Amazon will still be accepting Visa debit cards and non-Visa credit cards like Mastercard and American Express, suggesting the impact on consumers will largely be limited but nonetheless bothersome for a number of Amazon customers. This is just the latest development in an age-old dispute between merchants and payment processors continues over transaction fees, that shows no signs of abating. However the sense is that this is a relationship issue between Visa and Amazon that goes beyond fees alone. Fortunately Visa will be spared the pain until after the critical festive season is over with the change beginning on 19th January. Martin Lewis, founder of MoneySavingExpert.com, says Amazon could be looking to push Visa’s fees down: SSE has rebuffed calls to break itself up, and announced a multi-billion pound plan to boost investment across its renewable energy and electricity networks businesses. The FTSE 100 energy supplier will expand its investment plan for the next five years to £12.5bn, from its previous target of £7.5bn, in areas which will help the UK reach its net zero climate targets. By the end of the decade SSE plans to run a quarter of the UK’s offshore windfarms, alongside its electricity grid networks in the north of Scotland and parts of England, and its planned fleet of flexible “low carbon” power plants. Forty per cent of the extra £1bn of green investments every year to 2026 will go to its renewable energy business, 40% to its networks business, while the remaining 20% will be for the rest of the SSE business. The spending spree strengthens the company’s existing strategy in defiance of calls by Elliott Management, a major activist hedge fund, to break up the company by splitting off its renewables business. SSE said it had “carefully considered a wide range of available strategic options”, including the separation of its renewables division, but had concluded it would: “not be the best route for growth, execution and value creation and was not therefore in the long-term interests of its stakeholders”. However, SSE’s share price plunged by 5% after the firm set out its plans, which include a surprise dividend cut of about 30% from the 2023-24 financial year to 60p a share, alongside plans to sell off a quarter of its electricity networks businesses. Here’s the full story: Britain’s supply chain problems are affecting supplies of Greggs vegan sausage roll, reports Reuters: British baker and fast-food chain Greggs’ has warned its vegan sausage roll was the latest product to succumb to supply chain disruption. The vegan sausage roll - light puff pastry with a seasoned Quorn filling - was launched by the high street group in 2019 and quickly became a popular healthier alternative to its classic sausage roll and steak and chicken bakes. Based in Newcastle in northeast England, Greggs said there were “temporary interruptions” to supplies of products including vegan sausage rolls across the United Kingdom. “Some shops may not have them or may not have them throughout the day. It varies,” said a spokesperson for the chain, adding that the firm was working hard to minimise the disruption and did offer a broad range of alternative snacks. Stores in the capital were particularly hard hit with Reuters reporters noting Greggs branches in Twickenham, Richmond and Earls Court out of vegan sausage rolls in the first half of this week, its new outlet in Canary Wharf out of the product on Tuesday and Wednesday and its South Woodford branch out of stock on Wednesday. Amazon has told customers that it plans to stop accepting payments made with UK-issued Visa credit cards in January. In an email to users of the site, it blamed the cost of processing the payments, telling them: “Starting 19 January 2022, we will unfortunately no longer accept Visa credit cards issued in the UK, due to the high fees Visa charges for processing credit card transactions.” The retailer said it would continue to accept Visa debit cards and other credit cards, including Mastercard and American Express, but acknowledged that the change would be “inconvenient” for some customers. Payments on cards attract a range of fees including interchange fees and other transaction charges, and it is not clear which Amazon has taken issue with. In a statement, a spokesperson for the retailer said: “The cost of accepting card payments continues to be an obstacle for businesses striving to provide the best prices for customers. These costs should be going down over time with technological advancements but, instead, they continue to stay high or even rise. “As a result of Visa’s continued high cost of payments, we regret that Amazon.co.uk will no longer accept UK-issued Visa credit cards as of 19 January 2022.” Interchange fees are typically a percentage of the cost of the transaction, and are higher for credit card transactions, and for those where purchases are made remotely, including online sales, although there are caps on payments made within the UK. In a statement, Visa said it was “very disappointed that Amazon is threatening to restrict consumer choice in the future”. “When consumer choice is limited, nobody wins. We have a longstanding relationship with Amazon, and we continue to work toward a resolution, so our cardholders can use their preferred Visa credit cards at Amazon UK without Amazon-imposed restrictions come January 2022.” More here: Sterling has rallied today, as the jump in UK inflation boosted speculation that the Bank of England could raise interest rates as soon as next month. The pound touched a 21-month high against the euro, hitting €1.1915 for the first time since late February 2020 (when sterling slumped as the pandemic sparked a market crash). Sterling has also gained a third of a cent against the US dollar to $1.346 (two weeks ago, it tumbled from $1.365 after the BoE left rates on hold). Bank shares have also risen, with Lloyds up 1.2%. That’s a sign that traders are anticipating a rate rise, allowing banks to increase their net interest margins. Russ Mould, investment director at AJ Bell, says the sight of inflation at a 10-year high of 4.2% makes for uncomfortable reading. It “almost certainly means” the Bank of England will raise interest rates soon, potentially as soon as December, Mould adds: “What really matters to markets is the scale of any interest rate hikes over the next year, and that will be guided by the longevity and ferocity of inflation. There is a real chance that rates keep going up by small increments and after a while this starts to make life more difficult for consumers and companies as the cost of borrowing becomes more expensive. Economic thinktank NIESR has analysed today’s inflation data, and found that underlying cost of living pressures rose across the UK - and fastest in London. NIESR’s measure of underlying inflation increased in all 12 UK regions, rising to 2.9% in the capital, up from 2.5% in September. Northern Ireland saw the lowest regional trimmed mean inflation (which strips out sharply rising of falling prices), at 1.5% in October. Within the CPI, all but two major categories recorded price increases, reflecting the broad-based nature of the inflationary pressure, NIESR adds. UK inflation has increased to its highest level in a decade, hitting a rate more than double the government’s target amid a severe cost of living squeeze from soaring household energy bills. The Office for National Statistics said the consumer prices index measure of annual inflation rose to 4.2% in October, up from 3.1% in September – the highest rate since November 2011. Driven by a dramatic jump in household gas and electricity prices, the figure was higher than forecast by City economists, with the annual inflation rate more than double the 2% target set by the government for the Bank of England. The increase will put pressure on the Bank to raise interest rates from as early as next month amid growing concern over the cost of living. It comes after the energy regulator, Ofgem, lifted its cap on household bills after wholesale gas prices soared to record levels as economies around the world emerged from lockdown and supplies of Russian gas to Europe failed to meet demand. Grant Fitzner, chief economist at the ONS, said it was clear there would be further inflationary pressures in the coming months after the German government suspended its approval process for the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline, triggering an increase in wholesale energy prices. “You will see gas prices have gone up in the last day or two following the announcement from the German government on the Nord pipeline. It’s not clear that energy prices have peaked yet.” Here’s the full story: The property company British Land, which owns shopping centres including Sheffield’s Meadowhall, has announced a multimillion-pound plan to turn car parks and empty shopping centres into urban distribution hubs for online shopping and same-day grocery delivery services. UK and European gas prices have hit one month highs, as concerns over winter energy supplies rise. The December UK gas contract has risen 4% to 249p per therm, adding to yesterday’s jump when Germany temporarily suspended its approval process for the controversial Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline. Gas for next-day delivery in the UK is also up over 5% at 236p per therm, or almost four times its level back in January. European wholesale prices are also at their highest level in four weeks, with the benchmark Dutch front-month contract jumping over 6% to above €100 per megawatt hour. The suspension of the Nord Stream certification is a setback to Kremlin-backed Gazprom’s plans to extend Russian gas dominance via a new pipeline across the Baltic Sea. The approval process is on hold until the Nord Stream 2 company, which is registered in Switzerland, transfers its main assets and staffing budget to its German subsidiary. Here’s the full story: Adeline Van Houtte, Europe analyst, at the Economist Intelligence Unit says the suspension could delay Nord Stream 2 supplies until the second half of next year - meaning it would not help ease Europe’s gas shortage: Overall, the Federal Network Agency, the German regulator, was supposed to certify that the pipeline’s ownership and operating models comply with EU rules by January 2022, which now might be delayed because of the temporary suspension. The European Commission then has two months to consider the recommendation. So, it appears likely that the pipeline will start operating in the second half of 2022, although both bodies could reach a decision earlier depending on how long the set-up of the subsidiary of the operator will take.” But there’s also growing geopolitical pressure to scrap the project. Boris Johnson warned this week that the EU must choose between “mainlining ever more Russian hydrocarbons in giant new pipelines” and “sticking up for Ukraine” and “championing the cause for peace and stability” in eastern Europe. On Tuesday, the chief executive of Trafigura, one of the world’s biggest commodity traders, warned there could be rolling power outages in Europe this winter, if the weather turned too cold for supplies to meet demand. Crisps and other snacks have proved tricky to get hold of for convenience store and newsagent chain McColl’s Retail Group, amid worsening supply chain disruption and lorry driver shortage, knocking the firm’s revenues. The group, which has over 1,200 of what it calls “neighbourhood” stores in England, Scotland and Wales, said it had been struggling to obtain its usual supplies of “high margin branded impulse lines” such as bags of crisps and chocolate bars, usually grabbed by consumers when visiting one of their shops. The retailer said its nationwide supply chain continues to be impacted by “external factors, including the ongoing nationwide shortage of delivery drivers, labour shortages at distribution centres and insufficient supply of key products”, which it said had got worse in the fourth quarter of the year. McColl’s has warned that if its supply chain problems did not improve in the second half of its financial year, its full-year profits might be hit, and come in below the board’s expectations. Jonathan Miller, chief executive of McColl’s, said: “It is disappointing to see supply chain issues worsen through the second half, but external factors have not eased, and continue to impact much of the UK economy,” Shares in the group, which floated on the stock market in February 2014, fell by as much as 33% on the London stock exchange to a record low of 12p on Wednesday morning. This means McColl’s stock is set to register its worst day in three months, taking losses so far this year to 44%. Inflation has also risen across the eurozone, led by higher energy prices. Consumer prices in the euro area jumped by 4.1% per year in October, up from 3.4% in September, updated figures from stats body Eurostat show. Energy costs surged by more than 23% year-on-year, and by 5.6% in October alone, as higher gas prices and petrol costs hit consumers. Good inflation rose to 2%, while services was up 2.1%. Core inflation, stripping out energy and unprocessed food, rose to 2.1%. The European Central Bank wants to keep inflation at 2% over the medium term, and policymakers have argued the inflation surge was temporary. Earlier this week, ECB President Christine Lagarde told MEPs that tightening monetary policy now could choke off the post-pandemic economic recovery, as she pushed back on calls for a rate rise. UK house prices have hit a fresh record high, after prices surged over the last year. The average price increased by 11.8% over the year to September 2021, up from 10.2% in August, new figures from the Land Registry show. The report shows that: The average UK house price was at a record high of £270,000 in September 2021, which is £28,000 higher than this time last year. Average house prices increased over the year in England to £288,000 (11.5%), in Wales to £196,000 (15.4%), in Scotland to £180,000 (12.3%) and in Northern Ireland to £159,000 (10.7%). London continues to be the region with the lowest annual growth (2.8%) for the tenth consecutive month. September was the final month in which buyers could pay reduced stamp duty on purchases in England and Northern Ireland. That may have caused a scramble to complete deals, alongside the demand for larger homes as some office workers spend more time working from home. On a non-seasonally adjusted basis, average house prices in the UK increased by 2.5% between August and September 2021, the ONS adds. Simon French, chief economist at City firm Panmure Gordon, reckons the inflation surge is the ‘cherry’ on the cake for the Bank of England, as it weighs up a December interest rate rise. But, finance and economics writer Frances Coppola says the BoE shouldn’t panic, given the rise in energy prices is a big factor driving up inflation. Incidentally, higher energy bills will also do some of the job of an interest rate rise, by leaving people with less disposable income. Coupled with the strong employment data yesterday, the case for the Bank of England to act now and raise interest rates is “compelling”, argues Neil Wilson, analyst at Markets.com. But he also says the Bank may well resist lifting borrowing costs from record lows at its 16th December meeting, for three reasons: There are still plenty on the MPC who are wedded to the narrative that inflation is transitory – the Hawks v. Doves balance favours the latter camp still as November’s 7-2 vote indicated. Does the Bank think that hiking now would amount to a policy mistake a la Trichet? [the European Central Bank chief who fatefully raised interest rate in 2011, despite the eurozone crisis] If so then even if they do feel that inflation is becoming unanchored and problematic, they may chicken out of hiking due to fears of killing off the recovery. Do other risks to the economic outlook like Brexit mean hiking is simply not appropriate at this time? Whatever they think, the problem for the market is in not being able to trust statements about ‘acting on inflation’. Here’s our guide on how to protect your finances from inflation: including sorting savings, mortgage and pensions, and trying to cut regular costs where possible. More economists are agreeing that the jump in UK inflation increases the chances of a December interest rate rise. But it’s not certain, after the Bank of England surprised the markets by leaving borrowing costs on hold at its November meeting two weeks ago. Raising rates could cool consumer spending, lift variable rate mortgage costs, dampen inflationary expectations and wage pressures, and might slow the economic recovery, but it wouldn’t fix the global supply chain problems driving up some prices. Melanie Baker, senior economist at Royal London Asset Management, points out that some of the inflation pressures are temporary: Today’s consumer price index inflation (CPI) figures are clearly a long way above the Bank of England’s 2% CPI target. The main driver of the jump in CPI inflation, as expected, came from energy prices and there will also have been an impact from the start of the phasing out of last year’s VAT cut on hospitality. Inflation driven by these things can largely be described as transitory. Given that the Bank of England were expecting a 3.9%Y number for this release, it is worth bearing in mind that a big jump in inflation in itself won’t have come as a surprise for them. What will be important for the Bank is a broadening out of inflation pressure beyond things easily labelled as transitory. Given the scale of the surprise in these numbers and the jump in core inflation, that will apply to some of the rise in inflation today. There were downward contributions to inflation in October from a few of the main components, but these were relatively small. In isolation, today’s upside surprise increases the chance of a December rate rise, but there are several key data releases to go before then, including another set of business surveys and labour market data. Rupert Thompson, chief investment officer at Kingswood, flags that core inflation (stripping out volatile factors) has also risen: “UK consumer price inflation in October jumped more sharply than expected, rising to 4.2% from 3.1% the previous month. The core rate – excluding food, energy, alcohol and tobacco – also picked up to 3.4% from 2.9%. Household energy and fuel prices, along with second hand cars, restaurants and hotels, all contributed to the rise. Along with yesterday’s robust employment data, these numbers make a rate rise in December all the more likely – although after last month’s debacle it is dangerous to say this is a done deal.” Richard Carter, head of fixed interest research at Quilter Cheviot, says the increase in energy bills was ‘staggering’ (due to Ofgem lifting the energy cap, following rising wholesale gas prices). “12-month inflation rates for electricity and gas stand at a staggering 18.8% and 28.1% respectively, the highest annual rates since 2009. With petrol prices the highest since September 2012, motor fuel price hikes were also a big contributor to the elevated CPI numbers. All these goods registered price reductions as the pandemic began in March and April 2020. “This morning’s print suggests we should be braced for a showdown at the next MPC meeting in December, where all bets will be on a rate hike. Particularly given we now have more information on the state of the labour market in the UK, which seems to be transitioning from the end of the furlough scheme well. Yesterday’s employment numbers showed a 0.5% reduction in the unemployment rate between the second and third quarter of the year, despite the unwinding of the furlough scheme. But...raising interest rates won’t provide more gas or computer chips (as governor Andrew Bailey has pointed out several times). Carter explains: Some may say that the heightened inflation is evidence that the Bank of England should have acted already and started the process of tightening monetary policy. But really what’s causing the heightened price increases in the energy market is a perfect storm of factors that are all feeding through at the same time. It’s not clear how a modest 0.15bps rate hike would have any impact on the heightened prices in the electricity and gas market. Normal monetary levers might not be effective.” Berenberg’s Kallum Pickering says increased trade costs after Brexit are also adding to the UK’s “broad-based” inflationary pressures: They are driven by the combination of a rapid recovery in domestic demand, widespread global supply shortages as well as the UK’s unique Brexit challenges which raise the cost of trade with the EU, the UK’s biggest trading partner. Core inflation accelerated to 3.4% from 2.9%. In its most recent forecasts published some two weeks ago, the BoE had projected a 4.3% average rate for inflation in Q4. With further rises likely in the coming months, the actual trend is likely to blow through the BoE’s updated forecast. The big upside surprise highlights the uncertainties as well as significant upside risks to the inflation outlook. The data strengthen the case for the BoE to begin its policy normalisation at the upcoming 16 December meeting already. UK firms were also hit by rising costs last month, leading them to hike their own prices at the fastest rate in a decade. Input prices (what companies pay for raw materials, parts, labour and over costs) surged by 13% year-on-year in October, up from 11.9% a month earlier, and the highest rate since September 2008. Output prices (what companies charge for their wares) jumped by 8.0% per year, up from 7.0%. That’s the annual rate of output inflation since September 2011, which could well feed through to consumers in the coming months. These surging producer prices were primarily driven by crude oil and petroleum prices. But, the output cost of other products such as metal, machinery and equipment, chemical and pharmaceutical goods, and paper and printing products also rose. Kallum Pickering, senior economist at Berenberg, explains: Surging producer prices driven by global supply shortages and robust demand growth, as well as local issues such as rising energy costs, have not yet fully passed through into consumer prices. Surveys reporting severe shortages of key inputs and labour as well as anecdotal reports from producers suggest that global supply pressures are still intensifying and may last well into next year. Today’s jump in inflation means it is “even more likely” that the Bank of England raises UK interest rates at its December meeting, from 0.1% to 0.25%. So says Paul Dales, chief UK economist at Capital Economics: Unfavourable base effects may raise CPI inflation to around 4.7% in November and the surge in wholesale prices may result in it rising to around 5.0% by April next year. That peak would be in line with the Bank of England’s forecast, which the Bank has said is consistent with interest rates needing to rise. Further ahead, we suspect that CPI inflation will fall back a bit further and a bit faster in the second half of next year, perhaps to close to the 2.0% target by December 2022. So although interest rates may well rise from 0.10% to 0.25% in December and perhaps to 0.50% in February, we don’t think that they will reach the level of 1.00-1.25% currently priced into the market for the end of next year. Yesterday’s labour market data, showing a jump in workers on company payrolls in October and record vacancies, could also bolster the case for a rate rise. On Monday, BoE governor Andrew Bailey said he was “very uneasy” about the rising cost of living, but wanted to see signs that closing the furlough scheme at the end of September hasn’t caused a significant rise in unemployment. The rise in the VAT rate for hospitality, leisure and tourism businesses to 12.5% in October also pushed up the prices paid by consumers. It replaced the reduced 5% rate introduced in July 2020 after the first pandemic lockdowns, and has pushed up services inflation. James Sproule, chief Economist of Handelsbanken in the UK, says: We expect that most restaurants did not reduce prices when the VAT rate was cut from 20% in July 2020, so the reimposition of VAT (and it is due to rise to 20% at the end of March) has resulted in a step change upwards in prices.” Reaction to the jump in UK inflation is pouring in. Suren Thiru, head of economics at the British Chambers of Commerce, warns that inflation is on “a significant upward trajectory”, and likely heading for 5% next year (as the Bank of England also forecasts). October’s upturn was largely driven by rising household energy costs following the increase in Ofgem’s energy price cap, rising fuel prices and the partial reversal of the VAT reductions for hospitality and tourism which drove up restaurant and hotel prices. “A substantial winter surge in inflation remains probable with the rising cost of imported raw materials and higher energy prices likely to lift inflation to around 5% next year. But, Thiru argues that it should then ease back towards the UK’s 2% target as global supply chain problems improve, and tax rises hit people’s spending power: “The Bank of England are facing a tricky trade-off between surging inflation and a stalling recovery. However, with the UK economy facing mounting headwinds, raising interest rates too early should be resisted to avoid damaging business and consumer confidence.” These chart shows how prices of goods and services have risen in recent months, lifting UK inflation to its highest since late 2011: Grant Fitzner, chief economist at the ONS, says: “Inflation rose steeply in October to its highest rate in nearly a decade. “This was driven by increased household energy bills due to the price cap hike, a rise in the cost of second-hand cars and fuel as well as higher prices in restaurants and hotels. “Costs of goods produced by factories and the price of raw materials have also risen substantially and are now at their highest rates for at least 10 years Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. Inflation in the UK has soared to a 10-year high as rising energy bills, fuel costs, second-hand car prices and food hit families and businesses. Data just released shows that the Consumer Prices Index surged to 4.2% in the 12 months to October, more than double the Bank of England’s inflation target. This is the highest 12-month inflation rate since November 2011, the Office for National Statistics reports. That’s up from 3.1% in September, and higher than City economists had expected. It means the cost of living squeeze has intensified as a tough winter approaches. And it puts more pressure on the Bank of England to consider raising interest rates next month. In October alone, prices rose by 1.1%. The “main upward pressure came from electricity, gas and other fuels”, says the ONS, after the UK’s energy cap was lifted in October. That drove up household bills sharply, hitting vulnerable families hard. The ONS says: In April 2020, the energy price cap had been reduced causing electricity, gas and other fuels’ contribution to the CPIH headline rate to fall to negative 0.20 percentage points. But this fall was reversed in April 2021 with rises in gas and electricity prices. The further price rises in October 2021 have compounded the April 2021 increases, resulting in 12-month inflation rates of 18.8% for electricity and 28.1% for gas. These are the highest annual rates for these classes since early 2009. Rising petrol prices, and the cost of second hand cars, also drove inflation higher. Average petrol prices were 138.6 pence per litre in October, compared with 113.2 pence per litre a year earlier. That’s the highest recorded since September 2012, as the jump in crude oil prices fed through the pumps. Used car prices jumped by 4.6% during October, and have surged by 27.4% since April 2021, as the shortage of semiconductor chips to build new cars pushed up demand. The ONS adds that “restaurants and hotels, education, furniture and household goods, and food and non-alcoholic beverages” also made large upward contributions to higher inflation. More details and reaction to follow.... Inflation’s a global problem right now, and hit a 30-year high of 6.2% in the US last month. That helped to drive up spending on goods and services last month, as Ipek Ozkardeskaya, senior analyst at Swissquote, explains: Yesterday was all about the US retail health, and the sales data looked good at the first sight. But in reality, it was mixed. The US retail sales grew 1.7% in October, up from 0.8% printed a month earlier and better than 1.2% penciled in by analysts. That was the best month since March, however the jump was mostly because things costed more due to an inflation hovering around a three-decade high. The good news is that people could spend more to buy less, the bad news is that an increasing number of people see their purchasing power hit significantly, the savings are melting and the most affected households’ pullback could, at some point, hit the headline number. As such, the strong retail sales data from the US is a half good news. Inflation data from Canada, and updated numbers from the eurozone, will show how inflationary pressures are spreading. We also get new US housing data, and the weekly oil inventory figures. The UK’s FTSE 100 is set for a lower open, down around 0.3% premarket, while the US The agenda 7am GMT: UK inflation report and producer prices index for October 9.30am GMT: UK house price index for September 10am GMT: Eurozone inflation report for October (final reading) Noon GMT: US weekly mortgage applications 1.30pm GMT: Canadian inflation report for October 1.30pm GMT: US building permits and housing starts 2pm GMT: Bank of England policymaker Catherine Mann takes part in a JP Morgan podcast 3.30m GMT: EIA weekly oil inventory figuresScottish ministers have been accused of making a “shambolic” mess of their bottle and can recycling programme after admitting they no longer had a launch date for it. Scotland was expected to be the first part of the UK to introduce a compulsory bottle and can recycling scheme for retailers in July next year, but the Guardian revealed on Monday that the target date was expected to be scrapped. Legislation for the scheme was passed by Holyrood in 2019, and it had been due to start in April this year. That was pushed back to July 2022 – a date embraced by the Scottish National party and the Scottish Green party in their election manifestos this year. Lorna Slater, the Scottish Green minister in charge of delivering the scheme, confirmed on Wednesday that the government was now unsure when it would start and was urgently negotiating with retailers and producers. John Mayhew, the director of the Association for the Protection of Rural Scotland, which leads the Scottish campaign for the scheme, said he was furious. “Four years ago we were promised a world-leading deposit return system,” he said. “Now Scotland looks like an object lesson in how not to deliver one of the world’s most basic and widely deployed environmental measures. Sad to say, we wouldn’t be totally surprised if it now never happened.” Nina Schrank, a plastics campaigner for Greenpeace UK, said: “This shambolic delay to the long-awaited deposit return scheme is embarrassing for a government which loves to shout about its green credentials. Every year of delay means millions more bottles being dumped or burned.” To derision from opposition parties, Slater said the chaos of Brexit, the problems faced by retailers during the Covid crisis and uncertainties about VAT charges on deposits had been obstacles to the scheme’s introduction. She said the Treasury has confirmed on Tuesday that it believed VAT would need to be charged on deposits, and that would make the scheme – which is based on a 20p refundable deposit for each bottle and can – unaffordable. Slater said that was “deeply disappointing”. Mercedes Villalba, Scottish Labour’s environment spokesperson, pressed Slater on why the government had dropped its July 2022 start date since VAT charges had not been a barrier to deposit-return schemes in other European countries. Slater said she was negotiating with retailers and producers “to figure out what the shortest practical time is possible to implement this scheme given the challenges around Brexit and around the pandemic. This is constant industry engagement.” Liam McArthur, the Scottish Liberal Democrat MSP for Orkney, said the scheme posed significant challenges for small rural and island businesses. “Why is the government making such a mess of delivering DRS [deposit return scheme] in Scotland?” he asked. “I’m absolutely aware of the criticality to industry of getting a firm delivery date,” Slater replied. Maurice Golden, for the Scottish Conservatives, said contracts for the scheme were “shrouded in secrecy, with a multimillion tender process hidden from the public and this parliament,” as the government had contracted it out to a private company set up by industry. The Scottish Retail Consortium, which represents major supermarkets, said it was no surprise that the scheme had been delayed as the 2022 start date was unrealistic. “Retailers will raise a weary eyebrow that after this long-postponed announcement there will be a further delay until they receive clarity and visibility on the launch of the scheme,” said Ewan MacDonald-Russell, the consortium’s head of policy. “This process has been drawn out to a pretty farcical degree and needs to be urgently resolved. A new go-live date, no earlier than 2023, needs to be confirmed swiftly.”Although small in stature, my friend Michael Shamash, who has died aged 63, had a very big presence in the lives of many who knew him. Michael had an aptitude for building lasting friendships, whether through chairing the Restricted Growth Association (2003-07), lecturing on critical disability studies at the University of Middlesex, his directorship of the disability advocacy organisation Shaping Our Lives (2018-21), or through his work in social care and his wide range of interests. I met Mike in London in the early 1980s, when we both worked for Camden social services department. Later, we joined forces as shop stewards for the local branch of the public sector union Nalgo (now incorporated into Unison). Mike was passionate about social justice and worked hard to represent the interests of staff in need of help. In the 1990s he served as a trustee to the British Association of Social Workers. On visiting Mike’s flat for the first time, I was struck by the huge, framed wall prints of Russian communist iconography, depicting strong, proud images of Russian industrial workers. These works reflected Mike’s overlapping interests in art, fashion, politics and travel; he regularly travelled, often alone, to non-tourist destinations, such as (then) eastern bloc countries, to enquire for himself about life under different regimes. Also in Mike’s flat were his display of model buses, a form of transport he regularly used and one about whose regional history he had an almost encyclopedic knowledge. Mike could also wax lyrical on the merits of the Trabant car and, eventually, he journeyed to Germany in one with his childhood friend Will Self, the subject of a BBC Radio 4 series, Self Drives: The Trabant, broadcast in 2016. One of four children of Charles Shamash, a dentist, and Arabella (also Shamash by birth), Mike grew up and lived all his life in north-west London. He went to University College school in Hampstead, and studied sociology and politics at the University of Warwick before joining Camden council as a social work assistant. Later he completed an MA in criminology at the University of Middlesex. He loved the city of his birth, despite the demise of some landmarks that were personally significant to him. He and other contributors memorialised these on a website he and an old college friend initiated, called London RIP. As someone with restricted growth, Mike was noticeable when out in public and too often experienced being stared at or even ridiculed. Although never lost for the right expletive, Mike was rarely downhearted and his positive outlook was one of his many strengths, along with warmth, interest in others, and sense of fun. Ten years ago Mike met Helen Tonge and together they had a daughter, Lydia. Mike rejoiced in fatherhood and adored Lydia, who is now two years old and is proving to be as sociable as her dad. Mike is survived by Helen and Lydia, his mother, his sister, Adele, and brothers, Jack and Philip.So the sun is up on another good day to be white, straight and privileged in cricket in the UK. We’ve had an unbroken run of these stretching back, oh, let me lick my fingers and flick through the calendar, about 200 years now. This latest, the 73,049th by that count, is a little harder than some of the others, maybe some people are feeling a little sore as they settle in behind their desks, a little tender as they head into the changing room, gym or nets. But if experience tells you anything, it’s that they’ll all be comfortable again soon enough. Heck, the first Ashes Test starts in three weeks. There are warm-up games to look forward to. What was it Steve Brine MP said on Tuesday, the moment after Azeem Rafiq had just finished speaking about how he didn’t want his own son to go anywhere near cricket? “In conclusion then, by how many will we win the Ashes?” Thanks for getting back to what’s important, Steve, Rafiq’s testimony really needed the light relief. Which part got you hardest? The moment a teammate pinned him down and forced him to drink red wine while everyone else stayed silent? The one when the beloved old fast bowler called him “Raffa the Kaffir” and “elephant washer”? The bit where a venerated England captain bluntly contradicted his testimony, supported by two of Rafiq’s teammates, that he told him “there’s too many of you lot”? Or was it when he argued that the reason his teammates can’t recall racist behaviour at Yorkshire was because it was so normal that it became forgettable? Or when he said he felt the players’ union called the police on him just so they would have proof they’d tried to do something useful if he killed himself? That horror you’re feeling, the chill, the nausea, the hurt, all that unease and discomfort, don’t turn away from it. It’s necessary. Without it, nothing will change. Last week I wrote about how the game we’d seen in the media these past few weeks was both depressingly familiar and yet utterly unrecognisable from the game that’s played out there, in which a multicultural England team won the World Cup, and one-third of recreational players are from British-Asian backgrounds. And this week Rafiq’s testimony leaves a similar feeling. The extreme discrimination he faced was startling, but there was something dispiritingly familiar in what he said about the culture of the game, and how good people let bad behaviour slide. Just last month the Guardian ran an interview about exactly that with the England and Wales Cricket Board’s managing director of women’s cricket. That culture is one reason why there is only one British-Asian player on the books at Yorkshire, one reason why there is only one openly gay male player in professional cricket, one reason why pretty much every woman working in the press box has her own private story about being harassed. You can see it in Yorkshire, see it in the ECB, and maybe you can see it in your own experiences, too, in that talented kid who used to play for your club but who fell out of the game because he didn’t fit in, or that overheard remark you let pass when you were in the crowd. Me, I can see it in the second-hand truths I knew about some of the great old players but which I left out when I was writing tributes to them. The game always turns back to its comforts. Rafiq has given English cricket a chance to confront this. This opportunity cost him his health and his career. Now it’s up to everyone involved in the game to make the most of it. So what next? The ECB is running an “all-cricket meeting” to discuss it on Friday. Is it just more bunk and after the past 25 years, is there enough proof that the ECB can be trusted to fix this? But there is a model we can follow. For the past year, Cricket South Africa has been running “social justice and nation building hearings” to determine the causes, nature, and extent of racial discrimination in their game. The hearings are overseen by an independent ombudsman, and broadcast on YouTube. English cricket needs something similar. As Rafiq said, “There’s a quick rush to move forward, I think before we move forward, the game needs to listen to a lot of people who have suffered a lot of abuse up and down the country.” The ECB, and Yorkshire, have set up hotlines for people to report their experiences. What do you trust them to do with information harvested in private? Who, exactly, do you expect them to protect once they have it? Rafiq’s testimony showed the power of having these conversations in public. And it does need to be a conversation. Everyone implicated in the SJN hearings is given notice, and the opportunity to respond. This process only works if we hear from the people who failed, as well. Not in the form of short apologies signed off by lawyers, or statements of outright denial, but as part of a proper public discussion in which people are free to apologise where they need to, without feeling like they are going to be condemned for life. We need to hear, too, from all the people I wrote about last week, the ones who are out there every day, working to make the game better, about the obstacles in their way. And we need, as Rafiq says, to keep a relentless focus on the system rather than being distracted by back-and-forths between individuals. Because it’s not another episode in the culture war, but a hard conversation about what needs to be done; at the end of it, a clean start. And the depressing thing is, can we be sure any of this will happen? Now, about those Ashes …Reading have been deducted six points for breaking the English Football League’s financial regulations. The Championship club agreed the punishment with the EFL after they breached profit and sustainability rules, which permit a maximum loss of £39m across three seasons. They have also accepted a suspended six-point penalty that would be triggered if they fail to comply with a business plan. Reading’s reported £41m wage bill in 2018-19 equated to 194% of turnover and the EFL said the club exceeded permitted losses by £18.8m. The six-point deduction leaves Reading 19th, four points above the relegation places. As per league regulations, an “agreed decision” ensures an outcome without the need to refer the matter to an independent commission. Reading will need to comply with a business plan for the remainder of this season and next to avoid further sanctions. It includes controlling player-related expenditure. In 2018 Birmingham agreed to a business plan after exceeding the allowed losses. On Monday Reading announced the signing of the former England striker Andy Carroll on a contract until January. Paunovic said Carroll, who had been without a club since his release by Newcastle, was “a great match” for the club. Reading have been limited to signing free agents and loans since being placed under a transfer embargo. Danny Drinkwater and Scott Dann were among those brought in on frees in the summer. Reading, who were taken over by the Chinese investor Dai Yongge in 2017, were relegated from the Premier League in 2013. Reading declined to comment. On Tuesday the EFL confirmed Derby had been docked a further nine points after admitting to breaching rules over the £81m sale of their Pride Park stadium, leaving the division’s bottom club 18 points from safety.My friend Mike Mercer, who has died aged 81, was for 50 years the landlord of the Albion Inn, an attractive street-corner pub in the heart of Chester. The words “pub” and “landlord” scarcely do justice to the Albion or to Mike. A romantic and a perfectionist, he devoted much of his life to maintaining the comfort, atmosphere and appearance of a traditional English public house. The Albion was a magnet for those who believed that a drinking establishment should be a retreat from the bustle and frenzy of the outside world, where real ale and good food should be enjoyed in a relaxed and intimate atmosphere. Its decor proclaimed Mike’s old-fashioned and benign patriotism, but the atmosphere of the place was politically ecumenical. In its three bars, Guardian readers and devotees of the Telegraph sat side-by-side, talked sport and picked each other’s brains for crossword clues. The flip-side of running a pub on such traditional lines was the banning of what Mike considered the worst aspects of modern life: piped music, adulterated food, wide-screen television and bad behaviour. No purveyor of strong drink was ever so keen on prohibition. Mike enjoyed playing the curmudgeon, but his true nature was kindly, genial and humorous. He was passionate in his interests, supreme among which was the history of those who fought and died in the first world war. To that tragic generation he dedicated his pub, decorating the walls of every bar with an extraordinary array of memorabilia. The men and women of that war were not just memorialised in the fabric of the pub: they were honoured in Mike’s celebrated midwinter “Christmas in the trenches” gatherings; evenings of popular music of the first world war period, along with recitations and general revelry, to which a dwindling cohort of veterans were invited each year. Although Mike seemed to have been ordained from birth to become a landlord, keeping a pub was not something he had originally wanted to do. He was born in Northfleet, Kent, to Edward Mercer, a building firm manager, and his wife, Kathleen, and grew up in Kingsley, Cheshire, after the family moved there for Edward’s work. On leaving school he realised his dream of going to sea, qualifying as a radio officer and serving for much of his 20s in the merchant navy. An early marriage, which ended in divorce, and family commitments eventually brought him ashore, and he signed a lease with Greenall’s Brewery to run the Albion. Years at sea had cured Mike of the itch for foreign travel and he never wanted to be more than a day’s ride away from Chester in case the pub needed him. It was a good-humoured grumble of his second wife, Christina (nee Veal), whom he married in 1987, and who helped him run the pub, that the furthest he wanted to go on holiday was Scarborough. Mike is survived by Christina and and by his three daughters, Clare, Faith and Lorna, from his first marriage.Talking to MPs recently, an effusive Sajid Javid lauded the vital role paid by “our fantastic GPs”. But his warm words are unlikely to have persuaded many of England’s family doctors that the new health secretary was softening his stance in an increasingly bitter dispute over his insistence on face-to-face appointments for any patient that asks. The row has led to the first clash between the government and medical profession since Javid’s predecessor Jeremy Hunt confronted junior doctors in 2015 over weekend working, which led to a year-long struggle including a series of strikes by trainee medics. “GPs are under savage attack by the media and the government,” says one senior doctors’ leader, referring to a recent barrage of hostile coverage of family doctors in government-friendly newspapers. Family doctors believe they have been wrongly portrayed as lazy, overpaid and overly relaxed about the risk of missing signs of a serious illness by conducting appointments remotely – a practice Matt Hancock, Javid’s predecessor, advised them in 2018 to embrace. They are also fuming about plans to “name and shame” practices that don’t offer enough face-to-face appointments and force GPs who earn more than £150,000 a year from NHS work to declare it. Javid’s edict on in-person consultations could escalate into industrial action by GPs though not outright withdrawal of their labour. The British Medical Association (BMA) has undertaken an indicative ballot of GP practices to gauge appetite for taking action short of a strike to show their anger. The union’s GP committee meets on Thursday to analyse the results and decide what to do next. The stakes are high for both sides. Javid is taking on the group of workers the public trusts most: doctors. Research by Ipsos Mori found that 72% of Britons trust medics while only 15% trust government ministers. “This conflict is fraught with danger for the government and has been poorly thought through. There is little to be gained in picking a fight with hard-working healthcare workers in the midst of the pandemic,” says Conservative MP Dr Daniel Poulter, a former health minister. Another Tory MP says: “This is a political misjudgment.” The immediate flashpoint is whether GP appointments are conducted in person, as happens in about 60% of cases currently, down from 80% pre-pandemic, or remotely. GPs say stubbornly high Covid infections mean it makes sense to limit numbers who come into the surgery and that many patients either don’t need to be seen in person or are happy to interact by phone or video call. Public frustration at the difficulty in getting to see a GP had been growing for several years before Covid. But the BMA, Royal College of GPs and opposition parties at Westminster say the real problem is the falling number of full-time GPs at a time when demand for care has been rising due to the growing and ageing population. Family doctors are looking after on average 300 more patients each than they were in 2015 – a 15% rise. Javid recently admitted the government is likely to break its 2019 promise to boost the number of GPs by 6,000 by 2024. Hunt failed to deliver his target – 5,000 more by 2020 – because GPs retiring early outnumbered younger doctors joining the profession. “The public will always tend to trust doctors – particularly their GP – over politicians. The longer the conflict continues, the more it allows GPs to highlight the failure of previous secretaries of state for health to deliver the 5,000 extra GPs that were promised in the 2015 Conservative manifesto,” adds Poulter, himself an NHS psychiatrist. Beccy Baird, the King’s Fund lead on primary care, says the row matters because “for most people general practice is the face of the NHS, the part of the NHS they access most in any given year”. But GPs’ unique status as self-employed contractors, rather than directly employed NHS staff, can frustrate ministers, she adds. “There are long memories of the 2004 GP contract debacle, which saw GPs being able to opt out of out-of-hours work for a 6% loss of income. Some in government believe that must never happen again; that GPs can’t be seen to ‘win’ in contract negotiations.” A YouGov poll of 5,425 adults in the UK found that 66% prefer a face-to-face appointment, 5% a video call and 25% don’t mind which it is. Anna Quigley, the research director at pollsters Ipsos Mori, says: “Access – getting through when needed and the ease of making an appointment – is really important to patients. The qualitative and quantitative data on remote v face-to-face appointments suggests that remote appointments work well for some. “What seems most important to patients, though, is having the choice of appointment or knowing that a [face-to-face] appointment is available should they really need it.” Javid has stressed that patient choice is the principle driving his hardline stance. Who is likely to win the battle for hearts and minds over GP access? Quigley says it’s unclear who the public will side with if the BMA does decide to take industrial action. “We know there’s a lot of support for the NHS and those who work in it. When junior doctors went on strike the majority of the public supported them. Some 57% supported the all-out strike, which affected emergency [A&amp;E] care [but] it was 66% when emergency care wasn’t affected.” Dan Wellings, an expert on public attitudes towards the NHS at the King’s Fund, points out that previously issues of public access have translated into upset with the government. But, he adds, it is possible that this time doctors end up as the losers in the court of public opinion. “It’s hard to know where the public will point the finger of blame. There is a risk this might be different, in part because of the coverage from some sections of the media, and that a larger than usual proportion of the public might blame GPs. “It’s also important to point out that the difference with the junior doctor strikes is that the actual effect of that was felt by a relatively small percentage [of people] whereas access to primary care is key when it comes to overall perceptions of the NHS because it is the service used by the largest proportion of people.”Under Theresa May and Boris Johnson, the Conservative party has become increasingly ungovernable. The process shows no sign of stopping. It will continue in the next parliament, especially if Johnson wins with a smaller majority. Let me be clear. This isn’t me speaking: it is the view of a number of current and former Conservative MPs, with different standpoints, whom I have been talking to in recent days and weeks. The events of the last two weeks are a demonstration of this process at work. In the pre-Brexit past, the Tory party’s internal cohesion was led from Downing Street, enforced by the whips and backed up by the backbench 1922 Committee and its officers, who were essentially a parliamentary arm of government. Discipline was one of the party’s most intimidating parliamentary assets. Today almost the reverse is true. Tory discipline still exists, sometimes very formidably and effectively. But it exists in little groups of like-minded MPs, not across the party as a whole. Brexit highlighted that reality. But the reality continued after Britain finally left the EU in January 2020. Revolts among MPs are an almost weekly occurrence. Johnson’s proposal to clamp down on MPs’ outside earnings and jobs has provided a powerful example. That clampdown was promoted this week as though it would wrongfoot Labour and perhaps even recapture a bit of what remains of the moral high ground after the Owen Paterson debacle. But that is not how it was actually seen by Tory MPs, or probably even Johnson himself, and it is highly unlikely it will get anywhere soon. The proposal was performative. The reforms will not happen because even if he believed in the policy, Johnson could not rely on his party to deliver it. Many things make the modern Conservative party unusually difficult to manage. Its large parliamentary majority means a lot of thwarted ambition on the backbenches. But there are also a lot of backbench groupuscules – all divided by various forms of ideology, habit, culture and self-interest – a development enhanced by the successes at the 2019 election in the old industrial north and by Johnson’s own unpredictability. One of those groups, based around the so-called Spartans who brought down May, triggered the ill-judged attempt to get Paterson off the hook for breaking lobbying rules. This wasn’t really a government matter at all, in the old sense. But it was one in the new, groupuscule sense. It was a disaster. But despite the prime minister’s U-turn over Paterson, the groups still hold the power. One of the key facts to grasp about the past fortnight is that second jobs are much more common among Conservative backbenchers than opposition ones. Partly this is because that is the Tory party’s tradition; partly because they are the governing party. Either way, Johnson’s clampdown would have hit his own party worse than any other. Tory MPs would have felt it in their wallets. It would have been especially threatening to backbenchers with long careers in safe seats, and to those who no longer expect to become ministers. This is why, under the current ungovernability, it is never going to happen. Johnson’s proposal is based on a 2018 report by the independent committee on standards in public life. It would ban paid work as a parliamentary adviser or consultant and would insist that outside work be confined “within reasonable limits”. In short, it would threaten the way a significant proportion of Tories now organise their lives, which is partly why it has been gathering dust so far. There is a minefield of mischief in the report’s recommendations. Can an MP who sits on a board be defined as a parliamentary adviser? If not, that could be a loophole. And what are “reasonable limits”? It makes a lot of difference if they are defined by the income obtained or, as the government hopes, by the extracurricular hours spent. Crucially, who decides the meaning of “reasonable”? The answer cannot realistically be the prime minister. The committee says it should be the parliamentary commissioner for standards, Kathryn Stone, yet she is anathema to many Conservatives, including Johnson. Tory MPs hate these plans, and they tend to get what they want. The clear inference is that No 10 does not expect serious reform – which presupposes a cross-party approach and agreement, both unlikely – to see the light of day. But for many Tory MPs, the damage has already been done. For them, it is simply another sign that Johnson is a bad leader who does not bother to consult them, is not good at delivering, and whose credibility is on the slide. This tension, and the governmental ineffectiveness that umbilically goes with it, is not confined to the sleaze and standards rows. It is part of a whole range of major policy choices that now face Johnson and his party. These range from net zero carbon emissions, through a series of key public spending decisions, to this week’s much-trailed announcement about high-speed rail. On all of these, the gulf between the promises made and the evolving reality is enormous. Post-lockdown Covid policy is a powerful example too, with England (as distinct from the parts of the UK where Johnson’s writ does not run on health issues) essentially junking restrictions and regulations, while allowing Covid cases to rise and pressure on the health service to increase. The policy makes little sense and was not even supported by a majority of the public. It is in force because the issue is a hostage to the travel and entertainment industry interests, and ultimately to libertarian groupings on the Tory backbenches. The prime minister’s personal popularity has papered over many of the divides, failures and contradictions in the way he governs. In a striking chapter about 2019 voters in the newly published Nuffield study, it is made clear that Johnson’s attractiveness was the most influential factor behind former Labour voters switching to the Conservatives – far greater than either Brexit or dislike of Jeremy Corbyn. The question today is how far that is still true. Johnson’s ratings have fallen sharply. Yet his position remains secure. Tory MPs don’t like his methods or his ideas but they like his popularity. When he eventually ceases to be party leader, however, it is highly likely that the strange and unstable coalition over which he presides will become even less manageable than it is today. In those circumstances, the voters may look at the parties very differently too. • Martin Kettle is a Guardian columnistThe embattled boss of the video game company Activision Blizzard is facing a shareholder rebellion one day after employees staged a walkout to protest about the company’s response to sexual misconduct allegations at the firm. “In contrast to past company statements, CEO Bobby Kotick was aware of many incidents of sexual harassment, sexual assault and gender discrimination at Activision Blizzard, but failed either to ensure that the executives and managers responsible were terminated or to recognize and address the systematic nature of the company’s hostile workplace culture,” a group of shareholders, led by the Strategic Organizing Center (SOC) Investment Group and holding a total of 4.8m shares, wrote in a letter shared on Wednesday with the Washington Post. In addition to demanding Kotick’s resignation, the shareholders called for the board’s two longest-serving directors, Brian Kelly and Robert Morgado, to retire by the end of the year. The letter follows a report in the Wall Street Journal on Monday that claimed Kotick had been aware of some of the sexual misconduct behavior at the company for years. That report came on the same day that 110 employees walked out of the company’s Blizzard Entertainment headquarters in Irvine, California, after Kotick had described the Journal report as misleading in a video message distributed to employees. Activision is one of the largest and most successful makers of video games, with titles including Call of Duty and Warcraft among its products. With a market valuation of more than $50bn, it is the second largest US-headquartered game company after Microsoft with revenues of $8.1bn last year. Allegations against the company’s leadership center on its alleged failure to take action over an email the company received in July 2018 in which a former employee at Sledgehammer Games, an Activision-owned studio, alleged that her client had been raped by her male supervisor in 2016 and 2017 after being induced to consume alcohol at work and at work-related events. The employee reported the incidents to Sledgehammer’s HR department and supervisors, but no action was taken. Activision reportedly settled with the woman but Kotick did not inform the company’s board. The incident followed a number of similar alleged incidents of sexual assault and mistreatment of female employees which Kotick has also told directors and other executives he was not aware of. But according to the Journal, some departing employees who were accused of misconduct were praised when they left the company, while co-workers were encouraged to remain silent. The company is currently being investigated by the Securities and Exchange Commission into how it has handled reports of misconduct and the California department of fair employment and housing filed a lawsuit over the summer alleging numerous complaints of harassment, discrimination and retaliation had been ignored by the company. Among those, was a complaint in 2020 by 30 female employees who said that women had been subjected to unwanted touching, demeaning comments, exclusion from important meetings, and unsolicited comments on their appearance. Rejecting the characterization that Activision is dominated by a “frat boy” culture, Kotick said: “I am very committed to making sure we have the most welcoming, most inclusive workplace in the industry.” But Wednesday’s shareholder letter warned that if Kotick, Kelly and Morgado refused to step down, the activists would refuse to vote for the re-election of the board next year. “After the new revelations, it’s clear that the current leadership repeatedly failed to uphold a safe workplace – a basic function of their job,” the SOC executive director, Dieter Waizenegger, said in an interview with the Post. SOC holds a small fraction of Activision’s roughly 779m shares, with investment giants Vanguard holding 64m and BlackRock, 58m. “You need to have a clear governance failure,” he told the Post. “And now we believe, we can point to not only an overpaid CEO, but we have very clear implications for recruiting talent at the company, and potential legal ramifications, with regulators like the California agency and the Securities and Exchange Commission … that’s an indication that something went very wrong.” Kotick, 58, is one of the highest-paid chief executives of a US public company, with a pay package valued at $154m in 2020. After the initial reports of sexual harassment surfaced, Kotick said he would ask the board to cut his compensation to $62,500. A long-term female employee, Jennifer Oneal, was named to be co-head of the firm, but a month later she said she had no faith the company would “prioritize our people the right way” and said she, too, had been sexually harassed early in her career at Activision. “I have been tokenized, marginalized and discriminated against,” Oneal, who is Asian American and gay, wrote.My friend John Lambert, who has died aged 75 of cancer, was a director, performer and founder of the Q20 community theatre project in Bradford. He was also a Labour councillor for seven years and was among those who masterminded the restoration and refurbishment of the city’s Alhambra theatre. John established Q20 in 1969 with the aim of bringing theatre to a wider audience. It started in his parents’ house and grew to become a thriving company and business. John created stage productions throughout Yorkshire and ran a full-time theatre-in-education programme, visiting local schools. He was born in Baildon, West Yorkshire, to Joan (nee Heaton) and Hugh Lambert. When he was young, the family moved to Northern Rhodesia (now Zambia), where Hugh worked as a hydrogeologist. John attended the Gilbert Rene school in the capital Lusaka. On holiday back in Britain during the mid-1950s he saw two films, The Red Balloon and Disney’s Peter Pan. With no TV and little radio in Lusaka, he was spellbound. When the family returned to Yorkshire in 1965, John attended the Rose Bruford College of Speech and Drama in London. After he left, he was determined to start a theatre company in Bradford, which had no rep and no theatre provision for children and young people. Along with four friends from college and with the help of his parents, sister, Jill, and brother, Michael, John took over the family home to make costumes and create sets. He persuaded local authorities to back his idea of taking theatre into schools and his project soon grew. The company performed in public areas, shopping malls, galas and festivals and took a residency at the Gateshead Metro centre. On the education side, his group of actors went into schools every day and in the holidays performed in theatres. Over the years John employed thousands of actors, many of whom went on to have successful careers, including Robin Herford, the director of The Woman in Black; Simon Jones, who played Ford Prefect in Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy; Joanne Good, the BBC radio presenter; and Kevin Hubbard, a television producer. In 1980 John was elected to Bradford city council and four years later became its chair of education and arts. In all he served for seven years, championing diversity as well as being a driving force in the restoration of the Alhambra theatre, which re-opened in 1986. He also continued to perform himself, particularly as a clown, and with his clowning partner, Ros Ottery, represented Britain in an international clowning festival in Japan in 1989. John eventually realised his long-held dream of finding a permanent home for Q20 and a community creative hub. In 2013 he obtained a machine shed in Shipley and converted it into rehearsal rooms, studios and offices. The “Hub” has supported numerous groups including photographers, painters, film-makers, potters, a bagpipe maker and a casting director. John never retired but continued to work at the Hub. In 1978 he married Jacquie Mosley, and she survives him along with their children, Benjamin and Charlotte, his stepson, Alexander, five grandchildren, William, Matilda, Solomon, Theo and Jasper, and his sister, Jill.Speaking during his first appearance as the manager of Norwich City, Dean Smith made it clear that there was only one issue he wanted off the table: the events of his city break to New York last week. “I can’t say too much about New York, I’m afraid!” he beamed, with the glint of a man who really wanted you to know he had some stories to tell, if only he could. Smith had been in the Big Apple with his wife to see their son and, while he was there, mull over the prospect of taking the Canaries job. What precisely had he got up to? “A cycle round Central Park, trip to the Empire State Building, ferry to Staten Island; you know, typical tourist stuff.” Another big grin. In the space of nine days Smith had been sacked by the club he has supported all his life, whom he had just given the best years in their recent history, only to then become the man chosen by the league’s bottom team as someone who “shares our values” and can not only keep them in the division but help them kick on. Chuck in the ferry ride and it’s quite the whirlwind. As Smith spoke about his time at Aston Villa, his processes in moving on and his ambitions at his new club, it was clear he was not about to get emotional. Calmness was the abiding mood. The big smile was probably deliberate, to get everyone relaxed, the same for a gag about what he’s like at home when he is out of work: “I’ve got a little bit of OCD in me so I’m in the fridge making sure the ham is not out of date.” There was not a note of panic over the prospects for a Norwich side six points from safety. “If I thought [the job] was a risk wouldn’t have taken it,” Smith said. “My job is to keep us in the league this season and I firmly believe that’s what we can do. "The fact is we’re only 11 games in and have 27 games left. Yes, it hasn’t been the greatest of starts, hence why I’m sat here, but if you look at the teams who we had to play early on, it was tough. The win against Brentford was a big thing for the players. It should give them confidence to go on now. It’s a good squad that’s probably been underperforming and our job is to get performances.” Smith, who watched a number of Norwich games during his transatlantic flights, said it had not been a hard decision to come to East Anglia, nor to get over the separation with the club he so closely identifies with. “In my 30 years in football only three have been with Villa,” he said. “I know how to disconnect from each club and go fully and wholeheartedly into each new project. “I’ve said right from the start I’m a big boy and I can handle it. The hardest part is telling the people who are closest to you. But by Monday you have to move on. That’s life. I was brought up in a family with values of: ‘You have to cope.’ So we coped and moved on and thankfully Stuart [Webber, Norwich's sporting director] got in touch and we met up on Tuesday. I’ve always felt Norwich was a well-run football club. From the outside, coming here, they had passionate supporters, the club was very supportive towards the management team but you also have a team that plays exciting football, plays through the thirds. So from the outside I’ve always been impressed.” From Norwich’s point of view, you could see why Smith fits the bill. Although Frank Lampard was in consideration Webber had sought out Smith as soon as he knew of the Villa sacking. Smith has the pedigree they need; his experience will be valued more broadly too. Questions of how Billy Gilmour and Todd Cantwell may fit back into the team are for another day. “Both have a huge role to play,” said Smith, “as do the entire squad.” The first item on the agenda, Smith says, is to tighten up the defence. “We want to make defensive organisation and structure stronger,” he said. “I think there’s enough quality … We won’t go away from the type of football that the club has been known for, but fans should expect to see an organised, hard-working team who won’t leave anything out on the pitch. Hopefully they can enjoy some good performances.”David Lacey, the Guardian football correspondent whose impeccable judgment and unerring ability to turn match reports into an art form made him a titan of the press box, has died at the age of 83. A fixture in the pages of the Guardian for nearly 50 years, Lacey wrote his first match report for the paper in November 1964, covered 10 World Cups, retired as football correspondent after 30 years in 2002 and continued writing on football on these pages until 2013. Lacey’s byline was a watermark of quality. Long before the advent of laptops and the internet, he would phone over word-perfect match reports to copytakers, despite the din and crackle of the crowd, in time for the final whistle and for them to be devoured in the next day’s paper. Lacey was born in Lewes, Sussex in 1938. His father was the editor of a county newspaper and after national service in the RAF David followed him into journalism, joining the Evening Argus, where he cut his teeth in football reporting covering Brighton. His first assignment, though, was to pay the managing editor’s electricity bill. From there he joined the Guardian’s sports desk as a subeditor but after going to games in his spare time he quickly built his reputation. Sir Bobby Robson, the England manager from 1982 to 1990, was one of many inside and outside the game who regarded Lacey, particularly in his round-up essay on the weekend’s football in Monday’s paper, as a “must-read”. Lacey was named sports reporter of the year in 1997 and 2002. He covered his first World Cup in England in 1966 and after Pelé, his favourite player, retired from international football in 1971 Lacey hailed him as being “to Brazilian football what Bradman was to Australian cricket”. Lacey wrote: “To most people, if only because of the distance involved, Pelé represents a remote ideal – the ultimate coordination of mind and muscle, the perfect footballer – or as near as perfect as makes no difference. If this sounds sycophantic then examine his record: more than 1,000 goals at an average of 77 a year, with a top score of 125 in 1959.” No wonder, Lacey said, that when a European club wanted to sign Pelé “the Brazilian government of the time, knowing that if he left the country they might as well follow, passed an act of parliament prohibiting the transfer”. The Azteca in Mexico City was his favourite stadium. It was there he saw the favourite game of his career, Italy’s 4-3 victory in the 1970 World Cup semi-final, and England crash out of the 1986 World Cup to Argentina. He began his report of the latter match with a classic Laceyism: “The sorcery, not to mention the sauce of Diego Maradona, ended England’s World Cup hopes last night.” It was the hand of God that captured the headlines, but Lacey also paid tribute to Maradona’s wondrous second goal when he “left three England defenders lying on the ground like rag dolls before slipping the ball past Shilton”, describing it as one of the greatest ever. “Stevens was beaten by a sway of the hips, Butcher with a shrug of the shoulders, Fenwick with contemptuous ease,” Lacey wrote. “Shilton was given no chance.” Such language showed Lacey was an aesthete at heart and as early as 1973, during a period where English football was in one of its fallow periods he argued that kick‑and‑rush style was a poor substitute for skill. “Football is a game of possession, passing and precision: it is also a game of pace as opposed to unqualified speed,” he wrote. Such words could have been echoed by Pep Guardiola four decades on. Lacey died on Monday at a care home in St Ives, Cambridgeshire. His brother Roger said: “After he retired from the Guardian, David moved to the Cambridgeshire countryside, where he very much enjoyed the company of his family. In later years he went into care and while his memory may have faded he could usually be relied on to recall his first visit to Wembley for the Matthews Cup Final, Pak Doo-ik’s famous goal as North Korea beat Italy in the 1966 World Cup or the time he crossed swords with Mrs Thatcher during a Downing Street reception.” The former England international Gary Lineker tweeted: “Saddened to hear that #DavidLacey has died. An outstanding football writer whose match reports were so frequently a thing of beauty. A lovely man has left us. RIP David.” Sportswriters from across the industry paid tribute. Lawrence Donegan, the Guardian’s former golf correspondent, said watching him compile his match report from a press box was “like watching Picasso paint”. Paul Hayward, a former chief sportswriter for the Guardian and Telegraph, said “you felt proud to share a page with him”. The writer and journalist Michael Calvin described Lacey as “a gentle man, with a quietly wicked sense of humour. A brilliant match reporter, observant and insightful.” Matt Dickinson of the Times said: “I’m not sure David Lacey ever wrote a clumsy sentence.” Amy Lawrence of the Athletic, a former Guardian football writer, said Lacey was “a great in every way”. Her colleague Daniel Taylor, a former chief football writer of the Guardian, said he was “one of my press box heroes and one of the genuine greats of sports writing”. Ben Clissitt, a former Guardian sports editor, said: “He was the easiest person to work with. He wrote what he wanted to write. It was brilliant. And that was that.” Katharine Viner, editor-in-chief of Guardian News &amp; Media, said: “David was one of the giants of Guardian journalism, an outstanding journalist whose economy of writing and stylish wit lit up our pages for 50 years, including 30 as football correspondent. “In a career that encompassed thousands of games – including 10 World Cups – he showed time and again he was a great match reporter. As Frank Keating wrote on David’s retirement in 2002, he may well have been ‘the best football writer in the English language there has ever been’. He was liked and admired by readers, colleagues and people across football and his influence on our coverage resonates to this day.”We are unashamed septuagenarian members of the alleged subtitle-friendly minority (Pass notes, 16 November), utilising the TV facility for everything from British documentaries to US crime thrillers. The only potential hazard we ever encounter is when something called “audio description” is applied by mistake and a disembodied voice will suddenly proclaim: “And now he sticks a knife in her back.” Quentin Falk Little Marlow, Buckinghamshire • While I can understand Jean Davies’ reluctance to be visited by Boris Johnson (Letters, 15 November), I would welcome the chance to tell him what I think of him, preferably with media in attendance. I’m beginning my radiotherapy on Monday at the Beatson Cancer Centre in Glasgow, Boris, if you’d care to drop in. Rodney Smith Newton Mearns, East Renfrewshire • So, a “new space mission to hunt for potentially habitable planets around Earth’s closest neighbouring star system is under way” (Report, 16 November). Perhaps we should try to make this one habitable first. Rose Harvie Dumbarton, West Dunbartonshire • The clue “Kind of Swiss clock?” (Quick crossword, 17 November) should actually read “Kind of German clock?”. Ask them in the Black Forest about this common misconception! Patrick Russell Ealing, London • It’s interesting how men accused of abusing women have amazingly poor memories (Stanley Johnson accused of inappropriately touching Tory MP, 16 November). Sue Leyland Hunmanby, North Yorkshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.You report that “A&amp;E staff have struggled to find beds for patients because the hospital has run out of space as a result of Covid-19, because of an inability to discharge patients who are medically fit to leave, or due to the record demand for care” (NHS patients dying in back of ambulances stuck outside A&amp;E, report says, 14 November). Aren’t you missing the elephant in the room? The reason A&amp;E staff are struggling to find beds is that the beds aren’t there any more. When the Conservatives came to power in 2010 there were 169,681 hospital beds in the UK. By 2020 the Tories had slashed that to 131,795. Hospitals aren’t coping because the Tories are destroying the NHS. Denis Beaumont Wombourne, Staffordshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Jill Hughes writes of her longing for a Triumph Pink Witch bike (Letters, 11 November). In 1975, my family moved house, and I needed a bike for school. Dad bought one via the local paper small ads – a secondhand Pink Witch, 1958 vintage, one careful past owner. I’m sorry to say that I didn’t love it: it was heavy, and I cringed at the girly colours and the kitsch badge (a witch’s hat and broomstick). I named it Rosencrantz, for the pink, and learned to appreciate its reliability and its hub dynamo lights. After my A-levels, Dad gave it a makeover, painting it a more androgynous dark blue. In 1979, I took this old friend to university, where it was stolen – but then found thanks to the university’s system of numbering student bikes. I remember it fondly now, and enjoyed the thrill of recognition when I first read Edna O’Brien’s The Country Girls, where the dashing Baba rides a brand new Pink Witch. Jackie Collins featured in Triumph’s first ads for the Pink Witch: “Smart bike for smart girls”. Alison Cawley North Petherton, Somerset • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.As the art market evolves with new and emerging technology such as NFTs, we must ensure that we protect the rights of artists through mechanisms such as the artist’s resale right – payments that, crucially, support artists’ ongoing practice and livelihoods, and ensure they have a continuing stake in the increasing value of their work. While some in the global art market feel that there is a “royalty system missing from the physical art world, where artists often feel as if they have been shafted when their work is resold on the secondary market” (‘I went from having to borrow money to making $4m in a day’: how NFTs are shaking up the art world, 6 November), forms of the artist’s resale right law have existed in parts of Europe since the beginning of the 20th century. Its origins date back to the experience of the family of the French artist Jean-Francois Millet (1814-75), who were living in poverty following his death while his works sold for vast sums. Since 2006, the Design and Artists Copyright Society (DACS) has paid out over £100m in artist’s resale rights to artists and their estates – a royalty payment for paintings, sculptures and photographs that are resold on the art market. The question now is, how do we ensure that artists’ rights are maintained for artworks including NFTs? How, as a society that values creativity, do we guarantee that artists working in new technology are protected? Gilane Tawadros Chief executive, DACS • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.I have loved cricket for as long as I can remember; I have followed my county and England for 48 of my 55 years. I have been with England through highs and lows, from Headingley 1981 to the doldrums of the 1990s, and watched it rise again from 2005. I have admired David Gower, Ian Botham, Bob Willis, Graham Gooch and many others. As a Briton of south Asian descent, I have been filled with hope by watching Moeen Ali, Adil Rashid and many others who look and sound like me wearing an England shirt. I have also been stigmatised by the Tebbit test, have suffered negative treatment at all levels of English cricket, and have despaired of the lack of fairness, but through it all, my love of the game and passion for the England team has been constant. Not any more, I’m afraid. As the full story of the horrors suffered by Azeem Rafiq becomes clear (Azeem Rafiq tells MPs that ‘inhuman’ racist abuse cost him cricket career, 16 November) and now with other stories emerging, I fear that I may finally have to acknowledge that I cannot support this game or this team any more. It is not for the likes of me; my support is taken for granted and we receive little back from the game other than contempt. A shame, but I’m afraid my patience is gone. I applaud Rafiq, a remarkable and courageous man, and wish him well. I urge English cricketers to reflect on their actions and how they wield their power and influence, and for whose benefit. At the moment, it’s not for me. Nadeem Razvi Saffron Walden, Essex • As this week’s news from the cricketing world has shown, racism and racist abuse are very much alive in our society. Being the victim of racism can obviously have long-term negative effects on mental health. But racism can be damaging even when experienced vicariously. News reports and stories on social media in themselves may be distressing and may lead to hypervigilance and heightened distress in those who socially identify with the victims. Many of those not directly affected by racism are quick to condemn this behaviour and to defend its victims. People overwhelmingly want to help and support those affected by racism – but not everyone knows how to do so effectively. There is strong evidence that social support can mitigate some of the effects of racist discrimination. So-called “bystander behaviours” such as simply checking in with someone who may have experienced racism and offering them support are important and effective. Many factors influence our willingness to help victims of racism, or to intervene when witnessing a racist incident. Research has shown that active bystander training can help. Several organisations in the UK (such as Besea.n and the Racial Justice Network) offer such courses free of charge. Liesbeth Tip Edinburgh • The origins of Yorkshire County Cricket Club’s difficult relationship with Asian cricketers go back well before the current management. In the 1980s, Asian constituents of mine asked me why there were no Asian cricketers on the county books when there were many good young Asian cricketers in Yorkshire. I raised this with Brian Walsh QC, the club chair, who said he would look into it. He came back to me to say that because Asian cricketers did not feel welcome in clubs in the top Yorkshire leagues, they had formed their own league and that the county’s talent spotting system had not extended to this area of the game. This omission was rectified and young Asian cricketers began to enter the Yorkshire coaching system. Recent events suggest that underlying racist attitudes still exist and urgently need to be rectified. Michael Meadowcroft Liberal MP, Leeds West, 1983-87 • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Dani Alves went up the stairs and into the light at the end of the tunnel, where he stepped past a mat positioned at the edge of the Camp Nou pitch with Johan Cruyff’s most famous instruction written on it. “Go out there and enjoy it,” it said, as if Alves needed telling. Oh he was going to enjoy this, all right. That, after all, was what he was here for – part of the reason he had rejoined Barcelona five years later – and they couldn’t have wiped the smile off his face if they had tried. At the white line, Alves paused and slipped off his flip-flops – yes, flipflops – and stepped on to the pitch barefoot. He wanted to feel the grass, he said. In the stand above, 10,378 people roared and he laughed, which he did a lot. Wearing a black polo neck, a black velvet jacket and nothing on his feet, he took the microphone and, looking up at it all, cackled like Sid James. The Dani Alves show was back in town, and they were loving it. “Alves! Alves! Alves!” they chanted. He paraded back and forth, bowed and waved and pulled faces and cracked up, an atmosphere of celebration around him. It might have been a bit silly, and it was natural to wonder whether a 38-year-old free agent who hasn’t played for five months can really rescue Barcelona, especially when the club’s chief executive, Mateu Alemany, admitted there was no money to sign anyone else, but maybe they need a bit of that. “In recent years they have loaded negative things on to their shoulders,” Alves said. “It’s time to change and you need to be positive. That’s my mission here.” And so it went, until he signed off with his own twist on the traditional rallying call: “Long live Barça! Long Live Catalonia! And long live the mother that gave birth to you all!” He insisted “I’m one of you” and, still barely believing this was happening, kissed the pen with which he was invited to sign his contract, table and papers prepared on the pitch. That contract starts now, although he can’t play until 1 January, and runs out at the end of the season, but the 2022 World Cup is his target and Alves said that in these six months he would do what he could to convince the club to extend that deal. “If I fail, I’ll pack the suitcase myself. ‘Ciao!’” he said. That was not all he signed or kissed. He signed the billboard with his Warhol-style image on, doing so with a smiley face, and he kissed the shirt of course. On the back was an eight, the fifth number he has worn here after two and 20, 22 in honour of Eric Abidal, and six in honour of Xavi Hernández, the former teammate who is now his manager. That is a trend he said he was continuing. “I believe in paying homage to people while they’re still alive,” he insisted, citing Hristo Stoichkov and Andrés Iniesta and bringing another cheer, more kisses. “The last time I had this microphone, I said the dream wouldn’t end there,” he told them. “That’s why I’m here again.” Why, was the question. What could Alves offer? “I might have a bit less hair but some things never change: the spirit, the fight, the soul,” he said in the press room, dark glasses added to his outfit, but still no shoes. He also reckoned he was more handsome now and claimed that he had been so “pesado”, such a pain, constantly calling Joan Laporta and offering to play pretty much for free, that in the end the president passed him on to Xavi to get rid of him. “And when Xavi called and said they could do with my help, I didn’t want to hear anything else,” Alves said. As much of the focus was on the personality as it was on the player, and Alves talked about what he could do off the pitch, about “harmony” “synergy” and a “dressing room [that] is better with me in it”, about how he could change the culture at the club, returning them to the way they were. The man who has more winner’s medals than anyone else suggested “those of us with more kilometres on the clock” could help the younger generation, pointedly talking up Ousmane Dembélé. And when it came to sending footballs sailing into the upper tier, he had failed three times, giggling as the shots fell short. But it didn’t matter. And for all that the character is part of the charm, for all that the showmanship and nostalgia was unavoidable – asked whether Lionel Messi could come back too, Alves replied “give me a couple of hours and I’ll go and get him myself” – there has always been a seriousness about him, an iron competitiveness. And he insisted that has not changed. “Lifting cups is what’s really special,” he said. Since Alves left in 2016 Barcelona have spent €85m on right-backs, and none has adequately replaced him. “I’m special,” he said. He was laughing but he was right, just as he was when he said that “sometimes here it’s not enough just to be a great player”. There was another glimpse of that ambition in his refusal to meekly accept the assumption that he is here to play a pastoral role, still less a secondary one. Or that his position may shift. “I come to play as a full-back,” Alves said. “But I can do other things and when you put a limit on what you can do, it reduces your chances. My focus is the team. Xavi will decide. I am training as a full-back, working to win my place. Not because of what I did before but what I do now, to earn the right to wear this shirt. Many things in life change but the desire doesn’t. I’m coming here to fight. I know what this club represents. If we all pull in the same direction this boat will reach the port sooner.” Asked whether he expected to be a back-up option, he shot back: “I wasn’t born to be second. I’m not here to pass the time, just to live in Barcelona. I’m here to go to war. I’m here to fight to play. Not because of my history or because I have a good relationship with the coach, the president or the club, but because of my work. Age is just a number. There are lots of older players at a very high level and that’s my objective. I showed that at the Olympics. People expect the best of me and I’m going to respond. I’d like to thank everyone for coming here and I can guarantee I won’t let them down.”Andrew Neil has said journalists are “basically the PR department of Greenpeace” when it comes to reporting on the climate crisis, as the interviewer indicated he would like to return to British television screens in the future. The presenter, who had a brief but disastrous stint with the rightwing channel GB News, told a television industry conference that there was not enough critical reporting on predictions about the impact of rising global temperatures. Neil has previously said he accepts that climate change is real and needs confronting, but accused the likes of Extinction Rebellion of “nonsense scaremongering”. “You don’t need to be a climate reporting sceptic to challenge a lot of the reports that are coming out,” he told an event organised by Freeview, singling out recent coverage by the BBC and Sky of the Cop26 climate summit. Sky recently pledged to use its programming, including its news coverage, to nudge people to reduce their emissions. Neil complained that the news channels gave airtime to the president of the Pacific nation of Tuvalu complaining that his country was sinking due to rising sea levels, without also covering a 2018 study arguing that some of the islands have increased in size. However, the interviewer has no outlet for his views after his acrimonious departure from GB News this summer. Neil said his decision to help found the channel was the “single biggest mistake” of his career and it was now heading in a “Fox News direction”, with its backers resembling a “Ukip tribute band”. Despite losing many behind-the-scenes staff, GB News has ironed out many of the technical issues that plagued its launch. Its audience ratings are being sustained by the former Ukip leader Nigel Farage, whose weeknight evening show attracts a small but consistent audience of about 100,000 viewers. Neil predicted GB News would survive because “the investors are long-term and quite ideological” but he deeply regretted being involved in the shambolic launch. “The mistake was that I put my face on the tin and yet I quickly discovered that I really had no say over what was going into that tin.” He raised the prospect of returning to British television screens in 2022, with potential employers including the BBC or Rupert Murdoch’s forthcoming talkTV channel. “I’d like to do something on the TV front for one major reason and it’s entirely self-serving: I don’t want GB News to be the full stop in my broadcasting career.”Jane Campion has spoken out against superhero films calling them “noisy” and “ridiculous”. The Oscar-winning writer-director of The Piano was asked about her thoughts on the genre at a recent screening of her new awards-tipped Netflix drama The Power of the Dog. “I hate them,” she said to Variety. “I actually hate them” When asked if she would ever consider making the leap, she gave a firm response. “I think it’s safe to say that I will never do that,” she said. “They’re so noisy and like ridiculous. Sometimes you get a good giggle, but I don’t know what the thing is with the capes, a grown man in tights. I feel like it must come from pantomime.” In September, Campion told the Hollywood Reporter that she would never do one because she doesn’t need the money. “I don’t see so many people going backwards into smaller budgets once they go out and do a great big Marvel movie,” she added. “I think it’s hard to go back into personal stories.” Campion is the latest acclaimed director to criticise superhero films, following on Martin Scorsese, who compared them to “theme parks” in 2019, and Ridley Scott, who called them “fucking boring as shit” earlier this month. Both Marvel and DC have tried to bring over more auteurs, most recently Chloé Zhao, the Oscar-winning Nomadland director who made this month’s Eternals. But the film has become the Marvel Cinematic Universe’s worst reviewed offering to date. The Power of the Dog is the first film from Campion since 2009’s Bright Star and is one of the frontrunners for next year’s best picture Oscar. It stars Benedict Cumberbatch as a sexually repressed rancher who develops a strange fascination with an effete young man. The Guardian’s Peter Bradshaw gave it five stars and called it one of Campion’s best.In the bitter aftermath of him narrowly missing the ultimate achievement in tennis two months ago, Novak Djokovic spoke openly in New York about the pressure that came with his grand slam attempt. For weeks, he said, emotions became increasingly intense and difficult to handle, weighing so heavily on his shoulders even though he has already experienced and overcome most things in the sport. After he was beaten in the US Open final in straight sets by Daniil Medvedev, in the obvious sadness and frustration one of his very first emotions was simple relief. Difficult losses leave a mark and can linger in any player’s psyche for a while, so there was little surprise Djokovic spent the following weeks away from the court. It would not have been shocking if his efforts during this season had left a small mark on him and his motivations before a full reset in the off-season. But six weeks after the US Open Djokovic went to Paris and this month won a record 37th Masters 1000 title. That he bounced back so quickly, shaking off the rust through the rounds and remaining supremely motivated at the end of yet another long season as he overcame Medvedev in the final was impressive in itself. The nature of his victory was even more notable. Djokovic shook their match up by deciding his route to victory was partly in the forecourt. For two hours and 15 minutes he continually flitted to the net, serve and volleying 22 times and winning 19 points on them while approaching the net 36 times. As Djokovic, Medvedev and the rest of the top eight converged for the first ATP Finals in Turin, they strolled around the city last Friday for promotional photos. Djokovic stood out; not only did the 34-year-old seem ancient in a group where the next oldest players are 25, but a defining feature of the new generation is their height and athleticism. Most of them towered over Djokovic, who stands at 6ft 2in. When Djokovic first broke into the top 10, only one man, the 6ft 4in Ivan Ljubicic, was taller than him. Performances like the Paris final underline how Djokovic has consistently improved and evolved his game, particularly with the growing dominance of his serve and his ever-present variety, allowing him to adjust and remain on top even in his mid-30s against far younger athletes. Djokovic opened his tournament in Turin by overcoming a solid first set by Casper Ruud to win 7-6 (4), 6-2. He followed it up with a dominant, succinct 6-3, 6-2 win over Andrey Rublev on Wednesday. The most memorable moment of the encounter with the No 5-ranked Russian came at 2-2, deuce on Rublev’s serve in the second set. Rublev had Djokovic on the ropes, pounding forehands from side to side from inside the baseline, shots that would have been winners against almost every other player. Instead, Djokovic dug out a slice forehand at full sprint and splits, before flitting to the other corner and landing a winning angled backhand passing shot. Completely rattled by Djokovic’s defence in his first meeting with the world No 1, Rublev meekly gave away the break point with a backhand unforced error. He did not win another game. Throughout this season Djokovic has tidily arranged so many of his records in order and his Paris Masters run allowed him to clinch seven seasons as the year-end No 1, breaking his tie with his idol, Pete Sampras. By winning the Paris title, he also passed Rafael Nadal to become the owner of a record 37 Masters 1000 titles. This is a unique season and it is not over. With his win over Rublev, Djokovic’s record in Turin is now 4-0 in sets and he is already into the semi-finals. He will have the benefit of facing Cameron Norrie on Friday with no stress at all as he waits to see if anyone can meet his level at the top. Later on Wednesday, Norrie started brilliantly against Casper Ruud, the eighth seed, before he was gradually worn down by the tenacious Norwegian, who won 1-6, 6-3, 6-4 in just under two hours. Ruud will face Rublev on Friday, with the winner joining Djokovic in the semi-final from the Green Group. Norrie, the second alternate, was drafted in to the ATP Finals after the withdrawal of Stefanos Tsitsipas due to an elbow injury.My friend and former colleague, Grenville Jackson, who has died aged 72 of lymphoma, worked as a planning officer in Lanarkshire and Greater Manchester before joining the Development Board for Rural Wales in 1977. Senior posts in economic development with other Welsh public bodies followed and in 2006 Gren joined the civil service in Wales. I met Gren the following year when I joined the Welsh government as director of skills, higher education and lifelong learning. He was a member of my senior management team and led the division that provided support to industry bodies and employers to help them meet their training and development needs. He was charismatic, energetic, a great networker and passionate about the ways in which education and skills can contribute to business development. Gren’s talents were amply demonstrated when the economic crisis began to bite in 2007-08. The Welsh government saw an urgent need to help businesses cope with the recession and to protect jobs. Gren’s team developed and obtained significant EU funding for the ProAct programme, which enabled employees who had been placed on short-time working to learn new skills, and provided wage subsidy support to help retain skilled staff who might otherwise be made redundant. The independent review of ProAct in 2011 praised its innovative approach and estimated that it had safeguarded more than 1,800 jobs, adding far more value to the Welsh economy than it had cost to run. Gren and his team had the satisfaction of seeing ProAct’s impact described in the New York Times in an article on job-saving schemes in the EU. Gren was born in Nottingham, the son of Eddie and Florrie Jackson, both factory workers, and went to High Pavement grammar school. He studied urban and regional planning at Oxford Polytechnic before joining Lanarkshire county council as a planning officer. Later he completed an MA in regional economics at Lancaster University and then took up a regional planning post at Greater Manchester council. Gren retired from the civil service in 2011; he was made OBE the following year for his distinguished public service for Wales. For more than 40 years Gren and his wife, Anne-Marie, lived in Bishop’s Castle in Shropshire, close to the Welsh border. He was active in local organisations such as the local Labour party, health board and tennis club, and was a trustee of the AQA Examination Board for nine years. He drove many miles in support of his home-town football team, Nottingham Forest, hoping in vain to see them return to their place at the top of English football. Gren is survived by Anne-Marie, whom he met as a student on the planning course at Oxford Polytechnic and married in 1972, and by their sons, Rory and Corin, and grandchildren, Leila and Seth.The BBC has postponed the return of Radio 5 Live’s Tuffers and Vaughan Cricket Show amid ongoing turmoil in the corporation over how best to deal with a racism allegation against the expert summariser Michael Vaughan. The programme was pulled initially for one episode after Vaughan was accused of making a racist remark while playing for Yorkshire in 2009, which the former England captain has vigorously denied. However, its planned return next Monday has also been shelved, with the BBC putting Rugby Union Weekly in its 9pm slot instead. The BBC did not respond to a request for comment but insiders say the show is now unlikely to return until next month – at the earliest – and that the question of whether Vaughan will be part of the BBC’s Ashes coverage also remains up in the air. Vaughan, who has worked as a summariser and analyst on Test Match Special for 12 years, has been accused of telling three players of Asian descent that there were “too many of you lot, we need to do something about it” before a county match in Nottingham. That allegation was brought up again by Azeem Rafiq in his appearance in front of MPs on Tuesday, who said Vaughan had also used a Daily Telegraph column to try to discredit him. However, Vaughan vehemently denies the allegation and also says he has the backing of the other Yorkshire players in the match, which has made the issue particularly difficult for the BBC to resolve. Meanwhile, the Sky cricket analyst David Lloyd has apologised to Rafiq after it emerged in parliament that he had sent text messages about his personality and drinking that attempted to smear the former Yorkshire player. Rafiq said: “He rang me last night and I told him honestly what I thought about his comments, they were completely out of order. But the overriding thing was he rang, he apologised, I accepted the apology. Anyone that apologises ... that’s all I ever wanted.” News of the apology emerged after Sky had revealed it was investigating Lloyd’s texts. A Sky spokesperson told the Guardian: “Sky is committed to actively championing inclusion in cricket – and in all sports – and opposing all forms of discrimination. We will be investigating the comments attributed to David Lloyd in the select committee hearing.” On Tuesday night Lloyd also issued a public apology, saying he deeply regretted his actions. “In October 2020, I had a private message exchange with a third party involved in cricket, about a number of topics,” he said. “In these messages, I referred to allegations about Azeem Rafiq which I had heard from within the game. I also made some comments about the Asian cricket community. I deeply regret my actions, and I apologise most sincerely to Azeem and to the Asian cricket community for doing this, and for any offence caused.”Much to the dismay of many Symphony Hall regulars, this is Mirga Gražinytė-Tyla’s last season as the City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra’s music director. Though she will remain associated with the orchestra for at least another year as its chief guest conductor, there’s still a feeling she is leaving unfinished business – projects never realised, parts of the repertory never explored. But at least there is some opera in Gražinytė-Tyla’s final year – this performance of Janáček’s celebration of the enduring power of nature. The Cunning Little Vixen was presented as a stripped-down concert staging, directed by Thomas Henderson, with appropriate costumes for the protagonists, and a troupe of children from Trinity Boys Choir and Old Palace School as the creatures of the forest. However sumptuously Janáček’s score evokes the wonder of the natural world, there’s no denying that it does lose more than many operas without the visual trappings of a full production. The CBSO’s playing was consistently outstanding, but Gražinytė-Tyla’s approach sometimes seemed brisker and more matter-of-fact than ideal, though the glorious peroration of the final scene certainly made its point. What seemed missing most of all was some of the work’s vital humour and charm. Though there were surtitles, it might have been more involving had the opera been sung in English rather than the original Czech, especially with an almost entirely anglophone cast; Vixen Sharp-Ears herself, the Russian Elena Tsallagova, was the exception. Tsallagova, who is also due to sing the role with Gražinytė-Tyla conducting in a new production in Munich in January, was secure and contained – not the liveliest vixen, or the most endearing, but certainly a feisty one. Roland Wood was the rather gruff Forester, not quite conveying the full sense of wonder and renewal in the final scene, and Angela Brower the assertive, swaggering Fox; Robert Murray, Kitty Whately, Elizabeth Cragg, William Thomas and Ella Taylor, all doubled, trebled or – in Whately’s case – even quadrupled, in some vivid cameos. There was no doubting the care that had gone into every aspect of the performance; one just wanted the result to be more involving and, finally, more touching.My teacher and friend Gerry Hughes, the Jesuit philosopher, who has died aged 87, taught and administered at Heythrop College, University of London, from 1970 to 1998 and was then master of Campion Hall, Oxford, until 2006. He was a scintillating lecturer and exigent tutor, fearlessly and ingeniously defending individual conscience and the rationality of faith. To his pastoral work he brought remarkably clear thinking, a warm heart and a delightful unworldliness. Born in Surrey, one of three children of Margaret (nee Barry), a primary head, and Henry Hughes, a marine engineer, Gerry was educated at St Aloysius’ College, Glasgow, from which he entered the Society of Jesus in 1951. In addition to the usual Jesuit studies in philosophy and theology, he took firsts in mods and greats at Oxford and wrote a fine thesis on Aristotelian moral responsibility under Charles Stevenson at Michigan. Notable among his books are The Nature of God (1995) and Aristotle on Ethics (2001). Moral objectivity was a subject to which he returned in articles written throughout his career. He argued that the right thing to do, once discovered, possesses an authority that cannot be seriously dented by collisions with either personal moral weakness or the resistances of the culture. Gerry personified the practical wisdom of Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethics. His arguments were careful and his conclusions full of good sense, and he was passionate in manner and prudent in judgment. Faithful friendship came naturally to him. What he said and did was thought through, his teaching and example enhancing his students’ vision of goodness. In addition to his religion, music enchanted him. Gerry sang well and enjoyed, above all, Bach. The musical architecture of the Leipzig Passions fascinated him, as a person whose own apprehension of the central truths of Christianity was rational, exuberant and intricately harmonious with traditional faith. He played a full part in Jesuit life and was often a superior, and always a kind and conscientious trainer of younger members. He was an influential member of the 1974 General Congregation, which made significant changes to the life of the Society of Jesus. The title of his book Fidelity Without Fundamentalism (2010) sums up his attitude to church affairs. Progressive and a little impatient with the slow pace of reform, Gerry was nonetheless devotedly protective of the spiritual inheritance he had received; he understood it thoroughly and lived it with complete integrity. Gerry’s sister, Clare, and brother, Brian, predeceased him. He is survived by his sister-in-law, Cora, and three nieces and one nephew.Two men convicted in the assassination of Malcolm X are set to be cleared after more than half a century, with prosecutors now saying authorities withheld evidence in the civil rights leader’s killing. Muhammad Aziz and the late Khalil Islam, who were incarcerated for a combined 42 years for the crime, were being exonerated after a nearly two-year investigation by their lawyers and the Manhattan district attorney’s office. A court date is expected on Thursday. “This points to the truth that law enforcement over history has often failed to live up to its responsibilities,” the Manhattan district attorney, Cyrus Vance Jr, told the New York Times, which first reported the news. “These men did not get the justice that they deserved.” One of the civil rights era’s most polemical yet inspiring figures, Malcolm X rose to fame while advocating Black power as the Nation of Islam’s chief spokesperson. He famously urged Black people to claim civil rights “by any means necessary”. The revered leader was gunned down as he began a speech in Harlem’s Audubon Ballroom on 21 February 1965. He had left the Nation of Islam a year earlier, and had conceived of a new project, the Organization of Afro-American Unity. A Netflix documentary miniseries, Who Killed Malcolm X? reignited interest in the historic case last year, rekindling suspicions that the US justice system had targeted the wrong men. Aziz, Islam and a third man, Mujahid Abdul Halim – known at the time of the killing as Talmadge Hayer and later as Thomas Hagan – were convicted of murder in March 1966 and sentenced to life in prison. Halim confessed that he was one of three gunmen who attacked Malcolm X, but he testified that neither Aziz nor Islam were involved. They also maintained their innocence. Decades later, the men’s lawyers, the Innocence Project and the Manhattan district attorney’s office have pieced together the crime, although there are few living witnesses or potential suspects, and documents and physical evidence are largely unavailable. Even with those hurdles, they found enough to conclude that a new jury very well might have acquitted the two men. The investigation uncovered a living witness who supported Aziz’s alibi that he had been at home the day of the assassination, FBI documents about other suspects, and more. “This wasn’t a mere oversight,” lawyer Deborah Francois told the Times. “This was a product of extreme and gross official misconduct.” Aziz, who was called Norman 3X Butler at the time of the shooting, was released in 1985. He is now 83 years old. Islam, formerly Thomas 15X Johnson, was released two years later and died in 2009. The two collectively spent years in solitary confinement, according to the Times. They languished behind bars at some of New York’s most infamous maximum-security prisons. Both had children when they were locked away, and their marriages crumbled. “It affected them in every way you could possibly imagine,” said civil rights lawyer David Shanies. “Them and their families.” Associated Press contributed to this reportThe Biden administration is planning to dedicate billions of dollars to build up vaccine manufacturing in the US to produce at least a billion doses each year, in an effort to shore up global Covid-19 supply for poorer countries while also pre-empting future pandemics. As part of a public-private partnership, the government will draw on knowledge from companies that already use mRNA technology to make vaccines. Its ambitious goal is to get to a point where the US can produce at least a billion doses each year starting around mid-2022, according to the New York Times, which first reported the news. “This is about assuring expanded capacity against Covid variants and also preparing for the next pandemic,” David Kessler, who leads vaccine distribution for the White House, told the Times. “The goal, in the case of a future pandemic, a future virus, is to have vaccine capability within six to nine months of identification of that pandemic pathogen, and to have enough vaccines for all Americans.” A billion vaccines could also boost availability around the world, fighting the stark inequities that have so far plagued Covid-19 vaccination campaigns. “This effort is specifically aimed at building US domestic capacity,” Kessler said. “But that capacity is important not only for the US supply, but for global supply.” The initiative – which Kessler said will probably cost several billion dollars – relies on funding from the $1.9tn American Rescue Plan, pandemic relief that was signed into law earlier this year. Roughly 59% of eligible people in the US are fully vaccinated and nearly 16% have received booster shots. The White House said on Wednesday that about 10% of eligible children aged five to 11 have received a dose of the Pfizer Covid-19 vaccine since its approval for their age group two weeks ago. That equates to at least 2.6 million kids, said Jeff Zients, the White House Covid-19 coordinator. The pace of vaccination for that age bracket over the last week is more than three times faster than the rate adults were vaccinated at the start of the country’s vaccination campaign 11 months ago. The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is trying to expand eligibility for boosters to all adults in the coming days, providing Americans added protection during the holiday season. But many global citizens have yet to access a single shot, much less a full dosage or booster. Across Africa, for example, only 6% of the population has been fully vaccinated, the World Health Organization (WHO) reported in late October. These yawning disparities have incited pushback from global health leaders, who are urging policymakers to consider the bigger picture instead of focusing on domestic safety alone. “In the context of ongoing global vaccine supply constraints, broad-based administration of booster doses risks exacerbating inequities in vaccine access by driving up demand and diverting supply while priority populations in some countries, or in subnational settings, have not yet received a primary vaccination series,” the WHO said in a statement. In response to these critiques, Joe Biden’s administration has committed to donating over a billion vaccines abroad, a process that’s slowly rolling out. “I made – and I’m keeping – the promise that America will become the arsenal of vaccines as we were the arsenal of democracy during World War II,” the president said during a Covid-19 summit in September. “To put it another way: for every one shot we’ve administered today in America, we have now committed to do three shots to the rest of the world.” Yet critics have warned that the administration’s commitments abroad lack the urgency a deadly virus demands. Whether its new plan to increase manufacturing capacity will substantively address those concerns remains to be seen. “Purchasing doses for donation sometime next year is helpful, but it does not meaningfully expand the global supply,” Peter Maybarduk, who works for the non-profit consumer advocacy group Public Citizen, previously told the Times. “And it is not justice.” Associated Press contributed to this reportThe UK advertising watchdog has launched an investigation into a London bus and underground ad campaign for Floki Inu, a “meme coin” cryptocurrency named after a dog owned by Elon Musk, as pressure rises to ban the marketing of crypto products on public transport networks. The Advertising Standards Authority launched the investigation after receiving complaints about Floki’s latest campaign. The poster campaign encourages the public to invest in the cryptocurrency craze, appealing for them to look to Floki if they were not quick enough to buy into other popular cryptocurrencies, such as Doge, early enough. “Missed Doge? Get Floki”, runs one strapline. The campaign, which ran for three weeks last month, also uses the company’s cartoon dog logo. Products such as Floki are known as meme coins because they are launched quickly with branding that responds to popular cultural phenomena. In May, the ASA banned a campaign for the cryptocurrency exchange Luno that ran on the Transport for London (TfL) network. The campaign, which told the public “it’s time to buy” bitcoin, was found to be misleading and irresponsible for encouraging people to invest in unregulated financial products. On Wednesday, a spokesperson for the ASA said: “While I can’t go into specifics at this time, I can confirm that we are currently investigating Floki Inu.” The investigation, which was first reported by the Financial Times, comes days after Liberal Democrat and Green party members of the London assembly called on TfL to stop taking advertising from cryptocurrency-related firms until the UK government and Financial Conduct Authority set out new guidance on marketing. TfL says that while it does not have a ban on the marketing of cryptocurrencies, the ad campaigns are more heavily scrutinised than those for other sectors. This includes adding a disclaimer on all ads making it clear that cryptocurrencies are unregulated in the UK. “TfL is writing to the ASA and FCA to ask for their views on the concerns being raised,” said a spokesperson for the mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, who chairs TfL. “Once TfL has that input they will consider what action might be necessary going forward.” Floki, which is funded by an anonymous group, said its ads complied with “all laws and regulations”. Last year, the UK Treasury proposed the introduction of stricter rules for the financial advertising of most cryptocurrencies.