After four Olympic Games, seven gold and two silver medals, Sir Jason Kenny, Britain’s most decorated Olympian, has announced his retirement. Kenny admitted a certain amount of reluctance as he heads into coaching as Team GB’s sprint coach. For now, at least, he remains the most successful Olympian in his own household as well. Kenny, who was knighted in the new year honours after his memorable triumph in the keirin in Tokyo last summer saw him claim yet another Olympic title, formally began work as British Cycling’s men’s podium sprint coach this week. He said the decision had been taken jointly with his wife Dame Laura Kenny, Britain’s most successful female Olympian, who won her fifth gold with victory in the Madison alongside Katie Archibald last summer, and he hopes the new role will allow him more quality time with their son, Albie, who turned four last August. Laura is expected to target Paris 2024 for her fourth Olympics where she will be the same age, 33, that her husband is now. “It wasn’t an easy decision,” said Kenny. “I genuinely wanted to carry on to Paris, but I creak quite a lot these days and I always knew I wanted to go into coaching off the back of it, and this opportunity came along. I am a little bit sad to be honest because all I’ve known is riding and competing, but I’m quite excited to get stuck into the job.” He added: “Athletes’ days off are not really off – you’re planning for the next day,” he said. “It basically consists of not doing anything too arduous and fuelling right … you can’t just go and play football with Albie or whatever. Now I think I’ll have less time off but I’ll be able to enjoy it more.” Having previously racked up six gold medals and two silvers from his appearances in Beijing, London and Rio, Kenny stepped away from the sport for a year before deciding to head to his fourth Games. The 33-year-old had conceded he was “struggling” during the men’s sprint in Tokyo but saved arguably his most thrilling performance in the keirin for what turned out to be the final race of his professional career. The victory meant he surpassed both Sir Chris Hoy and Sir Bradley Wiggins as Britain’s most successful Olympian, with Kenny also becoming most decorated cyclist in Olympic history. Asked if winning his specialist event in Tokyo was the perfect way to sign off, he said: “It is. I’m dead happy with that. It was really special. To do it on that bike, the last day of the Olympics, for me that’s a really special moment in time. If I could have picked a day to end on, that would be the one.” Kenny replaces Scott Pollock, who had served as sprint coach in an interim role following the dismissal of Kevin Stewart in November 2020 for “inappropriate relationships” with riders. Hoy won team sprint gold alongside Kenny at the 2008 Olympics in Beijing and the Scot said he was looking forward to seeing his former teammate move into his new role. “I was really excited to hear that Jason has been appointed as the men’s sprint coach,” Hoy said. “He was a fantastic teammate, an extraordinary athlete and I’m looking forward to seeing him translate his experiences over four Olympic Games into supporting the next generation of talented British riders to achieve their best.” The British Cycling performance director, Stephen Park, added: “To win an Olympic medal of any colour is a magnificent achievement, but it’s almost impossible to comprehend the level of talent, dedication and resilience needed to top the podium seven times across four Olympic Games. “It goes without saying that Jason has made a magnificent contribution to our team, and I’m thrilled that we’ve been able to hold on to all of that knowledge and experience as he embarks on his career as a coach.”When Ikea bought the former Kings Mall two years ago, more than a quarter of stores in the run-down Hammersmith shopping centre stood empty. On Thursday, the Swedish furniture giant’s £170m experiment on the west London shopping mall will be tested with the opening of Livat, its first city centre shopping mall globally and the first to be refurbished rather than built from scratch. While Ikea’s parent group controls 47 other shopping centres worldwide, at 37,000sq metres Livat is just over a third of the size of its typical site and its first in the UK. Livat also houses Ikea’s only high street store in the UK – which is a quarter of the size of a typical store. The former Kings Mall is now fully let, with new tenants including German discount supermarket Lidl, a Library of Things (a social enterprise) and Sook, the rent-by-the hour retail or events space, alongside an Ikea’s outlet. “This is the first step on our journey to develop more city centre locations,” said Cindy Andersen, managing director of Ikea’s parent group’s property arm, Ingka Centres, which bought the 1980s site. “This was a perfect opportunity to refurbish and existing location which has been established for a long time and taking the next step to put some new energy into the place.” The mall, which Ikea spent £170m on buying and redeveloping, will include a small market hall for local food pop-ups alongside Ikea’s own Swedish Deli and two further cafes offering meatballs, open sandwiches and coffees. Brightly coloured seating on a stairway below a repaved atrium will lead to a locally run cafe above the mall, which sits beside a revamped outdoor space for council tenants in the residential block above, with a wildflower meadow, seating and planters. The project is a bold bet on a post-Covid world. It paves the way for the redevelopment of the former Topshop flagship on London’s Oxford Street, which will reopen as Ikea next autumn as the Swedish group plans to spend £1bn on expanding in the capital over the next three years. Andersen said Ikea was “actively searching” for more urban sites to redevelop in cities in the UK and across Europe and North America. Later this year, Ikea will breathe new life into San Francisco’s 6X6 “ghost mall” which has lain empty since it was completed in 2016. The group is meanwhile redeveloping Toronto’s Aura Podium which formerly housed a branch of Bed, Bath &amp; Beyond and some restaurants. The Hammersmith store opens a year later than expected after works to knock through smaller stores and a former Debenhams and a basement area, which was once several stockrooms, took longer than expected during the pandemic. Peter Jelkeby, the manager of Ikea’s UK retail business, said the retailer would look at a range of opportunities to fill in gaps and make the furnishings store more accessible in London as shopping habits change. More than 44% of the group’s UK sales were online last year compared to 19% in 2019. “We need to be agile,” he said, pointing to the group’s experiments with lockers where shoppers can pick up products in Twickenham and Kingston, west London. If the idea proves popular 20 more sites are on the cards in London by the end of this year. “Hammersmith is a new way to reach consumers. It is going to be accessible to quite different shopping behaviour … I am optimistic about physical [store] space but it needs to be in harmony with digital sales.” He said Ikea expected the furniture market to continue to grow, even if there was a slow down from the “extreme demand” for certain kinds of products, such as desks and office chairs, which was seen during the pandemic lockdowns and the switch to working from home. “It’s a volatile market but we are fairly optimistic,” Jelkeby said. He admitted that securing supply and transport of a whole range of products was “still challenging” and it was not clear how long the issues would last. Ikea said it expects price inflation of 10% to 11% in the UK and Ireland this year, although some products have risen by as much as 50%. Jelkeby said: “We have been absorbing a lot of cost increases and inflation is going to [continue] to be around us. We will continue to become more efficient and the consumer will decide if we are competitive.” Ikea’s Hammersmith store is a step on from Ikea’s previous high street formats in the UK, all of which have now closed, such as the small store based around planning kitchens or bathrooms in central London’s Tottenham Court Road and Bromley, south-east London. The store, which houses 18 room sets, compared to more than 30 in a typical Ikea store, featuring large items that can be ordered for home delivery as well as room design services and 1,800 different smaller items to takeaway, from mugs, artificial plants and kitchen kit to technology such as lamps featuring a Sonos smart speaker. The biggest item that can be taken home immediately is a coffee table.Students in England will have to pay back university loans over 40 years instead of 30 under swingeing reforms designed to save the Treasury tens of billions of pounds. The number of students expected to pay back their loan in full is expected to double from under a quarter (23%) to more than half (52%) as a result of the changes, which will see many graduates paying for their degree until retirement in what was described as a “lifelong graduate tax”. In a move designed to sugar the pill, interest rates on student loans will be slashed for new borrowers and set at no higher than the rate of inflation from next year – but experts said this would disproportionately benefit higher earning graduates. The controversial measures form the backbone of the government’s long-awaited response to the Augar review of post-18 education and funding, which will be detailed in a statement to parliament on Thursday. In a double whammy, graduates will also be asked to start paying off their debt sooner after the government confirmed the repayment threshold will be cut from £27,295 to £25,000 for new borrowers starting courses from September 2023. Annual tuition fees will be capped at £9,250 for a further two years, keeping costs down for students but hitting universities, which have seen the value of tuition fees eroded over the years due to inflation. The Department for Education (DfE) said the changes would “rebalance the burden of student loans more fairly between the student and the taxpayer and ensure that in future graduates don’t pay back more than they borrowed in real terms”. But Martin Lewis, founder of MoneySavingExpert.com, warned that most university leavers would pay thousands of pounds more for their degrees over their lifetime than they do now. “It’s effectively a lifelong graduate tax for most,” he said. “Only around a quarter of current [university] leavers are predicted to earn enough to repay in full now. Extending this period means the majority of lower and mid earners will keep paying for many more years, increasing their costs by thousands. Yet the highest earners who would clear [their debt] within the current 30 years won’t be impacted.” Bridget Phillipson, Labour’s shadow education secretary, accused the government of delivering another stealth tax for new graduates which will hit those on low incomes hardest. The student finance measures are aimed at stemming the soaring cost of student loans. At the end of March last year the value of outstanding loans stood at £161bn and is forecast to rise to about £500bn by 2043, the DfE said. While currently the department anticipates that graduates will pay back 59p in every £1 over the lifetime of their loans, under the reforms the DfE calculates borrowers will repay 81p, with a graduate earning £28,000 repaying about £17 a month. In addition to the changes to student finance, the government will also launch two consultations on Thursday. The first will seek views on controversial proposals to introduce minimum eligibility requirements to access student loans – either by requiring students to have a grade 4 pass in GCSE English and maths, or two Es at A-level – and student number controls to clamp down on what the government describes as poor-quality, low-cost courses. The second sets out plans for a lifelong loan entitlement for the equivalent of four years of post-18 education (£37,000 in today’s fees) to support students to study at any stage in their life through modular courses. Announcing the reforms, the education secretary Nadhim Zahawi said: “This package of reforms will ensure students are being offered a range of different pathways, whether that is higher or further education, that lead to opportunities with the best outcomes – and put an end once for all to high interest rates on their student loans.” Higher and further education minister Michelle Donelan added: “We are delivering a fairer system for students, graduates and taxpayers as well as future-proofing the student finance system.” Sir Philip Augar, who chaired the original post-18 education review, welcomed the reforms which he described as fair and sustainable. “The package … forms the basis of a properly connected further and higher education sector. That connection is long overdue,” he said. But Larissa Kennedy, president of the UK National Union of Students, said: “The minister is saddling young people with unimaginable debt for the next 40 years of their lives. This is nothing more than an attack on opportunity.”Supermarkets should stop selling fresh produce such as apples and potatoes in plastic packaging, research suggests, because it does not make them last longer and adds to pollution and food waste. The 18-month study by the sustainability charity Wrap, which also looked at sales of bananas, broccoli and cucumbers, debunks the idea that single-use plastic wrappers help prevent waste. Instead, this packaging often forces people to buy more than they need, increasing the problem of wasted food. Marcus Gover, Wrap’s chief executive, said that while packaging was important and often carried out a critical role to protect food, its research had found that plastic wrap “doesn’t necessarily prolong the life of uncut fresh produce”, adding: “It can in fact increase food waste in this case.” Britons throw away almost half a million tonnes of fresh vegetables and salad and a quarter of a million tonnes of fresh fruit – worth a total of £2.1bn – each year because it has gone soft or mouldy, or the date label has expired. This waste is bad for the planet: about one-third of the UK’s greenhouse gas emissions are associated with food and drink. In the battle with food waste, packaging was found to be a less important part of the picture than other factors, such as enabling people to buy the right amount or how it was stored. “We found that storing food in the fridge at below five degrees gave days, weeks, and, in the case of apples, months more quality product life,” said Gover. “We found that for most items, the plastic packaging they were sold in made little or no difference to their shelf life. “In cases where consumers had no choice but to buy more than they needed in pre-packed packaging, this could actually increase food waste,” he added. Wrap studied the five items: apples, bananas, broccoli, cucumber and potatoes, stored in the original packaging and loose, and at different temperatures. It calculated that if these five products were sold loose, and the best-before dates removed, it could save more than 10,300 tonnes of plastic and about 100,000 tonnes of food from being wasted each year – the equivalent of 14m shopping baskets of food. The food waste was prevented because people bought the right amount and used their judgment, rather than date labels, to decide if food was still good. One in 10 people dump groceries based on the date, resulting in good food being thrown out. Most supermarkets sell some of these items loose already but Wrap, whose work helps shape government policy on sustainability matters, said its research presented compelling evidence for a wider range of fruit and veg to be sold this way. As people faced rising fuel and food prices, there was a compelling economic as well as environmental case for ringing the changes in grocery aisles, Gover said, and retailers should step up and act on Wrap’s findings. “This helps save the planet and us money at the same time,” he said. Wrap conceded it would take time for things to change and it will now consult the Food Standards Agency, Defra, and the food industry to make loose produce in supermarkets a reality by 2025.When the Augar review of post-18 education and funding in England was announced by former prime minister Theresa May in February 2018, it was seen by many as a kneejerk response to Labour’s better than expected performance in the 2017 general election, buoyed up Jeremy Corbyn’s pledge to scrap student tuition fees. It was a time of mounting concern about spiralling levels of student debt and the loss of maintenance grants for the most disadvantaged. But while those concerns rightly persist today, the overriding drive behind the reforms unveiled by the government on Thursday will undoubtedly have been to lower the cost to the Treasury of financing England’s increasingly unwieldy student loan system. The figures are eye-watering. According to the Department for Education, the value of outstanding loans by the end of March 2021 was £161bn and it is forecast to rise to half a trillion pounds by 2043. To help tackle the debt, the student loan repayment period will be extended to 40 years and the repayment threshold lowered to £25,000. It will hit graduates – particularly lower earning graduates – hard, but will save the Treasury and the taxpayer billions. But behind the long-awaited finance reforms, there has also been a shift away from the idea of university as the best choice for all students and a rowing back on earlier Labour ambitions to get 50% of 18-year-olds into universities. A new consultation on a minimum qualification requirement to access loans to go to university has already been branded an attack on social mobility and disadvantaged students. Under the proposals, students who fail to gain a grade 4 GCSE pass in maths and English, or two E grades at A-level, will be blocked from accessing student loans and therefore going to university. In 2021 fewer than 5,000 students entered higher education without GCSE passes in English and maths. In a briefing to the media, higher and further education minister, Michelle Donelan insisted it was not a “definite” direction of travel: “But it is something that I think it’s right that we explore as an option. We used to have an entry requirement in this country of two Es,” she said. “We all know that there are young people that get three Es every year that feel compelled and pushed to go to university before they’re ready, and I think that that is doing them a disservice.” The government will also be keen to use its reforms to crack down on what they describe as “low value” courses which they say saddle students with debt while doing little to increase their earnings – and crucially their ability to pay off their loans. The government is keen for students to study the kind of degrees which will guarantee graduate earnings. There is also a new consultation seeking views on a lifelong loan entitlement for people to retrain flexibly at any time in their lives, worth the equivalent of £37,000, or four years of post-18 education. According to one sector insider it could be “the most significant education reform of the 2020s so far”, though it may well end up being significantly watered down. While the headlines will focus on changes to loan repayments and minimum entry requirements, the government’s reforms also include interesting plans to cut the cost of foundation year courses and a new national state scholarship to support high-achieving students from disadvantaged backgrounds access higher education, further education and apprenticeships. “Overall, people who hate the government will claim today’s package lets students, graduates and universities down,” said Nick Hillman, director of the Higher Education Policy Institute and a key government adviser when the current loan system was set up. “Meanwhile, those who love the government will claim it is a bold set of reforms. In reality, it is a quite carefully balanced package that sends some powerful signals about the government’s priorities.”Mask wearing has become a normal part of our lives With high Covid vaccination rates and the numbers of cases and rate of hospitalisations falling overall in many parts of Australia, we are starting to see the relaxation of mask mandates. This is yet another sign that we are moving one step closer to living with Covid. In terms of continuing to mandate the wearing of masks in high-risk environments such as public transport, hospitals and aged care centres, this is entirely appropriate, backed by evidence, and proportionate to the risk of transmission in these settings, even as the overall risk of infection in the population falls. Mask wearing remains an extremely effective and low-cost measure that has a significant impact on the risk of passing on infection and being infected. It has also been speculated that mask wearing, by potentially reducing the viral dose that individuals are exposed to if they do get infected, may impact on the severity of illness and possibly even the likelihood of developing long Covid. One of the important and perhaps somewhat obvious points to make is that the removal of mask mandates in lower-risk settings does not mean that you are not allowed to wear a mask in these settings. You still have the option, as you have always had, to factor in your personal circumstances and your tolerance for risk and take whatever extra precautions you feel you need to protect yourself from infection in any situation. This includes the option to don a mask whenever and wherever you feel this provides that additional level of reassurance you need. Mandates prescribe the minimums in terms of mitigation behaviours required of the community and do not restrict what individuals can decide to do that go over and above these minimum requirements. There are many ways in which this pandemic will have changed our society forever. While some of the ways are yet to be appreciated, it seems clear that in western societies the pandemic has led to the normalisation of mask wearing. Something that was viewed as peculiar pre-pandemic is now considered very much a normal part of our lives and will remain so as we learn to live with the virus. • Hassan Vally is an associate professor of epidemiology at Deakin University Some mask rules may be here to stay While there are still relatively high levels of Covid transmission occurring in the community, there are still settings where masks are needed – those with particularly high risk of transmission, or where the consequences of transmission are greatest. Places where we spend a reasonable amount of time with strangers in closed airspace, such as public transport and shared vehicles, remain on the list, as are the higher-risk settings including the prison system, healthcare, disability and aged care. Larger musical indoor events carry a different kind of risk, with many in the audience singing along, and so masks are still required. There are some state differences in easing mask mandates. In New South Wales, masks will no longer need to be worn by students or high school staff from Monday. Teachers and staff members at primary schools and early childcare centres will need to wear face masks until 7 March. The Queensland premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, said her government would relax the requirement to wear masks in most indoor settings, including workplaces, schools, shops, cafes, restaurants and pubs, from 4 March. Victoria is keeping rules in place for front-of-house hospitality workers given their exposure as they engage with patrons. The most discussed inconsistency is the Victorian decision to keep masks on in school, but only for primary school children from grade three up. These rules are under constant review which is a good thing, and the World Health Organization has provided a checklist to ensure that masks rules for kids are proportionate. The risk of exposure will also vary across different parts of the country, with some local government areas in Victoria, for instance, having a tenfold lower infection rate at the moment, so we might also see some of the remaining rules lifted sooner in particularly low-risk areas. However, some mask rules may be here to stay – those in very high-risk settings, especially within hospitals where there are very vulnerable patients, and where masks reduce exposure to a range of respiratory pathogens. Finally, no mask rules does not mean don’t wear masks: when around others and unable to keep our distance, a mask can make the difference between staying virus-free or picking up Covid or, as we move out of summer, catching a cold, or the flu. • Catherine Bennett is chair in epidemiology at Deakin UniversityOfficials are preparing for yet another critical water year in California as the state – along with most of the American west – remains mired in drought. The federal government said Wednesday that it won’t deliver water to farmers in California’s agricultural belt, which produces roughly a quarter of the nation’s food, due to the extreme water shortages that are expected to deepen if the direly dry conditions continue through March. “It’s devastating to the agricultural economy and to those people that rely on it,” said Ernest Conant, regional director for the US Bureau of Reclamation, adding that this year may turn out to be worse than 2021, when drought conditions forced farmers to fallow hundreds of thousands of acres of land. “But unfortunately we can’t make it rain.” The federal government operates the Central Valley Project in California, a complex system of dams, reservoirs and canals. It’s one of two major water systems the state relies on for agriculture, drinking water and the environment. The other system is run by the state government. This is the fourth time in the last decade that farmers south of the San Joaquin-Sacramento River Delta have received no water from the federal government. Water agencies contract with the federal government for certain amounts of water each year. In February, the federal government announces how much of those contracts can be fulfilled based on how much water is available. The government then updates the allocations throughout the year based on conditions. Last year, farmers started the year with a 5% allocation from the federal government but ended at 0% as the drought intensified. This year, the federal government is starting farmers at 0% while water for other purposes, including drinking and industrial uses, is at 25%. California depends on winter storms to refill its reservoirs and produce a strong snowpack, which serve as essential water savings accounts relied on through the rest of the year. But so far, the first two months in 2022 have offered little reprieve. The northern Sierra mountains, which are important for filling some of the state’s biggest reservoirs, have had just 1.7 inches of rain over those two months. That’s the lowest ever recorded, breaking a record set in 2013, said Kristin White, Central Valley operations manager for the US Bureau of Reclamation. The Central Valley Project’s reservoirs have decreased by 26.5% compared with last year. Even after record-breaking rains and above-average snow late last year, the state is facing a 1.2m acre-feet shortfall in the water amount predicted to be available through September, according to the California Department of Water Resources’ forecast. To put that in perspective, one acre-foot of water is roughly 326,000 gallons. It is enough water to cover a football field one-foot deep, and typically enough to supply two average households for one year. There’s still time left for some water gains to be made in March before the rainy season officially ends, and officials will update allocations if conditions change. The state water system already bumped its allocation to 15% in January from 0% allocations set the month before, after a big December deluge. Again, after weeks of clear skies and unseasonably hot weather, this week California got rain, snow and a burst of cold, finally breaking record-setting timespans of dryness in some areas, but the much-needed precipitation isn’t expected to make a significant dent in the drought. More than 66% of California is classified in “severe drought” by the US Drought Monitor and most of its reservoirs remain below their historical averages. State law requires both state and federal systems to have enough water available to maintain water quality throughout the San Joaquin-Sacramento River Delta, a sensitive environmental region home to endangered species of fish. Still, endangered species of fish – including salmon – have been dying by the thousands because there hasn’t been enough cold water for them to survive. “Fish and people need that water,” said Regina Chichizola, executive director for Save California Salmon, adding that environmental water releases are important because they keep saltwater from the ocean from creeping too far into the freshwater rivers. John McManus, president of the Golden State Salmon Association, called on agencies and water managers to do more to stave off the harm to salmon during another year of drought, and said in a statement that even with the reduced allocations, too much water was going to agriculture. “We’re likely looking at another year of decimated natural salmon runs due to water decisions that favor a small group of agricultural landowners over the interests of the rest of California,” he said. “This highlights the need for more responsible drought planning. When it comes to being responsible stewards of the state’s natural resources, water business as usual isn’t serving the state any more.” The Associated Press contributed reportingDaniel Sturridge has made just five appearances as a substitute since signing for Perth Glory and now the former Liverpool striker is facing a further frustrating spell on the sidelines after sustaining an injury – blamed on a rushed warm-up – which curtailed his latest attempt to make an impact on the A-League Men. Sturridge, who in October last year was hailed by Glory owner Tony Sage as one of the biggest signings in A-League history, has struggled for time on the pitch due to the fitness issues that have plagued his career combined with three separate stints in quarantine since arriving in Australia. The latest blow came during Wednesday’s 1-0 defeat to Macarthur in Launceston, where the 32-year-old, on as a second-half substitute, lasted just 18 minutes before pulling up clutching his groin after stretching to control a through pass. “I keep trying to bring him back and he keeps breaking down,” Glory coach Richard Garcia said. “We’ve got to get to grips with it and find out where he’s at. He keeps getting to certain stages ... we’ll have to wait and see how this one turns up. Hopefully it’s nothing.” During his latest cameo, Sturridge had a golden chance to open his ALM account and draw his side back on level terms after Ulises Davila had put Macarthur ahead in the ninth minute, but with the goal at his mercy he pulled his shot wide of the mark. Shortly after, he limped off the pitch, with Garcia later suggesting a lack of a proper warm-up during the half-time break was to blame. “We had him in at half-time, and then he did it so quickly that maybe he didn’t have enough time to warm up,” Garcia said. “He’s disappointed. We’ve got to take a look at it. Hopefully, it’s not as bad as it felt. He’s a pretty strong guy. He’s had these injuries before. It’s just about him coming back from it.” Defeat for Perth left them in 10th place, seven points off a place in the top six, although Garcia’s side do have games in hand on every team above them. They play table-topping Western United on Sunday in their last outing in Tasmania before heading back to Perth for a run of three home games at HBF Stadium.The prospect of sanctions is hurting the Russian part-owner of one of Australia’s largest alumina refineries, Queensland Alumina Limited, while the refinery’s majority owner, Rio Tinto, has warned of a looming “disruption” to its aluminium business. QAL, which operates a refinery in Gladstone, is 20% owned by the Russian aluminium giant Rusal, which has previously been hit by US sanctions in 2018, implemented in response to the country’s “malign activity around the globe”. Rusal’s share price has taken a battering as tensions in Ukraine escalate, falling up to 22% in Hong Kong, the biggest fall since April 2018, according to Bloomberg. QAL would not comment when approached by Guardian Australia about whether it feared further sanctions, or what impact they might have on the company. But Rio, which holds an 80% stake in QAL, told investors on Wednesday night that it was worried about the escalating tensions, which were creating a “very difficult situation”. “Specifically in our business, I think what there could be disruption to primarily the aluminium industry,” said its chief executive, Jakob Stausholm. “If we are going to see sanctions and, you know, we saw sanctions in 2018, I’d like to say, on that front, we managed well last time there were sanctions. And the advantage for Rio Tinto of having such a big aluminium industry is that we have an integrated supply chain from bauxite to alumina to final aluminium products, and that puts us in a very good position to meet our customer needs during times of disruptions.” The previous sanctions against Rusal were removed in January 2019 after the company’s founder, the billionaire Oleg Deripaska, gave up control of the company. So far, Australia’s sanctions have focused on Russia’s banks and eight members of its national security council. The sanctions involve travel bans and financial restrictions. Scott Morrison has also warned that the sanctions announced on Wednesday were only the first tranche and that more would follow if Russia did not de-escalate. Further measures are expected from the US and the EU. “We’ve got plenty left in the tank when it comes to further actions we would take if and when the violence is escalated by Russia,” the prime minister said. The Russian embassy in Australia has described Australia’s sanctions as “xenophobic”, a description dismissed by the energy minister, Angus Taylor, as the remarks of a bully. Morrison said on Thursday he did not expect the sanctions would deter Russia’s actions in Ukraine. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Now, I note that many have said, ‘Do you think that this will lead to Russia pulling back?’ I would hope so, but I don’t expect so,” he said. “The reason we’re doing this is there must be a price for the unprovoked, unlawful, unwarranted, unjustified attacks and threats and intimidation that has been imposed by Russia on Ukraine.” Ukraine’s Australian representative, Volodymyr Shalkivskyi, praised the sanctions and said fresh penalties should be directed towards energy and finance, which he said were the most vulnerable sectors in Russia. “We believe there’s need for significant expansion of sanctions but this will depend on the situation on the ground,” Shalkivskyi said.Three months ago Ronson Chan was working as deputy assignment editor at Stand News, one of Hong Kong’s independent and pro-democracy news sites. His job involved assigning news stories to the team of reporters, helping set the editorial agenda and running the outlet’s social media posts. As head of the Hong Kong Journalism Association he had seen up close the fallout from the Beijing media crackdown – closures, arrests, the offshoring of international bureaus. Then the knock on his door came and his own career was dramatically paused. On the same day, 29 December, his colleagues – including the paper’s editor-in-chief and some board members – were arrested in an early morning national security operation which also saw hundreds of officers raid the newsroom. Today Chan works as a delivery driver and is among scores of reporters and editors in Hong Kong whose lives are in limbo. To make ends meet he spent the lunar new year driving his car around Hong Kong, making deliveries for a friend’s online retail business. According to the International Federation of Journalists, about 20 journalists and press defenders have been arrested or detained by law enforcement so far under Hong Kong’s media crackdown, overseen by Beijing and carried out by a police force empowered with new laws and resources. The popular pro-democracy tabloid Apple Daily was forced to close months before Stand News. Independent outlet Citizen News shut its doors just days after. Foreign bureaus have moved staff overseas and correspondents have been denied visas. Alongside Chan, an estimated 1,000 people have lost their jobs, plus several hundred more in Apple Daily’s Taiwan sister-paper. Many Hong Kong journalists couldn’t find their way back to the industry, and now drive taxis or sell food, Vice reported. If Chan doesn’t find a new journalism job soon he’ll be forced to give up his role as the head of the journalism association. “I want to continue on my career path as a journalist, but it really depends on what are the opportunities that lie ahead,” he says. ‘I was shaking beyond control’ The knock on the door on 29 December wasn’t unexpected, Chan said, but it did come faster than he thought. “I woke up to the doorbell and I doubted whether what was happening was real,” he said. “There was barely a sense of anxiety or fear, but I was shaking beyond control as the officers held a search warrant.” The national security department officers were there to search his apartment and take him in for questioning, part of an investigation into Stand News and alleged conspiring to publish seditious content. At the same time, six others were being arrested across the city, including chief editor Patrick Lam, former chief editor Chung Pui-Kuen and former board member Christine Fang, and former board members Denise Ho, Margaret Ng, and Tat-chi Chow. Later that day, after being questioned without charge, he went straight to the newsroom where a decision had already been made: it was time to close the paper. “The editor-in-chief [Patrick Lam] was not there because he had been arrested,” Chan says. “They decided to cease operation as soon as possible … and I vowed my support of their decision.” “There is not much in detail I can share, I am afraid, but we have expected that this would happen one day, so we put things in the pipeline, [ready] for the worst to come.” The national security officers searched Chan’s home, seized his electronics and took him away for questioning. He livestreamed the raid on Facebook for as long as he could until an officer told him to stop, and the recording now joins a large catalogue of early-morning door knocks filmed by journalists, politicians and activists being arrested in the last two years. In the weeks since the raid, Chan has had to defend the journalist’s union, which he still leads, against government inquiries into its activities and demands for financial records. He continues to speak out about press freedom and in his spare time he visits his friends in prison. “At first, we grieved that we were in that kind of situation. But after a month of living behind bars, they have grown stronger and tougher and more courageous. We have been getting along, just chatting about our daily life and so on.” An uncertain future Stand News was founded in 2014 as an online independent and crowdfunded outlet, mostly covering Hong Kong’s political and social news, and grew to be seen as one of the city’s most credible sources, according to academic surveys. In 2019 its reporters were on the frontline of the pro-democracy protests – including Gwyneth Ho, who kept filming as she was attacked and beaten by assailants at Yuen Long. In recent months it has been targeted by the city’s powerful. Security chief Chris Tang labeled it a biased outlet and accused it of “smearing and demonising” government programmes. This year Stand News was shortlisted for a Reporters Without Borders Press Freedom award. Asked how he sees the outlet’s ethos, Chan pulls out his phone and says he has a Facebook post with an old mission statement he wants to read out. But then he starts scowling at the screen, exasperated as he realises that his Facebook account has been hacked – a frequent occurrence lately. The crackdown on the press has left journalists in fear of being questioned, arrested or charged. The vagueness in the national security law means no one knows where the red lines are, and while the law is not retroactive there is a lack of clarity about how to treat previously published stories which are still online, and how a journalist’s earlier – and at the time lawful – actions can be considered as signalling intent. Chan doesn’t know if he faces arrest in the future. He supports those still working as journalists in Hong Kong but warns they are susceptible to intimidation or punitive actions over their reporting, without clear parameters of what is OK. “There is no one forcing or telling you what to write and what not to write, but there will be consequences if you do something that crosses the line.” Six months before the raid Chan had told an interviewer that nobody could stop him from pursuing any kind of news story, “but you don’t know how long this freedom can be exercised”. Additional reporting by Daniel Ceng Shou YiVegetarians have a 14% lower chance of developing cancer than carnivores, according to a large study that links meat-eating to a heightened risk of the disease. A team of researchers from Oxford University analysed data on more than 470,000 Britons and found that pescatarians had a 10% reduced risk. Compared with people who eat meat regularly – defined as more than five times a week – those who consumed small amounts had a 2% lower risk of developing cancer, the study found. “In this large British cohort, being a low meat-eater, fish-eater or vegetarian was associated with a lower risk of all cancer sites when compared to regular meat-eaters,” the analysis found. However, the authors, led by Cody Watling from Oxford’s population health cancer epidemiology unit, made clear that their findings did not conclusively prove regular meat-eating increased the risk of cancer. Smoking and body fat could also help explain the differences found, they said. Their study of participants in the UK Biobank study also found that: Low meat-eaters – who consume meat five or fewer times a week – had a 9% lower risk of developing bowel cancer than regular meat-eaters. Vegetarian women were 18% less likely than those who ate meat regularly to develop postmenopausal breast cancer, though that may be due to their lower body mass index. Vegetarian men have a 31% lower risk of prostate cancer while among male pescatarians it is 20% lower. “The results … suggest that specific dietary behaviours such as low meat [and] vegetarian or pescatarian diets can have an impact on reducing the risk of certain cancers; in this case bowel, breast and prostate,” said Dr Giota Mitrou, director of research and innovation at World Cancer Research Fund International (WCRF), which co-funded the study with Cancer Research UK. The results confirm WCRF’s longstanding advice that people should limit their intake of red and processed meat and eat more wholegrains, vegetables, fruit and pulses, she added. The Oxford study authors said: “The lower risk of colorectal [bowel] cancer in low meat-eaters is consistent with previous evidence suggesting an adverse impact of meat intake. Vegetarian women’s lower risk of postmenopausal breast cancer is likely to be “largely” explained by their lower BMI. “It is not clear whether the other differences observed for all cancers and for prostate cancer reflect any causal relationship or are due to other factors.” While the researchers found that “being a low meat-eater, pescatarian or vegetarian was associated with a lower risk of all cancer”, they added that this “may be a result of dietary factors and/or non-dietary differences in lifestyle, such as smoking”. Their results are published on Thursday in the journal BMC Medicine. Richard McIlwain, chief executive of the Vegetarian Society, said: “This study adds to a growing body of research reinforcing the positive, protective effects of a vegetarian diet. “With cancer now affecting one in every two of us across the country, adopting a healthy vegetarian diet can clearly play a role in preventing this disease. Indeed, evidence from previous surveys suggests a balanced vegetarian diet can also reduce the risk of heart disease and diabetes, in addition to cancers.” Watling and his colleagues are undertaking further research among vegetarians, pescatarians and vegans to examine more closely the relationship between diet and cancer risk. Between 5% and 7% of Britons are thought to be vegetarian and 2-3% follow a vegan diet, according to surveys by YouGov. Dr Julie Sharp, Cancer Research UK’s head of health and patient information, said that while reducing intake of processed meat has been proven to reduce the risk of bowel cancer “having some bacon or ham every now and then won’t do much harm”, adding: “If you are having a lot of meat a lot of the time then cutting down is a good idea, but a vegetarian diet doesn’t always mean someone is eating healthily.”Ukraine’s president has made a desperate appeal to the Russian people asking them to “listen to the voice of reason” and stop a war he said the Kremlin has already ordered. After Ukraine declared a state of emergency and started calling up reservists, Volodymyr Zelenskiy delivered a 10-minute video address in the early hours of Thursday morning, saying Vladimir Putin had not taken his call. “Today I initiated a phone call with the president of the Russian Federation. The result was silence,” Zelenskiy said. For months, the Ukrainian president had played down the threat of invasion as alarmist, but by Thursday he was convinced that Europe was the brink of a horrendous new conflict. “We are separated by more than 2,000 km of mutual borders, along which 200,000 of your soldiers and a thousand armoured vehicles are standing. Your leadership has approved their step forward on to the territory of another country. This step could become the beginning of a big war,” Zelenskiy said. “They’re telling you that this flame will liberate the people of Ukraine, but the Ukrainian people are free.” Ukraine called an emergency session of the UN security council to confront Russia which, by irony of the rota, will be chairing the meeting. Meanwhile Zelenskiy’s approach was to try to speak directly to ordinary Russians, on a video uploaded to Telegram messaging app, over the heads of the Kremlin, predicting that the Russian media would not broadcast it. “I know this speech of mine won’t be shown on Russian TV, but the people of Russia need to see it,” the Ukrainian president said. They need to know the truth. The truth is that this must be stopped before it is too late.” “Listen to yourselves, to the voice of reason. The people of Ukraine want peace,” Zelenskiy said. But he added: “if someone attempts to take away our land, our freedom, our lives, the lives of our children, we will defend ourselves.” “By attacking, you will see our faces, not our backs, but our faces,” he said. Early on Thursday morning, Russia issued an alert warning all civilian aviation to stay out of the air space over the border between Russia and northeast Ukraine. As it manoeuvred its forces ever closer to the border and arrayed them in attack formation, the Kremlin announced it had received a request from the leaders of the small Moscow-run enclaves in east Ukraine asking for urgent assistance “to avoid civilian casualties and a humanitarian catastrophe”. Putin secured formal backing from Russia parliament on Tuesday, to deploy Russian forces beyond the country’s borders. For several days, Putin and his aides had been claiming there was a “genocide” of Russian speakers under way in the Donbas region, in the absence of any evidence. Dossiers of supposed evidence circulated at the UN and to the media, largely consisted of improvised burial sites of civilian casualties from shelling over the eight-year conflict there. Many of the dead referred to in the Russian dossier had died in the first year of fighting in 2014, when there were substantial civilian casualties on both sides of the frontline. According to several media reports, confirmed by the Guardian, the White House has warned the Zelenskiy government to expect a large-scale offensive in the next 48 hours. The north-eastern city of Kharkiv, 40kms from the border with Russia, is at particular risk, Newsweek CNN reported, citing US intelligence. “They have advanced their readiness where they are literally ready to go now if they get the order to go now,” a senior US defence official told reporters. “We assess today that he [Putin] is near 100% of all the forces we anticipated he would move in,” the official said, adding that 80% of those forces were in combat-ready positions. “They have plans to use reserves and their equivalent of the national guard. The implication would be that they have long-term goals here.” The Biden administration’s predictions of imminent attack have been wrong before, with a date given of last Wednesday – 16 February. But US, UK and Ukrainian officials all concur that Putin has to move in the next few days, or risk exhausting his troops waiting on the border. “We are potentially close to some sort of action,” the Pentagon spokesperson, John Kirby, said on Wednesday evening, adding: “Russian forces continue to assemble closer to the border.” Kirby said that Putin “is going to have to answer to Russian moms and dads about their soldiers that aren’t making it back home alive or making it back with injuries.” On Wednesday, Ukraine prepared its population for the prospect of a devastating war. The country’s parliament voted to approve a state of emergency, which allows authorities to impose curfews and restrictions on movement, block rallies and ban political parties and organisations. Some 36,000 reservists were mobilised, and a law was passed allowing Ukrainians to carry personal firearms, as many queued to purchase AR-15s and sniper rifles at local gun shops. Airports in the eastern Ukrainian cities of Kharkiv, Dnipro, and Zaporizhzhia closed their air space, and the nearly 3 million Ukrainians still in Russia were told to leave as soon as possible, warned that their government might not be able to help them much longer. The Ukrainian government said a massive cyber-attack had targeted ministries and banks on Wednesday. Officials have warned that Russia could use elements of hybrid warfare to sow confusion before launching an all-out military assault. Russia began evacuating its embassy in Kyiv on Wednesday to “protect the lives and safety [of diplomats]” [of diplomats]. Diplomats were filmed walking quickly with their luggage to waiting cars and smoke was observed emerging from the grounds in a possible effort to burn sensitive documents. The Russian flag was lowered. On the same day, EU countries approved tough new sanctions on Russian officials and “propagandists” , imposing asset freezes and travel bans on Russia’s defence minister, Sergei Shoigu, foreign ministry spokeswoman, Maria Zakharova, and 351 Duma deputies who voted to recognise the Russian-controlled territories in east Ukraine. In Washington Joe Biden said he was allowing sanctions to move forward against the company that built the Russia-to-Germany Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline, a day after Germany indefinitely suspended the project. But Russia appears unmoved by the diplomatic pressure. In fiery remarks at the United Nations on Wednesday, ambassador Vasily Nebenzya accused Ukraine of genocide and human rights violations against those living in Donbas, a claim widely denounced as being as false. Andriy Zagorodnyuk, Ukraine’s former defence minister, said Putin would have to decide in the next few days whether to attack Ukraine. “There are two scenarios. One, they engage in some sort of action. The other is they go for a strategic pause. For now, it’s 50-50.” He said the Russian troops massed in Belarus on Ukraine’s border were sleeping in tent encampments and were “literally tired”. The longer they stayed in a holding position the less effective they became, he said. “Either Moscow starts something or they are rotated out,” he added. Denis Pushilin, the leader of the Russian-controlled territory in Donetsk, said on Wednesday that he would not immediately order an attack on Ukrainian positions on the frontline but would not rule out a “military solution” to expanding his region’s borders, either. Appearing alongside the head of Russia’s ruling United Russia party, Pushilin said that Russia and its client state were not yet at the stage of a “military solution to [expanding] to the region’s borders”. On Wednesday, Putin delivered a video address in connection with the Defender of the Fatherland Day, a national holiday recognising members of the military and on which most Russian men receive presents. In the speech, he praised the battle-readiness of Russia’s military, which has 190,000 soldiers on the borders with Ukraine according to western estimates. “Our country is always open for direct and honest dialogue, for the search for diplomatic solutions to the most complex problems,” Putin said. But he added: “The interests of Russia, the security of our citizens, are non-negotiable for us.”Conservation groups have accused the Victorian government of proposing changes to logging rules that would weaken protections for bushfire-prone communities and the environment. The Andrews government has published draft changes to logging standards that regulate VicForests’ operations. It says the changes are intended to make the code clearer but environmental advocates are concerned the proposal could affect legal challenges to VicForests’ operations that are being heard by the supreme court. The environment group Kinglake Friends of the Forest has two active cases alleging VicForests has exceeded logging limits in mapped areas of forest known as bushfire moderation zones. As a result of the two cases, injunctions have been imposed on logging of 2,700 hectares of forest in the central highlands while the trials continue. The zones were introduced after the royal commission into the 2009 Black Saturday bushfires and placed limits on logging in forest near bushfire-prone communities. Under the logging code, VicForests is not permitted to log more than 1% of areas in which logging is permissible within any one bushfire moderation zone over a five-year period. One of the changes to the code proposed by the Victorian government would consolidate several bushfire moderation zones into a larger area known as a fuel hazard management unit. The 1% cap would apply to the larger area of forest, rather than in each of the smaller zones. Legal experts say this would have the effect of allowing a greater amount of logging within any single bushfire moderation zone. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Danya Jacobs, a special counsel at Environmental Justice Australia, said this change to the code’s wording risked increasing the concentration of logging in some areas close to towns. “The government is cynically framing changes that weaken the protection of regional communities from bushfire risk as mere clarifications,” she said. “What it does is give the logging industry increased access to forest in close proximity to communities in regional Victoria.” Kinglake Friends of the Forest said the group was concerned the government was attempting to “remove the ability of community groups to hold VicForests to account through the courts”. “The significance of the case is so high in terms of human safety. These are changes that were made after the 2009 fires,” said the group’s president, Sue McKinnon. “It appears that the impact and devastation and fears of those fires have been forgotten.” Hearings for a separate legal challenge, launched by Warburton Environment, commenced in the supreme court this week. That case is alleging VicForests has not complied with protections under the code for an endangered species known as tree geebung. Tree geebung is a unique species that grows in wet forest in Victoria’s central highlands. Under the logging code, VicForests was required to protect mature trees from disturbance “where possible”. The government has proposed changing that wording to “where reasonably practicable”, sparking concerns VicForests will have greater discretion to cut down the trees during its logging operations. Nic Fox, the president of Warburton Environment, described the proposed change as “very disturbing” and called on the government to focus on protecting people and biodiversity. “Once you start changing codes to enable them to continue to log one species – where does it end?” she said. The proposals are subject to a month of public consultation and would be the third raft of changes to logging laws since 2014. A spokesperson for the Victorian government said the proposed changes would reduce ambiguity in the code and make it clear and enforceable. “Legal challenges made it clear we needed to make the code clear and enforceable to protect the environment and give certainty to industry in the lead up to the phasing out logging of native timber forests in 2030 and that’s what these changes will achieve,” they said. “Strong environmental protections are fundamental in the Code of Practice and that isn’t changing,” they said. But Amelia Young, the national campaigns director for the Wilderness Society, said the outcome of the proposed changes would be greater flexibility for logging of forests. “The Andrews government may perhaps be interpreting, or ‘clarifying’ the law, but it is doing so in a manner that takes a weak position for protecting and restoring forests and wildlife,” she said. “Moving from ‘zones’ to larger ‘units’ risks logging being intensified in particular areas, including in forests adjacent to towns where communities are clearly saying no to more logging.”Advice that most members of state executive of the New South Wales Liberal party would cease to hold office next Monday would do “significant violence” to the principles of the party, the state’s supreme court has heard. On Thursday, the chief justice of the supreme court in equity, Julie Ward, reserved her decision in an urgent case which will determine the future of the NSW branch of the Liberal party. However Ward noted Monday’s crucial deadline, when the state executive of the party – the equivalent of the board of a company – arguably ceases to exist. A bitter factional war over preselections has paralysed the NSW party’s state executive, resulting in the Liberals not having endorsed candidates in nine important seats just weeks before an expected federal election in May. It has also prompted a constitutional crisis that has cast doubt on the division’s future, and prompted the federal party to consider a takeover. The urgent hearing, brought by one elected member of the state executive, Matthew Camenzuli, is seeking a declaration that members of the state executive can continue in office beyond Monday 28 February despite the annual general meeting of the party having been postponed to March. If Ward decides the state executive members cease to hold office, the federal division will step in and take control, giving the prime minister, Scott Morrison, a much greater say over who becomes candidates. If Camenzuli wins his case the state division continues to operate with its state executive in place, but there is no certainty that the gridlock over preselections will be resolved easily. Camenzuli and his supporters in the party want to see the local branches given the right to hold preselection ballots, where branch members choose the candidates, as the constitution of the party now requires. But time is running out. Factional organisers have been attempting to negotiate a deal that would see candidates appointed administratively, but have struggled to get 90% of the 28-member executive to agree to the carve-up of seats, as is required. The centre-right faction – that of Morrison and his representative on the state executive, Alex Hawke – appear to be supporting a federal intervention. Hawke, who has been named as first defendant in the case, had a lawyer present at proceedings on Thursday but did not make submissions. Ward heard detailed argument about the Liberal party of NSW’s constitution and what should happen if it fails to hold its annual general meeting. Last Thursday the NSW director, Chris Stone, presented legal advice to state executive stating that if it did not hold an annual meeting by the end of February they would soon be in breach of their constitution. Counsel for Camenzuli, Scott Robertson SC, said the interpretation advanced in Thursday’s legal advice would result in the ex-officio (appointed) members of the state executive remaining, while those elected by the 500-member state council were terminated. This, Robertson argued, “did significant violence” to the principles of the party. Nicholas Bender, who appeared in the capacity of “friend of the court” to argue the alternate view in the earlier legal advice, said the ex-officio members would continue, but it was clear the constitution did not allow for the elected members to continue. He said it was possible under his construction that a much smaller state executive could continue to meet and still have a valid quorum for an AGM of state council. Ward has reserved her decision.The rising rate at which Australian children are being admitted to hospital for serious food allergies has flattened since infant feeding guidelines were changed, new research shows. The rate of hospitalisation for food anaphylaxis has increased in Australia in recent decades – but data suggests that changes to allergy prevention and infant feeding guidelines in 2008 and 2016 have helped to stem the rise in young children and teenagers. In 2008, the Australasian Society of Clinical Immunology and Allergy guidelines were changed to recommend that allergenic solid foods should no longer be delayed, and in 2016 they were again updated to suggest such foods should be introduced in the first year of life. Study co-author Prof Mimi Tang, an immunologist at the Murdoch Children’s Research Institute, said the greatest benefit of the updated guidelines was in children aged one to four. In this age group, the researchers found that the yearly rate of increase in anaphylaxis admissions dropped from 17.6% between 1999 and 2007 to 6.2% between 2008 and 2015, and to 3.9% after 2016. In the first two periods, the annual rate of increase in children aged five to nine dropped from 22% to 13.9%, and after 2016 the rate of increase was -2.4%. For 10- to 14-year-olds, the annual rate of increase dropped from 18.0% between 2008 and 2015 to 10.8% after 2016. Tang said there had been important changes to allergy prevention advice in the last 15 years. “Prior to 2008, all of the food allergy … prevention guidelines around the world were advising to delay the introduction of allergenic foods such as egg, milk and peanut until the ages of somewhere between two and four, depending on the food,” she said. “The reason these recommendations were in place was based on theoretical concerns that the gut barrier was perhaps not as strong in young babies.” But a growing body of evidence showed that delaying allergenic foods was associated with an increased risk of developing food allergies. In 2015, a randomised controlled trial published in the New England Journal of Medicine found that introducing peanuts into the diet between the age of four and 11 months drastically reduced the chances of developing a peanut allergy by age five. That research “provided for the first time the highest-level evidence that earlier introduction could prevent food allergy”, Tang said. “Subsequent to that there were other studies showing similar findings for egg and milk allergies.” In the new study, published in the Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Tang and her colleagues noted an ongoing increase in anaphylaxis hospitalisation rates in teenagers aged 15 and older at the time the research was completed. People in this age group were born before the 2008 changes to the Australian guidelines. “We actually only saw flattening of rates in the children that could have benefited from the timing of these updates,” Tang said. There was, however, an acceleration in the year-on-year rate of increase for children aged one year and younger. “Children with food allergy typically react when they have eaten the food for the first time,” Tang said. The finding in infants suggests “that first exposure is happening in the first year of life rather than beyond”, she said. “But if you look at zero- to four-year-olds, in that cohort overall the rates are flattening. So whatever flattening is occurring with the one- to four-year-olds, it’s greater than the increase in the under ones,” she said. Overall, annual food anaphylaxis admission rates in children and teenagers increased ninefold in Australia between 1999 and 2019. “There are many things in the environment that may be contributing to the rise in food allergies,” Tang said. Such factors potentially include changing diet and exposure to a narrower range of microbes.Liberal MP Bridget Archer has blasted fellow Tasmanian senator Claire Chandler’s controversial legislation allowing sporting groups to exclude transgender people from single-sex sports as “a vanity bill” and “not government policy”. Archer’s excoriation follows a public endorsement of Chandler’s proposal by the prime minister. Scott Morrison this week backed the private senator’s bill which would amend the Sex Discrimination Act to “clarify” that the operation of single-sex sport on the basis of biological sex was not discriminatory. During a visit to Tasmania the prime minister described Chandler’s proposal as “terrific”. “I support it, as Claire knows,” Morrison told reporters earlier this week. “I think it’s a terrific bill and I’ve given her great encouragement”. “Claire is a champion for women’s sport and I think she’s been right to raise these issues in the way that she has. Well done, Claire”. But Archer – who crossed the floor in an effort to secure protections for transgender children during the recent parliamentary debate about religious discrimination – characterised her colleague’s proposal as “unnecessary and divisive”. “This is not government policy – this is a vanity bill,” Archer said. She said the Coalition needed to desist from a culture war that had real world implications for vulnerable people. “I wish we would stop talking about these issues,” Archer said. “I think people need a break”. The Liberal senator, Andrew Bragg, said: “I don’t think importing US culture wars is a good idea.” “Despite US controversy, I am not aware of issues in Australia,” he told Guardian Australia. “The Sex Discrimination Act exemptions are already broad and appear to work as intended. I see no case for law reform.” Advocacy groups have expressed similar criticisms. The chief executive of Equality Australia, Anna Brown, said this week sporting groups had been working hard for decades to ensure inclusivity for trans and gender diverse people, saying “sport should be for everyone”. “In supporting this cruel, divisive and unnecessary bill, the prime minister once again underestimates the community’s support for trans and gender diverse children,” Brown said. “The Senate must act decisively and with the same conviction as their lower house colleagues by standing for the inclusion of trans kids by rejecting this bill in its entirety”. Archer’s pointed criticism follows the scuttling of the religious discrimination bill during the past parliamentary sitting fortnight. Five Liberal MPs, including Archer, crossed the floor to ensure the protection of gender non-conforming students under the Sex Discrimination Act. The rebellion by moderates forced Morrison to shelve the government’s proposal after the amendments aimed at protecting LGBTQ+ students sparked a backlash from religious schools and government conservatives. Bragg had said he was prepared to support these amendments in the Senate. During his pre-campaign visit to Tasmania this week, before he endorsed Chandler’s bill, Morrison made a point of praising Archer, an outspoken Liberal moderate. Asked by a reporter whether he continued to support Archer “even though she has been speaking out against some things lately” Morrison replied: “Bridget, I know, is passionate”. “Bridget has come with life experience to our team that I greatly value and I greatly respect,” the prime minister said. “You know, we love Bridge. We really do. And I’m really pleased she’s on my team, and she’s on my team and she’s a fiery member of my team and she’s a fiery member for Bass”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning When she introduced her private member’s bill back on 10 February, Chandler told parliament single-sex sport for women and girls was “a fundamental good for our society”. She said the need to separate females and males on the sporting field – in the vast majority of sports – had “been understood for decades”. “Millions of Australian parents and grandparents have proudly watched their daughters’ and granddaughters’ sporting achievements: playing their first game, winning their first trophy, making their first state team, or signing their first professional contract,” Chandler said. “Yet under recent interpretations of Australia’s Sex Discrimination Act 1984 sporting codes, clubs and volunteers can have legal action taken against them for offering single-sex women’s sport”. “This interpretation has been used as a weapon to pressure sporting organisations to allow males to play women’s sport”. Only one week of parliament remains before the federal election, and that week will be dominated by the budget on 29 March. It is unclear whether the government will seek to bring Chandler’s bill to a vote.Mining billionaire Clive Palmer has left the Gold Coast hospital where he was taken by ambulance after he experienced Covid-like symptoms earlier this week. The unvaccinated 67-year-old left the hospital late on Thursday afternoon. Wearing shorts and a face mask pulled under his nose, Palmer was seen leaving in a car being driven by his wife. Palmer, chairman of the United Australia party, had earlier been taken from his Gold Coast home to the Pindara private hospital. A spokesperson for Palmer said he returned home on Thursday night. They had earlier confirmed Palmer “was being tested”. The spokesperson said Palmer had tested negative for Covid earlier this week. The Queensland ambulance service confirmed a patient was picked up from a Paradise Point residence and transported to hospital on Thursday afternoon. AAP reported Palmer did not undergo treatment but was been taken to the hospital for the test only. The mining magnate on Tuesday cancelled a speech at the National Press Club in Canberra. The venue stated Palmer was experiencing “Covid-like symptoms”. Palmer’s spokesperson described them as “flu-like symptoms” at the time and said he was under medical orders not to travel to Canberra. Palmer has previously told a New South Wales court he was not vaccinated against Covid. “I’m not vaccinated and I don’t intend to be vaccinated,” he also told an anti-lockdown rally in November 2021. The United Australia party’s headquarters, and party leader Craig Kelly, did not respond to requests for comment. The party plans to run candidates in every seat at the upcoming federal election, with Palmer and Kelly campaigning on a platform of removing Covid health measures and opposing vaccination mandates.Ben Roberts-Smith told another soldier “I just want to kill cunts” while on deployment in Afghanistan, and had pictures of slain insurgents on an iPod during training, the federal court has heard. A former SAS soldier, now an officer still serving in the Australian Defence Force, was subpoenaed to give evidence to Roberts-Smith’s defamation hearing this week. He was anonymised before the court as Person Two. Roberts-Smith is suing the Age, the Sydney Morning Herald and the Canberra Times over reports he alleges are defamatory and portray him as committing war crimes, including murder, as well as acts of bullying and domestic violence. The newspapers are pleading a defence of truth. Roberts-Smith denies any wrongdoing. Person Two was a witness for the newspapers. He told the court he was posted alongside Roberts-Smith on “picket duty” in a big bunker area during deployment in Afghanistan in 2006. Person Two said Roberts-Smith told him: “I just want to kill cunts. I don’t give a fuck, I just want to kill cunts.” Person Two also testified that sitting on a bus following a parachute training course in Australia, Roberts-Smith pulled out an iPod, leaned over the seat of another soldier, and said “hey check this out”. He then allegedly showed the other soldiers photographs of “dead insurgents” on the device. Person Two was a member of Roberts-Smith’s patrol in 2006, including for a mission on a mountain called Koran Ghar above the Chora Pass in Afghanistan’s Uruzgan province. The five-man patrol had carried 60kg packs to the top of the mountain during a 10-hour overnight climb to set up an observation post, watching over the valley, which was to be the scene of an allied assault. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning On the second day of the observation mission, Person Two and another soldier spotted a young Afghan male – “about 14 or 15 years old”, Person Two told the court – walking on a goat-track, near to the observation post. He said the teenager was not armed with a weapon, nor carrying a radio or wearing webbing. Person Two said he did not believe the young man had seen the Australian soldiers and so did not open fire on him. Person Two told the court Roberts-Smith and another soldier, Sergeant Matt Locke, came down to the observation post from another position and berated the soldiers on lookout duty, saying “‘why the fuck didn’t you shoot him?”. “I said ‘because we’re in an observation post’.” Person Two explained to the court: “The task for the mission was to observe and surveil … not to become decisively engaged. That was to be avoided at all costs, because it then affects your ability to complete your larger mission.” The court heard Roberts-Smith and Locke ran off after the teenager. Person Two said “about a minute later, two minutes later, I heard four or five shots, a suppressed M4 and a suppressed SR 25”. Those were the two weapons carried by Roberts-Smith and Locke, Person Two told the court. The shooting of the Afghan man attracted an insurgent attack, the court heard in evidence this week. Roberts-Smith’s patrol became engaged in a fierce firefight for several hours, encircled on the mountaintop and under direct attack from Taliban fighters. They were ultimately able to get down the mountain, but only after calling in aerial support to attack the insurgent positions. Roberts-Smith and Locke, later killed in action, were both awarded the Medal for Gallantry for their actions on the mountaintop. Person Two told the court he did not believe the initial engagement of the lone young Afghan male was justified. “I don’t believe the engagement was legitimate, because our task for the mission was to observe and surveil. By engaging that male, it compromised the observation post, it compromised our mission.” In his evidence before the court last year, Roberts-Smith said the man was a legitimate military target who was moving suspiciously. When he shot the man, Roberts-Smith said a flare – “what you typically get when ordnance goes off or detonates” – came off chest webbing the man was wearing. Under cross-examination, Person Two was forced to defend his evidence. Bruce McClintock said the conversation where Roberts-Smith allegedly expressed a bloodlust “to kill” “never happened”. “You’ve entirely fabricated that Person Two,” McClintock said. “No, I did not,” Person Two said. McClintock also put it two Person Two that there were no photographs of dead insurgents, and that Roberts-Smith did not even own an iPod with a screen in 2006, when the alleged incident was said to have taken place. “Once again, you have entirely fabricated this, haven’t you?” “No, I haven’t.” Under cross-examination, Person Two said he had met with the journalist Chris Masters. Notes from Masters discussed in court revealed he disclosed information about his deployments and operations. Masters is one of the respondents in this trial. The trial, before Justice Anthony Besanko, continues.A group of shouting protesters have chased the New Zealand prime minister’s van down a driveway as she visited a Christchurch primary school, amid tensions over increasingly volatile anti-vaccine mandate protests. Jacinda Ardern, who was visiting a primary school in Christchurch, was met by a crowd of people shouting “shame on you” and “traitor”. Some held signs saying that the prime minister would be “put on trial” and “held responsible”, and one man brandished a fabricated arrest warrant – references to conspiracy theories that a cohort of world leaders and powerful people are secretly using vaccines to commit a genocide, and would soon be put on trial and hanged for treason. Police officers formed a barrier to allow the prime minister to pass through. TVNZ deputy political editor, Maiki Sherman, who was attending the event, reported that parents and teachers at the school were “visibly upset”. The incident came as the country reported 6,137 new cases of Covid-19, almost a doubling from the previous record, set one day earlier. Anti-vaccine and anti-vaccine mandate protesters have been occupying New Zealand’s parliament grounds for more than two weeks and blocking a number of streets in Wellington’s central business district with their cars. The mood of the gatherings has darkened over time and rhetoric from some protesters has included violent threats against politicians, scientists and journalists. Two schools in the area have shut for the week, citing ongoing harassment of students for wearing masks. One protester was arrested this week after driving his car at a line of police officers, and police have also alleged that protesters threw faecal matter at officers. Last month, Ardern’s vehicle was chased and forced on to a curb by anti-vaccination protesters calling her a Nazi and yelling obscenities. Asked about the incident at the time, Ardern said it was “just another day”. “At no point was I worried about my safety or the safety of anyone that was with me,” she said. “Every day is faced with new and different experiences in this job … We are in an environment at the moment that does have an intensity to it that is unusual for New Zealand. I do also believe that with time it will pass.”For many Russians, it was an unfamiliar sight to see the faces of the two leaders of the pro-Kremlin proxy states in eastern Ukraine pop up on their television screens last Friday, announcing the mass evacuation of Donbas citizens to Russia. Since then, however, Denis Pushilin and Leonid Pasechnik, heads of the self-proclaimed republics in Luhansk and Donetsk, have seen their political profiles rocket, culminating on Monday with the two leaders asking the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, to recognise their “republics”. “This is their golden hour; they are quickly becoming stars,” said the political analyst Konstantin Skorkin, a Luhansk native who focuses on the region. Amid reports of Russian tanks rolling into the Donbas, questions have arisen as to what extent the separatists have been acting on their own accord or are just pawns in the Kremlin’s bigger geopolitical aims. “They are simply puppets of the Kremlin and the recent events only confirmed this once again,” said Skorkin. He points to how each statement that the two leaders made over the past week was quickly picked up by state media and the Kremlin. “The Russian leadership coordinated everything and nothing was left to chance,” the analyst said. The two regions have been highly dependent on Russian support since their formation in 2014 as they suffered economic collapse during their eight years of unrecognised independence. The regions’ People’s Militia is also fully armed by the Russian state, and Ukrainian officials believe up to 11,000 Russian soldiers are permanently stationed in the Donbas. “They just simply wouldn’t exist without Russian support,” said Nikolaus von Twickel, former OSCE staff member in Donetsk who has written extensively on the Donbas. “But their relationship with Moscow has changed over the years.” In the chaos that followed the 2014 Maidan revolution, a number of rogue and unpredictable local leaders emerged as heads of the two separatist states. Von Twickel said the Kremlin had since worked systematically to replace these firebrands with trusted loyalists. Analysts see 2018 as a turning point in the relative independence of the region, when Alexander Zakharchenko, the head of the self-proclaimed Donetsk people’s republic, was killed in a car bomb and replaced by the more reliable Pushilin. The Ukrainian security service said at the time Zakharchenko’s death was a result of an operation by Russian special forces. “Zacharchenko had his own personal army, and the Donbas even had its own defence ministry – all of that has disbanded since. It was a clear signal that the rebels will only act according to Kremlin’s rules,” Von Twickel said. And while experts now point to the very limited autonomy of Pushilin and Pasechnik, closely following the two leaders can serve as a good indication of what the Kremlin may do next in Ukraine. Denis Pushilin The younger and more charismatic of the two, not much is known about Pushilin’s early days in the Donbas. He first came to prominence in 2011, while working for the infamous MMM group, a notorious Russian Ponzi scheme that is considered to be one of the world’s largest fraud organisations of all time. “He is your typical wheeler-dealer kind of guy,” said Von Twickel. Pushilin joined the separatist cause early on in 2014, but in contrast to some of the other Donetsk leaders, he never saw any large military action, often sporting a suit in public, a habit he was occasionally mocked for by the other rebels. But over the years, Pushilin looked to have gained the Kremlin’s trust as he became the head of the region after the murky murder of Zakharchenko. Pushilin has repeatedly expressed his desire for the region to be part of a “renewed Russian empire” rather than an independent state. “Donbas should be part of the Russian empire. I don’t see anything bad in imperialism,” he once said. Leonid Pasechnik Prior to the 2014 Maidan revolution, Pasechnik had a long career in the Ukrainian security services, where he rose to the rank of lieutenant colonel. He first received national attention in 2006 when in a special operation he intercepted 7.24m Russian roubles in cash (almost £2m) that was being smuggled across the Russian-Ukrainian border. Pasechnik reportedly refused to take a bribe from the smugglers in the operation, receiving a medal from the pro-western Ukrainian president, Viktor Yushchenko, for the operation. Like many other generals in the Ukrainian security services in the Donbas, Pasechnik chose the side of the pro-Russian separatists in 2014, when he headed the notorious state security department of the self-proclaimed Luhansk people’s republic. “He operated the main prisons and the so-called isolation cells, cellars where pretty sinister stuff happened,” said Von Twickel, referring to the many media reports depicting stories of torture of those who opposed the separatists. In 2017, Pasechnik emerged as the victor of a violent power struggle with the then head of Luhansk, Igor Plotnitsky. Not much has since been heard from the camera-shy and timid Pasechnik, and he has somewhat looked out of place as he was suddenly sprung into the country’s spotlight.Scott Morrison has played down the prospect of fighting “temporary” fuel price hikes with a cut in excise tax, as Russia’s invasion of Ukraine reignites concerns about Australia’s energy security. With petrol prices at the bowser already north of $1.80 and headed to $2.00, the expected invasion has added to global oil price pressures and led to concern for gas supplies to Europe – although experts say there is little Australia can do about either. The government has come under pressure including from independent senator, Rex Patrick, to cut fuel excise, which is 44.2 cents a litre. Labor so far has attacked the government on fuel security but has not weighed in on tax. On Thursday Morrison acknowledged that Australia’s petrol prices are “very high” but explained there was a “a global issue with fuel prices”. “The advice we’re getting, particularly out of the [International Energy Agency], is that this impact is likely to be short term, it’s likely to be temporary,” he told ABC Radio. “You don’t go and completely recalibrate your budget based on fluctuations in oil prices. They’ve gone up, they’ve gone down. “The movement in oil prices quickly overwhelms any sort of movements [in tax]. So people make these points politically, but governments, I think, have to look at these things in a bigger context.” On Thursday the energy minister, Angus Taylor, said Australia stands “ready to take action to help alleviate these pressures” including through using its oil stocks held in the United States’ strategic petroleum reserve as part of a coordinated International Energy Agency (IEA) action to increase supply. In a statement, Taylor said Australia “cannot control international price spikes” but is “closely monitoring the situation with the IEA and the United States”. The Australian government has purchased just under 1.7m barrels of oil stored in the US reserve and entered deals to secure the longterm future of the only two remaining oil refineries in Australia: Viva refinery in Geelong and Ampol’s Lytton refinery in Brisbane. Under IEA rules, each country has an obligation to hold emergency oil stocks equivalent to at least 90 days of net oil imports as part of planning to avoid a hit from any major disruption to oil supplies. In December Australia still fell short of the requirement, with 67 days’ worth of petrol onshore, with a further 12 days’ worth on vessels coming to Australia and 10 days’ held offshore. Taylor said because of “strong international partnerships and diverse supply chains” he is “confident Australia is well supplied to keep us moving”. Labor’s Anthony Albanese said fuel prices had gone “through the roof” in part because “half of the refineries in Australia have shut down during this term of government”. Albanese said the government had “not met its obligations under the IEA for fuel reserves” and had bolstered stocks “in the Gulf of Mexico”. “Well, that’s useful, that is.” Albanese argued Australia’s fuel dependency would already be lower if the government had prioritised higher take-up of electric vehicles and hydrogen, which it had originally derided, claiming EVs would “end the weekend” and hydrogen was “snake oil”. Energy program director at The Australia Institute, Richie Merzian, said Australia is “incredibly liquid fuel insecure” with 90% of fuel imported from overseas, just two local refineries, and “no flag carrying oil tankers” outside those used by the navy. Head of energy at the Australian Industry Group, Tennant Reed, said Australia “may be bystanders to whatever transpires” because it would take “many years” to grow hydrogen production and reduce demand through more transport electrification. There is also “formally not a lot Australia can do” to help European supply of gas, Reed said. He noted Australia’s domestic gas security security mechanism could only be used if legislative or regulation change is made, and it “requires a determination far in advance”. “If the government swung into action now to make a decision, they could possibly limit some gas exports from next year.” Associate professor Liam Wagner said that the majority of Australia’s gas exports were “already contracted for delivery” to other markets, including Asia, South East Asia and Japan. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Wagner said the gas spot price is “reacting to fear” but there is “not much the Australian government can do”. On petrol excise, Wagner said it would be “unwise” to use it to tackle temporary price spikes and unlikely as it is a “considerable source of income to government”. “Our onshore resources make us continually vulnerable to international energy crises.” “We have far less than 90 days’ supply, and have done for 10 years. We’ve been very lucky not to have had shortages of supply.” National secretary of the Australian Workers Union, Daniel Walton, said the current crisis “highlights importance of maintaining fuel refining”, including ensuring that Australia’s two remaining refineries could convert Australian crude oil. While Australia should examine how gas exports could make up shortfall in markets such as Asia, Walton warned that supplying international markets should not be done “at the detriment of Australian manufacturers and users”. The Australian government revealed on Thursday that it would wait until the end of March to bring into force the sanctions that specifically curb trade with the two Ukrainian regions now recognised as independent by Vladimir Putin. Morrison said Australian businesses needed time to “make changes to their arrangements in an orderly way”. He acknowledged that Australia’s trade with Russia was “actually quite minor compared to many other countries” and said the Treasury secretary, Steven Kennedy, had advised the national security committee that it could “impose these sanctions with minimal impact on Australian businesses”. The prime minister said while he did not expect the Australian sanctions to persuade Russia to cancel the invasion, there “must be consequences for violent, coercive and bullying behaviour.” He said the Australian government had “plenty left in the tank when it comes to further actions that we would take” if and when Russia escalated the violence.The QAnon conspiracy myth movement continues to thrive in the US and has even strengthened more than a year after Donald Trump left the White House, according to the largest ever study of its followers. Some 22% of Americans believe that a “storm” is coming, 18% think violence might be necessary to save the country and 16% hold that the government, media and financial worlds are controlled by Satan-worshipping pedophiles, according to four surveys carried out last year by the Public Religion Research Institute (PRRI) think tank. Each of these baseless and bizarre views is a core tenet of QAnon, an antisemitic internet conspiracy theory which held that Trump was waging a secret battle against a cabal of pedophiles and its “deep state” collaborators – a “storm” that would sweep them out of power. Yet despite his election defeat by Joe Biden, major social media platforms banning QAnon activity and the disappearance of its leader, “Q”, the movement has not gone away. If anything, it has strengthened. “The share of QAnon believers has increased slightly through 2021,” the report by the PRRI states. “In March, 14% of Americans were QAnon believers, compared to 16% in July, 17% in September, and 17% in October. “The share of QAnon doubters has remained relatively steady (46% in March, 49% in July, 48% in September, and 49% in October), while the share of QAnon rejecters has decreased slightly from 40% in March to 35% in July, 35% in September, and 34% in October.” These findings are based on 19,399 respondents from four surveys designed and conducted by the PRRI during 2021, using random samples of adults in all 50 states. Natalie Jackson, research lead, said: “People who are susceptible to believing in these conspiracy theories are found in every demographic. It’s not just restricted to Republicans or the uneducated or those who are in a specific age group. It’s distributed throughout. “Of course, there are some groups that are more prevalent than others, like there are many more Republicans than Democrats, but we do find that people in every demographic find these wild conspiracies believable.” Among the discernible patterns, about one in five QAnon believers identify as white evangelical Protestants, and QAnon believers are significantly less likely than all Americans to have college degrees. Media consumption is the strongest independent predictor of being a QAnon believer. Americans who most trust rightwing news outlets such as the One America News Network and Newsmax are nearly five times more likely than those who most trust mainstream news to be QAnon believers. Those who most trust Fox News are about twice as likely as those who trust mainstream news to be QAnon believers. They generally have positive views of the Republican party and negative views of Democrats, with 68% agreeing in the October survey that “the Democratic Party has been taken over by socialists”. Some 26% of QAnon believers have a favorable view of Biden while 69% have unfavorable views of him. About 63% have a favorable opinion of Trump but 31% have an unfavorable view of the former president who once claimed that QAnon followers “love our country” and “like me very much”. Seven in 10 QAnon believers agree with the false statement that the 2020 election was stolen from Trump, including just under half who completely agree. These individuals are also most likely to blame leftwing groups such as antifa for the US Capitol insurrection on 6 January 2021 (there is no organized antifa organization). Jackson said: “These are people who believe that their culture is under attack, their way of life is under attack, so a lot of them do align with the Trump philosophies. According to those theories, Trump was supposed to be their leader. “One of the things that’s somewhat impressive is even with Trump out of power, and the fact that January 6 was not ‘the storm’ that they thought it might be, these beliefs have persisted.” Around eight in 10 QAnon believers agree with the statement that America is in danger of losing its culture and identity. More than seven in 10 say the values of Islam are at odds with American values and way of life, or that the American way of life needs to be protected from foreign influence. And 32% of QAnon believers agree with the statement that “the idea of America where most people are not white bothers me”. In late 2021, about one in 10 Americans (9%) agreed it might be necessary to commit an act of violence to save the country. QAnon believers (17%) and QAnon doubters (11%) were more likely than QAnon rejecters (4%) to share this view.The New South Wales upper house has for a third time disallowed regulations to establish flood plain harvesting licences, arguing the state government’s plan would have led to an unsustainable amount of water being taken from the Murray-Darling river system. Labor, the Greens and some crossbenchers united to disallow the licences on Thursday morning, despite the new water minister, Kevin Anderson, moving preemptively to issue licence determinations on Monday. The Shooters, Fishers and Farmers party abstained from the vote. The licensing of flood plain harvesting – the practice of capturing water as it moves across the extensive flat plains of the north-west using levees, channels and dams – is one of the last parts of the Murray-Darling Basin plan that needs to be implemented. While all stakeholders agree that licensing of the practice is needed so the water being taken can be controlled, measured and policed, there has been a bitter dispute between irrigators and the environmental movement over volumes to be licensed and the fact that the government intends to give the licences free to irrigators. Justin Field, the independent who moved the disallowance, said the NSW upper house had voted 18 to 15 to support his motion. “This vote recognises that the government hasn’t got the policy right when it comes to floodplain harvesting,” he said. “The government’s plan is a gift to a handful of large corporate irrigators, many of whom built dams far in excess of known caps. This is as much about equity for farming neighbours and other water licence holders as it is about downstream communities and the environment. “There is broad agreement that floodplain harvesting should be regulated, licensed and measured but the current rules leave downstream communities, other water license holders and the environment carrying the risk. That is not acceptable.” Cate Faehrmann, the Greens MP who chaired an upper house committee into the practice, said: “It should now be clear to the government that they do not have a social licence to gift $1 billion worth of water licences to their corporate irrigator mates.” The committee said more scientific work was needed and that any plan had to ensure flows in the lower part of the river system were maintained. “The government must bring floodplain harvesting to within the legal limits in the Murray-Darling basin plan,” she said. Faehrmann said that meant licensing 64GL of water take, not the 346GL that the government said it intends to license. “We will never support the expansion of floodplain harvesting beyond the legal limit of 64GL because it is ultimately unsustainable for the river system itself,” she said. Successive NSW water ministers have attempted to implement the regulations, only to have them disallowed by the upper house. On Monday, Anderson, who had produced regulations just before Christmas, went further than his predecessors, declaring flood plain harvesting a regulated water source and issuing volume determinations to irrigators. This was despite the upper house signalling it may again disallow the regulations at the first opportunity, which was this week. It is unclear what the legal impact of the minister’s actions will be. It could trigger compensation claims. Equally, by declaring flood plain harvesting a regulated water source under the Water Act, Anderson may also have made it illegal for irrigators to take the water without a licence. Until now irrigators were operating in a legal limbo and many continue to transfer overland flows from recent downpours into massive on-farm dams. The chief executive of the NSW Irrigators’ Council, Claire Miller, described the disallowance as “extremely frustrating’. “All the politicians who spoke today agreed floodplain harvesting must be reduced, licensed and metered. Yet, they voted against the regulations to do just that. Politics again got in the way of a major environmental reform,” she said “Our members want floodplain harvesting to be regulated, the same as water used from rivers and groundwater. This is in the public interest, and in our interest that water access is secure and sustainable.” Chris Gambian, the chief executive of the Nature Conservation Council, said this was the best decision possible for river health, First Nations peoples and downstream communities. “The new water minister, Kevin Anderson, now has an opportunity to sit down in good faith and understand the perspectives of the whole community on floodplain water harvesting. “We have to strike the right balance to ensure a viable agricultural sector all along the river system while keeping the river flowing and connected end to end. There’s no agriculture on a dead river system,” he said. The upper house called on the minister to engage in another round of consultations.The New South Wales government had made plans for a two-week shutdown of the state’s train system as early as last week, casting doubt on the timeline provided by the transport minister, David Elliott, about when he first knew of Monday’s network closure. Documents obtained through the Fair Work Commission reveal senior officials in the state’s transport department believed as early as Thursday last week that the state’s rail system would need to be shuttered for a fortnight if industrial action proposed by the Rail, Tram and Bus Union went ahead. Ahead of the planned action, a risk assessment conducted by Sydney Trains finalised on 16 February concluded that the “risks associated” with the union’s planned action meant the rail system would need to be shut down. “On 17 February 2022, in view of the finalised risk assessment, the executive leadership team made the decision that the rail network could not be operated for the two-week period commencing 21 February 2022,” Sydney Trains acting chief customer officer, Jasbir Tumber, said in a statement to the FWC. The assessment was carried out before the RTBU agreed to amend its planned industrial action at the FWC on Saturday night, but it makes clear Sydney Trains did not believe the rail network would be able to operate without “altered working conditions”, which the union was committed to not undertaking. The existence of the document raises questions about the timeline previously provided by Elliott about when he first knew of the shutdown risk. Elliott on Wednesday blamed a communication breakdown for not alerting the premier, saying: “My office remained of the view until approximately 1.30[am Monday] that there would be a significant disruption to services but not a total network shutdown.” In question time on Thursday, Labor pushed both Elliott and the premier, Dominic Perrottet, on previous statements in which they insisted they were not aware of the shutdown despite the information having been circulated to various government departments. Asked during question time on Thursday whether the decision to close the network had been made on 17 February, Perrottet replied: “Not to my knowledge”. Elliott dodged questions on his knowledge of the shutdown, describing the submissions made by the department as “a contingency plan, an assessment”. “Assessments are done to assure that any potential contingency is addressed,” he said. “Assessments are done by government. Every time a department faces a dilemma, whether it be industrial action, whether it be a police operation, whether it be natural disaster, they do assessments to address all contingencies. “This isn’t rocket science. This is government 101.” While Elliott has previously told reporters he had an “inkling” of what might have occurred, he has defended not informing Perrottet of the shutdown because it was not a certainty. “I had no confirmation and I didn’t know exactly what action Transport for NSW would be taking,” he said this week. But the thousands of pages of transcripts and affidavits released by the commission on Thursday afternoon reveal the possibility of a shutdown had been widely shared within various government departments. NSW Treasury chief economist, Stephen Walters, conducted modelling forecasting the cost of a shutdown as $33.3m a day, and $370m for the full two weeks. “I have been informed and verily believe that the cumulative effect of the notified industrial action is that there will be a complete stoppage of train services for the period of the notified action,” he stated. The Department of Communities and Justice, the Department of Education and the Department of Health also provided affidavits to the commission on the impacts of industrial action, including a possible two-week shutdown. The documents also reveal for the first time the cause of a breakdown between the government and union after an agreement between the parties had been struck on Saturday night. While the government has accused the union of “walking away” from the agreement, the transcript reveals the union’s barrister, Lucy Saunders, had read out the terms of the deal between both parties on Saturday night. However emails between officials from the department of transport and the union late on Sunday afternoon reveal a “disagreement” on the details of the rostering arrangements agreed to by the parties. During negotiations before the FWC over the weekend, the RTBU agreed to drop both a ban on overtime and alterations to rostering arrangements. It planned to push ahead with a ban on altered working, meaning staff only would perform shifts they were set without any changes. The documents submitted to the FWC show Sydney Trains did not believe the rail network would be able to operate without altered working conditions. However the government’s lawyer, Maurice Baroni, was unable to tell the commission on Sunday night whether the misunderstanding would lead to the network shutting down on Monday because of the dropped claims. “We are undertaking a risk assessment to see what the impact of this is,” he said in the hearing. “The affidavit of Mr Tumber doesn’t specifically deal with this because what he was dealing with was something different to what arose out of the discussions yesterday.” On Thursday, NSW Labor leader, Chris Minns, called for Elliott to be sacked from the ministry. “David Elliot has to go,” he said. “All of these people all over the NSW government knew about a two week stoppage, but the transport minister himself had absolutely no idea. “At the very least, he’s an incompetent minister, not in charge of his portfolio.” He also questioned how it was possible that Perrottet did not know of the looming shutdown. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The minister has previously offered conflicting versions of when he became aware of the shutdown, but insisted the decision was made after he went to bed between 11pm and midnight on Sunday night. On Tuesday he told parliament during question time that he knew about the closure early on Monday. Perrottet insisted on Wednesday that he retained confidence in Elliott as transport minister, while rebuking his decision to go to bed as transport scrambled to find a solution on Sunday night.Scarlet elf-cups have opened. So much stranger and more animal than flowers of snowdrops and lesser celandines, these bloody, little, inside-out mushrooms of the fungus Sarcoscypha austriaca appear as envoys of a parallel season. They materialise at the end of winter, not as heralds of spring but of a perpetual autumn in the realm of rot. The storm-drama of wind and rain thrashing through trees above defines the day, but the elf-cups blooming in the quietly rotting debris of previous storms belong to a hardly noticeable world. The fungus feeds on fallen sticks in the damp, mossy shadows under trees. Its gauze of weaving filaments infiltrates cells of dead wood to digest the timber and return it to the soil. The storm is rewilding. It owes much of its ferocity to our agency that creates climate chaos but, despite being branded with a human name, the storm is immune to attempts to domesticate it and is crushingly indifferent; it cares nothing for what we care about. It seeks out vulnerabilities in the architecture of trees, wrenching, twisting, jamming into fractures, bursting them open, breaking, uprooting, overturning – the macro equivalent of the micro workings of the fungus. Weather and fungi are in league with each other, a creative-destructive pact for the disintegration, decay and rejuvenation of the forest. The scarlet elf-cups carry their folklore lightly. They are brightly otherworldly and are left behind by elves, pixies, fairies and those populations of supernatural folk once commonplace in rural culture – now, even talking about them, the words seem so distantly extinct. Medicinal properties, culinary curiosity and scientific revelations keep fungi culturally in the exotically weird, a fifth column in the service of a more-than-human-worldliness. Perhaps instead of seeing the elf-cups as receptacles of myth, they may be thought of as sensory structures. Passing Jodrell Bank on the train, the radio telescopes seem to echo elf-cups on a massive scale. The great dishes listening to the sky, receiving signals from the galactic radio, are gross, dull versions of the tiny scarlet ears picking up the storm frequency, transmitting space capsule spores into the future, connecting a microscopic world to the void. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiarySouth-east Queensland and northern NSW are bracing for more wild weather as emergency officials warn of a “concerning weather system” off the coast that is tracking towards land. The widespread rain is predicted to last for another week and the Bureau of Meteorology also says there is an increased chance of unusually high rainfall - in the top 20% of historical records - for March to May in much of eastern NSW. The forecast comes as the body of a motorcyclist missing in the Queensland floods was found after his bike was swept away by rising water more than a day ago. Local man Philip Gary Lambert, 54, was coming home from work at a Gympie shopping centre when he attempted to ride over nearby Greens Creek at 1.30am on Wednesday, Acting Inspector Paul Algie said. “As a result of riding into floodwater he has come off his motorcycle and has been washed away,” Insp Algie said on Thursday. A motorcycle helmet and a bag in a tree were discovered during the search for Lambert, and his body was found close by at 11.30am on Thursday. The motorcyclist’s death follows that of a 63-year-old woman killed in the floods triggered by a slow-moving low pressure system which has dumped up to 600mm of rain in some parts of the state’s southeast. Her body was found in her car, which was submerged in floodwaters west of Eumundi on the Sunshine Coast on Wednesday morning. The Queensland premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, said there were 19 flood rescues and 240 calls for help throughout Wednesday and on Thursday morning. The Bureau of Meteorology has issued a severe weather warning for intense rainfall of up to 300mm possibly causing “dangerous and life-threatening flash floods” from Maryborough to the NSW border from Thursday afternoon. A weather system is currently sitting offshore of the Sunshine Coast, and Insp Algie said the Bureau of Meteorology is warning of two possible outcomes. “I am very concerned that if that rain does return to the coast and it gets dumped in the Mary catchment, then we will have real problems in the Gympie area,” he said. The forecaster is also warning of possibly damaging winds, with gusts of up to 90km/h from the Sunshine Coast to the Gold Coast. Palaszczuk urged residents in the state’s southeast to watch out for alerts and avoid going out if possible. “Our message is very clear to people this afternoon: please listen to your radio, social media, television,” Palaszczuk told parliament on Thursday. “Please keep up to date to see what is happening, especially if you’re planning to go out this evening and probably during the pick up time this afternoon for (school) children.” There is a major flood warning for Eyre Creek and moderate flood warnings for the Georgina, Mary and Stanley rivers, as well as Tinana and Six Mile creeks.A Northern Territory sergeant who trained Constable Zachary Rolfe has described him in court as a senior member of a specialist response team and good marksman. Sgt Lee Bauwens also said in the NT supreme court on Thursday that Rolfe achieved perfect scores in shooting training, and had later assisted him in some training sessions. Bauwens was giving evidence during Rolfe’s trial for murder. Rolfe is charged with murdering Kumanjayi Walker in Yuendumu, a remote community about 300km from Alice Springs, on 9 November 2019. The court has previously heard that Walker, a 19-year-old Warlpiri man, stabbed Rolfe while the officer was trying to arrest him. Rolfe then shot Walker three times. The murder charge relates to the second two shots, which the prosecution alleges were fired at close range while Walker was on the ground under the control of another officer, Adam Eberl. Rolfe has pleaded not guilty and defends his actions on the basis they were justified in light of the risk Walker posed to him and Eberl. The defence also disputes that Walker was under control at the time of the shots. On Wednesday, Bauwens gave evidence that he performed Rolfe’s induction training when he joined the immediate response team (IRT) in either late 2017 or early 2018. The court heard the team, which Bauwens led and helped create, is a squad of general duties officers who receive additional training that enables them to be deployed to support other police or cordon and contain high-risk events until specialist officers arrive. In continuing his evidence on Thursday, Bauwens described Rolfe as a senior member of the IRT. He said that a training record tendered in evidence to the court had shown Rolfe hit 15 out of 15 targets while using a primary weapon, which Bauwens said would have been an AR-15 rifle, and all six targets using his secondary weapon, a Glock semi-automatic handgun. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Bauwens was asked extensive questions by prosecutor Philip Strickland SC about the defensive tactics and cordon-and-contain training that Rolfe had received. Strickland told the court in opening his case that the context leading up to the shooting, including Rolfe’s training and the planning undertaken before the IRT travelled to Yuendumu, was relevant to the murder charge. David Edwardson QC, for Rolfe, also asked Bauwens about NT police training, including a manoeuvre Bauwens described as a “shove and shoot”. Bauwens said this was specifically taught to officers as training for how to respond when confronted with an edged weapon by an offender who was in close proximity, and it involved shoving or hitting the offender with one arm while using the other to draw the gun and fire at the offender. Under questioning from Edwardson, Bauwens agreed that all NT police were trained to only use force when necessary, and to only use force that was reasonable and proportionate to the threat. “In other words, if someone is brandishing a chopstick, you don’t pull out your gun, do you?” Edwardson said. “Not generally, no,” Bauwens responded. Edwardson then asked: “On the other hand, if they produced an edged weapon which is potentially lethal, then you’re told you’re entitled to deploy your weapon and you have to, if necessary, be prepared to pull the trigger?” “That’s correct,” Bauwens said. The trial continues.This blog is closing now but please continue to follow our live coverage on our new liveblog here. Thank you for reading. The Russian rouble has fallen 5.4% to a record low on Thursday, after financial markets were shaken by Vladimir Putin’s decision to invade Ukraine. The Moscow Exchange said on Thursday morning it had suspended trading on all markets. Brent crude oil prices crossed $100/barrel for first time since 2014. Safe haven currencies such as the yen and US dollar rose, along with gold and other valuable commodities such as nickel and wheat. Stock markets saw heavy losses with the the Hang Seng in Hong Kong off 3.1%, the Nikkei down 2%, Seoul losing 2.7% and the ASX in Sydney closing down 3%. Big losses also coming in Europe. US president Joe Biden recently spoke with Ukraine’s president Zelenskiy Volodymyr. A White House statement reads: President Zelenskiy reached out to me tonight and we just finished speaking. I condemned this unprovoked and unjustified attack by Russian military forces. I briefed him on the steps we are taking to rally international condemnation, including tonight at the United Nations Security Council. He asked me to call on the leaders of the world to speak out clearly against President Putin’s flagrant aggression, and to stand with the people of Ukraine. Tomorrow, I will be meeting with the Leaders of the G7, and the United States and our Allies and partners will be imposing severe sanctions on Russia. We will continue to provide support and assistance to Ukraine and the Ukrainian people.” Reports of explosions are filtering in from Kyiv, as well as air raid sirens and rocket attacks on Ukrainian fighter jets at an airport outside the city. Russian forces fired missiles at several Ukrainian cities and landed troops on its south coast on Thursday, officials and local media report, after Russian President Vladimir Putin authorised what he called a “special military operation” in the east. Russian-backed separatists in Ukraine’s Donetsk have launched large-scale strikes against Ukrainian forces along the line of contact, Russia’s Interfax news agency cited a separatist spokesman as saying on Thursday. Guardian reporter Luke Harding who is based in Kyiv said explosions have been reported across the country, including in Kyiv, Kharkiv, Mariupol, Dnipro, Odessa, Slavayansk and Kramatorsk. Two big blasts were reported being heard from the city of Mariupol one after another in an easterly direction, according to a Reuters witness. Ukraine’s defence minister said Russia began intense shelling of Ukrainian military units in the east, as well as military control centres and airfields. A photo provided by the Ukrainian President’s office appeared to show an explosion in the country’s capital, Kyiv, early Thursday morning. Residents in Ukrainian cities appear to be fleeing in the wake of the Russian military attack. Here are some images on the news wires. Ukraine’s foreign minister has called for more sanctions on Russia and requested military and financial assistance as well as humanitarian aid. The European Union says it will “hold Moscow accountable” for what commission chief Ursula von der Leyen said was an “unjustified” attack on Ukraine. “In these dark hours, our thoughts are with Ukraine and the innocent women, men and children as they face this unprovoked attack and fear for their lives,” she said on Twitter. “We will hold the Kremlin accountable,” von der Leyen added. EU leaders will hold an emergency summit in Brussels later on Thursday. The British prime minister has responded to the Russian attack on Ukraine: The Guardian’s Luke Harding is in Ukraine where president Volodymyr Zelenskiy just addressed the nation following reports from Ukrainian officials that Russian troops have landed in Odessa while others are crossing the border into Kharkiv. Ukraine’s president Zelenskiy made an urgent national address this morning, introducing martial law while urging people to remain calm. In a brief video address which has since been published by the ministry of defence on Thursday morning, Zelenskiy said Russia has carried out missile strikes on Ukraine infrastructure and on Ukrainian border guards with explosions being heard in many cities across the country. He added that he spoken with US president Joe Biden, and told Ukrainians to stay home and to stay calm: “The army works. I will be with you all the time. Stay strong. We will win because we are Ukraine. Glory to Ukraine” Zelenskiy also said Ukraine will introduce martial law on all territories of the state, Reuters reports. Ukrainian officials say Russian troops have landed in Odessa while others are crossing the border into Kharkiv. The Ukrainian interior ministry made the announcement on Telegram, adding that rocket attacks are targeting Ukrainian fighter jets at an airport outside Kyiv. Ukraine’s state emergency service says attacks have been launched against 10 Ukrainian regions, primarily in the east and south of the country. At least seven “powerful” airstrikes on Vasilkovsky airport outside Kyiv, where Ukraine’s military fighter bombers are kept, Kyiv command says Guardian senior reporter Peter Beaumont tells us if the reports coming in from around Ukraine are accurate, this is far from a being a limited operation by Russia. Instead it looks like military operations of different kinds are being launched in a broad crescent from Odessa in the south-west along the coast eastwards towards Mariupol, through to Kharkiv further north and finally Kyiv at the top of the crescent. While a lot of reported attacks so far appear to have involved missile strikes, there are unconfirmed reports now via Ifax and elsewhere of troops landing in the south and crossing the border near Kharkiv too. Ukraine’s deputy interior minister, Anton Gerashchenko, has also confirmed a Russian invasion has begun. In a statement posted to his official Facebook page, the minister said: The invasion has begun. There have just been missiles on the military headquarters, airports, military warehouses, near Kyiv, Kharkiv, Dnieper. Gunfire at the border is underway. From this day, there is a new geopolitical reality in the world” United Nations secretary-general Antonio Guterres has made a direct plea to Russian present Putin, saying: “In the name of humanity bring your troops back to Russia.” Guterres, who has served as secretary-general since 2017, added that today’s actions are the “saddest moment in my tenure”. Ukraine’s foreign minister Dmytro Kuleba has confirmed Russia’s “full-scale invasion” of Ukraine. Putin has just launched a full-scale invasion of Ukraine. Peaceful Ukrainian cities are under strikes. This is a war of aggression. Ukraine will defend itself and will win. The world can and must stop Putin. The time to act is now.” Russia’s representative to the United Nations, Vasily Nebenzya, has justified Russia’s military operations under article 51 of the UN charter, which allows for “self-defence”. Nebenzya defended Russia’s decision to take military action in the Donbas region of eastern Ukraine during an emergency meeting of the UN Security Council held just moments earlier. According to Reuters, Nebenzya told the United Nations security council of Putin’s announcement of a special military operation in eastern Ukraine. The root of today’s crisis around Ukraine is the actions of Ukraine itself, who for many years were sabotaging its obligations.” Nebenzya is presumably referring to the Minsk agreement. He also claimed that the Russian operation aimed to protect residents in the Russian-backed separatist regions of eastern Ukraine, “who for eight years have been cowering from Ukraine’s shelling.” Nebenzya went on to say that “Ukrainian provocation against those in Donbas not only has not stopped but has intensified,” which he said prompted separatist leaders in the regions of Luhansk and Donetsk to request Russian assistance. Ukraine’s UN ambassador responded, declaring Russian president Putin declared “a war on my country”. The British ambassador to Ukraine, Melinda Simmons, has said that a “wholly unprovoked” attack on Ukraine is under way. “A wholly unprovoked attack on a peaceful country is unfolding. Horrified,” she said in a tweet on Thursday morning. “Just because you’ve prepared and thought about this possibility for weeks and months doesn’t mean it isn’t shocking when it actually happens.” US president Joe Biden has delivered a statement on Russia’s “unprovoked and unjustified” attack on Ukraine. A White House statement reads: The prayers of the entire world are with the people of Ukraine tonight as they suffer an unprovoked and unjustified attack by Russian military forces. President Putin has chosen a premeditated war that will bring a catastrophic loss of life and human suffering. Russia alone is responsible for the death and destruction this attack will bring, and the United States and its Allies and partners will respond in a united and decisive way. The world will hold Russia accountable.” Biden said he will meet his G7 counterparts in the morning [EST] before speaking to the American people to announce the “further consequences the United States and our Allies and partners will impose on Russia for this needless act of aggression” against Ukraine and global peace and security. “Jill and I are praying for the brave and proud people of Ukraine,” Biden added. Here is a snap from the Guardian’s Peter Beaumont reporting from Lviv in western Ukraine. After a sleepless night in Ukraine in which many people here were expecting a Russian attack to begin and remained glued to their phones throughout the night, reports of explosions have begun coming in from various cities in the last few minutes. On a live broadcast from Kyiv just now CNN’s Mathew Chance has described hearing 4-5 loud bangs that he could not identify. A report on Ifax also reported gunfire near Kyiv’s Boryspil airport, again so far unconfirmed as A Nato official told Reuters ban invasion appeared to be underway. There were also initial albeit unconfirmed details coming in of explosions being heard in Kharkiv, Kramatorsk, Kharkiv, Odesa and Mariupol. The reports follow hard on the heels of a speech by Russian president Vladimir Putin announcing that he was ordering a military operation against Ukraine – declaring war on Ukraine in other words. Putin added that any foreign attempt to interfere with Russian action would lead to ‘consequences they have never seen.’ Accusing the US and its allies of ignoring Russia’s demands to stop Ukraine from joining Nato and offer Moscow security guarantees Putin said the Russian military operation aimed to ensure a “demilitarisation” and “de-Nazification” – in his words – of Ukraine. Putin said Ukrainian servicemen who lay down arms will be able to safely leave the zone of combat. So far, where I am in Lviv in Ukraine’s west, it remains quiet. Financial markets have been rocked by developments in Ukraine and we’re seeing large falls on the major Asia Pacific indices where Thursday’s session is already underway. The Nikkei in Tokyo has dropped 1.9%, Seoul is down 2.3% and the ASX in Sydney has plunged 3%. The Hang Seng has dropped 2.82%. Bitcoin has dropped another 5.4% as riskier assets took a pounding in the wake of reports of explosions across Ukraine and Vladimir Putin’s bellicose address. But safe havens such as gold, the US dollar and a range of commodities including nickel, and wheat have all spiked upwards. Multiple reports are coming in of the sounds of explosions being heard across Ukraine, this morning. “Two booms heard from my apartment on Khreshatyk, Kyiv in the past 3 minutes,” CNN reporter Neil Hauer said. Other reports of a large explosion in Kharkiv in northeast Ukraine are also filtering through. A witness in Kyiv told Reuters they also reported hearing a series of distant loud noises similar to the firing of artillery, according to the news agency. More from Putin’s address: The Russian president says he wants to “demilitarise and de-Nazify” Ukraine Putin has also called on Ukrainian soldiers to put down their weapons and go home, according to Reuters, citing the Russian news agency Tass. The Russian president adds that “in case of foreign interference, Russia will act immediately”. Responsibility for bloodshed will be on the hands of the “Ukrainian regime” Russia’s response “will be instant if anyone tries to take it on” He tells Ukrainians that “your fathers and grandfathers did not fight so you could help ‘neo-Nazis’” Vladimir Putin has announced that Russia will carry out a “special military operation” in Ukraine, Reuters reports. In an address to the Russian people under way now and coinciding with the United nations security council meeting, the Russian president also said: Clashes between Ukrainian and Russian forces are “inevitable” and “only a question of time”. Further nato expansion and its use of Ukraine’s territory are unacceptable The Russian military operation aims to “protect people” Circumstances “demand decisive action from Russia” The UK’s representative Dame Barbara Woodward has wrapped up her speech now. For months, Russia has been holding a gun to Ukraine’s head. Now, Putin’s finger is on the trigger.” US representative Linda Thomas-Greenfield took to the floor with an emphatic plea to Russia. We are here tonight because we believe along with Ukraine that a full-scale further invasion into Ukraine by Russia is imminent. Tonight we’re seeing the Russians close airspace, move troops into Donbas and move forces into combat-ready positions. This is a perilous moment and we’re here for one reason, and one reason only: to ask Russia to stop. Return to your borders. Send your troops, your tanks, and your planes back to their barracks and hangars. And send your diplomats to the negotiating table. Back away from the brink, before it is too late.” Thomas-Greenfield added that Russia called previous US predictions “hysterical”. She added: Russia said we were lying. Russia said we were supplying the world with misinformation. But what we said would happen has come to pass, for all the world to see.” Albania’s representative Ferit Hoxha has called the situation a “senseless madness”. Ukrainians are facing another aggression just because they dare to exist. Russian wars have nothing to do with its security. This is a confrontation between Russia and international law.” UN secretary general ⁦Antonio Guterres has just addressed the UN security council meeting. Guterres addressed Russian president Putin directly: If indeed an operation is being prepared I have only one thing to say. Putin stop your troops from attacking Ukraine. Give peace a chance. Too many people have already died.” Another emergency UN security council meeting on Ukraine is set to get underway. Russia’s UN representative Vasily Nebenzya has just told reporters: “I’m starting to enjoy nightly meetings.” You can follow the live coverage below: Flights of civil aircraft across Ukraine airspace have been suspended after a notice to airmen (Notam) was released. Earlier, airports in the Ukraine cities of Dnipro, Kharkiv and Zaporizhzhia were closed to traffic. A fuller picture of the atmosphere in Kyiv is emerging as many in the city say they are unable to sleep. “It feels like almost all people I know are not sleeping,” Kyvi Independent journalist Oleksiy Sorokin said in a Twitter post early on Thursday. “It feels as if the whole country is awake this night.” Fellow Kyiv Independent journalist Anastasiia Lapatina said: “Seems like hundreds, and probably thousands, of Ukrainians are awake right now. It’s 4 in the morning. Scrolling, waiting, texting. What a horrific moment.” “It feels like almost all people I know are not sleeping,” Oleksiy Sorokin, a Kyvi-based journalist said in a Twitter post early on Thursday. “It feels as if the whole country is awake this night.” “Kyiv is quiet right now. Not a single car on the road when I walked outside,” foreign correspondent, Trey Yingst, added. “There are millions of innocent civilians here who do not want conflict. There are no winners in war.” It’s a busy night tonight with officials in Ukraine and in the west saying that Russia is on the brink of launching an invasion. The last few hours have seen western leaders scramble to arrange talks in a last-ditch effort to avert war in Ukraine. The United Nations security council is set to hold another emergency meeting in the coming hour to discuss Ukraine. Here’s what we know so far: The United States has said that a full-scale Russian invasion of Ukraine is imminent, and that Russian troops and separatist forces surrounding the country were in combat-ready positions. US secretary of state Antony Blinken said “everything seems to be in place” for a Russian invasion of Ukraine but still sees a chance to “avert a major aggression”. The UN has confirmed that there will be an emergency meeting of the security council to discuss the Ukraine crisis at 9.30pm on Wednesday, New York time. That is 4.30am in Ukraine and 2.30am GMT, or around 30 minutes from now. Russia has banned civil aircraft from airspace around north-eastern Ukraine while the three Ukrainian airports of Dnipro, Kharkiv and Zaporizhzhia have been closed to traffic until Thursday morning, according to a recent notice to airmen. Ukrainian media are reporting at least six government websites are down in an alleged cyberattack early on Thursday morning. At least five explosions were heard in the separatist-held eastern Ukraine city of Donetsk early on Thursday morning, a Reuters witness has said. Meanwhile, Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy, gave a 10-minute national address to his country in the early hours of Thursday morning pleading for peace and adding that he believed Russia had approved an offensive against Ukraine. Zelenskiy vowed Ukraine would defend itself in the face of invasion and rejected Moscow’s claims that his country poses a threat to Russia, lamenting that a Russian invasion would cost tens of thousands of lives. He also said Russian president Vladimir Putin had not replied to his invitation to hold talks. Reuters has just confirmed our earlier report that the three Ukrainian airports of Dnipro, Kharkiv and Zaporizhzhia have been closed to traffic until Thursday morning, citing a recent notice to airmen. US state department spokesperson Ned Price has issued another warning about “Kremlin disinformation campaigns”. He says there is no evidence to support Ukraine is committing genocide or conducting attacks in Donetsk or Luhansk. The Kremlin continues to create false narratives to justify invasion. It is fabricating supposed Ukrainian provocations in order to evacuate civilians from parts of eastern Ukraine. Metadata from evacuation videos filmed by Russia-backed officials exposed they were filmed February 16, 2 days before the alleged attacks occurred. (February 16, not January 16) Eerie scenes from Kyiv are emerging after Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy issued a state of emergency across Ukraine. “The city itself still feels calm, if a little emptier than usual. There were armoured vehicles earlier on Maidan square,” Moscow correspondent for the Financial Times Polina Ivanova said in a tweet in the early hours of Thursday morning. US secretary of state Antony Blinken says “everything seems to be in place” for a Russian invasion of Ukraine but still sees a chance to “avert a major aggression”. Speaking to NBC News he said: Everything seems to be in place for Russia to engage in a major aggression against Ukraine.” Blinken also told ABC News that Russia is “putting the final touches” on having forces in places for a “full-on invasion” and said the US has “certainly seen the presence of Russian forces inside of Ukraine.” The secretary of state did not elaborate on the Russian forces he said they have seen inside Ukraine and could not give “specific numbers,” but “everything we’ve seen over the last 24 to 48 hours has Russia of putting the final touches on having its forces in place across all of Ukraine’s borders, to the north, to the east, to the south, to be ready for a full-on invasion.” Russia has reportedly banned civil aircraft from airspace around northeastern Ukraine while flight paths along the Ukraine Russia border are reportedly closed and runways appear to be blocked in Ukraine’s airports. Ukrainian airports in Kharkiv, Dnipro and Zaporizhzhia are closed and runways are blocked in case of a possible attack, the Kyiv Independent reports, citing a report from ZN media. The airport in Kherson is to be closed next. Aviation analyst Alex Macheras said multiple airlines, including European carriers, have been informed by aviation risk management agencies that Ukraine is now considered a “do not fly” area. According to CNN, Russia has issued a notice banning civil aircraft from flight routes bordering north-eastern Ukraine. “Russia issued a NOTAM (notice to airmen or notice to air missions) that covers a corridor of territory where Russian forces have gathered over the past weeks,” the outlet reported. Stocks in Asia Pacific are being hammered on Thursday morning as the grim drumbeat of war in Ukraine becomes louder by the minute. The Australian ASX200 index was first cab off the rank and is down 2.3% after 90 minutes of trading. In Tokyo, the Nikkei average is down 0.8% and the Kospi in Seoul has fallen 1.4%. It follows steep losses on Wall Street where the Dow lost 1.4%, S&amp;P 500 dropped 1.8%, Nasdaq plunged 2.6%. The S&amp;P 500 – the broadest measure of shares in the US – has fallen 10% since its record high on 3 January, meaning it is officially in a correction phase. The Dow is only a fraction off the same metric. The Nasdaq has tumbled more than 16% so far this year. At least five explosions were heard in the separatist-held eastern Ukraine city of Donetsk early on Thursday morning, a Reuters witness has said. Following the blasts, four military trucks could be seen heading for the scene. Hours earlier, the Kremlin said two separatist breakaway regions in Ukraine had asked for Russian help to repel “aggression” by the Ukrainian army. The United States has said that a full-scale Russian invasion of Ukraine is imminent, and that Russian troops and separatist forces surrounding the country were in combat-ready positions. Pentagon spokesperson, John F Kirby, told reporters. Russian forces continue to assemble closer to the border ... They are ready to go. They could attack at any time ... with a significant military force.” The UN has confirmed that there will be an emergency meeting of the security council to discuss the Ukraine crisis at 9.30pm on Wednesday, New York time. That is 4.30am in Ukraine and 2.30am GMT, or around two hours from now. France is urging citizens to leave Ukraine “without delay” amid mounting concerns that Russia is preparing a full-scale attack. France’s foreign ministry said the decision was made in the context of “serious tensions caused by the concentration of Russian troops on Ukraine’s borders” and and in light of the establishment of the state of emergency passed by the Ukrainian Parliament. In a statement, as reported by Agence France-Presse, the ministry said: French citizens finding themselves in Ukraine should leave the country without delay. Any travel to the border areas in the north and east of the country is strictly discouraged.” Ukrainian media are reporting at least six government websites are down in an alleged cyberattack. “Cyber attack also hit websites of ministries of infrastructure, strategic industries and education,” the Kyiv Independent newspaper reports. According to the publication, the websites of the cabinet of ministers, foreign and agricultural ministries and the security service are down. The United Nations security council will hold an emergency meeting on Wednesday night to discuss Ukraine, diplomats said, after separatists in eastern Ukraine asked for Russia for help to repel “aggression”, Reuters is reporting. The Ukrainian president said he is pleading for peace while Vladimir Putin would not accept his call. In an emotional address address, Zelenskiy rejected Moscow’s claims that his country poses a threat to Russia and lamented that a Russian invasion would cost tens of thousands of lives. The people of Ukraine and the government of Ukraine want peace.” He said the people of Ukraine wanted peace, but “if someone attempts to take away our land, our freedom, our lives, the lives of our children, we will defend ourselves”. By attacking, you will see our faces, not our backs, but our faces.” Zelenskiy said the people of Russia were being lied to and that the possibility of war also “depends on you”. “Who can stop [the war]? People. These people are among you, I am sure,” he said. Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has just given a 10-minute national address to his country in the early hours of Thursday morning, local time. Zelenskiy said Russia had approved an offensive against Ukraine and said Russian president Vladimir Putin had not replied to his invitation to hold talks, Reuters reports, citing the address in which he spoke in both Ukrainian and Russian. He also warned that any flare-up from Russia could “burn everything” and create a catastrophic crisis. Speaking in Russian, he called on Russians to not believe the narratives about Ukraine being presented on Russian state television. I initiated a telephone call with the president of the Russian Federation. Result: silence. This step could be the start of a big war on the European continent. The whole world is talking about what could happen any day now. Any provocation. Any flare-up – one that could burn everything.” The address has since been posted on Telegram. Hello, it’s Samantha Lock with you as my colleague Maanvi Singh signs off. French President Emmanuel Macron has reiterated his support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity after a call with Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskiy, the Elysée Palace said in a statement late on Wednesday. “[Macron] also praised the Ukrainian President’s composure in the current situation,” the French presidency said. Support that the European Union can provide to Ukraine will be on the agenda of the meeting of the European Council on Thursday, the Elysée Palace added. Volodymyr Zelenskiy said that Russia had not responded to his invitation to hold talks. In a national address posted on Telegram, Zelenskiy warned that any flare-up from Russian could “burn everything” and create a catastrophic crisis. Addressing Russians directly, in their language, he said that the narratives they were being fed by Russian media were far from Ukrainians’ reality. Here’s some translation from the FT’s Max Seddon: Here’s the Guardian’s Luke Harding on the mood in Ukraine tonight. Ukraine is requesting a meeting of the UN security council, in response to the request by the self-proclaimed republics in Luhansk and Donetsk for Russian military assistance. Ukrainians in the UK have called on the west to provide military aid to their homeland, ahead of a protest outside the Russian embassy in London tonight. Wolodymyr Pawluk, chair of the London branch of the Association of Ukrainians in Great Britain, called on the west to provide both military and economic aid to help Ukrainians resist Russian forces. Pawluk, who said the AUGB has so far raised £50,000 towards an emergency humanitarian fund, added: “We understand the Nato troops aren’t going to fight on Ukrainian soil. Well, if they’re not willing to fight, send us the armour [so] that we can fight [for] ourselves.” Other Ukrainians in the UK told the Guardian they want the west to impose much tougher sanctions on Russia. Olesya Khromeychuk, director of the Ukrainian Institute London, said: “Sanctions, right now, don’t match the strong declarations of support we heard from British politicians. The UK needs to decide: to sacrifice the Russian wealth, including that which comes in the form of donations to political parties, or be laughed at by the Kremlin and lose credibility around the world.” Marta Mulyak, head of the London branch of Plast National Scout Organisation of Ukraine, said: “Seeing the west being so weak is very unsettling. The UK sanctioned five banks and three oligarchs. It’s a joke. It’s not about saving lives, it’s about saving your profits.” Ukrainian communities around the UK have also spoken about the trauma and anxiety experienced by the diaspora amid escalating Russian military action against their homeland. Wol Wowczuk, secretary of the Leicester Ukrainian Centre, said: “It’s shock, it’s horror, it’s disbelief, it’s anger, it’s great upset. And it’s not knowing what’s going to happen next.” Petro Chymera, head of the Ukrainian Youth Association in Bradford, said: “We’ve seen it coming, but when it finally happens it is really shocking. That speech that Putin made on Monday has got everyone scared of the future. It was threatening the very existence of Ukraine. “It’s really important that the west unites and stands up for Ukraine. Because we can’t have any more concessions. We’re fighting for Ukraine’s very existence.” Here’s an update of what’s happened so far today: Donetsk and Luhansk asked Russia for military aid, a move many experts are calling the possible final pretext for a Russia invasion. Ukraine imposed a national state of emergency for the next 30 days. US President Joe Biden announced sanctions on the company that owns Nord Stream 2, the controversial pipeline project. Russia began evacuating its embassy in Kyiv, Ukraine’s capital. Russia moved nearly 100% of troops into invasion-ready position, according to a senior US defence official. Additional reports said US intelligence warned Ukraine that an all-out attack was imminent. The UN general assembly held a meeting about the Ukraine crisis, with several member states calling for Russia to deescalate and spelling out the consequences of an invasion. More on life for Ukraine residents as a Russian invasion looms: here’s a Guardian gallery depicting Ukrainian civilians, soldiers and other aspects of life on the country’s eastern front, shot by photographer Gaëlle Girbes. Amid escalating aggression from Russia, parents in Ukraine have been trying to protect their children in case of a full-out attack, with some sending their kids to school wearing stickers with their blood types listed, reports NBC. The US Pentagon believes that “additional Russian military forces” are moving into the Donetsk and Luhansk regions, according to Pentagon spokesperson John Kirby. From CNN’s Kaitlan Collins: Leaders of two separatist regions in eastern Ukraine have asked Russia for help with aggression from the Ukrainian army, reports Ifax citing Russian government spokesperson Dmitry Peskov. Many experts are pointing to these requests as the latest (possibly final) pretext that Russia could use to launch a full attack on Ukraine. More on the plant in Armyansk that was evacuated: Ukraine’s military intelligence has tweeted out a statement that Ukraine has not planned and will not plan any sabotage of the facility, calling such statements false. From the Ukraine military intelligence account: We officially declare that Ukraine has not planned and does not plan any act of sabotage at this facility and refutes all statements on this issue. Ukraine’s foreign minister Dmytro Kuleba tweeted out recently that a chemical plant in Crimea was evacuated today, saying that the move could be preparation for another staged provocation from Russia. Kuleba wrote: Worrying reports from Crimea on the entire night shift of Titan chemicals plant in Armyansk evacuated from the facility. This might be a preparation for another staged provocation by Russia. Moscow seems to have no limits in attempts to falsify pretexts for further aggression. Following the announcement of Ukraine imposing a 30-day state of emergency order, here is a video explainer from BBC on what the order means for the Ukraine crisis. Here is a further breakdown of what measures Ukraine can implement following the approval of the state of emergency order from journalist Oleksiy Sorokin: The Ukraine parliament just voted to approve a state of emergency. The state of emergency decree will begin on 24 February and last 30 days. More details to come. Several European countries, along with stationed US military, are preparing to accommodate upwards of 1 million refugees from Ukraine if Russia continues with an invasion, reports the Washington Post. From the Post’s Loveday Morris: A new war on the edge of Europe has the potential to unleash the continent’s biggest humanitarian crisis since the Syrian civil war triggered the arrival of more than 1 million refugees in 2015. At every level, plans are complicated by huge unknowns. Could there be a trickle of people seeking safety inside the borders of the European Union — or potentially millions? Polish officials have indicated that a worst-case scenario could see as many as 1 million people arriving from Ukraine in case of a full-scale Russian invasion. Hungary, which also borders Ukraine, has said it is sending troops to the border, partly in preparation for refugees. Romania has said it is considering refugee camps. But Poland, which is already home to as many as 2 million Ukrainians and shares more than 300 miles of border with the country, is expected to bear the brunt of any influx. Officials in Przemysl, a Polish city next to the border, said the city was asked on Monday whether it had space to house as many as 1,000 Americans leaving by land. As urgency has built, EU Commissioner for Home Affairs Ylva Johansson traveled to Warsaw earlier this week, where she said Europe was “well prepared” for an influx. But in towns along the border, some city officials don’t feel the same as they work on their own to designate gym halls, schools student dorms as potential waystations. Read the full article here (paywall). An update from inside Ukraine’s parliament as the language of an emergency decree issued earlier today is finalized: From Ukrainian MP Lesia Vasylenko: The mood is sombre in the Parliament of Ukraine as MPs await the final text of the State of Emergency decree. Voting to start in several minutes. The White House has issued a statement from Joe Biden, confirming the president’s decision to impose sanctions on Nord Stream 2: Since Russia began deploying troops to the Ukrainian border, the United States has worked closely with our allies and partners to deliver a strong, unified response. As I said when I met with Chancellor Scholz earlier this month, Germany has been a leader in that effort, and we have closely coordinated our efforts to stop the Nord Stream 2 pipeline if Russia further invaded Ukraine. Yesterday, after further close consultations between our two governments, Germany announced that it would halt certification of the pipeline. Today, I have directed my administration to impose sanctions on Nord Stream 2 AG and its corporate officers. These steps are another piece of our initial tranche of sanctions in response to Russia’s actions in Ukraine. As I have made clear, we will not hesitate to take further steps if Russia continues to escalate. Through his actions, President Putin has provided the world with an overwhelming incentive to move away from Russian gas and to other forms of energy. I want to thank Chancellor Scholz for his close partnership and continued dedication to holding Russia accountable for its actions. According to my colleague Joan E Greve, Biden had previously blocked congressionally approved sanctions on Nord Stream 2 AG, out of concern for the relationship with Germany, but Chancellor Olaf Scholz’s decision to halt the project’s certification has now cleared the way. As the west sounded the alarm about the Kremlin ordering troops into eastern Ukraine and decried it as an invasion, Russian state media painted a completely different picture - of Moscow coming to the rescue of war-torn areas tormented by Ukraine’s aggression and bringing them peace, reports the Associated Press. TV presenters hailed the “historic” day and professed the end of suffering for the residents of the breakaway regions. “You paid with your blood for these eight years of torment and anticipation,” anchor Olga Skabeyeva told residents of the areas known as Donbas during a popular political talk show Tuesday morning on Russia 1 state TV. “Russia will now be defending Donbas.” TV pundit Vladimir Solovyev echoed those sentiments on his morning show on state Vesti.FM radio. “We will ensure their safety,” he declared. “It is now dangerous to fight with them because one will now have to fight with the Russian army.” Channel One, another popular state-funded TV station, struck a more festive tone, with its correspondent in Donetsk asserting that local residents “say it is the best news over the past years of war.” “Now they have confidence in the future and that the years-long war will finally come to an end,” she said. Whether Russians are buying it is another question. A Facebook campaign with the hashtag “I’m not staying silent”, launched by independent Russian news site Holod urged people “to express their opinion about the war aloud - and also to remember that each of us has something connecting us to Ukraine”. It brought dozens of posts sharing memories about Ukraine and condemning the Kremlin’s moves. Still, many have voiced their wholehearted support for Putin’s decision. “It should have been done a long time ago,” said Irina Nareyko, a Moscow resident. “These poor people who identify as Russian, who mainly identify as Orthodox, who cannot wait anymore and live expecting to be killed we should have accepted them a long time ago.” Denis Volkov, director of the Levada Center, Russia’s top independent pollster, said that according to its poll data, more than half of Russians were ready to support Putin’s moves. “The situation, as it is understood by the majority, is that the west is pressuring Ukraine” to make a move against the rebel-held areas, “and Russia needs to somehow help”, Volkov told the AP. The narrative of Ukraine having aggressive designs on Donbas has been actively promoted by the Russian authorities - along with accusations that the west is pumping Ukraine full of weapons and warmongering. The official rhetoric heated up last week, when Putin charged that “what is now happening in Donbas is genocide”. Popular newscasts and political talk shows on state TV channels started widely using the term. Prominent news anchor Dmitry Kiselev likened what was happening in Donbas to second world war atrocities committed by Nazi Germany. “It is, simply, solidarity with the genocide of today,” he charged on Russia 1s flagship news show. Russia has begun evacuating its embassy in the Ukrainian capital, Kyiv. According to the state news agency Tass, Russia cleared everyone from its diplomatic posts in Ukraine following the announcement of a plan to evacuate. As of Wednesday afternoon the Russian flag is no longer flying over the Kyiv embassy. Police surround the building. According to AP, after weeks of trying to project calm, Ukrainian authorities signalled increasing concern. The foreign ministry has recommended all Ukrainians living in Russia return, saying Moscow’s “aggression” could lead to a significant reduction in consular services. Ukraine’s national security and defence council chief, Oleksiy Danilov, called for a national state of emergency, subject to parliamentary approval. He said it will be up to regional authorities to determine which measures to apply, but they could include additional security at public facilities, traffic restrictions and additional transport and document checks. A wave of denial-of-service attacks temporarily knocked out websites for the Ukrainian parliament, cabinet and foreign ministry, and caused delays to the defence and interior ministry websites. Many of the same sites were knocked offline last week too, in attacks that the US and UK quickly blamed on the GRU, Russian military intelligence. The Brandenburg Gate, the landmark in the German capital Berlin, has been lit up blue and yellow in a show of solidarity with Ukraine. In Paris, City Hall was similarly illuminated in the country’s national colours. “We are showing our solidarity with the people of Ukraine, the many Berliners with Ukrainian roots but also with the many Russians who want peace in Russia and Ukraine,” said the mayor of Berlin, Franziska Giffey. The EU is ready to launch a second set of sanctions against Russia if its troops move beyond Ukraine separatist regions, said Valdis Dombrovskis, the European Commission’s executive vice-president. “If there is further Russian aggression and further incursion into Ukraine territory we are willing to step up our response also in terms of sanctions,” Dombrovskis told Reuters. Dombrovskis sad sanctions would include export controls, for example. “Coming with strong sanctions against Russia is going to have some impact on the EU economy and we need to be ready for this,” he said. “But here we have the security and territorial integrity of Ukraine at stake, and we have the broader security architecture at sake, so we need to be able to react and also take some economic cost, if it is necessary.” More from the Guardian’s Julian Borger about reports of an imminent attack on Ukraine: The Guardian can confirm that the warning of an imminent attack has gone out to Ukraine and allies and that the UK shared the US assessment. Diplomats I have been talking to are aware the west has cried wolf once before, on 16 February, so there are caveats. There was also a scare last night, when some intelligence suggested an all-out attack was about to happen but it turned out to be a false alarm. The bottom line is there are large Russian formations on the move, so the assessment is that an onslaught could be unleashed at any time. More on previous reporting about US intelligence warning Ukraine of an imminent attack: A senior US defence official has said that Russia has moved nearly 100% of its troops into position needed for an invasion. The official was not able to confirm if additional troops had moved into the Donbas area. “They are literally ready to go now if they get the order to go,” said the senior official regarding the 150,000 Russian troops that are at Ukraine’s borders. The senior official added that the US will do “as much as we can as long as we can” to monitor Russian troop activity from air space, reported Reuters. Two separate convoys of military equipment that did not have visible insignia were seen moving towards the city of Donetsk located in eastern Ukraine, reported Reuters. One convoy included nine tanks as well as an infantry fighting vehicle. The other convoy included trucks and fuel tanks, according to a reporter on the ground. There are reports today that US intelligence has warned Ukraine that an all-out attack is imminent. Newsweek was the first to report this story, saying that the US warned the offensive would come within 48 hours. CNN’s intelligence correspondent, Katie Bo Lillis has said her reporting confirmed the Newsweek story. More from the Guardian’s Julian Borger on the developing report: Katie Bo Lillis did not repeat the 48 hours timeline, just that an attack was said to be imminent, but she did say the city of Kharkiv would be particularly at risk. US intelligence has given warnings of an all-out attack before, on February 16, which came and went, though some accounts said that US assessment was that Russian commanders were told to be ready from February 16, not necessarily for an attack on that day. This story is developing - more to come. The US ambassador to the UN, Linda Thomas-Greenfield, also spoke earlier on the Ukraine crisis, spelling out the dire consequences of Russia invading Ukraine for both countries and the global community. Thomas-Greenfield speaking on how an invasion would affect Russian civilians: Ordinary Russians should be asking how many Russian lives Putin is willing to sacrifice to feed his ambitions. If Russia continues down this path, it could ... create a new refugee crisis with as many as 5 million more people displaced. Thomas-Greenfield also added that a Russian invasion was something that no UN member state could look away from: History tells us that looking the other way is ultimately the more costly path. Urging cooperation between UN member states to counter Russia’s aggression, Thomas-Greenfield said: Now is the time to get off the sidelines. Let us together show Russia that it is isolated and alone in its aggressive actions. The Russian representative to the UN also spoke earlier during the meeting, accusing Ukraine of being anti-Russian and seemingly unhappy about UN involvement in the Ukraine crisis. During his remarks, Vasily Nebenzya accused Ukraine of genocide and human rights violations against those living in Donbas, a claim that several sources have flagged as false. Nebenzya also questioned the title of the UN assembly meeting, arguing that the title should reflect Ukraine losing territory due to its treatment of its own citizens. Nebenzya, as he wrapped up his speech, said: We urge you today to focus efforts on reigning in Kyiv and deterring it from conducting a new military adventure that might cost the whole of Ukraine very dearly. Thank you. Full quote from the Ukrainian foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, warning the world about the global consequences of the Ukraine crisis: I warn every nation in this distinguished chamber, no one will be able to sit out this crisis if President Putin decides that he can move forward with his aggression against Ukraine. Your governments and people will face painful consequences. The United Nations general assembly meeting is happening now with delegates discussing the Ukraine crisis and Russia’s ongoing aggression. The UN chief, António Guterres, said: “If the conflict in Ukraine expands, the world could see a scale and severity of need unseen for many years.” Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, also spoke this morning to the general assembly about Russia’s aggression, urging other delegates that the crisis affects everyone. “What is happening right now in eastern Ukraine ... must be a concern for everyone. For all of you,” said Kuleba. “No one will be able to sit out this crisis.” Spain’s foreign minister, José Manuel Albares, recommended today that Spaniards left Ukraine temporarily as soon as possible, reported Reuters. “We recommend to temporarily leave the country as soon as possible and advise against travelling to Ukraine under any circumstances,” said Albares to a parliamentary committee. Albares confirmed that about 334 Spaniards remained in Ukraine. The EU has now adopted its first sanctions package in response to “the decision by the Russian Federation to proceed with the recognition of the non-government controlled areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts of Ukraine as independent entities, and the subsequent decision to send Russian troops into these areas.” Josep Borrell, High Representative of the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, said: Such decisions are illegal and unacceptable. They violate international law, Ukraine’s territorial integrity and sovereignty, Russia’s own international commitments and further escalate the crisis. A quote from the Nato secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, at the alliance’s Stronger Together conference happening today: There is much at stake in today’s crisis; the risk of conflict is real. Russia is using force and ultimatums not only to redraw borders in Europe, but to try to rewrite the entire global security architecture. The Nato secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, is currently speaking at a conference with the Dutch prime minister, Mark Rutte, highlighting some developments in the Russia-Ukraine situation. You can also watch the conference here. Ukraine’s minister of digital transformation confirmed that Ukrainian banks were hit by a DDOS attack on Wednesday, following a series of cyber-attacks last week, reported Reuters. Many Ukrainian state websites, such as the government and foreign ministry home page, were not accessible today. Ukrainian authorities also confirmed that they had seen online warnings this week about hackers planning major attacks on government agencies, banks, and other sectors. This story is developing – stay tuned. In his letter of invitation to tomorrow’s summit of EU heads of state and government, the European Council president, Charles Michel writes: “The use of force and coercion to change borders has no place in the 21st century. “I would like to thank you for the unity shown over the last days notably through the swift adoption today of the sanctions package by council. “The aggressive actions by the Russian Federation violate international law and the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Ukraine. They also undermine the European security order. “It is important that we continue to be united and determined and jointly define our collective approach and actions. Therefore, I would like to invite you for a special European Council on Thursday 24 February, which will take place in person in Brussels and start at 20.00. “I would like us to discuss: the latest developments; how we protect the rules-based international order; how we deal with Russia, notably holding Russia accountable for its actions; how we will further support Ukraine and its people. “I look forward to seeing you tomorrow evening.” Reuters, citing Interfax, is reporting that another DDOS cyber-attack has started in Ukraine. The Guardian understands that the attack has hit the websites of the parliament, cabinet ministers, the ministry of foreign affairs and the security service. It follows earlier cyber-attacks. EU leaders are to meet for an emergency summit on Thursday evening, diplomatic sources in Brussels have said. The 27 heads of state and government will debate how to further respond to Russian aggression. Charles Michel, the president of the European Council, tweeted: The use of force and coercion to change borders has no place in the 21st century. I am calling a special European Council tomorrow in Brussels to discuss the latest developments related to Ukraine and Russia. The issue of when to impose a second major tranche of sanctions is a sensitive one in Brussels. The impact of punishing Russia through sanctions on the energy sector or by cutting Russia out of the Swift financial system - which moves money from bank to bank around the world - would not be evenly felt among the 27 member states. Russia has started evacuating diplomatic staff from all of its missions in Ukraine, TASS news agency reported on Wednesday, citing a representative of the Russian Embassy in Kyiv. The embassy and the consulate general in Odessa were seen on Wednesday with Russian flags taken down. “Several cars left the territory of the consulate in the morning,” a member of the Ukrainian National Guard who was on duty near the Russian consulate in Odessa told Reuters. Russia’s foreign ministry announced an evacuation of diplomatic staff from Ukraine for what it called safety reasons on Tuesday, a day after President Vladimir Putin recognised independence of two breakaway regions in Ukraine’s east and ordered Russian troops “to keep peace” there, while massing military along Ukrainian borders. (Via Reuters) Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has demanded “immediate” security guarantees from the west and Moscow to avert a feared Russian invasion. Zelenskiy made his comments as Russia began to evacuate diplomats from its Kyiv embassy after Moscow formally approved the use of military force abroad. During a joint media appearance with the visiting leaders of Poland and Lithuania on Wednesday, Zelenskiy said: Ukraine needs security guarantees. Clear, specific, and immediate. I believe that Russia must be among those countries giving clear security guarantees. Zelenskiy said that he made repeated offers to meet President Putin in an effort to head off the threat of an all-out conflict breaking out in eastern Europe. Many times now, I have offered the Russian president a chance to sit down at the negotiating table and talk. This is a question of dialogue. He also thanked Poland and Lithuania, two close Ukrainian allies, for keeping their embassies in Kyiv open despite the rising fears of a Russian attack. It is an “obscene perversion” for Putin to speak of Russian soldiers acting as peacekeepers in Ukraine, Australia’s foreign minister, Marise Payne, has said. Speaking during a visit to Prague, Payne said: Any suggestions that there is a legitimate basis for Russia’s actions are pure propaganda and disinformation. The assertion by President Putin of Russian soldiers acting as peacekeepers is indeed an obscene perversion of the noble and vital role that generations of peacekeepers have played across the world. (Via Reuters) In recent weeks, the crisis in Ukraine has been compared to discussions over the future of the democratically-run island of Taiwan. On Wednesday, Taiwan’s president, Tsai Ing-wen, called on her government to be “vigilant”. Denouncing Russia’s actions, Tsai said: We should continue to strengthen the combat readiness of our forces in the Taiwan Strait to ensure our safety. [In] the face of external forces attempting to manipulate the situation in Ukraine and affect the morale in Taiwan’s society, all government units must be more vigilant against cognitive warfare. She’s not the only one who has talked about Taiwan in relation to Ukraine. At last week’s Munich Security Conference, Boris Johnson said in his warning to the international community: “If Ukraine is endangered, the shock will echo around the world. And those echoes will be heard in east Asia — will be heard in Taiwan.” But the latest warning from Taipei – whose administration is currently run by the Democratic Progress party – adds to an existing chorus of concern for the island as Beijing refrains from condemning Moscow directly. Of course, there are differences between Ukraine and Taiwan. For starters, as Chatham House’s senior China fellow, Dr Yu Jie, pointed out yesterday: “Ukraine is a full member of the UN, whereas Taiwan does not enjoy such status.” Beijing is keen to dismiss such a comparison. “Taiwan is not Ukraine,” China’s foreign ministry spokesperson, Hua Chunying, said on Wednesday. “Taiwan has always been an inalienable part of China. This is an indisputable legal and historical fact.” Beijing has long regarded Taiwan as its breakaway province. Hua’s line echoes the views from Chinese government analysts. “This association is extremely wrong. The Taiwan issue is fundamentally different from the Ukraine issue,” said Cui Hongjian, who leads the Department for European Studies at the influential government thinktank China Institute of International Studies. Cui admitted that it’s not only those from outside China who are linking Ukraine to Taiwan. Some of the comparisons, in fact, come from within China. “[They] view Russia’s approach to the issue of Ukraine as a sort of ‘model’ for the future resolution of the Taiwan question, and they advocate for closer imitation of Russia.” Cui’s observation is very telling. He points at the rising nationalism inside China, and in particular in China’s cyberspace. The question is: would it sway Beijing’s view of the situation? Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, has told Putin that Ankara does not recognise steps against Ukraine’s territorial integrity following Russia’s recognition of the two separatist republics in east Ukraine. Turkey, a Nato member that borders Ukraine and Russia in the Black Sea, has good ties with both countries and opposes sanctions on principle. It has offered to mediate the crisis and warned against military conflict. In a phone call, Erdoğan told Putin military conflict in the region would not benefit anyone and repeated his offer to help achieve a solution, his office said. Erdoğan also said he valued Putin’s close cooperation on regional issues and wanted to continue this. President Erdoğan, who renewed his call for the matter to be resolved through dialogue, stated that it was important to bring diplomacy to the forefront, and that [Turkey] continued its constructive stance in Nato as well. Earlier, Erdoğan was cited by media as saying Turkey could not abandon ties with Ukraine or Russia. (Via Reuters) This from PA - see Chris Bryant’s comments here: Boris Johnson has issued a correction after he wrongly claimed that Chelsea Football Club owner Roman Abramovich was the subject of targeted sanctions by the UK government. The prime minister tabled a written ministerial statement in the House of Commons to clarify such measures had not been imposed on the Russian-Israeli billionaire businessman. On Tuesday, Mr Johnson told MPs that Abramovich was “already facing sanctions” - a claim disputed by Labour MP Chris Bryant, among others. In his new statement, the prime minister reiterated the UK government’s first wave of sanctions following Russia’s actions against Ukraine had seen “oligarchs at the heart of Putin’s inner circle and banks which have bankrolled the Russian occupation of Crimea” among those targeted. He added on Wednesday: Roman Abramovich has not been the subject of targeted measures. More generally anyone who comes to this country on an Israeli passport is a non-visa national. Israelis are required to obtain a visa if they want to live, work or study in the UK. Abramovich had issues around his entrepreneurial visa in 2018. In October 2021, the businessman’s spokesperson confirmed he travelled to London as an Israeli citizen - therefore entering the United Kingdom without the need for a visa. Channel 4’s international editor, Lindsey Hilsum, is one of quite a few journalists who point out that UK action against RT could have consequences for the BBC in Russia ... Angus Roxburgh, a former BBC Moscow correspondent and consultant to the Kremlin, thinks the UK needs to rethink how it pursues sanctions. Going after Russian oligarchs, he writes for the Guardian, has little effect on Russian policy: The idea that they [the oligarchs] influence his policies is pure fantasy. The proof of that is that sanctions regularly meted out on oligarchs since 2014 have made not one jot of difference to Putin’s policies. The west imposed sanctions over Crimea, the downing of a Malaysian passenger jet over Ukraine and the attempted murder of Sergei Skripal in Salisbury. None of them elicited so much as an expression of regret, far less a change of course. What they did do, of course, was deepen Putin’s already simmering hatred of the west.” Better, Roxburgh writes, to target the political class, “the members of the Duma, the Senate, the presidential council, the top echelons of the security and defence services, top state television employees”. He adds: These men (and some women) draft, rubber-stamp, promote and carry out Putin’s decisions. Some of them also – unlike the oligarchs – actually advise him … These are the people to target – because when several thousand of the people Putin actually depends on begin to feel the consequences of his policies in their personal lives, there will be a groundswell of discontent.” You can read the whole article here: Continuing the sanctions theme, the deputy US Treasury secretary, Wally Adeyemo, has told CNBC that the US is prepared to withhold technology and resources from Russia if Vladimir Putin takes further action against Ukraine. Adeyemo said: President Putin clearly has the ability to do much more than he has done so far. The key thing that President Putin needs to consider is whether he wants to ensure that Russia’s economy is able to grow, that he has the resources he needs to be able to project power in the future. If he chooses to invade, what we’re telling him very directly, is that we’re going to cut that off. We’re going to cut him off from western technology that’s critical to advancing his military, cut him off from western financial resources that will be critical for feeding his economy and also to enriching himself.” Reuters reports that people familiar with the matter have told the news agency that the Biden administration could deprive Russia of a vast swath of low and high-tech US and foreign-made goods, from commercial electronics and computers to semiconductors and aircraft parts. Ukraine deserves European Union candidate status, and Poland and Lithuania will support it in this goal, the presidents of the two countries said in a joint declaration with the Ukrainian president on Wednesday. Reuters carries the declaration, signed in Kyiv by Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, the Polish president, Andrzej Duda, and the Lithuanian president, Gitanas Nausėda: We emphasise that, given the significant progress in the implementation of the Association Agreement and internal reforms, as well as the current security challenges, Ukraine deserves EU candidate status and Lithuania and Poland will support Ukraine in achieving this goal.” The joint declaration calls on the international community for “swift introduction” of “robust” sanctions on Russia, including measures targeting the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline between Russia and Germany. Chris Bryant, the Labour MP and member of the UK’s Commons foreign affairs select committee, has been withering in his assessment of the UK’s sanctions effort thus far: Bryant wrote for the Guardian on a similar subject in an opinion article published on Tuesday evening. In a briefing on Wednesday Boris Johnson’s spokesperson said the government was holding further sanctions against Russia in readiness if the situation escalated further. EU ambassadors in Brussels have agreed on the current package of sanctions against Russia. The package is expected to be adopted and implemented at 15:00 CET today. Some EU capitals had expressed an aspiration for a “big bang sanctions package” to come soon after, echoing the debate in the UK, diplomats said. This excellent, in-depth visual guide is well worth a look if you want to know how we got here - and what could happen next … More here on the pope’s words from my colleague in Rome, Angela Giuffrida: Pope Francis warned of “increasingly alarming scenarios” in Ukraine during his weekly audience on Wednesday, saying the threat of war caused “great pain in my heart” while appealing to all sides “to abstain from any action that could provoke more suffering to the populations, destabilising coexistence among nations and discrediting international law”. The pontiff proclaimed Ash Wednesday, which falls on 2 March, a day of international prayer for peace and fasting: Jesus taught us that we should respond to the diabolic senselessness of violence with the weapons of God, with prayer and fasting. Denis Pushilin, the leader of the Russian-controlled territory in Donetsk, has said that he will not immediately order an attack on Ukrainian positions on the front line but will not rule out a “military solution” to expanding his region’s borders either. Appearing alongside the head of Russia’s ruling United Russia party, Pushilin said the Russian-backed separatists were not yet at the stage of a “military solution to [expanding] the region’s borders”. He said: We’re not at that point yet. We’re at the point where the enemy’s forces are located at the front line and could go on the offensive at any moment. There are no indications that Ukraine has prepared any kind of offensive. But it could likely be a pretext for Russia to formally attack Ukrainian positions. “We haven’t done anything about this yet,” said Pushilin, referring to the border issue. “We haven’t taken it in hand.” Russia has denied it is planning to send a large deployment of troops and equipment into the area, although photographs from Russia’s Rostov region suggest a considerable buildup on the borders with the territories. The remarks came during a visit by a delegation of Russian lawmakers to the region. Andrey Turchak, the head of the United Russia party, said that the Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, would soon hold formal meetings with diplomats from the two regions, which have only been recognised by a handful of states led by Russia. France’s foreign minister, Jean-Yves Le Drian, has said Putin no longer accepts Ukraine’s independence under international law, AFP reports. “President Putin in his speech [on Monday] declared in a sense the negation of Ukraine as a sovereign country,” Le Drian told reporters after talks with his German counterpart, Annalena Baerbock, in Berlin. Le Drian said Putin’s decision to recognise two breakaway regions in Ukraine smacked of “revisionism” and a bid to “reinvent history”. In general, he is not keeping his promises, neither in public nor in private, whether to President Macron or to Chancellor Scholz. When or how should we believe what President Putin says? I don’t know if anyone knows. When asked about the likelihood of a full Russian invasion, Le Drian said that with “140,000 [Russian] troops” massed on Ukraine’s borders “anything is possible, including the worst”. Baerbock accused Putin of “lying” about his intentions in Ukraine in talks with western leaders in recent days. “When you do the opposite of what you said a week ago then you didn’t tell the truth or, in plain German: you lied,” she told reporters. It is the Russian president who took the decision to completely violate international law, to trample on international law, and to contribute to the fact that we are now no longer talking about shared peace in Europe but rather how we can continue to avoid a war. Baerbock said the west was “prepared for all scenarios” including a full Russian invasion of Ukraine, adding that sanctions already agreed with European partners “can be increased at any time”. Russia’s defence minister, commanders-in-chief of the Russian air force and Black Sea fleet, leading state “propagandists” - as well as 351 Duma deputies - are expected to be targeted in EU sanctions announced later on Wednesday, with the bloc imposing asset freezes and travel bans on 23 people, three banks and a notorious internet “troll factory” in St Petersburg. Ukraine has advised its estimated 3 million citizens living in Russia to leave the country, in the latest signal that Kyiv believes Moscow may be planning an invasion. It is also mulling the declaration of a state of emergency. Russia has issued a defiant response to sanctions, suggesting the move would hurt global financial and energy markets as well as ordinary citizens. The UK defence secretary has accused Putin of going “full tonto” and said the Russian president has made the mistake of having no allies in his actions. The British government has defended its sanctions plan amid criticism, insisting that a “very serious package” of sanctions will “inflict pain” on Putin. Russia’s defence minister, Sergei Shoigu, the commanders-in-chief of the Russian Air Force and Black Sea Fleet, leading state “propagandists” - as well as 351 Duma deputies - are expected to be targeted in EU sanctions announced later on Wednesday. The measures, which have to be signed off by EU foreign ministers, would go further than those announced by the US - and well beyond Boris Johnson’s Russia sanctions. If approved, the EU will impose asset freezes and travel bans on 23 people, three banks and a notorious internet ‘troll factory’ in St Petersburg, in response to Russian president Vladimir Putin’s decision to recognise the self-proclaimed republics in Donetsk and Luhansk as independent states. The bloc is also expected to sanction 351 members of the Russian state Duma that voted for recognition of the two territories. The Russian government will also see further restrictions on its ability to raise money on EU financial markets. EU officials are also drawing up measures to ban trade between the two Russian-controlled territories in eastern Ukraine, mirroring earlier sanctions on Crimea in 2014. “Everyone seems on board for the adoption of sanctions,” an EU diplomat said. EU capitals have a few hours to send comments, with ministers expected to approve the sanctions at 3pm CET. At the top of the sanctions list is Shoigu, because he is “ultimately responsible for any military action against Ukraine”, according to the draft list seen by the Guardian. He is joined by Anton Vaino, Putin’s chief of staff, who “plays an active role in decision making”, as well as Igor Osipov, commander-in-chief of the Black Sea Fleet, and Sergei Surovikin, commander-in-chief of Russian Aerospace Forces. Other top officials include deputy prime minister and chair of state-owned VTB bank, Dmitry Grigorenko, and Igor Shuvalov, chair of Russia’s state development bank, VEB, which plays an important role in funding its defence sector. The EU is also targeting Russian “propagandists”, including foreign ministry spokeswoman Maria Zakharova, and the head of the RT channel, Margarita Simonyan, both of whom are known for their strident anti-western rhetoric. Vladimir Solovyov, the pro-Kremlin presenter of the Russia One channel, also makes the list. Other notable figures include Yevgeniy Prigozhin. Known as Putin’s chef, Prigozhin finances the Internet Research Agency (IRA), which has also been added to the EU sanctions list. Based in St Petersburg, the IRA is better known as the “troll factory” , where bloggers work around the clock to flood the global internet with pro-Putin and anti-western views. According to US sanctions, Prigozhin is also believed to be the “manager and financier” of the Wagner mercenary group, which is already subject to EU sanctions for its role in sending forces into conflicts in west Africa. Prigozhin’s mother and wife, who own companies with links to him, are also on the draft list. The sanctioned banks are Bank Rossiya, believed by EU and western officials to be the personal bank for Putin and many of his officials, as well as Promsvyazbank and Vnesheconombank, both considered by EU officials to be instructed personally by the Russian president, with a key role in financing Russia’s defence sector. EU leaders have signalled further sanctions could follow in the coming days. “Expect some more discussions on the broader big bang sanctions package later this week,” said the EU official. Ben Wallace, the former Scots Guards officer who now serves as the UK defence secretary, has accused Vladimir Putin of going “full tonto” over Ukraine, PA reports. Wallace said the Russian president has made the mistake of having no allies in his actions, comparing him to Tsar Nicholas I during the Crimean War. Wallace said his old regiment had “kicked the backside” of the tsar in the Crimea and “we can always do it again”. The unguarded comments came as the cabinet minister chatted with serving military personnel at the Horse Guards building in Westminster. He said: It’s going to be a busy army. Unfortunately we’ve got a busy adversary now in Putin, who has gone full tonto. Wallace said the UK had 1,000 personnel on standby to respond to the crisis, adding: The Scots Guards kicked the backside of Tsar Nicholas I in 1853 in Crimea - we can always do it again. Tsar Nicholas I made the same mistake Putin did … he had no friends, no alliances. Eight senior Russian security officials and the oil and gas sectors will be targeted in the first round of Australian sanctions, with the prime minister vowing to go after anyone “aiding and abetting” the invasion of Ukraine. Scott Morrison met with the cabinet’s national security committee on Wednesday before declaring the Russian government was “behaving like thugs and bullies” and there “must be consequences for Russia’s actions”. Morrison characterised the sanctions as only the first step of Australia’s response and indicated Australian security agencies were on alert for possible counter-actions by Russia such as espionage and cyber attacks. Ukraine’s National Security and Defence Council has asked parliament to impose a state of emergency throughout Ukraine, except for Luhansk and Donetsk oblasts – the areas claimed by Russia – where one has already been in place for many years. The council met after Russia began moving troops across the border into the separatist-held territories it recognised on Monday, and the US announced that the invasion of Ukraine it had been warning about for weeks had begun. Oleksiy Danilov, the secretary of the council, told journalists after the meeting that the state of emergency allowed the government to bring in controls including restrictions on movement, and curfews. However curfews are not currently expected to be brought in, and would only be imposed in case of increased Russian aggression, he said. He also confirmed that the country was calling up the first 36,000 military reservists. The country has nearly half a million veterans with frontline experience in the east, so potentially still has a large pool of fighters it could call up. Danilov said each of Ukraine’s regions would be able to select which particular measures to apply, “depending on how necessary they might be”. “What could it be? This could be added enforcement of public order,” Danilov said. “This could involve limiting certain types of transport, increased vehicle checks, or asking people to show this or that document,” he added, calling it a “preventive” measure. The ministry of foreign affairs also called on all Ukrainian citizens to leave Russia. China has accused the US of creating “fear and panic” over the crisis in Ukraine, and called for talks to reduce rapidly building tensions, AP reports. The foreign ministry spokesperson Hua Chunying said China was opposed to new unilateral sanctions imposed on Russia, reiterating a longstanding Chinese position. She said the US was fuelling tensions by providing defensive weapons to Ukraine, without mentioning Russia’s deployment of as many as 190,000 troops on the Ukrainian border. Hua also did not mention efforts by the US, France and others to engage Russia diplomatically. China-Russia ties have grown closer under the Chinese leader Xi Jinping, who hosted the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, at talks in Beijing earlier this month. The two sides issued a joint statement backing Moscow’s opposition to a Nato expansion in former Soviet republics and buttressing China’s claim to the self-governing island of Taiwan. Speaking at a daily briefing on Wednesday, Hua said: On the Ukraine issue, unlike the US, which keeps sending weapons to Ukraine, creating fear and panic and even playing up the threat of war, China has been calling on all parties to respect and pay attention to each other’s legitimate security concerns, work together to solve problems through negotiations and consultations, and maintain regional peace and stability. The outcome of the Ukraine crisis is seen as having ramifications for China over its threat to invade Taiwan, a close US ally, and its border dispute with India and its claims in the South China and East China seas, where it has raised concerns over conflict with Japan, the Philippines and others. Ukraine’s parliament has voted to approve in the first reading a draft law which gives permission to Ukrainians to carry firearms and act in self-defence. “The adoption of this law is fully in the interests of the state and society,” the authors of the draft law said in a note, adding that the law was needed due to “existing threats and dangers for the citizens of Ukraine”. (Via Reuters) Germany can meet its energy needs without Russian gas, its economy minister said on Wednesday, a day after the government decided to halt the approval of the controversial Nord Stream 2 pipeline amid rising Ukraine tensions. Asked on public radio if Europe’s largest economy could do without natural gas deliveries from Russia, currently its largest supplier, Robert Habeck responded, “Yes, it can”. On Tuesday, Chancellor Olaf Scholz said the approval of the NordStream 2 pipeline from Russia would be suspended in response to Putin’s decision to recognise two breakaway regions of Ukraine. Cutting itself off completely from Russian gas would leave a big hole in the market that in the first instance would “drive prices higher”, said Habeck of the Green party. However Germany’s power demands could be “compensated” with other energy sources and suppliers, including an accelerated renewables push set out by the government, he said. The Nord Stream 2 pipeline, which was completed but never approved by regulators, was set to increase Germany’s dependency on Russia for gas to 70% of its total deliveries. The project was consistently supported by the previous chancellor Angela Merkel, who left office at the end of last year, as well as her successor Scholz - until the current crisis. (Via AFP) Russia’s state-funded broadcaster RT is not happy with Liz Truss’s suggestion that the UK’s broadcast regulator, Ofcom, would be looking at RT’s output, Reuters reports. RT’s deputy editor in chief and head of communications, Anna Belkina, said: It is unfortunate that Minister Truss, and, recently, a select few other UK politicians, seem to be trying to directly or indirectly interfere in institutions they tout as supposedly independent and wholly free from political pressure. These comments once more undermine the independence of the UK regulator.” Ukraine’s parliament has approved imposing sanctions on 351 Russians, including lawmakers who supported the recognition of the independence of separatist-controlled territories and the use of Russian troops in eastern Ukraine. The sanctions restrict almost all possible types of activities, in particular a ban on entry into Ukraine, prohibit access to assets, capital, property, licenses for business. The security council was due to impose the sanctions after the vote. (Via Reuters) Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, wants the west to ratchet up its sanctions on Russia: “Hit more. Hit hard. Hit now.” The country is also advising its citizens to leave Russia, with the foreign ministry recommending “that citizens of Ukraine refrain from any trips to the Russian Federation, and those who are in this country to leave its territory immediately”. There are estimated to be 3 million Ukrainians living in Russia. Pope Francis has called on political leaders to look to their consciences, Reuters reports. On Wednesday the pope said the threat of war in Ukraine had caused “great pain in my heart”, and urged politicians to make a serious examination of conscience before God about their actions. Speaking in a sombre tone at the end of his weekly general audience, Francis urged leaders to abstain from any moves that would cause further suffering for people and proclaimed Ash Wednesday - 2 March - an international day of fasting and prayer for peace. Japan will impose sanctions on Russia and individuals linked to Ukrainian regions controlled by pro-Kremlin separatists. Wednesday’s announcement follows similar measures by the US, the UK and the EU. Japan strongly condemns Russia’s actions “that infringe on Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, violating international law”, Prime Minister Fumio Kishida told reporters. “From the viewpoint of responding to the issue in cooperation with the international community, Japan decided to impose sanctions.” The Japanese sanctions include a ban on issuing visas to individuals linked to the “so-called two republics” as well as freezing their assets and barring trade with the regions. There will also be a ban on the issuing and trade of Russian government bonds in Japan. Kishida said further sanctions were possible if the situation worsened. (Via AFP) And more on the sanctions row - this time from a prominent Conservative figure. The former UK foreign secretary Jeremy Hunt says the British government needs to take action that the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, is “not expecting”. Speaking to BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, Hunt said: We do need to go further, and I suspect the government wanted to. They’ve been pretty robust in what they’ve said but it’s very important to go in lockstep with our allies in a situation like this. But what we have to remember is that Putin has both predicted these sanctions and indeed further sanctions - and discounted them. If we are going to avoid being two steps behind in the diplomatic chess game, we have to do some things that he’s not expecting. The most important is to do sanctions - economic and financial sanctions - that are tough enough and last long enough to reduce the ability of the Russian state to finance the Russian military. And that means we have got to be prepared to dig in for the long term and not do what I’m afraid has happened all too often, which is that you get a future government that decides they want to reset relations with Moscow, as, for example, President Obama did when he became president, and they cancel previous sanctions or penalties and Russia can feel that it’s got away with what it’s done. (Via PA) The row over the UK government’s sanctions package is still going strong today. This from the i newspaper’s Paul Waugh and the Labour MP Chris Bryant, chair of the all-party parliamentary group on Russia … Liz Truss says she believes Putin is “hell-bent” on invading Ukraine. Challenged on whether the current UK sanctions are tough enough to stop the Russian state financing the military, she told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: One of the banks that we’ve sanctioned is the bank that finances the Russian military, so we are absolutely taking that step. I believe that Putin is hell-bent on invading Ukraine. This is about inflicting pain on Putin and degrading the Russian economic system over time, targeting people that are close to Putin. But if you’re asking me is he paying attention, my view is that he wants to invade, this is a long-standing plan. And what we have to do is make it as painful as possible, both by supplying support to the Ukrainian government in terms of defensive weapons, in terms of economic support, and by imposing economic costs. (Via PA) From the Guardian’s Brussels correspondent ... Truss has also used the BBC Breakfast interview to defend the government against accusations that its sanctions are nowhere near stringent enough. She said: These are the toughest sanctions we’ve ever put on Russia. They’re targeting people who are very close to the Kremlin - absolutely key oligarchs. They’re targeting banks that fund the Russian military and key banks that keep the Russian regime going. We’re also making sure that Russia won’t be able to raise sovereign debt on international markets. We’re making sure that the territorial sanctions will be in place in those regions as well. We’re targeting politicians in the Russian parliament who voted for that recognition [of the self-proclaimed republics of Donetsk and Luhansk] to take place. The EU is going through its formal procedures for imposing its first tranche of sanctions on Russia following political agreement on Tuesday and scrutiny of legal text last night. An agenda item has been added to this morning’s meeting of EU ambassadors with regard to approval of the legal texts. The 27 EU member states can provide “minimal” input to the presidency of the EU, which is currently held by France. The ambassadors will approve the text and launch a so-called “written procedure”, which gives foreign ministers up until 3pm today to give their formal approval remotely without the need for a further meeting. A diplomatic source said: “Expect some more discussions on the broader big bang sanctions package later this week.” Russian forces massing near Ukraine’s borders can only remain in position for a few days before they have to be sent back to nearby bases or risk their capability being significantly degraded, western officials and experts believe. That means that President Vladimir Putin will come under increasing pressure to use them in a full invasion of Ukraine – or send them back to staging areas, still in Russia’s south or west, but tens or even hundreds of kilometres back. Such advance positions, often with poor protection from the cold, can be held only for a short period – and there is some evidence on social media of the poor conditions endured by soldiers near the border. This is Sam Jones, taking on the blog for the next few hours. Australia’s prime minister, Scott Morrison, says the country will target Russia with a round of sanctions and will “ratchet up” the response should military action in Ukraine continue. He’s also accused Russia of behaving “like thugs and bullies”. Sanctions and travel bans will target eight members of the Russian Federation’s security council, while existing sanctions in place over past aggression will be expanded. Russian banks have also been targeted. Morrison said he expected further tranches of sanctions against more individuals but remained tight-lipped about who would be targeted. He told reporters in Sydney: We will take this step by step and I can assure you those steps will get stronger and stronger. Meanwhile, Russia’s ambassador to Australia, Alexey Pavlovsky, met with the secretary of the Department of Foreign Affairs on Wednesday afternoon, following the announcement of the sanctions. Morrison, who convened cabinet’s national security committee on Wednesday, said Russia needed to understand the world’s condemnation of its decision. He said: The invasion of Ukraine has effectively already begun. They’re acting like thugs and bullies. Australians always stand up to bullies and we will be standing up to Russia. (Via Australian Associated Press) Thanks for joining me, Samantha Lock, for all the latest developments surrounding the Ukraine crisis. I’ll now be handing over to my colleague Sam Jones who will continue to bring you all the latest updates. As many westerns nations rush to impose sanctions on Russia, China’s foreign ministry has said it opposes the measures and does not believe sanctions are the best way to solve problems, Reuters is reporting. China hopes relevant parties can try to resolve their issues through dialogue and remain calm and exercise restraint, ministry spokesperson Hua Chunying told reporters in Beijing. Some photos from last night’s pro-Ukraine rally in the city of Mariupol in south eastern Ukraine have emerged. Freelance photojournalist, Olga Tokariuk, who is based in Kyiv shared some snaps taken by her colleague Andriy Tsapliyenko. “People here won’t be welcoming Russian soldiers,” she said. In the latest slew of sanctions to hit Moscow, Britain will stop Russia selling sovereign debt in London after Putin deployed military forces into two breakaway regions of eastern Ukraine, UK foreign secretary Liz Truss said on Wednesday. Truss said that if Putin went further and ordered a full-scale invasion of Ukraine then sanctions would be escalated, PA Media reports. Russia’s ambassador to the United States has hit back at the imposition of sanctions imposed by US president Joe Biden, suggesting the move would hurt global financial and energy markets as well as ordinary citizens. According to a recent post on the Russian embassy Facebook page early Wednesday, ambassador Anatoly Antonov said: Sanctions will not solve anything regarding Russia. It’s hard to imagine that anyone in Washington is counting on Russia to review its foreign policy course under threat of restrictions. I don’t remember a single day when our country lived without any restrictions from the Western world. We learned how to work in such conditions. And not only survive, but also develop our state. There is no doubt that the sanctions imposed against us will hurt the global financial and energy markets. The United States will not be left out, where ordinary citizens will feel the full consequences of rising prices.” South Korea is considering the possibility of joining sanctions against Russia over the Ukraine crisis after speaking with the United States. However, the east Asian nation is not considering military assistance, the Yonhap news agency said on Wednesday, citing the presidential Blue House. The Ukrainian military has said another soldier was killed and six wounded in shelling by pro-Russian separatists in east Ukraine in the past 24 hours. The military said it had recorded 96 incidents of shelling by separatists over the past 24 hours, 81 of which were with the use of heavy weapons, compared with 84 a day earlier, according to Ukraine’s joint forces operation situation recently published report. It said separatist forces used heavy artillery, mortars and Grad rocket systems. Russian President Vladimir Putin says Moscow is ready to look for “diplomatic solutions” over Ukraine but stressed that the country’s interests were non-negotiable. In a video address on Wednesday morning to mark the Defender of the Fatherland Day, a public holiday in Russia, Agence France-Press cites Putin as saying: Our country is always open for direct and honest dialogue, for the search for diplomatic solutions to the most complex problems. The interests of Russia, the security of our citizens, are non-negotiable for us.” In the video address, Putin congratulated the country’s men, praised the battle-readiness of the Russian army and said he was certain of the “professionalism” of the military and that they will stand up for the country’s national interests. His speech follows Russia’s unanimous approval to deploy “peacekeepers” to two self-proclaimed republics in Luhansk and Donetsk now recognised by Moscow as independent. Putin said Russia would continue to develop state-of-the-art weapons. We will continue to develop advanced weapon systems, including hypersonic and those based on new physical principles, and expand the use of advanced digital technologies and elements of artificial intelligence. Such complexes are truly the weapons of the future, which significantly increase the combat potential of our armed forces.” We earlier reported a cache of satellite images showing a new deployment of more than 100 military vehicles and dozens of troop tents in southern Belarus near the Ukraine border. The images - published by private US company on Tuesday - reportedly show a new field hospital has been added to a military garrison in western Russia close to the border with Ukraine, according to a statement from Maxar Technologies, which has been tracking the buildup of Russian forces for weeks. The images could not be independently verified by Reuters however they have been widely shared by correspondents reporting from Ukraine. British prime minister Boris Johnson has been urged to impose tougher sanctions on Russia after announcing on Tuesday that three billionaire allies of the Russian President and five Russian banks would face punitive measures. The prime minister is likely to come under fire in the Commons today and will criticism from all sides for not going far enough, PA Media reports. Labour leader Sir Keir Starmer said “we must be prepared to go further”, while the sanctions were branded as “gruel” by the Liberal Democrats’ Layla Moran. Former Tory foreign secretary Jeremy Hunt warned that “Putin will have predicted and discounted western sanctions long ago, so does he (Johnson) agree that if we are not to be behind in the diplomatic chess game, we need to do some things that he is not expecting?”. Tobias Ellwood, Conservative chairman of the defence committee, said: “Sanctions alone will not be enough, indeed untargeted sanctions may play into Putin’s plan to pivot Russia ever closer to China.” Former Tory minister Mark Harper asked for assurances that Boris Johnson will implement “further and stronger measures even if President Putin does no more”. Johnson and Downing Street insisted this was only the “first barrage” of measures, where “very high net wealth individuals” Gennady Timchenko, Boris Rotenberg and Igor Rotenberg - who he described as “cronies” of the Russian president - were targeted. The sanctions, which include UK asset freezes, a travel ban and prohibition on British individuals and businesses dealing with them, were also tabled against Russian banks Rossiya, IS Bank, General Bank, Promsvyazbank and the Black Sea Bank. Russia’s ministry of defence has just issued a bizarre call out, urging Russians to celebrate their “fatherland” by installing photos of military might on their desktops. US secretary of state Antony Blinken earlier said an invasion of Ukraine had been Russian president Vladimir Putin’s “plan all along”, calling the situation a “manufactured crisis”. In a joint press conference with Ukrainian foreign minister Dmytro Kuleba in Washington held on Tuesday evening local time, Blinken said: His plan all along has been to invade Ukraine; to control Ukraine and its people; to destroy Ukraine’s democracy, which offers a stark contrast to the autocracy that he leads; to reclaim Ukraine as a part of Russia. That’s why this is the greatest threat to security in Europe since world war two”. During the press conference, Blinken also added that he will no longer be meeting with the Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, in Paris on Friday as planned : “Now that we see the invasion is beginning and Russia has made clear its wholesale rejection of diplomacy it does not make sense to go forward that meeting at this time.” The meeting followed Joe Biden’s announcement on Tuesday about the first round of sanctions against Russian banks, oligarchs and others, with plans to escalate sanctions if Russia advances its invasion. Video of the press conference is also available here. The UK’s foreign secretary Liz Truss has revealed potential further UK sanctions on Russia, warning those close to Putin will see his incursion into Ukraine as a “self-inflicted wound” and adding “nothing is off the table”. British prime minister Boris Johnson announced on Tuesday that three billionaire allies of the Russian president and five Russian banks would face punitive measures in response to their country’s aggression. Truss said the UK was also considering sanctions for members of the Russian Duma and Federation Council, and extending Crimea’s territorial sanctions to the separatist controlled territories in the Donbas. Writing in The Times, she said: Putin is ... undermining Europe’s security and stability. We will use every lever at our disposal to stop him in his tracks. We have put in place our toughest sanctions regime against Russia. Nothing is off the table. This first wave will target the individuals and companies closest to the Kremlin. Truss added that “no UK individual or business will be able to deal with these territories until they are returned to Ukraine.” Truss also said the UK has a “long list” of people who have been complicit in the actions of the Russian leadership, who the government is willing to “(turn) up the heat” on unless Russia pulls back its forces. Beyond financial sanctions, Truss added the UK was willing to introduce “measures to limit Russia’s ability to trade and prohibit a range of high-tech exports, degrading the development of its military industrial base for years”. “In time, even those close to President Putin will come to see his decisions this week as a self-inflicted wound.” Welcome to our live blog on the Ukraine crisis. I’m Samantha Lock. There have been a number of important developments over the last few hours so if you’re just joining us or need a quick recap, here are some of the main points: US secretary of state Antony Blinken said an invasion of Ukraine had been Vladimir Putin’s “plan all along”, calling the situation a “manufactured crisis”. He also cancelled a meeting planned for Friday with Russian foreign minister Sergei Lavrov. US president Joe Biden announced sanctions against Russia and the Russian president’s decision to send troops into eastern Ukraine was the “beginning of the invasion of Ukraine”. The sanctions will target Russian banks and sovereign debt, as well as prominent members of what Biden called the Russian “elite”. Ukraine’s foreign minister Dmytro Kuleba welcomed the sanctions but said they weren’t enough to discourage Putin. Speaking in Washington with Blinken, he said the US must help his country because the future of the world order “is being decided right now in Ukraine”. Russia’s ambassador to the US hit back at the sanctions, suggesting the move would hurt global financial and energy markets as well as ordinary citizens. The UK and European Union also announced similar sanctions to the US but were criticised as not being strong enough, and could also come at a cost for the west. Australia and Japan followed suit. Ukraine’s president has called up the country’s reservists and warned that Ukraine could face a battle for its very existence. Satellite images show a new deployment of more than 100 military vehicles and dozens of troop tents in southern Belarus and in Russia near the Ukraine border, a private US company said. Canada delivered a second aircraft to Ukraine filled with “lethal military aid”, calling Russia’s invasion of a sovereign state “absolutely unacceptable”. Oil prices only rose slightly on Wednesday’s as the market judged that sanctions against Russia will not disrupt supplies from the world’s third largest producer.Billy Connolly Does … 9pm, Gold The Big Yin looks back at his life and 50-year standup career in this new seven-parter, featuring unparalleled access to his home life in Florida. In tonight’s opener, he muses on bad behaviour (his own and others’), from encounters with Keith Moon at the height of their bad-boy years, to wild stories about trucks full of snakes, to assaulting salesmen with bowls of trifle. Of course. Ali Catterall Tonight: Losing Your Home – The True Cost 7.30pm, ITV The pandemic exacerbated a housing crisis that had already pushed millions into the rental sector. Now faced with the increased cost of living, what happens next? Daniel Hewitt examines the reality of thousands who live with the threat of losing their home. Hollie Richardson Dragons’ Den 8pm, BBC One The dragons get a treat this week when a German hooch brewer drops in to peddle his highly alcoholic wares. Also on the menu tonight is a man popping out of a wheelie bin with an eco-friendly deodorant and a woman pulling the bring-your-dog-to-work card as she pitches for investment. Hannah Verdier Resident Alien 9pm, Sky Max The mildly daft but gently charming drama about an alien marooned on Earth returns for a second series. Harry (the pleasingly bewildered Alan Tudyk) has a new quest, but he is increasingly struggling with encroaching human emotions, leading to a paradox: might he care about humanity too much to be able to save it? Phil Harrison The Fear Index 9pm, Sky Atlantic The paranoid, psychological thriller continues. After his run-in with the intruder, Dr Alex Hoffman (Josh Hartnett) hotfoots it to his therapist, worried about his sanity, until he finds hidden cameras all over his office. Is he being framed? AC Dating’s Dangerous Secrets 10pm, BBC Three Getting a date can be as easy as a couple of swipes on your phone screen, but the ease of this can come at the cost of your safety. Linda Adey investigates the reality of this, speaking with people who have had bad experiences and asking whether background checks should be done by dating apps. HRFifteen years ago a then 30-year-old Ashley Tabor-King sparked a British radio revolution striking the first of a series of deals totalling more than £600m that would ultimately create Europe’s biggest commercially funded group, owner of stations from Capital and Heart to LBC and Classic FM. Earlier this week, Tabor-King’s Global once again flexed its financial muscle by signing deals with BBC stars Emily Maitlis and Jon Sopel, who will join former colleague Andrew Marr at LBC, reportedly doubling their salaries in the process. The move is classic Global: spend big to get bigger by exploiting opportunity in the market, backed by a seemingly unlimited reservoir of cash bankrolled by its controlling shareholder – Tabor-King’s father. In the mid-noughties Tabor-King – who had worked at Capital Radio in the 1990s before setting up a music company where he worked with acts including Corinne Bailey Rae and The Wanted – spied a looming sea change in British radio. The inexorable switch to digital radio would help level the playing field with the BBC, which had dominated with the prime FM and AM spectrum, while consolidation among commercial players would give the scale needed to compete and take advantage of a future iPhone, smart speaker and podcast generation of listening. “Daddy basically bought the company,” says one industry executive, referring to Tabor-King’s £375m deal to buy the owner of Capital Radio in 2008, then the biggest commercial operator in the UK. “That doesn’t mean their strategy isn’t sound and well-executed, but it definitely helps having deep pockets though.” Tabor-King, who changed his name on marrying his partner George King in 2019, is the son of Michael Tabor. Monaco-based Tabor has made a fortune estimated by the Sunday Times at more than £600m from a combination of investments in gambling, buying BetVictor in 2014, plus a string of thoroughbred racehorses. In 2007, Global made its first move buying Chrysalis Radio, home to Heart, Galaxy and LBC, for £170m. At the time the deal was reported to be backed by Tabor and wealthy Irish businessmen including John Magnier and JP McManus, his fellow partners in the Coolmore Stud racing stable. Former ITV chief executive Charles Allen, later Lord Allen of Kensington, assumed the role of chairman of Global, a position he still holds. Five years later a final major deal, a fiercely contested £70m bidding war for GMG Radio, then third-biggest player in the UK and part of the group that owns the Guardian, cemented Global’s place as the biggest commercial player in British radio. Global, which takes half the £700m spent on radio advertising annually in the UK, made £358m in revenues in the pre-pandemic year to the end of March 2020. While operating profits hit £60m, the business continues to make significant losses at a pre-tax level. This is in part due to a structure whereby Global, which is ultimately incorporated in Jersey, is financed by £1.7bn loans from the Tabor family and banks. “The group is primarily funded by debt and although both shareholder and bank loans have increased during the year, the group’s operations are cash generative,” the company said in its most recent annual financial filing to Companies House. This financial freedom has allowed Global to aggressively invest and grow through good times and bad, under the group chief executive, Stephen Miron, who joined from the publisher of the Daily Mail in 2008. Global has had the deep pockets to be able to strike a raft of deals to secure must-listen stars in recent years, including Kate Garraway, Amanda Holden, Moira Stuart, John Humphrys, Alexander Armstrong and Eddie Mair. Maitlis, who secured the famous Prince Andrew interview, will work alongside former North America editor Sopel to front the new podcast for Global Player and host a radio show together on LBC. They will work with Dino Sofos, the founder and chief executive of the audio production company Persephonica, a former head of BBC news podcasts and the creator of Brexitcast, Newscast and Americast. With 18 brands, including a growing number of extensions from Capital Dance and Smooth Country to Heart 80s, Global is able to commercialise 26m weekly listeners which account for 24% of all radio listening. While the pandemic fuelled a precipitous decline in revenues as commuting by car ground to a halt, a key commercial radio audience, the industry bounced back rapidly as listening to radio and podcasts at home boomed. Online listening, including via smart speakers, now accounts for 17% of all listening time. Digital listening, including DAB radio, represents 65% of all radio listening. By the first quarter of last year, which proved to be the biggest ever for annual radio revenues at £718m according to the Radiocentre, Global’s radio operation saw revenues climb 3% over pre-pandemic levels. The company does not reveal details of the performance of podcasts, but points to significant success with originals including John Sweeney’s Hunting Ghislaine, Rachel Johnson’s Difficult Women and Vogue Williams’ My Therapist Ghosted Me. “Younger adults, especially the under-24s, are listening to much less radio overall than previously, and the sector will find it difficult to draw these people in as they get older,” says Gill Hind, a director at Enders Analysis. “Hence their investments in podcasts and streaming services.” Four years ago Global made another audacious move to diversify and strengthen its overall media business by striking a number of deals for outdoor advertising companies including Exterion, which runs the £1.1bn contract for Transport for London including London Underground, the biggest of its kind in the world. The sector was one of the worst-hit during the pandemic as cities effectively shut down but it is recovering rapidly, giving Global more than a third share of a £1bn-plus UK outdoor advertising market, and boosting the company’s overall annual revenues well over £700m. While the BBC faces having to find as much as £2bn in savings over the next six years as the government squeezes licence-fee income, occasional glimpses into the life of low-profile Tabor-King gives a stark insight into the differing financial fortunes the two radio giants find themselves. As well as having held New Year’s Eve parties at the family’s Sunset Reef home in Barbados, reportedly attended in the past by Simon Cowell and Sir Philip Green, Tabor-King made headlines in 2017 when he was refused permission to knock together two flats in Knightsbridge to create a £200m penthouse flat. Still, Global’s 2,000 employees can take some solace that they weren’t forgotten when Tabor-King was awarded an OBE for services to the media industry the same year, when he tweeted: “This one is for everyone @global”.When their son was seven months old, strangers used to ask Kat West and Jaime Vallés if they fed him sedatives. “No, I don’t drug my baby!” West recalls with mock incredulity. “That was the weirdest question.” But it wasn’t: as Vallés reminds West, someone once asked if their son was animatronic. West and Vallés were subject to this line of questioning because, for about six months in 2019, their baby boy Rafael played Bobby Carney in The Ferryman. Bobby, as you might have gathered, is also a baby – the youngest character in the Olivier-winning Troubles drama by Jez Butterworth. For the show’s production team, and ultimately its audience, a real baby was miles better than a doll. “The live baby added to the verisimilitude of the production,” said Tim Hoare, associate director at the time. During its Broadway run, four different babies became Bobby, with Rafael playing him four times a week. “Played”, of course, could be overstating things. Rafael’s role involved sitting in the dark and being passed around by the adults. But he is just one of a number of babies who have trodden the boards. The Book of Dust: La Belle Sauvage – running at the Bridge theatre in London – also features real babies, cast as tiny infant Lyra, the protagonist of Philip Pullman’s famous His Dark Materials fantasy series. These babies raise a number of questions. How, exactly, do you audition an infant? Can you train one? And aren’t there a million stinky, shouty ways it can go less than all right on the night? Just like adult actors, babies need agents. Bonnie Lia, founder of child talent agency Bonnie &amp; Betty, says the last time they opened their books to babies, they received 1,300 applications, but could only represent 50. Who makes the cut? The aim is to get a wide range. “It would be pointless,” says Lia, “to have 20 Caucasian baby boys all aged three months with brown hair and brown eyes.” Then, when a casting call comes in, the team can put forward babies of the right race and age. “Generally,” Lia explains, “we try to match the baby to the actors playing the parents.” Then comes the audition – at which parents are placed under scrutiny, too. “They need to be flexible, committed, available at short notice,” Lia explains, “not too far from the location and laid-back with their baby possibly being handled by various cast and crew.” For modelling shoots and ads, sometimes babies are cast from photos or videos. But for theatre, directors need to see if a baby is prone to stage fright. “Our audition,” Vallés explains, “consisted of handing the baby over to the stage manager, him bringing the baby to the middle of the stage in darkness, and putting Rafael down on a mattress for 20 seconds with weird, spooky music playing.” The reason was simple – that’s how act two of The Ferryman began. Rafael was second in line and the baby ahead cried bitterly when left alone. “I looked at my son and said, ‘All right, kid, you’re never gonna have a better shot than this, because the person in front of you just blew it.’” West and Vallés responded to the casting call because both have experience in the arts – she’s a stage manager, while he works in video production. Rafael aced his audition. He stayed put on the mattress, didn’t cry at the bright lights, and wasn’t fussed when actors carried him around. By the time the production finished its run, West swears her son understood the concept of a cue light – the bulb that flashed when it was his time to go on. She says he never cried on stage once during his 48 performances. James Cousins, co-director on The Book of Dust, also auditioned babies by running them through scenes in the show and checking that both baby and parents were relaxed. Adiya Ijaha, one of the show’s four babies, received glowing reviews: she was cast because she was “amazingly chill” but also “really engaged with what’s going on”. The cast joke that she has learned the script. “We like to think she knows exactly what she’s doing,” says Cousins, “and has been on stage in a previous life.” Adiya had no real rehearsal time. The production didn’t involve the babies until the day before its first preview – before then, actors rehearsed with weighted dolls. When the babies finally arrived, they were taken through their five scenes over the course of two hours. Ultimately, the actors required more training than the infants – one of them had never held a baby before. For Cousins, casting a real baby was a no-brainer: “This show, ultimately, is about a baby.” However, a doll is swapped in for fight scenes and when the cast are rocked on a boat. While the baby is in five scenes, it has – unsurprisingly – no cues once on stage, although Adiya has on occasion let out a coincidentally well-timed giggle. Rafael was also in no way trained for his part: he was simply acclimatised to the stage and the actors. “They weren’t asking the baby to do anything,” Vallés explains. “It was the opposite: they wanted the baby to do nothing.” Sometimes, however, flukes meant that Rafael seemed trained. During the final scene on opening night, one actor asked another what the baby’s name was. “As soon as the actor said that, our son looked at the woman who was carrying him like, ‘What’s my name?’ And the audience died laughing because it looked like it was on cue.” In film and TV productions, babies do have to emote on command. Because it’s unethical to scare a baby into crying, sometimes the crew simply wait until a baby is hungry or needs its nappy changed. Then they film it having a wail. In The Book of Dust, Lyra never has to cry or laugh on demand, but sometimes a baby actor has timed the weeping well. In one scene, Lyra is picked up by the father who abandoned her. He holds her at arm’s length. “If she cries at that point,” says Cousins, “we let it happen, as long as she’s not bawling the house down.” However, if the baby cries when it shouldn’t, “the actors know the things they can cut out in order to get the baby off stage.” And if a Book of Dust baby is crying right before she’s due on stage, they just swap in the doll. So what about those tricky matters of child safeguarding? In The Ferryman, when Rafael was left alone on a mattress in darkness, two ushers stood on either side of the front row to ensure that no one in the audience leaned forward to snatch the baby. “Their only job,” says West, “was to stare at that baby until the baby got picked up by the actor, which was comforting.” The show started at 8pm every night, meaning West and Vallés wouldn’t get Rafael back home until after 11pm. “He would often pass out on the way,” says Vallés. “Then it would be harder to put him to sleep later – that part was rough.” Book of Dust babies, meanwhile, have a 10pm curfew. Lia explains that all children, no matter how young, require a performance licence issued by their local authority. In the UK, babies can get a licence at any age, even if they were born yesterday, although in California and many other US states, babies can only start acting when they’re 15 days old, and need a note from a doctor. In the UK, the licence stipulates how many hours the child can be on set and how many breaks it must be given. Babies are also paid: West and Vallés were legally required to put a percentage of Rafael’s earnings in a trust fund. Some of the remaining money was used to offset the cost of one of the parents having to be in the theatre four times a week. “He had to pay taxes when he was barely one year old,” West laughs. The family shared a dressing room with a standby baby and its parents. There was a one-hour break between its first entrance and its second, in which the parents would try to get their infant to nap. The standby baby had to be ready in costume in case Rafael had a bowel movement or started to wail. In fact, on his first ever performance, Rafael filled his nappy seconds before he was due on stage. Like a pro, he went on – although actors and front-row audience members might have preferred it if he hadn’t. Cousins jokes that baby Adiya has a better backstage setup than most of the cast. They share dressing rooms, while the baby actor has one of its own. “They can have whatever they want there,” Cousins says. Adiya particularly favoured a baby bouncer hung on the door. What, ultimately, is all this hard work for? Why not get an animatronic baby? “As soon as the baby is there,” Cousins says, “the energy on stage changes. The audience just lights up.” Baby Lyra is first brought on stage in a wheelbarrow: when she was revealed on opening night, the audience gasped. However, this excitement is not allowed to last too long. “Her moments on stage are kept quite short,” explains Cousins, “because the audience just stops listening to whatever’s going on.” The Book of Dust: La Belle Sauvage is at the Bridge theatre, London, until SaturdayThe British government has not listened to victims in its efforts to tackle abuse in the humanitarian sector after the “sex for aid” scandals, a UK watchdog has said. The Independent Commission for Aid Impact (Icai) said the government was falling short because of a “top-down” approach and needed to listen and learn from recipients of aid who remained reluctant to report abuse allegations. “The UK has played an important role in galvanising international action on protecting people from sexual exploitation and abuse in humanitarian crises,” said Icai’s commissioner Sir Hugh Bayley. “But its top-down approach requires those delivering UK aid to spend more time reporting back to the FCDO [Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office], than listening to the people they are seeking to protect and addressing their needs.” Britain’s initiative to tackle sexual exploitation in the aid sector was launched in 2018 after revelations that Oxfam employees sexually exploited victims of the 2010 Haiti earthquake. The government held an international safeguarding summit to tackle the problem. But the report found that abuse cases were still underreported. Icai said a survey in Uganda found people were hesitant to report cases to agencies because of long investigation processes, and concerns about corruption and not being believed. Mechanisms for dealing with complaints were often overwhelmed because they dealt with a broad range of safeguarding issues beyond sexual exploitation, Icai added. It said there were weaknesses internationally in sharing information about exploitation. However, the report said there had been progress in working with donors to promote a coordinated response within the humanitarian sector. Stephanie Draper, chief executive of Bond, a network of charities and NGOs in the UK, said the FCDO had “taken important steps” but progress was being held back by a lack of data “around incidents of sexual exploitation and abuse and what works where, and how to address and prevent it”. “Ultimately, the voices of victims and survivors need to be sought out and heard and this work needs to be adequately funded so organisations do not need to cut corners when it comes to safeguarding.” A spokesperson for the FCDO said the UK was a “world leader” in tackling sexual exploitation, abuse and harassment in the aid sector. “We continue to prioritise this work, protecting the most vulnerable and making sure money does not go to organisations that fall short of high safeguarding standards,” they said.What is the relationship between Russia’s threats to Ukraine and the gas price crisis? Gas prices are soaring globally, largely because of the resurgence of demand for fossil fuels after the Covid-19 pandemic and lockdowns, depleted storage and the difficulty of ramping up supply after the disruptions of the past two years. But prices have also been significantly affected by Russia’s recent decision to tighten gas supplies to Europe, which experts believe was driven by Vladimir Putin’s desire to move against Ukraine. Europe is dependent on Russia for about 40% of its natural gas supplies, and despite the expansion of renewable energy over the past two decades, that dependency is increasing as countries shift to gas, away from dirtier coal. Germany is particularly vulnerable, as it has shut down nearly all of its nuclear power stations and aims to eliminate coal by 2030. A major new gas pipeline, Gazprom’s $11bn Nord Stream 2 from Russia across the Baltic to Germany, which would heat 26m German homes, has been the focus of Germany’s diplomatic relations with Russia since it was announced in 2015. Construction on the 1,200km pipeline was completed last year, but no gas has yet flowed and its future is now in doubt as Germany’s chancellor Olaf Scholz dramatically halted approval for the project on Tuesday. Concerns that Russia is using its gas supplies as a weapon to achieve its political aims are well founded. Fatih Birol, executive director of the International Energy Agency, noted that Russia’s decision to drop gas supplies to Europe by a quarter came as it was heightening tension towards Ukraine. “I hope this was only a coincidence,” he told the Guardian. Is this really another war over fossil fuels? No. Energy resources are not the focus of this threatened conflict. Vladimir Putin has a long history of territorial ambitions in former Soviet nations, which he made explicit this week, and of attempts to exert political control over Ukraine. Putin is said by supporters to be concerned over the possibility of Nato expansion, although many analysts say this is a pretext. So the Ukraine crisis is not a war over resources, but it has many implications for resource use. Russia is effectively weaponising its dominance over European gas supply for political ends. Reducing reliance on Russian gas is an urgent necessity for the EU to reach net zero emissions, and would also diminish Putin’s political leverage over the EU. It is also worth noting that in the longer term, as Europe weans itself off gas and pursues net zero emissions, the value of this political weapon will wane rapidly. Russia’s industries have never recovered from the fall of communism, and its economy is now based overwhelmingly on the export of fossil fuels, with much of the rest made up of energy-dependent mineral resources, such as iron, steel, aluminium and other metals, and some agriculture. Four in 10 roubles accruing to Russia’s federal budget pre-pandemic came from oil and gas, which made up 60% of Russian exports in 2019. Kremlin strategists are therefore keenly aware that in the longer term the global move to net zero threatens the whole basis of Russia’s economy and global influence. Why is Europe so dependent on Russian gas? Historically, much of Europe was heavily dependent on coal for power and heating. Renewable energy generation has more than doubled since 2004, and reached 22% of final energy production in 2020. However, at the same time the share generated from nuclear power has fallen, from about a third of the EU’s electricity in 1995 to about a quarter today. After the accident at Japan’s Fukushima nuclear power plant in 2011, Germany’s then chancellor Angela Merkel announced an “Energiewende” – an energy shift – that would see all of the country’s reactors shut down. This has increased Germany’s need for gas, and similar moves away from coal and towards lower emissions in other countries – including the UK, which despite North Sea gas production is a net importer of gas – have heightened the dependency. The geopolitical implications of this dependency, as well as the climate impacts, are now unignorable. Paul Bledsoe, a former Clinton White House climate adviser, now with the Progressive Policy Institute in Washington DC, says: “It has taken the current crisis for Germany and the EU to recognise that its co-dependence on Russian gas is a geopolitical and climate nightmare from which they must finally awake. Reducing Russian gas reliance is a huge climate and moral imperative that Europe must prioritise.” Will Russia turn off gas supplies to Europe if the EU and the UK impose sanctions? That would be a momentous move from Russia. Any further reductions of Russian gas supply to Europe would have severe consequences, for Europe but also for Russia itself. Birol said earlier this month, before sanctions were imposed: “If Russia stops the gas supply to Europe, it could have a seismic impact on European energy. [Russia] has to consider the consequences if existing oil and gas supplies to Europe are halted.” He added: “Failure to maintain [supplies] would shatter Russia’s reputation as a reliable partner and that would be a tectonic shift. Russia would be seen as a threat and that would have far-reaching consequences for European economies, but even more consequences for Russia. Europe would choose a strategy to diverge from Russia.” What impact will Russia’s actions in Ukraine have on climate diplomacy? Russia was almost invisible at the Cop26 UN climate summit in Glasgow last November, after a surprising public commitment to reach net zero greenhouse gas emissions by 2060. But the Kremlin has left the details of the goal vague and shown little sign of updating Russia’s emissions commitments for 2030, which are key to limiting global temperature rises to 1.5C. This is a crucial year for climate diplomacy, as the pledges from all countries in Glasgow are still inadequate for the 1.5C goal, and the UK Cop26 presidency is hoping for major progress before the next UN climate meeting in Egypt this November. Russia’s stance on Ukraine will certainly have an impact on those discussions, not least as any conflict will focus attention on the move from fossil fuels. It is also notable that Russia’s oil and gas operations are among the worst in the world for the climate. Data released this week by the IEA shows that emissions of methane, a powerful greenhouse gas and the major component of natural gas, are 70% higher than countries had claimed. Russia makes little or no attempt to capture methane from its oil and gas drilling, and to stop its pipelines leaking, so there are huge opportunities. If Putin were serious about tackling the climate crisis, Russia could provide an invaluable service to the rest of the world by plugging these leaks – reducing methane globally by a third by 2030 could reduce temperatures by 0.2C – and at current gas prices this could be done at no net cost and could even be profitable. Should the UK be fracking more, or producing more from the North Sea, to reduce dependency on Russian gas? No. Attempts to frack in the UK started more than a decade ago, but went nowhere, in part because of protests but also because the economics of industrial fracking in a densely populated country make it impractical. Any move to restart fracking now would take many years to produce any gas, long after the current gas price crisis has been forgotten. New licences for oil and gas exploration in the North Sea are also currently under consideration by the government, and on Thursday the Committee on Climate Change will publish its advice to ministers on whether these licences can be compatible with the UK’s climate goals. However, any newly licensed fields would also take years to come into production, so would have no impact on the current crisis. Bob Ward, policy director at the Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change at the London School of Economics, warns of falling for false solutions: “We know that some opponents of climate policy will try to hide the truth and instead fool the public into falsely believing that the soaring prices are due to green energy. If they are successful, they might slow down the transition to clean domestic energy.” Far more good could be done in the shorter term by insulating homes and ramping up renewable energy generation. What is the answer to the crisis? Rachel Kyte, dean of the Fletcher School at Tufts University in the US and an adviser to the UN secretary-general on the climate, says: “The west needs to meet Putin’s flagrant breach of international law with tough sanctions to force a change in calculus in Moscow. Putin believes he has to the largest extent sanction-proofed Russia, but Russia earns hundreds of millions of dollars a day from sales of oil and refined products, and more from sales of gas and minerals. “Weaning ourselves off these as quickly as possible is one route available to the west. In fact, Putin’s understanding of what decarbonisation would mean for Russian energy exports in the medium and long term may be a factor in the timing of Putin’s attack on Ukraine now.” Ending the use of fossil fuels is imperative, to reach net zero emissions and stave off the worst impacts of climate breakdown. But the shift will also create geopolitical tensions as the world’s massive fossil fuel exporters – Russia, Saudi Arabia and some other Middle Eastern countries, Latin American oil producers, Australia – begin to lose out economically. The crisis in Ukraine shows that some fossil fuel producers at least may not want to give up without a struggle the political leverage they gain from their resources.The Syria crisis continues unnoticed. It holds key lessons for the west about Putin yet it has gone virtually unnoticed by the rest of the world. War crimes and crimes against humanity continue in the Russian-sponsored dictatorship, even as some misguided leaders want to usher Bashar al-Assad, the architect of these crimes, back into acceptable society. We can rest assured that the president of Ukraine, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, unlike Assad, is not welcoming Putin with open arms. But in responding to the Ukraine emergency, there are lessons the west can and should learn from the situation in Syria. Since the UN removed Syria’s declared chemical weapons stockpile in 2014, Assad has continued to bomb hospitals and schools, and burn villages to the ground in a macabre, medieval-style scorched-earth policy. Mercifully, we have not seen chemical weapons used since April 2019, but Syria today is a Russian state in all but name, and Assad a puppet dictator with strings very clearly tugged from Moscow. Idlib, a province in northwest Syria, is the only region still free of the tyranny, but with millions of malnourished souls trapped there, and Assad throwing in incendiary devices to smoke them out as you would vermin, it still resembles hell on earth. Even the UN has turned its back on Idlib, giving aid to Assad and his wife to distribute as they see fit. Syria now represents a major Russian and Iranian presence on the edge of Europe; and if Ukraine also falls, the balance of power will very much shift eastwards. With too many European countries reliant on Russian gas, the current global instability began in Damascus. An emboldened Russia buoyed up by high oil prices seems much more willing to face off with Nato than it did a few years ago, when its antiquated military was no match for western tanks. While the rest of us have cut our militaries to the bone, relying on electronics and space to fight the next war, Russia has modernised its armoured might, now on show around Ukraine – there is a unique quality in mass and heavy armour, which no cyberwarrior is going to vaporise. Syria shows what happens when you turn a blind eye and are too heavily influenced by peaceniks. Those of us involved in interventions in Iraq and Afghanistan over the past 30 years have our issues with overstepping the mark in those places, but we look at Syria and know we should have done better. That knowledge should inform our response to Putin’s aggression now. It is clear when discussing Syria with Syrians from Idlib and regime-held areas that everybody has suffered. At least those in Idlib are getting support through Turkey, and there are some innovative projects being funded by European countries. Many hospitals and clinics in Idlib now have solar power to run their generators and surgical theatres, as there is no fuel and the power network was destroyed years ago. There is an electric car, also powered by solar energy, distributing medicines and Covid vaccines – when they are occasionally available – around Idlib. In a remarkable twist that would only happen in war, some of these Syrian medics who have developed a viable medical system under the most trying and demanding circumstances are now offering to help in Afghanistan. The Syrian people have shown resilience and innovation beyond compare, even as they have been let down again and again. First, the west did not intervene when the regime started attacking its own people. Then, in response to chemical weapon use, illegal under every rule of war, the US declared a red line on their use – but failed to act when that line was crossed. And finally, we stood by as Russia and Iran muscled their way across Syria to create a forward operation base on our doorstep. Our leaders will do well to remember this and be strong and resilient to protect Ukraine. I cannot think that a few sanctions on a few banks and billionaires is going to perturb Putin. He only understands strength and power – it’s time to show our steel. Hamish de Bretton-Gordon is a chemical weapons expert, fellow of Magdalene College, Cambridge and an adviser to the Union of Syrian Medical Charities Join a panel of journalists, hosted by Michael Safi, for a livestreamed event on the Russia-Ukraine crisis. On Thursday 3 March, 8pm GMT | 9pm CET | 12pm PST | 3pm EST. Book tickets hereBuildings that showcase Norwich’s Victorian industrial heritage, including a magnificent conservatory at the home of the family behind the Colman’s mustard brand, have been given special protection by the government. Among new listings, which were announced on Thursday, is the ornate conservatory at Carrow House. Built in 1895 by iron founders Boulton and Paul Ltd, the structure features rich patterns of ironwork, stained glass and mosaic, which have been remarkably well preserved, said Historic England, the body that manages the national heritage list for England. The conservatory’s original ventilation and heating systems have been retained. It is listed at Grade II*. Carrow House, which was listed more than 30 years ago. was the family home of Jeremiah James Colman. His company, J &amp; J Colman, moved to the nearby Carrow Works in the early 1850s, and Colman’s mustard, with its distinctive bright yellow label, was produced at the site for 160 years. The works were later bought by Unilever, and production ended in 2020. Trowse railway station is also newly listed at Grade II. Built in 1844-45, it was the terminus of the Norwich and Brandon line, which connected the city to London by rail for the first time. The station, at Bracondale, represented a “pivotal moment in railway and communications history”, said Historic England. Five months after it opened, a new swing bridge over the River Wensum allowed the line to continue to Norwich station. Trowse station, which is crafted from knapped flint, a traditional Norfolk building material, closed in 1939. Trowse sewage pumping station also gets Grade II listing. It was built about 1869 by Norwich corporation to improve sewage disposal caused by the growing industrialisation and population of the city in the 19th century. The engine house, which is built from red brick in an Italianate style, contains a grand spiral staircase and decorative embellishments. A replacement engine house built in 1909 has also been listed. Unusually for a utility building, it was constructed in a Renaissance style usually reserved for important civic buildings such as town halls, museums and libraries. Caroline Skinner, listing team leader at Historic England, said: “These remarkable heritage sites in east Norwich … can continue to tell an important story of a local industry that became a globally recognised brand, and the societal changes that took place in the town at this time.”It would not surprise me if Melanie Lynskey had deliberately matched her pale blouse to the pale curtains behind her, and her pale complexion, the better to blend into the background. After 30 years of critical acclaim, but not mainstream fame, Lynskey is getting noticed and it feels very, very strange to her. Her show, Yellowjackets, has steadily become a hit. Lynskey is not quite the lead in this ensemble piece, but near enough, as one of four fortysomething women who survived a plane crash as teenagers, and went through some savage stuff, involving murder and almost certainly cannibalism. Likened to a mix of Lord of the Flies, Lost and Mean Girls, with a pleasing amount of 90s nostalgia, it has become one of the most talked-about shows of the moment. “It’s funny to be on something that people are watching,” Lynskey says with a laugh. “It’s a different experience.” A concerned friend recently texted her to ask how she was dealing with that. “I said, I actually feel very nervous,” she says when we speak over Zoom (she is in Atlanta, where she is filming a crime drama with Jessica Biel). She is low-key and gentle. “It’s a lot easier to stay under the radar, have people be like, ‘You should get more attention, you should have more roles’ or whatever. It’s weird to have been doing this for 30 years and then all of a sudden …” She smiles. “I didn’t think this would happen. I thought if it was going to happen, it would happen in my 20s. So I’m grateful, and it’s really nice to have choices. But it feels vulnerable.” Lynskey has worked a huge amount, in a career that might have lacked attention but not quality – she was in the HBO series Togetherness and the recent BBC drama Mrs America, and independent films such as Hello I Must be Going and I Don’t Feel at Home in This World Anymore. I suspect this is how she likes it. She is wary of fame – until now, one of her most high-profile roles was as a stalkerish neighbour in the sitcom Two and a Half Men, but she left when she felt the role might provide too much exposure or threaten to typecast her, and went on to infinitely more interesting, if much lower-paid, roles instead. It’s her husband, the actor Jason Ritter (they have a three-year-old daughter), who gets recognised when they’re out. Lynskey is the one who takes the pictures for fans, she says with a laugh. That is surely about to change, but those low expectations can be hard to shrug off, even in the face of long-overdue recognition. “We’ll see,” she says. She had an astonishing start. In the early 90s, she was a high school pupil in New Zealand when the director Peter Jackson, having exhausted his search of actors for a film, started trawling schools. Lynskey was chosen, and she turned 16 while shooting Heavenly Creatures alongside the then-unknown Kate Winslet, based on a true story about two teenage girls whose intense relationship has catastrophic consequences. One became a megastar, the other … went back to school, then spent years on the periphery of Hollywood, had successful supporting roles (from Coyote Ugly at the beginning of her career, to the recent Netflix film Don’t Look Up), put in some excellent performances in acclaimed indie films, and now, at 44, has become a primetime lead. “I learned so early on not to have expectations,” says Lynskey. But she liked what she read when she got the script for Yellowjackets (it’s the name of the girls’ football team; they were on their way to a tournament when their plane crashed), and she had a conversation with the creators who had a clear plan for her character and about five seasons’ worth of material. She felt, she says, that it could work. “I wonder if we’ve all just gone through this collective trauma and everyone’s feeling a bit shaken up and they don’t really know how to put the pieces back together. This plane crash and these people surviving – I feel like people are interested in that. I think people can relate to that kind of general feeling right now. But I also just think it’s fun.” Lynskey’s character Shauna is unassuming, but it’s a thin, fragile layer – she also has some dubious sexual fantasies, and an unforgiving attitude to pest control (and blackmail). There is something so compelling about the rage of middle-aged women. “It’s very common and it’s also very common to not know what your outlet’s allowed to be for your rage,” says Lynskey. “I think a lot of us were raised having to squash those feelings down, and you get to a particular age and you’re like, it’s coming up and I don’t know how to healthily let go of it.” Shauna might come across as someone with self-doubt, but it’s not really true, says Lynskey, even if her life hasn’t turned out the way she might have hoped. “I think she still believes: ‘I’m a confident, sexual, interesting person, and I deserve a lot.’” With self-doubt, says Lynskey, “it’s very hard for it not to creep in, in middle age – you’re being told everywhere you look you’re not of any value any more, nobody’s interested. But I think within herself, she believes that she’s worthy.” Lynskey knew she wanted to be an actor from the age of six. She grew up in New Plymouth, in New Zealand, the eldest of five; her father was a surgeon, her mother a nurse. Lynskey was, she says, “very, very shy. I’m still very shy.” Getting a part in a school play was a revelation. “It was so freeing, having someone give me the words to say and not being myself for a minute. It just felt like a weight was lifted off my shoulders. I wasn’t consumed with anxiety. Then I just was addicted – I did whatever I could.” When she was cast in Heavenly Creatures, they were already close to shooting. She was given a day on set to learn the basics of screen acting – things like how to avoid looking at the camera – and an acting coach was hired to help her access emotions, but she found the woman’s methods brutal: “It just put me in absolute panic.” Jackson hired another coach, “who was a lot kinder, thank God. But that was how I started out, that was my first day of rehearsal.” Despite being two years younger than her co-star, and inexperienced, Lynskey gives an incredible performance. She carries the film. Yet it was Winslet’s career that took off. Lynskey remembers the excitement around them. Winslet was ready for it. “I wasn’t. I’d never done anything before, and I was very shy.” She didn’t – doesn’t – begrudge Winslet any of it. “I adored her and I admired her so much. There wasn’t a part of me that thought it could have happened to either one of us. It felt like it was supposed to happen to her. She’s a movie star – there’s a glow. I’d never met anybody like that in my life.” All the same, she says, “it was a little hard to have absolutely nothing happen for me. It would have been easier if some agents were interested, but there was nothing. It was hard to not feel like I had failed in some way.” She had to learn, she says, “how to be OK with the good things that had happened and not hope for more. That was the beginning of me lowering my expectations.” She was a cinema geek, though, and for years had been subscribing to serious film magazines. Having critics she respected praise her performance gave her a glimmer of hope, so after a year of university, she got an agent and started going to Los Angeles for auditions. One was for The Crucible, the Daniel Day-Lewis film, which she didn’t get “but it went well, and that built my confidence a little bit”. She got others, including a stepsister in Drew Barrymore’s Cinderella film, Ever After, and weighty films such as The Cherry Orchard “with some of my favourite actors of all time, like Katrin Cartlidge, Alan Bates and Charlotte Rampling. I was so grateful to be working, I didn’t need much – I had been living on nothing. I understood that I was building it from the ground up at that point, and I felt lucky that the door had been opened again.” But it was also disheartening. “I felt like so much of the stuff I was reading would have required me to really compromise myself in some way,” says Lynskey. “There was so much that was just straight-up misogynistic, sexist, disappointing.” She was, she says, “unhappy a lot of the time”. Lynskey is, as anyone can see, beautiful, but in the late 90s and the early years of this century, the infamous size zero was the look. She kept getting put up for best friend-type roles in dross. “I’d get another script to be like, ‘the fat character just sitting in the corner eating a chocolate bar, while the pretty girls are all at the dance’ or whatever. I was like, ‘No’. It’s so irresponsible that there are scripts like this at all.” She asked her agency not to keep sending her stuff like that. When it did, she left. Throughout this time, Lynskey had developed an eating disorder, restricting herself to a certain number of calories a day, and if she went over, she would make herself throw up. She was also exercising obsessively. She was living with her boyfriend at the time and says, “it just broke his heart. It was the first time somebody had really noticed and cared. He did this weird thing, which sounds controlling but wasn’t, where he would cook but not let me be in the kitchen.” Or they’d go out for dinner and he would try to stop her going to throw up in the bathroom as soon as they’d finished. “We had fights in restaurants because I was like …” She pauses. “I remember one day, he said: ‘It’s just so violent, what you’re doing to yourself.’” Lynskey broke up with him. “I suppose I was too filled with self-loathing. But I’m very grateful [to him]. That was the beginning of me being able to work my way out of it, and feel worthy. Something about him saying that it was ‘violent’. And I was such a young feminist – I read the 70s feminists, and all the newer feminists that were coming up in the 90s. I was aware of what I was participating in, but I just couldn’t stop it.” It wasn’t even as if the thinner she got, the more successful she became. She couldn’t win. “Even me at my sickest and thinnest, I looked pretty normal. I’m just built a particular way and that was exhausting, where it doesn’t matter how hard I exercise or how little I eat … I really had to learn to start being OK with how I was made.” It also made her angry. “To have been so unkind to my own body for so long, I was furious about how Hollywood was working.” It just didn’t reflect what she saw and felt in real life – the idea that only thin women could be attractive or lovable patently wasn’t true. “They’re telling women that this is how you have to be, and it’s just not reality. There’s just so much about it that infuriated me. I felt a responsibility to not perpetuate it and so even when there was nothing else on the table, and I had no other options, I just wouldn’t play that part.” There is more diversity now – you could easily argue not enough – but in an interview with Rolling Stone last month, Lynskey said someone on the Yellowjackets production had made a comment about her size, which prompted her co-stars to step in to support her. “Overwhelmingly on Yellowjackets, I felt supported,” she says. At the end of the shoot, Lynskey wrote to an executive to thank them for not making her feel as if she had to lose weight. The executive was confused. “She was like: ‘It never crossed my mind. Everyone thought you looked real and sexy.’ How funny that I feel the need to thank someone. It’s just so ingrained.” Some of the public response though, she says, “has been a bit interesting”. People online have commented on how she looks (Lynskey took to Twitter a few weeks ago to complain that it was “the story of my life since Yellowjackets premiered”). “It’s trying to tune out that stuff and just listen to the women who say: thank you for just being on screen and not pinching your tummy, or being like: ‘I wish I was thinner.’” It’s still rare enough to see a woman in her mid-40s having such a rampant sex life on screen, as Shauna does, that it feels refreshing. Lynskey smiles. “I started to get to a point reading the script where I was like: ‘Oh my God, I’m having sex again!’ Then I was like: ‘How great that I’m the one who’s having all the sex!’ Because it happens. It’s just so funny to me, this narrative that you …” She smiles and says she loves the Amy Schumer sketch about actresses marking their “last fuckable day”, usually somewhere in their 40s. Like so much else popular culture has tried to tell us about women, she says, a hint of rage simmering beneath her preternaturally calm manner, “it’s not a real thing”.The list of the worst disasters that have befallen Great Britain is topped by the Black Death of 1347-50 when about 3.5 million died. The current Covid pandemic is placed sixth, behind the 1557 influenza outbreak, which claimed 200,000 lives. The highest placed weather-related death toll is the great storm of 1703 when 8,000 were killed. Hurricane-force winds sank dozens of ships in the Channel and North Sea including a number of Royal Navy warships. Some vessels that did survive were driven hundreds of miles north and west before the sailors could regain control of their vessels. There was loss of life on land too. People as well as thousands of farm animals drowned in extensive flooding in the West Country, and a large number of people were killed by falling trees, flying debris and chimney stacks falling through roofs. It is hard to compare the ferocity of that storm with Eunice last week although both battered the southern half of the country worst of all. There was one crucial difference. In 1703 the wooden sailing ships were caught unawares at sea and unable to reach safety, and the Somerset Levels flooded without prior warning. Last week many lives were protected by accurate weather forecasting and early warnings.Western leaders have responded with fury to Russia’s “barbaric” military attacks on Ukrainian cities and vowed to hold the Kremlin to account for the invasion with a barrage of crippling sanctions. Shortly after reports broke of explosions near Kyiv, the US president, Joe Biden, accused his Russian counterpart, Vladimir Putin, of choosing a “premeditated war that will bring a catastrophic loss of life and human suffering”. “The prayers of the world are with the people of Ukraine tonight as they suffer an unprovoked and unjustified attack by Russian military forces,” he said. “Russia alone is responsible for the death and destruction this attack will bring, and the United States and its allies and partners will respond in a united and decisive way,” Biden said. “The world will hold Russia accountable.” Biden said he had spoken to the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, on the phone shortly after the attacks began, and said he had told him he and allied partners would be “imposing severe sanctions on Russia” once the G7 leaders had met on Thursday. “We will continue to provide support and assistance to Ukraine and the Ukrainian people.” A joint statement issued by the 27 heads of state and government of the EU warned Russia that they would later on Thursday agree on “further restrictive measures that will impose massive and severe consequences on Russia for its action, in close coordination with our transatlantic partners.” The UK prime minister, Boris Johnson, told the House of Commons that the UK and its allies would respond with “a massive package of sanctions” that will “hobble the Russian economy”. He said: “Ukraine is a country that for decades has enjoyed freedom and democracy and the right to choose its own destiny. We and the world cannot allow that freedom just to be snuffed out. We cannot and will not just look away.” A Downing Street spokesperson said the prime minister had told Ukraine’s president he hoped his forces could resist the onslaught. France’s president, Emmanuel Macron, who had made a last ditch effort to broker peace through a summit between Putin and Biden, was in contact with Zelenskiy on his mobile phone early on Thursday. He said: “France strongly condemns Russia’s decision to wage war on Ukraine. Russia must end its military operations immediately. “France stands in solidarity with Ukraine. It stands with the Ukrainians and works with its partners and allies to end the war.” In a statement, Germany’s chancellor, Olaf Scholz, said: “Germany condemns in the strongest possible terms this unscrupulous act by President Putin. Our solidarity goes out to Ukraine and its people.” The world “will not forget this day of shame”, Germany’s foreign minister, Annalena Baerbock, said. Mario Draghi, Italy’s prime minister, who has until now been cautious over imposing the most hard-hitting sanctions on Russia, suggested the EU would be unified in an immediate and tough response. He said: “The Italian government condemns Russia’s attack on Ukraine. It is unjustified and unjustifiable. “Italy is close to the Ukrainian people and institutions in this dramatic moment. We are working with European and Nato allies to respond immediately, with unity and determination.” Japan’s prime minister, Fumio Kishida, said his government strongly condemned Russia’s one-sided aggression. A virtual meeting of the G7, the world’s seven biggest economies, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the UK and the US, is scheduled for later on Thursday. Ursula von der Leyen and Charles Michel, the presidents of the European Commission and European Council, issued a joint statement in which they promised financial and humanitarian assistance for Kyiv and vowed to “impose massive and severe consequences on Russia for its action”. Von der Leyen said Putin was responsible “for bringing war back to Europe”, describing the Russian leader’s behaviour as “barbaric”, as she outlined the scale and scope of the punitive measures planned. She said: “We will hold President Putin accountable for that. With this package, we will target strategic sectors of the Russian economy by blocking their access to key technologies and markets. “We will weaken Russia’s economic base and its capacity to modernise. In addition, we will freeze Russian assets in the EU and stop the access of Russian banks to the European financial market.” EU leaders will meet in Brussels on Thursday evening to discuss the long-prepared “full monty” package of sanctions against Russia, which have been designed to cripple the country’s economy. They range from cutting Russia out of the Swift payment system that lubricates world trade, to imposing export controls on critical goods such as high-tech components that the country cannot replace in the fields of artificial intelligence and weaponry, quantum computers, lasers and space. The foreign ministers for Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania said in a joint statement that the agreed measures had to include “disengaging Russia from Swift”. They said: “We would need to urgently provide Ukrainian people with weapons, ammunition and any other kind of military support to defend itself.” Nato secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, announced that an alliance summit will be held on Friday, with Finland and Sweden in attendance as non-members. He said: “It will be a new reality, a new Europe after the invasion we saw today” Following an emergency meeting of the North Atlantic council, the alliance’s political decision making body, new guidance had also been issued to to its military commanders to allow them to more quickly move military forces around Europe, he said. He said: “We have already increased and we are increasing the presence of Nato troops in the eastern part of the alliance. “We do not have Nato troops in Ukraine and we do not have plans to send Nato troops to Ukraine.” Stoltenberg, speaking in Brussels, said that Russia was waging war with air and missile attacks, ground forces and special forces from multiple directions, targeting the military infrastructure and major urban centres. He said: “This is a brutal act of war. Our thoughts are with the brave people of Ukraine. “Sadly, what we have warned against for months has come to pass. Despite all calls on Russia to change course and tireless efforts to seek a diplomatic solution. “Peace in our continent has been shattered. We now have war in Europe, on a scale and of a type we thought belong to history. “This is a grave moment for the security of Europe.” Spain’s prime minister, Pedro Sánchez, tweeted: “The government of Spain condemns Russia’s aggression against Ukraine and expresses its solidarity with the Ukrainian government and its people. I remain in close contact with our partners and allies in the European Union and Nato to coordinate our response.” The United Nations secretary general António Guterres, who had urged Putin just before the assault began to stop his troops from attacking, tweeted an updated plea. “Under the present circumstances, I must change my appeal: President Putin, in the name of humanity, bring your troops back to Russia,” he said. “This conflict must stop now.”Top story: Kremlin invokes ‘demilitarisation’ as excuse Hello – Warren Murray introducing the news on a day we feared would come. Russian forces have attacked Ukraine on the orders of Vladimir Putin, who announced what he called a “special military operation” at dawn. Explosions and airstrikes have been heard this morning near major Ukrainian cities, including the capital, Kyiv, and air raid sirens went off. Our correspondent Luke Harding reported earlier: “At least seven ‘powerful’ airstrikes on Vasilkovsky airport outside Kyiv, where Ukraine’s military fighter bombers are kept, Kyiv command says.” The Ukraine foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, confirmed what he called the “full-scale invasion of Ukraine. Peaceful Ukrainian cities are under strikes.” In a bid to justify the invasion, Putin branded Ukraine an “anti-Russia … created on our historic lands” and claimed the campaign was for the “demilitarisation and denazification” of Russia’s neighbour – echoing a false theme of Kremlin propaganda that the Kyiv government is controlled by the far right. Joe Biden said: “The prayers of the entire world are with the people of Ukraine tonight as they suffer an unprovoked and unjustified attack by Russian military forces. President Putin has chosen a premeditated war that will bring a catastrophic loss of life and human suffering.” Boris Johnson said: “I am appalled by the horrific events in Ukraine and I have spoken to President Zelenskiy to discuss next steps. President Putin has chosen a path of bloodshed and destruction by launching this unprovoked attack on Ukraine. The UK and our allies will respond decisively.” Here’s what we know so far about the Russian invasion. Make sure you keep up with the rapid developments in Ukraine at our live blog. As Putin was speaking and the first detonations were reported, the UN security council was holding an emergency session, chaired by Russia itself, which holds the rotating presidency, and at which the Russian and Ukrainian representatives traded barbs. Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, earlier put out an address appealing directly to the Russian people to “listen to the voice of reason”. Russia’s leadership, he said, was “telling you that this flame will liberate the people of Ukraine, but the Ukrainian people are free”. He warned: “If someone attempts to take away our land, our freedom, our lives, the lives of our children, we will defend ourselves. By attacking, you will see our faces, not our backs, but our faces.” With international condemnation growing, Russia’s defence minister, Sergei Shoigu, the commanders-in-chief of the Russian air force and Black Sea fleet, leading state “propagandists” and 351 Duma deputies are expected to be identified in EU sanctions that go further than the US, and further still than Boris Johnson’s Russia sanctions. Larry Elliott thinks that targeting Putin’s regime economically has mixed prospects: “Putin has been actively seeking to insulate Russia from the west ever since the invasion of the Crimea in 2014 … [and] Russia has used the money from its oil and gas exports to build up substantial financial defences. Moscow is sitting on foreign currency reserves of about $500bn (£369bn) and, by international standards, has extremely low levels of national debt.” The latter has a bearing on sanctions that stop Russia issuing or trading its sovereign debt in London and New York: the amount of bonds Russia needs to sell is relatively small. Europe’s dependence on gas from Russia looms large in all of this, of course. According to calculations by the Institute of Energy Economics at the University of Cologne shared with the Guardian, current levels of gas held in European reserves “could compensate for a loss of Russian deliveries” over the next six weeks unless temperatures were to drop dramatically in February or March. The US and other countries have said they are ready to step in with supplies of gas if Russia cuts Europe off. * * * Another 10 years of debt – Students in England will have to continue paying back university loans over 40 years instead of 30. The number of graduates repaying in full is expected to double from under a quarter to more than half. They will face repayments sooner as the government cuts the wage threshold from £27,295 to £25,000 for new borrowers from September 2023. Martin Lewis, the founder of MoneySavingExpert.com, said: “It’s effectively a lifelong graduate tax for most.” Larissa Kennedy, president of the UK National Union of Students, said ministers were “saddling young people with unimaginable debt for the next 40 years of their lives”. In a concession, interest rates on student loans will be slashed for new borrowers and set no higher than the rate of inflation from next year – but Labour’s shadow education secretary accused the government of delivering a stealth tax that hits those on low incomes hardest. The government is also launching consultations on introducing minimum eligibility requirements to access student loans; and a lifelong loan entitlement for the equivalent of four years of post-18 education. * * * Meat and cancer – Vegetarians have a 14% lower chance of developing cancer than meat eaters, according to a large study by Oxford researchers. Compared with people who eat meat more than five times a week, those who consumed small amounts had a 2% lower risk of cancer. The authors made clear that their findings did not conclusively prove regular meat-eating increased the risk of cancer. Smoking and body fat could also help explain the differences found, they said. Low meat eaters in the study had a 9% lower risk of developing bowel cancer than regular meat eaters. Vegetarian women were 18% less likely than those who ate meat regularly to develop postmenopausal breast cancer, though that may be due to their lower body mass index. Vegetarian men had a 31% lower risk of prostate cancer, while among males who still ate fish it was 20% lower. * * * Starmer v Sunak – Keir Starmer will today pledge to “reimagine the role of government” as a partner to the private sector and take advantage of the opportunities of Brexit. Speaking in Huddersfield, the Labour leader will promise to value private companies as a partner to the state, and lay into Rishi Sunak and the Conservatives for “increasing taxes more than any other chancellor in half a century”. Labour’s strategy is for Starmer to drill issues such as tax and the cost of living to inflame Tory divisions and put Sunak in the spotlight given his ambitions to succeed Johnson as leader. Sunak will be delivering the annual Mais lecture at Bayes business school, in which he will say he wants to cut taxes “sustainably” and downgrade the role of the state as an engine of growth – aiming to quell concern among Tory backbenchers about the tax burden rising to its highest level in 70 years. * * * Ikea but it’s Lidl – Today, Ikea’s £170m experiment on the former Kings Mall in Hammersmith will be tested with the opening of Livat, its first city centre shopping mall globally and the first to be refurbished rather than built from scratch. Ikea has 47 other shopping centres worldwide, but Livat is just over a third of the size of its typical site, and its first in the UK. It houses Ikea’s only high street store in the UK, a quarter the size of a typical store, as well as a Lidl, a Library of Things, and Sook, a rent-by-the hour retail or events space. Today in Focus podcast: Covid gets free rein Today marks the first day in nearly two years that no laws will be in place in England to deal with the spread of Covid-19. But is the government still following the science? Lunchtime read: One person’s influence is someone else’s profit More and more young people are enticed by the glittering promises of a career as an influencer – but it’s usually someone else getting rich. Sport Ralf Rangnick admitted Manchester United’s plan was in the “dustbin” after Atlético Madrid scored on seven minutes before Anthony Elanga’s second half equaliser snatched a draw for the interim manager’s team in the Champions League last-16 first leg. Antonio Conte has questioned whether he is the right manager to turn Tottenham’s fortunes around after Burnley inflicted their fourth defeat in five games. England manager Sarina Wiegman said her side have taken “lots of information” from their 3-1 victory against Germany and inaugural Arnold Clark Cup win but will not get carried away before the European Championship in the summer. In the Premier League, Liverpool hammered Leeds 6-0 at Anfield, with two goals each for Mohamed Salah and Sadio Mané and one apiece for Joël Matip and Virgil van Dijk. England coach Eddie Jones is expected to deploy Manu Tuilagi at centre for the Six Nations encounter with Wales, who have dropped Louis Rees-Zammit. After four Olympic Games, seven gold and two silver medals, Sir Jason Kenny, Britain’s most decorated Olympian, has announced his retirement. Joe Root has declined to divulge his role in the decision to drop Jimmy Anderson and Stuart Broad for the West Indies tour but said it does not shut the door on their record-breaking careers. And Lewis Hamilton has accused Formula One stewards of potential bias towards specific drivers and teams as old wounds were reopened on the first day of pre-season testing in Barcelona on Wednesday. Business Vladimir Putin’s decision to invade Ukraine has wreaked havoc on already-wobbly financial markets this morning with shares falling precipitously in Asia Pacific overnight. Hong Kong was the worst hit, down more than 3%, and the FTSE100 is set to shed around 2.5% at the opening bell. Brent crude soared past $100 a barrel in a sign of increasing nerves about the impact on supplies, the Russian rouble hit a record low and the Moscow stock exchange suspended trading on all markets. The US dollar strengthened on all the uncertainty and left the pound at $1.349 and €1.201. The papers The print editions were slightly overtaken by events today. The Guardian’s splash is “State of emergency in Ukraine as US warns Putin ready to invade”. “Welcome to hell” – the Mirror says that is the “warning from Ukraine” to Russian soldiers if they invade. But the Express says Putin is “Hell-bent” and has “gone full tonto” – the latter having been said by the UK defence secretary, Ben Wallace, and the former by Liz Truss, the foreign secretary. Wallace clearly had the better line: “Putin’s gone ‘full tonto’” is the Metro’s page one headline. The Financial Times says “Brussels hits Putin’s inner circle as US hardens invasion warning”. The i has a front-page Ukraine picture overlaid with “State of emergency declared as nation feels ‘knot of fear’”. Its splash though is “Students to face ‘lifelong graduate tax’”, the same story that leads the Times: “Students set to shoulder £100k bill for degrees”. “Sunak vows to slash tax burden” says the Telegraph, while at this moment the Mail is most worried about Britain’s spies being told, as it puts in its own words, to “go woke” by an internal guide to diversity and inclusion. The Sun says mock royal jewels from TV show The Crown have been stolen. Sign up The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekendChina’s new ambassador to Australia has offered an olive branch in the intense diplomatic dispute between the two countries, saying they should “meet each other halfway” and “look into the future”. Xiao Qian, who arrived in Canberra in January after years of increasing tensions, said China attached “great importance” to the relationship and was willing to “actively develop friendship and cooperation with Australia”. The intervention comes just days after the prime minister, Scott Morrison, accused China of a dangerous “act of intimidation” over a Chinese warship’s shining of a laser at a RAAF surveillance plane north of Australia last week. China’s national defence ministry, in turn, accused the Australian defence force of “spiteful and provocative actions”. Xiao said in a speech on Thursday that the healthy and stable development of China-Australia relations served the fundamental interests and “common aspirations” of people in both countries. Given this year marked the 50th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic ties, he said, there was an opportunity to ease tensions. “China is willing to work with Australia to meet each other halfway,” said Xiao, who previously was China’s ambassador to Indonesia. He said the two governments should “jointly make efforts” to push the relationship back on “the right track”. They should “review the past” and also “look into the future”. Xiao did not specify any tangible actions Beijing may take to get the relationship back on track – but clearly signalled he wants to talk. Later, he told SBS World News and the ABC: “The diplomatic channel is open.” Australian ministers have complained since early 2020 they have been unable to secure phone calls or meetings with their direct counterparts – although contacts have continued to occur at lower diplomatic levels. The Australian government accuses Beijing of engaging in “economic coercion” by hitting a range of Australian export sectors with tariffs, bans or other sanctions in 2020 – some of which are being challenged at the World Trade Organization. Both major political parties in Australia view the differences in the relationship with China as largely structural and therefore not something that can be fixed by adopting a different tone. China is particularly sensitive to criticism about human rights and the crackdown on dissent in Hong Kong and Australia’s longstanding position against using force or the threat of force to bring Taiwan under Beijing’s control. In recent months, Beijing has ramped up its criticism of new or renewed groupings such as the Quad and Aukus. Still, Xiao’s comments signalled a more open approach to dialogue, and contrast with a warning from his predecessor Cheng Jingye in April last year that Beijing would respond “in kind” if Australia followed other countries in imposing sanctions against its officials over human rights abuses in Xinjiang. On Wednesday, the former Australian foreign minister Julie Bishop added her voice to calls for Australia’s foreign policy and national security to “always be, as far as possible, bipartisan”. Bishop’s comments to the ABC’s 7.30 program follow growing attempts by the Morrison government to argue a point of difference with Labor over China in the lead-up to the May election. Politicisation of national security also triggered carefully worded pushback from the Asio chief, Mike Burgess. Xiao was speaking at an event at the Chinese embassy in Canberra to present the family of the late New South Wales police force officer Kelly Foster with a medal honouring her bravery. Foster died trying to save Chinese student Jennifer Qi in a whirlpool in the Blue Mountains in January last year. Qi also lost her life. Xiao told the audience – which included senior Australian federal police and NSW police force representatives – that Foster had displayed “the warmth of great love and humanity that transcend race, culture and nationality”. “China and Australia are far away from each other geographically, by thousands of miles, yet great love knows no national boundaries nor distance,” the ambassador said. He said Foster’s “heroic act” had been widely reported in China, where millions of people “could feel the warmth, kindness and friendship of the Australian people”. The NSW police commissioner, Karen Webb, said the force felt the loss deeply. “It is a testament to her courage that she went immediately to Jennifer’s aid without a second’s thought for her own safety,” Webb said. Foster was posthumously awarded the Great Wall Commemorative Medal of China’s Ministry of Public Security. The national anthems of both China and Australia were played at the embassy event.The revelation that more than 1,000 Victoria police officers have been working without proper authority for up to eight years is part of a “pattern” that raises serious concerns around police accountability, according to legal experts. The state’s chief commissioner, Shane Patton, on Thursday revealed between July 2014 and August 2021 1,076 police officers, 157 protective service officers and 29 police custody officers had been incorrectly sworn following the introduction of the Victoria Police Act. “The reality is that number of police officers and PSOs have been performing that role without having the actual powers validly to do so over that period of time,” he said. “They have of course, been working with other police officers during that period of time who had those extra powers that police are granted and they also have those standing powers as any citizen has to conduct arrests.” In the past, deputy commissioners were able to appoint acting assistant commissioners, who went on to swear in graduating police officers. But under changes made by the then-Coalition government to the Victoria Police Act 2013, which came into effect in mid-2014, acting assistant commissioners needed to be appointed by the chief commissioner or by a deputy commissioner to whom the chief commissioner had delegated authority. “So what that means is that on a number of occasions since 2014 acting assistant commissioners on occasions have sworn in police officers and protective services officers without having the valid powers to do so,” Patton said. He said about 660 officers would be sworn in on Thursday, with the remainder to follow in the coming days. Patton said if anyone was seeking to contest matters, police would be looking to adjourn them. “We will obviously continue to deal with that on a case-by-case basis. I can’t speak for every case, I will say that I am very confident once we get retrospective legislation it will continue not to be an issue at all,” he said. It is also his expectation there will be no ongoing ramifications for police officers involved. “They’ve been acting in good faith, they’ve been performing their duties in the belief that they had the requisite powers and as a result of that we will continue to indemnify those officers,” he said. The Liberty Victoria president, Michael Stanton, said the issue would exacerbate court delays due to Covid-19. “There’s been people waiting for years to get their cases heard, and it affects other people as well, complainants and other witnesses, everyone’s in limbo,” he said. Stanton said he was concerned there had been a “pattern” of similar issues within Victoria police. In 2011, the Baillieu government passed retrospective laws to salvage more than 6000 prosecutions after police admitted they had failed to swear or affirm affidavits correctly. “It’s a real concern given the importance and extent of police powers,” Stanton said. Lawyer Jeremy King who leads the police misconduct team at Robinson Gill, agreed. “Victoria Police have blamed this on an administrative error but this sort of thing just keeps happening,” King said. “There was the Lawyer X scandal, we learnt recently that police were ‘accidentally’ disclosing privileged conversations between lawyers and their clients, they were incorrectly swearing affidavits, PSOs didn’t have powers to use pepper spray. “It’s starting to look a little reckless.” He said it was another example of why there needs to be a stronger police oversight system. “People have been arrested, charged, they’ve gone through the criminal system and some have been put in jail by police officers who weren’t authorised. This should never have happened,” King said. Patton said the authority of an acting assistant commissioner to make directions was first raised at a court hearing into a major drug investigation in February 2021. “At that stage, we believed that the questions about that authority and the ability to do that, the validity of those powers, we believed was confined to that specific issue,” Patton said. “We then sought further legal advice and requested an audit of all delegations.” The Victorian police minister, Lisa Neville, said she was made aware of the issue on Tuesday. Neville is set to introduce legislation to state parliament next sitting week to ensure all decisions that have been made by the officers had validity going forward. “It’s really important that we act quickly,” Neville said, noting the opposition had been briefed on the issue. “I’m very confident that they will also want to provide comfort to these police officers and ensure criminals don’t get away with crimes because of an administrative problem that we’ve had over the last eight years.” Neville said it was her hope the legislation passed both houses of parliament during the sitting week to “minimise the impact that this will have on any cases”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The state’s corruption watchdog, the Independent Broad-based Anti-corruption Commission, and the Office of Public Prosecution have been notified. The opposition spokesperson for police, Brad Battin, said the Coalition would support the government’s legislation, so long as it only deals with fixing the issue at hand. In a statement, the Police Association Victoria said it was aware of the “unintended and highly technical administrative error”. “We understand that Victoria police will move decisively and quickly to remedy this situation so that our members can get back to doing what they do best, looking after the community,” they said. “We will support the members impacted in any way we can and ensure that their legal and industrial rights are protected, as this issue is rectified.”Gun safety advocates have condemned Tennessee legislation which would designate some gun owners as police, allowing civilians to carry firearms in locations usually reserved for law enforcement. The proposed law, introduced in the Tennessee house and senate this month, “expands the definition of ‘law enforcement officer’” to include civilians who hold an enhanced handgun-carry permit – earned by taking an eight-hour handgun safety course and paying a $100 fee. It comes as a separate bill which would allow 18-year-olds to apply for concealed-carry licenses was approved by a Tennessee house subcommittee on Tuesday. Shannon Watts, founder of the gun safety group Moms Demand Action, told the Guardian: “Encouraging people to arm themselves and play police puts everyone at risk while making the jobs of actual law enforcement much more difficult. “The process of obtaining a handgun permit doesn’t come anywhere close to the extensive training that real officers go through, and it’s ridiculous to equate the two. Extremist and dangerous bills like these are part of the gun lobby’s blatant attempt to codify and legalize armed vigilantism.” She added: “Tennessee has the 14th highest rate of gun violence in the country, and lawmakers should be focused on passing policies that will actually make communities safer, not reckless bills like these.” The proposed bill was introduced in the state senate by Joey Hensley, a Republican, who told ABC News that the aim of the bill was to allow people with an enhanced handgun carry permit to carry their guns into locations where off-duty law enforcement are allowed to enter, including a store or restaurant that prohibits firearms. “This is trying to open it up so that people who go to the extreme to get this extra permit can have the right to defend themselves in more places,” Hensley said. Hensley’s plan has not just alarmed those who advocate for better gun safety. The Tennessee State Lodge for the Fraternal Order of Police, the state’s largest police union, said that it is “adamantly opposed to this bill in its current form.” Scottie DeLashmit, the president of Tennessee State Lodge for the Fraternal Order of Police, told ABC that officers “spend countless hours” honing their skills, and must qualify annually with the same weapons. DeLashmit added that officers also spend hours training in “driving, criminal law, defensive tactics, etc.” “These vigorous standards are in place to ensure officers are familiar with their weapons,” DeLashmit said in the statement. “The enhanced handgun carry permit training is far less demanding than anything required from a cadet attending a basic law enforcement academy.” The bill was introduced in the Tennessee House by Chris Hurt, who did not respond to a request for comment. Hensley, who was a member of the House for ten years before he was elected to the state senate in 2013, has a history of supporting extreme legislation, including anti-LGBTQ laws. The Tennessee firearm association donated to his reelection campaign in 2020.I saw a young woman recently lugging empty crates into the back of her supermarket delivery van. It was parked some distance from the entrance of the block where I live. I asked her what the job was like. She said she had not been doing it long and it wasn’t too bad apart from all the lifting, with which she was struggling. I’ve always thought the job must be a lot easier outside towns and cities, where parking tends to be tricky. “That’s true,” she said. “But the biggest problem I have, whatever route I’m on, is finding somewhere to go to the toilet. By the time I’ve found a toilet to use, I’ve got behind on my drops and I get into trouble.” Trying to be helpful, I asked if she had thought about using a Shewee, which I had heard come in useful for some women at festivals and whatnot. She seemed quite interested and asked me exactly how they worked. I explained that the operational details of such devices were obviously outside my lived experience. She laughed and went on her way. I rarely get supermarket deliveries, but, like most of us, have taken items from countless delivery people. Invariably, they seem stressed out, behind schedule and, I now realise, are quite possibly dying for a wee. How sad, when every delivery they make is to a property with at least one toilet. Yesterday, something came for me mid-afternoon. I opened the door to allow a young chap to hand it over. As he turned to go, I said: “Excuse me, would you, erm, like to use my, er …” I hesitated, suddenly aware how absurd this was going to sound. He looked wary. “Toilet?” I blurted out. Now he looked alarmed. “No, you’re OK,” he said, hurrying away. I shut the door, feeling idiotic. I still think I’m on to something here, but I’m not sure how to take the idea any further without frightening the life out of any more delivery workers. • Adrian Chiles is a broadcaster, writer and Guardian columnistDuring a brief window between named storms this month, 30 or so people gather in a darkened car park on a hillside east of Snowdonia. Red lights are flashing hither and yon. “Has everyone got warm hats and decent shoes?” asks Dani Robertson, dark skies officer at the North Wales Dark Skies Partnership, with the tone of a concerned mum. “We’ve got some camping mats if you need them” The group mumbles in the affirmative, before setting off for a 15-minute walk up Moel Famau in the Clwydian Range Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty. We’re here for an introductory astronomy session, one of a series of events organised for the first Welsh Dark Skies Week at several locations across the country – other options include a astro-archaeology lectures and astral photography courses. The red lights on torches and headlamps provided will allow night vision to develop – not just for the rocky path ahead, but hopefully for optimal stargazing, too. The idea is to learn a little about the cosmos and the damage done by light pollution, and hopefully to encourage participants to contribute less unnecessary light in the evenings. The group pushes on into the chilly February night: heather fringes the footpath, and young ash trees are silhouetted ominously on the hillside to the left. Above, there is a more obvious problem: cloud cover. “If you want to guarantee clouds, all you have to do is arrange an astronomy event,” says astronomer and college lecturer Rob Jones. “But darkness is about more than just stars,” he adds quickly. Low clouds amplify the light pollution on the fringes of this deeply dark place. The small town of Ruthin appears as obnoxiously bright as Las Vegas Boulevard compared with the inky valleys around it. Chester lies over the horizon to the east, but glows as though aflame, its light bouncing off the clouds above. Robertson tells the group about the manifold problems of too much light – especially the ultra-bright LEDs that have become commonplace over the past decade. She begins to explain how this can affect the health of people and animals but doesn’t get too far before the clouds miraculously begin to melt, then part. With our eyes already helpfully dilated like Ibizan clubbers, the stars – little and otherwise – twinkle-twinkle above. Jones begins to talk us through individual stars, using a green laser pen that he appears to shoot across the galaxy. He introduces “Rigel the blue supergiant”, the brightest star in the constellation Orion. The green lance then moves north-west to point out Betelgeuse, an ancient star on its way to supernova and also part of Orion. Jones begins to stretch our level of comprehension by explaining that the star may already be dead – it’s so distant from Earth (642.5 light years) that it could have exploded before Columbus sailed to the New World in 1492, and the light from that violent event still wouldn’t have reached us yet. A six-year-old boy – who wisely asked his parents to bring a hot-water bottle up the hill with him – has his mind gently blown by this knowledge, information he seems to accept more readily than the news that, no, that flashing light crossing the sky is not a UFO but an aircraft. “I think it went well,” says Robertson when we meet the following afternoon, in blindingly bright weather. “Between the storms and the pandemic, I wasn’t sure how things were going to go, but the event last night was sold out and all across the country it has been really popular. It seems to have got people’s attention.” Creating stargazers – or astral photographers, or nocturnal animal spotters – is a happy byproduct of the week, but the main aim is to improve appreciation and desire for dark skies. In this, Wales is already blessed – with two official international dark dky reserves in the Brecon Beacons and Snowdonia. But Robertson and her team are in the process of applying to the International Dark Sky Association to have more regions similarly classified (including Clwydian Range and Dee Valley AONB). The Welsh Dark Skies Week is in part designed to raise awareness of this campaign, with events in national parks and AONBs all over the country. Outside the Dark Skies Week, Robertson and colleagues run events year round: in winter they focus on stargazing, walks, telescope and astrophotography workshops and talks using a pop-up planetarium. In summer the focus is more on wildlife and biodiversity, with owl walks, bat box making, night swimming, and glow worm and nightjar walks. Go Stargazing’s Dark Sky Sites is, she adds, a good guide to places that are accessible at night and safe for the public to stargaze without having to trek miles. But further designations and awareness will bring additional benefits – part of the process to become a Dark Sky Reserve or Park is having the local authority adopt planning rules that enforce a high standard of lighting to minimise light pollution. “We want those designations because they do bring benefits, including tourism, but for us it’s more about resident health, whether that’s people or animals,” says Robertson. “It’s about using it with consideration. We’re not trying to take people’s lights away – it’s more about getting them to use the right lights in the right places.” She is quick to acknowledge that the widespread shift to LED lighting massively reduced the carbon footprint of conventional bulbs, while simultaneously reducing the energy bills of both households and local authorities. “Unfortunately, they didn’t have the understanding of the colour temperatures at the time – they tried to replicate daylight, so a really harsh light. That’s detrimental to human and animal health. It’s like crossing the road from carbon emissions only to be hit by the bus of biodiversity collapse.” As human settlements have grown larger and brighter, so certain species have found it harder to orient themselves. This affectsmigratory birds and, more problematically, insects, vital pollinators and the basis of many food chains. Unlike other forms of pollution, which would take years to clean out of the environment, light is one of the easiest to fix. “You just have to switch off and that’s it,” she says. “All done.” Welsh Dark Skies Week runs until 27 February and will return next year. For information on Dark sky adventures in Wales visit Discovery in the Dark WalesWe recently sold our semi-detached house and moved to a second-floor flat in a seven-storey block. We had both contents and buildings insurance for the house with Axa. As we no longer need buildings cover we tried to move our contents cover with us, but were told Axa wouldn’t insure properties with a flat roof. That response has been almost universal. The cover we eventually found is more expensive than the combined contents and buildings insurance previously. Some neighbours in our block don’t have contents cover. This must be a common problem. How do people negotiate it? TS, Eastbourne, East Sussex Given how many apartment blocks have flat roofs, this is a startling experience. Insurers are generally wary of houses with roofs with a pitch of less than 10% because of the increased risk of storm damage and intruder access, and if more than a quarter of the roof area is flat, you’re looking at specialist, pricier policies. But you are not in a house. I assumed that Axa would relent when I pointed out there are five storeys between you and the problematic roof, but no. “Axa UK, along with many other insurers, does not provide home insurance when more than 50% of a property’s roof is flat,” it says. “This is because there is a higher risk of weather damage to the building and contents.” You say you searched out quotes on price comparison sites. These tend to use a standard template for applications which may not differentiate between a flat and a house when it comes to the roof type. This means you’re likely to be refused cover, or charged significantly more. Brokers are better placed to help find appropriate policies. I contacted the UK’s largest, Swinton, and was assured that it’s straightforward to insure contents in flat-roofed blocks. The company has since found you cover at half the cost of your previous quote. Cotswold Outdoor puts its best foot forward I hope you can help recognise outstanding customer service. I bought a pair of walking boots from Cotswold Outdoor in July 2019. Recently, they started leaking between the sole and the leather uppers. They were well out of guarantee, but I considered that, at a cost of more than £200, they should last longer. Customer service sent the boots to the German manufacturer who agreed there was a fault. Cotswold offered me a full refund via a voucher. As I no longer live near a store, I asked if it could refund me the cash and it agreed. From my first email, to the money landing in my bank account, the whole thing took less than four weeks, and I was emailed regularly about progress. Truly fantastic. MS, London Email your.problems@observer.co.uk. Include an address and phone number. Submission and publication are subject to our terms and conditionsThe prospects for an expansion of oil and gas drilling in the North Sea have cleared a major hurdle, as the Committee on Climate Change said “stringent tests” must be applied to any new exploration licences but stopped short of saying they could not be issued. New drilling would not reduce energy bills for UK consumers, the committee found, and its chair, former Conservative environment secretary Lord Deben, said he would “favour” a moratorium on North Sea exploration. He said refusing new licences would “send a clear signal to investors and consumers that the UK is committed” to its climate goals, and help to “strengthen climate ambition internationally”. But the committee, which is the statutory adviser to the government on the net zero goal, concluded that as it could not establish clearly whether new exploration would significantly increase greenhouse gas emissions globally, and as considering the UK’s energy security went beyond its remit, any decision on new licences must be taken by ministers. “Weighing these advantages is an inherently political decision, which goes beyond climate policy and sits rightly with government, not with my committee,” wrote Deben, in a letter to business secretary Kwasi Kwarteng published on Thursday. He also made clear that producing more North Sea oil and gas would do little or nothing to help UK consumers cope with high energy prices. “Any increases in UK extraction of oil and gas would have, at most, a marginal effect on the prices faced by UK consumers in future,” he wrote. Despite these warnings, the committee’s conclusion is likely to boost controversial government plans to license new oil and gasfields in the North Sea. Green campaigners said any exploration for new oilfields, to rejuvenate the North Sea’s declining production, would have disastrous impacts on the climate. Tessa Khan, director of Uplift, which campaigns for an end to fossil fuel extraction, said: “The committee’s opposition to continued North Sea exploration is a clear acknowledgment that there is a limit to what we can safely burn. There’s no justification for these developments, which will see the oil in them exported. They won’t lower bills or contribute to UK energy security. All they’ll do is increase industry profits.” The UK hosted the Cop26 UN climate summit last November, and will continue to direct international climate efforts this year as president of the UN negotiations. Deben made it clear that allowing new oil and gas extraction would have a “material” impact on the UK’s ability to encourage other countries to improve their climate targets. “Continuing to allow extraction may weaken UK diplomacy to encourage other countries to adapt ambitious climate policies. It is also important on a domestic state for their to be a perception that government policy is fully aligned with net zero, rather than being undermined by questions such as seen over the last year with the proposed coal mine in Cumbria and the Cambo oilfield,” he wrote. Caroline Lucas, the Green party MP, warned of the impact on the UK’s attempts to bolster the achievements of Cop26. “New North Sea oil and gas developments send out totally the wrong signals both to UK businesses and consumers and the wider world,” she said. “The UK Cop president, Alok Sharma, is being cut off at the knees in his diplomatic efforts to keep [the global heating limit of] 1.5C alive – the key objective of the Glasgow climate pact. These licences don’t make climate sense, they don’t make diplomatic sense and they don’t make financial sense, and no amount of so-called climate compatibility tests will change that.” However, the committee’s advice that climate tests should be applied to licences that have already been issued, such as that to the Cambo oilfield, was welcomed. Danny Gross, campaigner at Friends of the Earth, said: “It’s reassuring that the government’s plan to apply climate tests only to new licensing rounds is totally wrong in the committee’s view. This loophole would allow dozens of carbon-intensive projects that have already been licensed, but not yet approved, to escape these tests.” The government is consulting on a “climate checkpoint” that would require any new oil and gas licences to pass a series of tests on their environmental impact. Kwasi Kwarteng, the business secretary, is expected to review at least six applications for new drilling licences in the North Sea this year, after a similar number were approved last year. A spokesperson for the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy said: “There will continue to be ongoing demand for oil and gas over the coming decades as we transition to cleaner and cheaper forms of energy generated in this country. Turning off North Sea gas overnight would put energy security, British jobs and industries at risk and we would be more dependent on foreign imports. We welcome the committee’s acknowledgment that carbon budgets can still be met if new oil and gas fields are developed in the UK.” The committee also emphasised the role of insulation and renewable energy in cutting energy bills. Scrapped housebuilding regulations would have knocked about £40 off energy bills, and if the 2030 target for offshore wind had been brought forward sooner, consumers would be £100 a year better off. Rosie Rogers, head of oil and gas transition for Greenpeace UK, said: “Anyone who’s read this advice and thinks the North Sea’s future lies in oil and gas is utterly deluded, because it will take decades and won’t ease energy bills. What we need to tackle bills and climate change is home insulation, heat pumps, electric vehicles and renewable power.” She added: “The future of the North Sea is in renewables. Our economy, our energy security and our climate depends on it.”Heather Morgan is free, for now. The 31-year-old fraudster was offered bail on Valentine’s Day, releasing her from incarceration while her husband, Ilya “Dutch” Liechtenstein, remains in federal bondage. Morgan is at the centre of a psychedelic cryptocurrency saga, that began when the pair were arrested on suspicion of laundering $4.5bn worth of stolen bitcoin. That money was originally pilfered from a Hong Kong-based crypto exchange firm called Bitfinex, and it breaks the record for the most digital currency that’s ever been seized by a criminal sting operation. (The pair allegedly spent the money on NFTs, gold and a Walmart gift card.) It’s the first major crime saga of the Web3 era – Blockchain noir, ripe for a Safdie Brothers film – and each twist in the storyline is more implausible than the last. But who is this Bitcoin crime queen and what does she tell us about the future of organized crime and the stark new inequalities that it might create? The money that Morgan and Lichtenstein are accused of laundering was originally pilfered six years ago, and honestly it’s a minor miracle that the Department of Justice was capable of digging it up in the first place as crypto is notoriously difficult to recover. So far they have seized $3.6bn. So if you are already the sort of person who might be seduced by the grifter’s lifestyle, cryptocurrency is a natural hideout point. Everything about this case is more evidence of the worryingly psychotropic texture our monetary system has taken on in 2022 – a year when late-night hosts are dropping thousands of dollars on cartoon apes and YouTube prankster Logan Paul is making $20m per boxing match. It is hard to articulate how it feels to be alive in an age of massive wealth disparity and multiple deregulatory lines of questionable crypto minting, but I think watching an alleged Bitcoin embezzler struggle through painful rap bars in a flat-billed cap that reads “0 FCKS” is a good summation of the overwhelming confusion. Let’s begin with the many layers of Heather Morgan’s business portfolio. It turns out that when The Crime Queen of Bitcoin is not conducting her digital heists, she’s also an ascendent TikTokker, a self-help YouTuber, an economic columnist and most impressively, an amateur rapper. The alias she uses for her artistic ventures: “Razzlekhan.” After her arrests, the world was briefly subsumed by Razzlekhan’s mesmerizing public brand as reporters around the world splunked through the tranches of content left behind in Morgan’s wake. In one memorable music video, she gallivants through Wall Street in John Lennon sunglasses and a leopard-print scarf, ready for a fight. “I’ve got pallid blood, I’m a real risk-taker,” she rhymes in the shadow of a bronze George Washington statue. There’s also a 14-minute YouTube soliloquy where Razzlekhan doles out higher-education advice. “I’m not trust fund,” she says. “My parents both work for the government. I’ve been totally broke and homeless. Money, in my mind, comes goes. Sometimes you have it and sometimes you don’t.” She makes no reference as to the exact nature in which she found herself with money. Morgan was upfront about her financial avarice in a column she wrote for Inc. in 2021 entitled: 4 First-Time Founder Mistakes to Avoid at All Costs, Morgan asks readers to remember that your desire to hustle should never run dry. “The first million dollars in revenue is so exciting,” she wrote. “But once you hit that, you’re thinking about how to get to $5m, $10m, and suddenly $100m.” At one point she asks her viewers to consider a goal, and find the “easiest path” to achieve it. Pinned to the top of her Twitter page is a quote that is erroneously attributed to Winston Churchill: “You have enemies? Good. That means you’ve stood up for something in your life.” It is unsurprising that Morgan surfaced within the burgeoning blockchain underground.She embodies a ubiquitous type in the world of crypto – the chronically posting hustle-entrepreneur who has consolidated every available publicity stunt and duplicitous business undertaking within reach to brute-force a hollow, demi-influencer’s subsistence. To think that those music videos might’ve been funded by freshly laundered crypto credit is ghoulishly predictable. The couple is “a perfect synecdoche for everything anyone doesn’t like about an attention economy in which anything can be financialized”, argues Vice in their investigation into her rap career. Unsurprisingly, this week also brought news that Netflix was already hard at work on a docuseries about the couple. Who knows? Maybe Razzlekhan is destined to become the next Tiger King. Heather Morgan and Dutch Liechtenstein have not pleaded guilty. Their defense attorney has taken an adversarial stance in the proceedings thus far, claiming that the government’s case is “thin.” So perhaps normalcy will return, justice will be served and the world can breathe easy knowing that a mediocre rapper and her husband are not capable of participating in the largest crypto heist in human history. But for now we do not have that privilege and I think that’s why everyone keeps tumbling down the Razzlekhan rabbit hole. The lasting legacy of Morgan and Lichtenstein may be that they’ve killed the image we hold of a criminal kingpin in our heads. It’s been a long time since the mob ran New York City, in part because traditional organized crime, with its body counts, turf wars and punitive sentencing measures, is far too risky for the expected gains. In their stead, we have received a generation of crypto eccentrics who have moved operations to the arctic regions of the American economy. The blockchain was always going to attract the most unbridled dreamers of the population, and now we are watching one of them morph into a supervillain dressed in leather pants and a flight jacket, calling themselves the Turkish Martha Stewart in some of the worst hip-hop ever recorded. As we get deeper into our uncertain metaversal future I expect that the rise and fall of figures like Morgan will become increasingly common. There are so many skeletons lingering in the closets of Manhattan high-rises, especially the ones lined with Bitcoin.It will go down as one of the most surreal sessions the United Nations chamber has ever witnessed, as the very war it was supposed to prevent broke out while it was sitting. Vladimir Putin, with brutal timing, delivered a speech announcing that Russia would start a “special military operation” in Ukraine – while an emergency session of the UN security council was under way. The secretary general, Antonio Guterres, was the first to speak, and at that time Putin’s intentions were not entirely clear. But Guterres pointed to the reports of troops moving into position, and did something notable and rare for a UN secretary general: he publicly called out the head of a security council permanent member. “If indeed an operation is being prepared, I have only one thing to say, from the bottom of my heart,” Guterres said. “President Putin: stop your troops from attacking Ukraine. Give peace a chance. Too many people have already died.” By the time it was the turn of the Russian representative, Vasily Nebenzya, to speak, Putin had given his address, and there was no more mystery. Peace was not to be given a chance after all. Nebenzya, who had spent weeks deriding western states for their “hysterical” warnings of impending invasion, pivoted to argue it was not actually a war that was getting under way, but a “special military operation” to protect the people of the Donbass. The Ukrainian ambassador, Sergiy Kyslytsya, had been waiting for his turn to speak while receiving constant updates from Kyiv. When his time came, he had to dispense with his prepared speech because, he said, “most of it is already useless”. Instead he held up a copy of the UN charter and read the clause that said UN membership was open to all peace-loving states that accepted the obligations contained in the small sky-blue booklet. “Russia is not able to carry out any of those obligations,” Kyslytsya declared. He challenged Nebenzya to deny that Ukraine was under attack. “You have a smartphone,” he said, taunting the Russian to check with his boss, the foreign minister, on what was really going on. “You can call Lavrov right now. We can make a pause to let you go out and call him.” Nebenzya declined. “I have already said all I know at this point,” he said. “Waking up minister Lavrov at this time is not something I plan to do.” An hour or so into the meeting, the multiplying reports of bombardment of Ukrainian cities had reached the chamber, and if the futility of the council’s calls for peace and dialogue had not been clear before, they were now agonisingly obvious. Some ambassadors demanded to speak for a second time to express their sense of betrayal. “At the exact time as we were gathered in the council seeking peace, Putin delivered a message of war in total disdain for the responsibility of this council,” said the US permanent representative, Linda Thomas-Greenfield. “This is a grave emergency.” Her British counterpart, Barbara Woodward, declared it “a grave day for Ukraine and for the principles of the United Nations”. Kyslytsya himself was trembling with emotion. He stared at Nebenzya and demanded the Russian relinquish his duties as chair of the council. “There is no purgatory for war criminals,” he warned him. “They go straight to hell.” At that point, Nebenzya quickly closed the meeting, claiming that Russia’s aggression was not directed at the Ukrainian people, but against what he called “the junta that is in power in Kiev”. Then he adjourned and left. A security council that had begun, just about, in peacetime, had broken up in a time of war, and perhaps at the start of a major conflict.Early into the premiere episode of Race, the six-part Netflix docuseries on Bubba Wallace, the thesis statement comes roaring in as loud as a stock car at wide-open throttle. “I think a lot of the world needs to understand that this is probably the most pressured athlete in all of sports history,” muses Ryan Hall, Wallace’s baby-faced manager. And while no one would deny the unique stresses that Wallace has endured as the only Black driver in Nascar’s top racing division … pump your brakes. At last check Warner Bros just dropped a feature film about two Black girls from Compton who somehow went on to dominate the lily-white world of tennis. And then there’s also that Black kid from Stevenage who broke into Formula One on the way to becoming arguably the greatest driver in the sport’s history. The Old World racism that the Williams sisters and Lewis Hamilton overcame on their way to the top is every bit as virulent as the Southern fried variety that Wallace, 28, has to reckon with — and the Williams and Hamilton haven’t entirely risen above it either. This self-important streak is a major headwind for Race, which would’ve been better served by letting the whirlwind driver’s life speak for itself. That was the hook for Behind the Wall, the eight-part docuseries that helped launch Facebook Watch in 2018. And it introduced the world to a happy-go-lucky sort who didn’t shrink from his burden of being the fourth Black driver to ever compete at Nascar’s highest-echelon Cup series, but also didn’t let that burden get in the way of palling around with peer drivers and crew members, flogging his basement drum kit for fun, or annoying his fiancee, Amanda, with his bouts of uncontrolled flatulence. The let-the-subject-breathe approach just doesn’t work for Behind the Wall, which captures Wallace in his maiden Cup season when the driver colloquially known as Nascar’s Charley Pride had hoped to be considered one of the good ol’ boys. But the show-don’t-tell formula ends up becoming the secret sauce in Drive to Survive - Formula One’s hit Netflix reality series. It lets F1’s personalities, politics and rivalries do the hard job of shrinking a sprawling, technophilic sport down to savoury morsels. Race was supposed to be Nascar’s Drive to Survive rebuttal, their bid to pull racing agnostics into the sport. But unlike the earlier series, which limited expert testimony to a small batch of insiders, Race does something far different. Rather than restrict the wide-angle perspectives to authorities like Nascar D&amp;I head Brandon Thompson and the all-knowing beat reporter Bob Pockrass,the urgency to grab casual viewers has director Erik Parker going to W Kamau Bell, Jemele Hill and other Nascar dilettantes to reinforce why this here project is so essential and well worth your time. Here’s the thing, though: unlike Formula One, still a largely unknown quantity on these shores, the curious odyssey of Nascar’s Bubba Wallace has been headline news for the better part of a decade. Race picks it up at its controversial peak in 2020 and finds the driver world-weary and struggling with depression. In the doc Wallace calls 2020 the craziest year of his life, and June was easily the maddest month. Race reveals how a sport idled by the pandemic sent Wallace hurtling on to a crash course with the boiling social justice movement, and how the viral video of Ahmaud Arbery’s shooting death kicked up memories of a similar incident in his family 15 years earlier. (Brace yourself: the first episode almost gleefully replays the Arbery video over. And over. And over …) Dead-set on making a statement, despite his car owner going on record with his disdain for national anthem protesters, Wallace turned up to Nascar’s 7 June restart in Atlanta in a black T-shirt bearing George Floyd’s last words: “I Can’t Breathe.” A day later he pushed Nascar to ban displays of the confederate flag, an ugly vestige of the sport’s southeastern roots. For the following week’s race at Martinsville, Va., his car was turned into a Black Lives Matter billboard. Two weeks after that, he was greeted at a race in Talladega by a parade of rebel flag bearers and with what looked like a noose hanging from his garage door stall. And when the FBI closed its investigation without calling the noose incident a hate crime, seemingly every red-hat right winger from President Trump on down called out Wallace for crying wolf - even though it was a crew member who called in the sighting. But the truly astonishing bit comes when Wallace, in the Race premiere, talks about how he knew he was risking it all by placing the Amazon order for that “I Can’t Breathe” shirt and how he was prepared to suffer the consequences. “I put everything else aside and was selfish for a change,” he tells me. The irony of course is that by standing 10-toes down in his Blackness, Wallace wasn’t just embraced by Nascar’s inner circle and the larger Black American community; he became an endorsement magnet on the way to helming an expansion racing team co-owned by Michael Jordan that just opened the 2022 season with a second-place finish at Sunday’s Daytona 500. Worse than lacking Drive to Survive’s luxury marques, glamorous locales and space-age technology, Race suffocates its subject in context, overstating the significance of a driver who doesn’t need much setup. Wallace’s isn’t the untold story of some far away historical figure but, rather, the unfinished journey of a driver on the cusp unfolding under the scrutinising eyes of social media and the international press. That’s a plenty compelling hook on its own. Race didn’t need the extra fuming to justify itself.Imagine tasting a full English breakfast whenever you heard the words “Tottenham Court Road”. Or the flavour of pineapple chunks at the tinkling of a piano. For James, who is a synaesthete and one of the extraordinary people described in Guy Leschziner’s new book, words, music and life itself are saturated with striking taste sensations. Leschziner, a professor of neurology at Guy’s and St Thomas’ Hospital, has brought together a collection of exceptionally unusual and interesting stories in his second book, dedicated to the wonder of our senses. Among his astonishing tales of what happens when the processing of sensory inputs goes wrong, Leschziner includes crystal-clear explanations of something no less amazing – how our senses operate normally. We meet a cast of people whose lives changed when the senses they took for granted suddenly shifted: Valeria the sommelier who lost her sense of taste; Oliver the film-maker who only discovered in his mid-20s that he was missing a chunk of his visual field; and Mark, a man who can hear his own eyeballs “moving and squelching”. Bill Oddie makes a charming if unexpected appearance at one point, discussing his hearing loss-related auditory hallucinations, which sound like a brass band playing nearby. As well as the Big Five – sight, smell, taste, hearing and touch – Leschziner introduces us to people with neurological differences in less obvious modalities. His first patient, Paul, has a genetic disorder that means he cannot feel pain. Far from being a blessing, this causes him to suffer constant ruinous injuries. Rachel experiences the impairment of something most people wouldn’t even consider a sense at all: proprioception, the awareness of where our bodies and their various parts are in space, is critical to our everyday functioning. She struggles with door handles, or lifting a cup to her lips. Almost all the people in Leschziner’s collection of cases have suffered catastrophic losses, and yet they show stunning resilience. Their stories are jaw-dropping, but this is not misery porn. Refreshingly, one never has the sense that Leschziner is wringing out his patients’ lives for dramatic effect. His prose is straightforward, and it lacks the whiff of narcissism or martyrdom that can emerge when doctors write books for a popular audience. For all his professional expertise, the moments when Leschziner lets himself get personal or make a gentle, avuncular quip are where his warmth and empathy show, making a book that could otherwise be hard-going a delightful read. At one point, he imagines what it would be like to be a maggot or a dung beetle. He reminisces about the fragrance of sun-warmed pebbles in kindergarten. In the middle of the book – not quite out of nowhere, as he is circuitously talking about our sense of taste – are three delicious pages of lyrical culinary descriptions of the cuisine of his dual Baghdadi-Jewish and Ashkenazi heritage and a dip into his fascinating family history. Tantalisingly, Leschziner leaves any serious consideration of the major philosophical implications of our imperfect senses – which he describes as “like trying to stream an HD movie over a slow internet connection” – until the epilogue. At this point, having introduced heavyweights such as Cartesian mind-body duality and the notion that our reality is merely a controlled hallucination, he taps out of the ring, stating: “I make no pretence at being a philosopher.” Yet Leschziner’s existential insights are exactly what I want to hear more of at the end of this intriguing book. Instead, he leaves the reader hankering for more, with a renewed sense of awe at the delicate, magnificent workings of the senses. • The Man Who Tasted Words: Inside the Strange and Startling World of Our Senses by Guy Leschziner is published by Simon &amp; Schuster (£16.99). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Scientists working with one of the world’s largest climate research publishers say they’re increasingly alarmed that the company works with the fossil fuel industry to help increase oil and gas drilling, the Guardian can reveal. Elsevier, a Dutch company behind many renowned peer-reviewed scientific journals, including the Lancet and Global Environmental Change, is also one of the top publishers of books aimed at expanding fossil fuel production. For more than a decade, the company has supported the energy industry’s efforts to optimize oil and gas extraction. It commissions authors, editors and journal advisory board members who are employees at top oil firms. Elsevier also markets some of its research portals and data services directly to the oil and gas industry to help “increase the odds of exploration success”. Several former and current employees say that for the past year, dozens of workers have spoken out internally and at company-wide town halls to urge Elsevier to reconsider its relationship with the fossil fuel industry. “When I first started, I heard a lot about the company’s climate commitments,” said a former Elsevier journal editor who agreed to speak on condition of anonymity. “Eventually I just realized it was all marketing, which is really upsetting because Elsevier has published all the research it needs to know exactly what to do if it wants to make a meaningful difference.” What makes Elsevier’s ties to the fossil fuel industry particularly alarming to its critics is that it is one of a handful of companies that publish peer-reviewed climate research. Scientists and academics say they’re concerned that Elsevier’s conflicting business interests risk undermining their work. Julia Steinberger, a social ecologist and ecological economist at the Université de Lausanne who has published studies in several Elsevier journals, said she was shocked to hear that the company took an active role in expanding fossil fuel extraction. “Elsevier is the publisher of some of the most important journals in the environmental space,” she said. “They cannot claim ignorance of the facts of climate change and the urgent necessity to move away from fossil fuels.” She added: “Their business model seems to be to profit from publishing climate and energy science, while disregarding the most basic fact of climate action: the urgent need to move away from fossil fuels.” Elsevier and its parent company, RELX, say they are committed to supporting the fossil fuel industry as it transitions toward clean energy. And while Elsevier has emerged as an industry leader with its own climate pledges, a spokesperson for the company said they are not prepared to draw a line between the transition away from fossil fuels and the expansion of oil and gas extraction. She voiced concern about publishers boycotting or “canceling” oil and gas firms. “We recognize that we are imperfect and we have to do more, but that shouldn’t negate all of the amazing work we have done over the past 15 years,” Márcia Balisciano, founding global head of corporate responsibility at RELX, told the Guardian. Of the more than 2,000 scholarly journals that Elsevier publishes, only seven are specific to fossil fuel extraction (14 if you count special publications and subsidiaries). Those journals include Upstream Oil and Gas Technology, the editor-in-chief of which works for Shell, and Unconventional Resources, which is edited by a Chevron researcher. It also runs a subsidiary book publisher, Gulf Publishing, which includes titles such as The Shale Oil and Gas Handbook and Strategies for Optimizing Petroleum Exploration. Elsevier also provides consultancy services to corporate clients. For the past 12 years, it has marketed a tool called Geofacets to fossil fuel companies. Geofacets combines thousands of maps and studies to make it easier to find and access oil and gas reserves, in addition to locations for wind farms or carbon storage facilities. The company claims the tool cuts research time by 50% and helps identify “riskier, more remote areas that had previously been inaccessible”. Top climate scientists, including those published in Elsevier’s own journals, however, say just the opposite must happen in order to avert a climate catastrophe. Limiting warming to 1.5C or less requires a worldwide decrease in fossil fuel production with more than 80% of all proven reserves left in the ground. “We will not comment on the practices of individual companies, but any actions actively supporting the expansion of fossil fuel development are indeed inconsistent” with the United Nations’ sustainable development goals, said Sherri Aldis, acting deputy director for the UN department of global communications. RELX is an astoundingly profitable company, with annual revenues topping $9.8bn, about a third of which are brought in by Elsevier. Balisciano emphasizes that fossil fuel content represents less than 1% of Elsevier’s publishing revenue, and less than half of Geofacets’ revenue, which itself represents only about 2% of Elsevier’s earnings. RELX and Elsevier say the bulk of their work supports and enables an energy transition via publications centered on clean energy. “We don’t want to draw a binary and we don’t think you can just flip a switch, but we have been reducing our involvement with fossil fuel activities while increasing the amount of research we publish on climate and clean energy,” said Esra Erkal, executive vice president of communications at Elsevier. *** Elsevier is not alone in navigating relationships with both climate researchers and fossil fuel executives. Multiple other publishers of peer-reviewed climate research have signed on to the UN’s Sustainable Development Goals Publishers Compact while also partnering with the oil and gas industry in various ways. The UK-based publisher Taylor &amp; Francis, for example, signed the UN pledge and released its own net-zero commitments while also touting its publishing partnership with “industry leader” ExxonMobil, the oil company most linked to obstructionism on climate in the public consciousness. Another top climate publisher, Wiley, also signed on to the sustainability compact while publishing multiple books and journals aimed at helping the industry find and drill for more oil and gas. “It’s problematic,” said Dr Kimberly Nicholas, associate professor of sustainability science at Lund University in Sweden, noting that while corporate greenwashing is rampant across multiple industries, the publishers of peer-reviewed climate research have a unique responsibility. “If the same publisher putting out the papers that show definitively we can’t burn any more fossil fuels and stay within this carbon budget is also helping the fossil fuel industry do just that, what does that do to the whole premise of validity around the climate research? That is what’s deeply concerning about these conflicts,” she said. Ben Franta, a researcher at Stanford University who has also published studies in Elsevier journals, notes that the publisher’s relationship with oil firms is indicative of just how entwined that industry is with so many other aspects of society. “This all happens without the broader public knowing, and it operates to entrench the industry,” he said. “To effect a rapid replacement of fossil fuels, I believe these entanglements will need to be exposed and reformed.” Elsevier, for its part, emphasizes the role of editorial independence. “We wouldn’t want to tell journal editors what they can and can’t publish,” Balisciano said. However, such conflicts often place researchers in a tough position to navigate. James Dyke, assistant director of the Global Systems Institute at the University of Exeter, was surprised that Elsevier would be working to contradict climate researchers in this way. “It’s hard to believe that a company that publishes research about the dangers of the climate and ecological crises is the very same company that actively works with oil and gas companies to extract more fossil fuels, which drags us towards disaster,” he said.A barista course aimed at people with disability that allegedly lacked basic equipment and had no specific training manuals was established using a $300,000 federal government grant, an inquiry has heard. Guardian Australia reported on Wednesday that the Busy Beans program, run by disability employment services provider AimBig, was facing claims aired at the disability royal commission that it had “no established policies, procedures, safety measures or proper facilities to train the participants”. The program is the main case study of three-day hearings this week examining the troubled $1bn-a-year disability employment services program. The royal commission heard on Thursday that on top of $874,000 in government payments for putting jobseekers through the training, the program was also funded using a grant from the National Disability Insurance Agency worth “in excess of $300,000”. Guardian Australia can reveal grant documents show $313,769.50 was awarded in 2019 to Rehab Management, which shares a holding company with AimBig. Under the Busy Beans model, people with disability – who were either paid in part using about $100,000 in government wage subsidies or were unpaid interns – learned to make coffee by serving as in-house baristas for workers at AimBig and Rehab Management offices or other external businesses. People on the autism spectrum or with “moderate intellectual disabilities” were to “receive barista, job readiness and customer service training delivered by qualified barista trainers at ‘coffee schools’ across Australia”. An AimBig manager, Matthew Ting, who was responsible for introducing the Busy Beans program, was asked about photos from one of the several “coffee schools” run out of a Rehab Management office. The photos showed the site of a Rehab Management office with two “home”-style coffee machines laid on office desks in the corner of an office floor. “It boggles my mind why that was set up like that and who did that,” he said. “I don’t understand a reason for that.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Mzia*, a woman with ADHD who was employed as a Busy Beans barista trainer, claimed on Wednesday that she arrived on her first day to find there was not even a coffee jug, or “proper milks”. Trainees had to carry a bucket of hot water across the office to the kitchenette because there was no sink near the “barista training” area, the inquiry was told. Ting said he had never visited the site where Mzia had worked and described the environment as “not at all suitable”. Ting claimed Mzia was “responsible” for the coffee school set-up, though he acknowledged responsibility also lay with her managers. The inquiry heard on Wednesday that Mzia, who told the inquiry she had been employed as a barista trainer but then required to set up a program from “scratch”, had complained about the set-up and lack of equipment to her superiors. Ting said looking at the site as it was in “June 2019, gave a wrong impression in my view of what the program was”. Ting provided other photos to the royal commission of another barista training at an external employer which he said showed a “very, very different environment”, suggesting the program had improved over time. Despite the significant government funds flowing to the company, Ting also noted the Busy Beans program was “expensive” and insisted it “did lose quite a good deal of money for AimBig”. The inquiry also heard that between March and November 2019, there were no specific training materials for the Busy Beans program. “How is it possible to construct a training program without documentation that explains what’s to be conveyed to the people who are being trained?” the chair, Ronald Sackville, asked. Ting said the course was supposed to be “hands-on” and “definitely not accredited training”, which was “what was needed for these participants”. The inquiry heard on Wednesday that Mzia had been frustrated about the lack of direction for the program and created her own training documents. These were adopted in November 2019, before Busy Beans was suspended in March 2020 due to Covid. The counsel assisting the royal commission, Cathy Dowsett, put it to Ting that Rehab Management sought to exit participants from Busy Beans after 26 weeks. A 26-week “outcome” triggers a substantial government payment to a disability employment services provider. Ting denied the claims. “We did continue to give them rostered shifts after the 26 weeks, so I think the argument that it was 26 weeks and you’re on the street is not quite accurate,” he said. A web page promoting the Busy Beans program on the NDIS website was no longer accessible on Thursday. Last year, Guardian Australia revealed a damning consultants’ report that discovered myriad problems with the disability employment services program. The chief executive of the holding company for AimBig and Rehab Management, Arriba Group, Marcella Romero, will give evidence on Friday. A national disability insurance agency spokesperson said: “In October 2020, administration for the grants component of the ILC building program transitioned from the National Disability Insurance Agency to the Department of Social Services.” The Department of Social Services was approached for comment. The inquiry continues. *Mzia is a pseudonym provided by the royal commissionThat is where we will leave the blog for today. Thanks for following along. Here’s some of what you might have missed today: Prime minister Scott Morrison announced new sanctions on Russia, affecting 25 people, including military personnel and four entities involved in the sale of weapons. The PM earlier said the Russian ambassador had not yet been asked to leave. The PM also said Australia wasn’t considering providing “lethal military assistance” to Ukraine. Labor offered bipartisan support again, saying Australia must stand with allies to hold Russia to account. Queensland battened down amid fears heavy rainfall will reintensify and continue to pummel the south-east. Some 1,200 Victoria police officers and protective service officers have been working without proper authorisation for up to eight years due to a bungle. Billionaire businessman Clive Palmer was taken to a Queensland hospital. Qantas posted a $1.28bn pre-tax loss in its half-year financial results, as the airline blamed lockdowns in the second half of last year and the Omicron variant for hitting travel confidence at the end of 2020. Major construction company Probuild went into administration, putting at risk hundreds of jobs and also a series of major projects. NSW recorded 8,271 new Covid cases and 12 deaths; Victoria recorded 6,715 new cases and 16 deaths; Queensland recorded 6,094 new cases and 37 deaths; the ACT reported 661 new cases; WA reported 610 new cases; SA reported 1,735 new cases and three deaths; the NT reported 757 new cases and three deaths; and Tasmania reported 853 new cases. Thanks for reading. Restrictions are being eased in South Australia, where dancing and bigger sporting events will be allowed again. The South Australian police commissioner and state emergency coordinator, Grant Stevens, announced the easing of the restrictions earlier today, which include: Hospitality venues with stand-up drinking will be allowed to host 50% capacity, with seated venues allowed to move to 75%. Venues with combined seating and standing can have up to 50% capacity. Private functions at hospitality venues can have 50% capacity of up to 150 people and stand-up drinking, singing and dancing will be allowed. Fully seated private functions can have 75% capacity. Capacity restrictions on seated outdoor events will be lifted. All the new rules will come into effect at 12:01am on Saturday. Stevens said that despite the rising case numbers, the state’s hospitalisation rates meant they could adjust the restrictions: This does mean if we were to see a significant increase in cases that did put excessive pressure on the health system, we may have to reintroduce restrictions to keep on top of that. In a statement following his brief press conference, PM Scott Morrison says Australia is committed to seeing Russia pay a “high price” for its invasion of Ukraine. In a joint statement with the foreign minister, Marise Payne, the PM shared comments he didn’t air in the presser, claiming Russian president Vladimir Putin had “fabricated a feeble pretext on which to invade.” “Russia’s disinformation and propaganda has convinced no one,” Morrison and Payne said. “We call on Russia to cease its illegal and unprovoked actions, and to stop violating Ukraine’s independence. Russia must reverse its breach of international law and of the UN Charter, and withdraw its military from Ukraine.” “The Australian government will continue working with our partners to keep Australians safe and defend our values and principles.” The statement confirmed Australia’s next round of sanctions would put financial penalties on an extra 25 people and four entities “who have been responsible for the unprovoked and unacceptable aggression”. Four more Russian financial institutions will be sanctioned, meaning Australians will be restricted from investing in those bodies. The PM did not immediately detail a list of which individuals or entities those sanctions would apply to. Guardian Australia understands a more detailed list may be released publicly in coming days, once Australian assets of those entities are frozen or cut off. And with that, the PM ends a relatively short presser, mainly condemning the attacks and announcing new sanctions. Is the PM worried that China will use global instability to launch any action in the Indo-Pacific? I think it’s important to separate these issues, and I want to make that point, in particular, to Australians. What I would be asking – as I have consistently, and I would welcome this being supported, both here in this country and elsewhere – it’s important that all countries denounce what is occurring in Russia and Ukraine. It is important that all countries do that. This is an unprovoked, unwarranted, illegal invasion of Ukraine. And the best way to ensure that these acts are condemned is to enjoin the actions of countries like Australia, the United Kingdom, the United States, Canada, Japan, and impose these sanctions to ensure that there is a penalty and there is a cost. Asked if discussions have happened with the Russian Ambassador: Even in moments of terrible conflicts such as this, it is important to maintain channels of communication. That has been the conventional way these things have been dealt with in the past. It’s appropriate for him to have been brought in to speak to the secretary of Dfat, and that has taken place, and that dialogue will continue there. But you can be in no doubt about the very stern messages that have been sent to the ambassador on behalf of the Australian government. First question has been about whether or not Australian military support has been requested: The latter is not something the Australian government has been requested, working with our military partners in the region. We work closely with Nato and their member states. What we are doing is working with them in other ways, which I cannot go into a lot of detail about. Sanctions of the order that I have outlined matter. They do have an impact on those individuals, particularly when they’re done in concert with other countries like those I have mentioned. That’s why I think it’s important that all countries engage in these sanctions against these individuals. It sends a very clear message. The PM confirms there have been “no evidence of state-sanctioned cyberattacks”: In briefings received this afternoon, we have still no evidence of any state-sanctioned cyberattacks on Australian assets here, but I thank the corporate community for the preparations that they’ve been undertaking and working with the Australian Cyber Security Centre to prepare themselves. I want to assure you that Australia stands ready to support internationally coordinated action to respond to any price or supply shocks in energy markets. The PM says there must be a cost for “reprehensible violence”: We must ensure there is a cost for this violent, unacceptable, and egregious behaviour. There must be a cost. As I said today, we’ve firmly believed that, because of the actions of Russia over many months to prepare for this, that it was unlikely that they would change course. But there always must be a cost for such reprehensible violence and the way this is being done in Ukraine as we speak. The government is also engaging with our partners and businesses to make sure we’re mitigating risks to critical supply chains, and we will continue to work closely with Australian business to manage those risks. The PM continues, announcing new sanctions to an additional 25 people, including military personnel and four entities involved in the sale of weapons: Yesterday, I announced travel bans on eight members of Russia’s Security Council. They will come into effect at midnight this evening. This council bears responsibility for the current phase of the invasion, including President Putin’s declaration regarding Donetsk and Luhansk. I’ve also announced financial sanctions which mean Australian individuals and entities cannot do business with five Russian banks. This was in addition to restrictions on Australians investing in the State Development Bank. We are now progressing in the second phase of those financial sanctions. The acting minister of financial affairs, senator Birmingham, has completed the process of applying sanctions to an additional 25 persons. This includes army commanders, deputy defence ministers and Russian mercenaries who have been responsible for the unprovoked and unacceptable regression, and four entities involved in the development and sale of military technology and weapons. We are now moving to place restrictions on Australians investing in a further four financial institutions. There will be further waves of sanctions as we identify those responsible for these egregious acts, including – as I discussed this afternoon with the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade – moving on around over 300 members of the Russian parliament. The PM has continued, saying the the minister for immigration and multicultural affairs has met with Ukrainian community leaders, and has urged Australians in Ukraine to leave: Earlier today, the minister for immigration and multicultural affairs met with community leaders from the Ukrainian community in Australia – some 18 of them – to hear from them directly, to answer questions about the arrangements Australia is putting in place. And I thank them for working closely with the government, and I thank them for their leadership in the community. As I said this morning also, I want to send a particular message to Australians of Russian descent. I know that they will also be feeling terrible about these events. Whether they’re of Ukrainian descent or Russian descent, we’re all Australians, and we thank them for their contribution to Australia, and we stand together with them as Australians. My message to those Australians who continue to be in Ukraine is to – where safe to do so – leave. The PM has begun by condemning the “brutal Russian invasion” of Ukraine, and has called on the Russian government to withdraw. I’ll call it what it is – the Russian government launched a brutal invasion, unprovoked, on Ukraine, and should be condemned for doing so – and Australia does. Together with the international community, we are banding together in strong terms to condemn these outrageous acts in the strongest possible terms. The footage that is emerging of missile strikes, air-raid sirens, and reports of hundreds of casualties dash yet unconfirmed are, sadly, not surprising given the events we’ve been witnessing for some time now, and have been warning about. But, even as these events continue to take place, we do call on the Russian government to withdraw and return Ukraine to a peaceful situation. The Prime Minister has stepped up to give a press conference on Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. Prime minister Scott Morrison is due to address reporters in Sydney in around 20 minutes (around 5:30pm AEDT). We are expecting that he will detail the Australian government’s response to the Russian invasion of Ukraine. The Northern Territory has reported 757 new cases overnight, and are sadly reporting the deaths of three people. There have now been 19 Covid related deaths in the Territory since the beginning of the pandemic. There are currently 108 people in hospital with the virus, with 23 requiring oxygen. The Australian share market has closed down 3% for the day, with the ASX 200 benchmark index ending at 6900.6 points. That’s the lowest close this month. Bourses across the region are posting similar falls of 2-3%, with Singapore’s 2.9% decline so far the largest intraday slide since mid-May. The Australian dollar was a bit stronger than earlier in the day, though, trading recently at 71.9 US cents. The Russian rouble is more akin to rubble today, dropping 5.8% to a record low 86.12 per US dollar, Reuters reported. The New Zealand minister for foreign affairs, Nanaia Mahuta, has echoed sentiments across the globe in condemning the “unprovoked and unjustified attack by Russia on Ukraine.” Millionaire businessman Neville Power must wait to learn whether he will be jailed for breaching Western Australia’s strict Covid quarantine laws after his sentencing was delayed, according to AAP. Power, 63, and his son Nicholas Power, 36, admitted failing to self-quarantine upon returning from Queensland on a private helicopter in October 2021, an offence that carries a maximum penalty of 12 months’ imprisonment. The incident came 18 months after Neville Power was appointed to head up prime minister Scott Morrison’s now-disbanded national Covid-19 coordination commission. The Powers had been due to be sentenced on Thursday in Perth magistrates court. But the court was told Nicholas Power was unable to attend, prompting magistrate Elizabeth Woods to adjourn the sentencing for both men. Their lawyer Sam Vandongen SC did not provide a reason for Nicholas Power’s absence. Neville Power, who attended Thursday’s hearing, declined to comment outside court. A police prosecutor earlier this month said the pair’s actions had put West Australians at “unacceptable risk” and a term of imprisonment was appropriate. But Vandongen urged the magistrate to instead impose substantial fines on the pair. He also flagged they would apply for spent convictions which would allow Neville Power, the former chief executive of Fortescue Metals Group, to continue in his board roles. Power this week stepped down from his role as Perth airport chairman and has been granted a leave of absence from board roles with Strike Energy and disability services provider APM. He also recently resigned as chair of the Royal Flying Doctor Service Federation. Vandongen cited a psychological report which said Power had suffered stress-induced “cognitive distortions” which had clouded his judgment. The court heard Power and his son had flown separately to Queensland in September last year spending a week mustering cattle at the family’s Bushy Park station near Mt Isa. They flew back to WA together on a private helicopter, staying overnight in Exmouth in WA’s north - where they were captured on CCTV footage moving freely around a resort while not wearing face masks - before arriving at Jandakot airport on 9 October. Travellers from Queensland were required at the time to isolate for 14 days upon arrival in WA under the state’s controlled border regime. They also had to complete G2G pass declarations advising of their recent movements. But the pair did not make G2G applications and failed to isolate. They each pleaded guilty to two charges of failing to comply with a direction under WA’s Emergency Management Act. Woods on Thursday adjourned the sentencing to 23 March. Victorian premier Daniel Andrews has announced that buildings in Melbourne’s CBD will be lit up in the colours of the Ukrainian flag, in a show of support to the people of Ukraine. In a statement, Andrews said “this will be a distressing time for Victorian Ukrainian and Russian communities.” The overt act of aggression by the Russian Federation will cause harm and untold suffering to thousands, if not millions, of people. Lighting up public buildings in blue and yellow is just one small thing we can do to show our support as a government and state. Whatever happens today, or in the days to come, we stand ready to support these communities. Vladimir Putin’s decision to invade Ukraine “marks a grave moment for humanity”, the federal opposition has said. The Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, and the shadow foreign affairs minister, Penny Wong, said in a statement: All Australians stand with the people of Ukraine, and are united in condemnation of Russia’s shameful act of aggression. This attack is wholly unprovoked and without justification. Russia alone is the aggressor, and Russia alone bears responsibility for the bloodshed and suffering that will follow. As US President Biden has said, the world is ready to respond with unity, clarity, and conviction. Australia must stand united with our allies, in holding Russia to account. This is not just an attack on Ukraine, it is also a contemptuous attack on one of the core principles of the post-World War II order, which is that all UN members shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any state. Our thoughts are with the Ukrainian people, and all Australians of Ukrainian heritage. Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and reports of targeted attacks beyond the renegade areas in the benighted nation’s east has prompted investors to become more risk averse everywhere. Australia’s benchmark S&amp;P/ASX 200 share index extended falls through much of Thursday and was recently more than 3% down for the day. Brent crude oil futures popped above the $US100 a barrel mark for the first time since 2014, rising more than 3% for the day, according to Bloomberg. Investors have been buying up government bonds as they hunt for havens. Another one is gold, and prices of that commodity are near to eight-month highs in US dollar terms. Ukraine, as you may recall, is a big wheat producer (except for those periods known as the Holodomor when the Soviet Union treated Ukrainian farmers abysmally) and one effect of the invasion has been to send food prices higher. Wheat prices are at their highest since 2012, Bloomberg says. The Aussie dollar, which was worth 72.5 US cents a day ago, slumped to 71.75 cents on Thursday. The Victorian opposition leader, Matthew Guy, who has a Ukranian background, has given an emotional statement in Parliament on the situation in Ukraine, saying he has family in Kharkiv. The premier, Daniel Andrews, said it was a situation that “saddens all of us.” Our thoughts and prayers are with them today. It will be a very very anxious time. So I just want to go back to the WA Covid update, where premier Mark McGowan has urged people not to panic over the growing number of daily cases announced. WA of course went months maintaining Covid zero, but has seen cases rise exponentially in the past week or so, and today was the second consecutive day to see case numbers above 600. McGowan said cases will continue to rise, and will at one point hit 1,000 a day: It’s clear that cases are rising in the community. The mathematics are clear, we are not far away from recording 1,000 new cases a day. This is to be expected, it’s not a cause for panic, but it’s a reminder we have to take Omicron seriously. If we all stick together and do the right thing, we will be in the best possible position. One of Australia’s biggest building firms has been plunged into administration as unions seek assurances that workers will be looked after, AAP reports. Probuild confirmed on Thursday its South African parent company, Wilson Bayly Holmes-Ovcon Ltd, had placed the building company into administration. “We are caught up in a set of circumstances not of our making,” a Probuild spokesperson said. “We are working closely with the administrator on a number of plans to protect our clients, subcontractors and employees.” Probuild said it was pursuing “several options” to raise the capital necessary for it to continue as an Australian building company. Deloitte has been appointed as administrator. Sal Algeri, of Deloitte, said the company’s immediate focus would be on assessing Probuild’s financial situation and working to stabilise businesses and projects “where possible”. “We will assess options to preserve value, and engage closely with creditor groups and other stakeholders across the spectrum, including clients, employees, unions, suppliers, contractors and sub-contractors,” he said. Two other businesses under WBHO Australia – Monaco Hickey and WBHO Infrastructure – have also been placed into administration. Probuild is a major design, construction and project management group operating in most states, including NSW, Victoria, Queensland and Western Australia. It employs more than 1,000 people as well as contract trade workers to build offices, residential buildings, and shopping centres and other key infrastructure. Probuild is currently managing at least a dozen major projects across Victoria, NSW, Queensland and WA. The construction union is trying to establish the company’s situation and the likely impact on workers. The construction industry has faced shortages of key materials and increased costs during the pandemic, compounded by a lack of skilled workers. In 2020, another major builder, Grocon, went into administration after a legal stoush with government agency Infrastructure NSW over its Central Barangaroo project in Sydney, which torpedoed its balance sheet. The Queensland government has bought Australia’s northernmost cattle station, Bramwell Station in Cape York, and will return the land to First Nations people for conservation. The purchase of Bramwell Station and Richardson Station will add 131,900ha to Queensland’s protected areas estate. It is the largest conservation acquisition by the state in more than a decade. “This is one of the most significant purchases in Queensland history – linking close to one million hectares of protected land in a picturesque part of our state,” the premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, said. Conserving and returning this land to Traditional Owners will create jobs and opportunities for local workers in the future. The state environment minister, Meaghan Scanlon, said the Cape York Tenure Resolution Program, which returns areas of the Cape to traditional owners, would now negotiate which sections of the land would be designated as national park - to be co-managed by Indigenous people - and which sections would become Aboriginal freehold land. Conservation groups welcomed the announcement. Andrew Picone, a spokesperson for Our Living Outback, said the property occupied a critical place in the Cape York landscape. “Today’s acquisition for future divestment back to Traditional Owners has been long-awaited,” Picone said. The new area supports 25 ecosystems that are already underrepresented in our protected area network, two of which – lowland tropical rainforest and open woodland plains – are threatened. Asked if he could confirm reports Clive Palmer had been taken to hospital, the businessman’s long-time media spokesman Andrew Crook says Palmer is “just being tested”. Clive Palmer’s address to the National Press Club was cancelled on Tuesday with the venue stating: The NPC has just been informed that Clive Palmer has been directed not to travel due [to] him exhibiting Covid-like symptoms ... All ticket holders will be contacted to be refunded. The mining magnate and one-time federal MP told an anti-vaccine mandate rally in November: “I’m not vaccinated and I don’t intend to be vaccinated.” Palmer was due to give a speech at the press club on the UAP’s strategy for the upcoming federal election. Billionaire businessman Clive Palmer has been taken to a Queensland hospital. Guardian Australia confirmed Palmer has been taken from his Gold Coast home to the Pindara Private Hospital by ambulance. A scheduled speech by Palmer at the National Press Club in Canberra was cancelled earlier this week due to the United Australia Party figurehead developing Covid-like symptoms. Palmer has previously told a New South Wales court he is not vaccinated. Palmer has been one of Australia’s leading campaigners against Covid restrictions and vaccine mandates. Here are the latest coronavirus numbers from around Australia today, as the country records at least 42 deaths from Covid 19: ACT Deaths: 0 Cases: 661 In hospital: 41 (with three people in ICU) NSW Deaths: 12 Cases: 8,271 In hospital: 1,211 (with 59 people in ICU) NT Deaths: 3 Cases: 757 In hospital: 108 (with 7 people in ICU) Queensland Deaths: eight Cases: 6,094 In hospital: 334 South Australia Deaths: 3 Cases: 1,735 In hospital: 142 (with 13 people in ICU) Victoria Deaths: 16 Cases: 6,715 In hospital: 322 (with 43 people in ICU) Western Australia Deaths: 0 Cases: 610 local (and seven travel-related cases) The Australian Capital Territory has reported 661 new cases, as the cluster from the ANU O-Week continue to grow. 41 people are in hospital with the virus, and three in intensive care, but thankfully none need ventilation. China’s new ambassador to Australia has offered an olive branch in the intense diplomatic dispute between the two countries, saying they should “meet each other halfway”. Xiao Qian, who landed in Australia last month after years of increasing tensions, said the healthy and stable development of China-Australia relations served the fundamental interests of both sides. China has always attached great importance to the China-Australia relationship, and China is willing to actively develop friendship and cooperation with Australia. The comments come just days after the Morrison government accused China of a dangerous “act of intimidation” over a warship’s shining of a laser at a Royal Australian Air Force surveillance plane north of Australia last week, and after China’s national defence ministry in turn accused the Australian defence force of “spiteful and provocative actions”. Both major political parties in Australia view the differences in the relationship with China as largely structural. In a speech today, Xiao said given this year marked the 50th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic ties, there was an opportunity to ease tensions: China is willing to work with Australia to meet each other halfway. Xiao did not specify any tangible actions the Chinese government may be willing to take to get that relationship back on track – but has clearly signalled he wants to talk. He said the two governments should “jointly make efforts” to push the relationship back on “the right track”. Xiao was speaking at an event at the Chinese embassy in Canberra to present the family of the late New South Wales police force officer Kelly Foster with a medal honouring the bravery of the senior constable. Foster died trying to save Chinese student Jennifer Qi in a whirlpool in the Blue Mountains in January last year. Xiao said Foster had displayed warmth and love “that transcends race, culture and nationality”. China and Australia are far away from each other geographically, by thousands of miles, yet great love knows no national boundaries nor distance … Millions and millions of people in China could feel the warmth, kindness and friendship of the Australian people. Western Australia has recorded 610 new locally acquired cases, and seven travel-related cases. The collapse into administration of Probuild (see earlier post), it turns out, has a China angle. Just over a year ago, treasurer Josh Frydenberg intervened to say he would block a planned takeover of the local unit of the South African-owned WBHO builder, citing national security grounds, the AFR reported at the time. The suitor China State Construction Engineering Corp (who, as the name implies, is state-owned) had been offering to pay $300m for the troubled operations. WBHO cited that rejection as one of the reasons for pulling the pin on the Australian operations: “During 2020, the Company entered into negotiations with a third party to sell the Probuild business, this transaction was progressed to agreed terms by December 2020 but approval from the Australian Foreign Investment Review Board was not obtained. “Following on from this, WBHO implemented its strategy to downsize the business, and considered other sales options which proved fruitless due to concerns potential acquirers had as to the impact of the regulatory approach to Covid.” As the AFR reported in January 2021, Probuild’s executive chairman Simon Gray, who was also a part owner of the Australian unit, wasn’t happy with the decision. (He “slammed” it, apparently.) Gray noted that Probuild was less exposed to significant work, like tunnels and airports, than John Holland, which was bought by the China Communications Construction Company for $1bn in 2015, the paper said. It does make you wonder whether John Holland might take on a Port of Darwin flavour (leased to a Chinese company for 99 years), with questions raised about whether nefarious China string-pulling, etc, might be a risk. Perhaps Australian voters could ask for some consistency. Both Gray and Frydenberg have been approached for comment. In the meantime, it’s worth noting South African shareholders weren’t very impressed by the Probuild fiasco, sending WBHO’s shares down a tidy 27% yesterday, according to Bloomberg. Good afternoon everyone, Mostafa Rachwani with you for the rest of the day, and a quick thanks to the ever brilliant Matilda Boseley for her work this morning. With that, I shall leave you for today, but never fear the fantastic Mostafa Rachwani is here to take you through the afternoon! Vegetarians have a 14% lower chance of developing cancer than carnivores, according to a large-scale study that links meat-eating to a heightened risk of the disease. A team of researchers from Oxford University analysed data on more than 470,000 Britons and found that pescatarians had a 10% reduced risk. Compared with people who eat meat regularly – defined as more than five times a week – those who consumed small amounts had a 2% lower risk of developing cancer, the study found. “In this large British cohort, being a low meat-eater, fish-eater or vegetarian was associated with a lower risk of all cancer sites when compared to regular meat-eaters,” the analysis found. You can ready the full report below: Victoria’s health department has issued a slight correction to this morning’s Covid numbers. They wrote there were 43 active cases are currently in ICU. However, there are actually 43 cases in ICU, “both active and cleared”. Anthony Albanese has targeted the Morrison government on rising petrol prices at his doorstop at the Gold Coast. Albanese said that “fuel prices have gone through the roof”, in part because half the country’s refineries had “shut down” under this government. He also chipped Angus Taylor for locating some of Australia’s fuel reserves in the Gulf of Mexico. Albanese also noted that Australia’s dependency on fuel would be less if we had a greater takeup of electric vehicles, but Scott Morrison said that EVs would “end the weekend”. Earlier, Morrison played down the prospect of cutting fuel excise to tackle rising petrol prices, noting that supply interruptions and price rises are expected to be temporary. Some such as independent senator Rex Patrick have called to cut excise, but Labor hasn’t gone there. The prospect of sanctions is hurting the Russian part-owner of one of Australia’s largest alumina refineries, Queensland Alumina Limited, while the refinery’s majority owner, Rio Tinto, has warned of a looming “disruption” to its aluminium business. QAL, which operates a refinery in Gladstone, is 20% owned by the Russian aluminium giant Rusal, which has previously been hit by US sanctions in 2018, implemented in response to the country’s “malign activity around the globe”. Rusal’s share price has taken a battering as tensions in Ukraine escalate, falling up to 22% in Hong Kong, the biggest fall since April 2018, according to Bloomberg. QAL would not comment when approached by Guardian Australia about whether it feared further sanctions, or what impact they might have on the company. You can read the full report below: Queensland supreme court judge Helen Bowskill has been appointed as the new chief justice, Marty Silk from AAP reports. The senior judge administrator will take over the state’s top legal job from Justice Catherine Holmes, who is retiring. The premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, says Justice Bowskill, who has been a supreme and district court judge, is the right person to lead the court. She also paid tribute to Justice Holmes, who was Queensland’s first female chief justice. The baton that passes to Judge Bowskill has been wielded most admirably by her predecessor ... Chief Justice Catherine Holmes is widely acknowledged as one of the finest legal minds our state has produced. Mr Speaker, one day it will go unremarked that both Justices Holmes and Bowskill are women. Sadly we are not quite there, but we are close. It is a source of pride to me that all three branches of public administration in this state are led by women. Bowskill will take over as chief justice on 19 March. In order to cope with the crushing weight of the news nowadays, I sometimes like to photoshop luscious locks of hair onto politicians. Please enjoy this new and improved Anthony Albanese photo shoot. Australia is relaxing face mask rules – but when, and where, should you keep wearing them? Find out in this piece from Hassan Vally and Catherine Bennett below: Things don’t seem to be easing up all too quickly in south-east Queensland, with the potential for flash flooding still strong. Probuild, one of Australia’s largest construction companies, has gone into administration, putting at risk hundreds of jobs and also a series of major projects from CSL’s new headquarters and a big one for Victoria police. In a statement this morning, Deloitte said 18 related companies within the WBHO Australia group had been placed into voluntary administration, effective 10pm AEDT on Wednesday. “WBHOA has been a major contributor to the construction sector and the broader economy, including as a direct and indirect employer,” Sal Algeri, leader of Deloitte’s (optimistically named) Turnaround and Restructuring unit, said: The Covid-19 pandemic has created challenging trading conditions for many businesses, and for WBHOA, which has also been impacted by certain loss-making projects ... Our immediate focus will be to undertake an urgent assessment of the entities’ financial positions and work with key stakeholders to stabilise the business and projects where possible. Deloitte said the company directly employs approximately 750 people and has annual revenues of more than $1.4bn. Reporting has focused on several big projects that went awry, including one in Queen St, Brisbane that left a $45m loss, according to the Australian. The South African-based owners, Wilson Bayly Holmes-Ovcon, told the Johannesburg stock exchange yesterday that it was “discontinuing financial assistance”. In a statement, it said: The Australian construction environment has also become increasingly competitive and contractual, in our view, the potential risk on large mega-building projects outweighs the current margins available. The statement went on to blame Australia’s pandemic response for its woes: The Australian government’s hard-line approach of managing Covid-19 through a combination of border restrictions, snap lockdowns and mandatory work-from-home regulations for many sectors, has had a considerable impact on property markets as well as other industries such as the leisure industry. The impact of lockdown restrictions on the retail, hotel and leisure and commercial office sectors of building markets have created high levels of business uncertainty in Australia and have significantly reduced demand and delayed the award of new projects in these key sectors of the construction industry. Fair to say that Probuild’s transition to Antibuild hasn’t helped the local stock market, with shares off about 2% so far today. Qantas, which reported a $1.3bn half-yearly loss, is pacing those falls. Of course, those Russia/Ukraine tensions are likely to be the main source of the dim mood. Queensland has recorded another eight Covid-19 related deaths and 6,094 cases as hospital admissions continue to drop, reports AAP. The premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, expressed her “deepest sympathy” for the families of those who have died, four of whom were in aged care. Hospital numbers in the state continue to drop, down to 334 on Thursday from 379, and Palaszczuk said cases in school-aged children are also trending down. Just under 63.6% of eligible Queenslanders have received their third booster shot, but the first dose vaccine rate for kids aged between five and 11 is still under 50%. The figure currently sits at 42.28% as the state counts down to mask mandate lifting in just over a week. Palaszczuk is encouraging parents to get their children vaccinated before 4 March when restrictions are scheduled to relax. The Morrison government has awarded over half a million dollars in funding for the installation of fibre-to-the-premises NBN to a single business in the electorate of the deputy prime minister, Barnaby Joyce, despite the government having previously argued against taxpayer-funded fibre upgrades. Fruit and vegetable grower Costa Group, which on Tuesday reported a 2021 yearly net profit after tax of $64m, is listed in documents provided to Senate estimates as the sole beneficiary of a planned upgrade from satellite NBN services to a full fibre-to-the-premises service. The upgrade is for the company’s tomato glasshouse facility in Guyra, in the New England electorate, as part of the federal government’s regional connectivity program. NBN Co will switch the business over at a cost of $520,018, with the company needing to install fibre along the New England Highway to connect Costa’s facility. You can read the full report below: Queensland recorded eight Covid deaths and 6,094 new infections overnight. There are now 334 Covid-positive cases in the state’s public hospital system. The code brown in Victoria might be over, but it seems a very different kind of code brown in NSW has begun. There has been a 97% increase in gastro outbreaks in NSW childcare centres in February compared to normal levels. NSW Health is now urging parents to keep their kids at home if they have any gastro symptoms. Executive director of health protection, Dr Richard Broome, says there have been 156 outbreaks of gastroenteritis so far this month. Almost 1,000 children and more than 210 staff members have been affected to date, a 97% increase above the number normally reported for the month of February. NSW Health has notified the directors of NSW early childhood education services to an increase in viral gastroenteritis outbreaks, and since then there have been further notifications of gastroenteritis outbreaks across the sector. NSW Health say the symptoms of viral gastroenteritis include “nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, fever, abdominal pain, headache and muscle aches”. They can take up to three days to develop and usually last between one or two days, and sometimes longer. From AAP: The South Australian government has promised a $500m expansion across the state’s health system if returned at the March state election. The commitment includes funds for new capital workers to expand a series of major hospitals. “There is no doubt the Covid-19 pandemic has presented challenges to our health system but here in South Australia we have stood up better than anywhere else in the nation,” the premier, Steven Marshall, said. “Our management of the pandemic has kept our state safe and now we have a strong plan to boost our health system to ensure South Australians can continue to get the care they need, when and where they need it.” But the opposition said the government’s announcement was a vague plan to spend millions on unspecified work in response to Labor’s recent health commitments including funds for 300 more hospital beds, 300 more nurses and 100 more doctors. South-east Queensland is bracing for another day of heavy rainfall as a slow-moving storm system threatens to bring 300 millimetres of rain in just six hours. It comes amid the search for a missing motorbike rider, feared to have been swept away in the flood at Gympie on Wednesday. Morrison says Australia isn’t considering providing “lethal military assistance” to Ukraine. Reporter: Prime minister, the Ukraine Council for New South Wales said Australia should provide lethal military assistance to Kyiv. At what point would something like that be considered? Morrison: That’s not under contemplation by Australia, never has been, never been requested. The support we provide in relation to that type of assistance is done a long way away from Ukraine. It doesn’t involve the deployment of those types of forces. It never would be in that contexts. The prime minister has been asked how much he expects petrol prices to go up as a result of the Russian situation. (Russia is one of the globe’s major natural gas producers.) Our advice from the International Energy Agency is we do expect there to be a short-term – they say a temporary – impact on world oil prices. I think that is to be accepted with the uncertainty and instability that can follow an event of this magnitude but there is nothing to suggest that at the moment that would necessarily be a prolonged event. That could change. Oil prices go up and down and for many other reasons. Those events are pretty much completely outside of the control of the Australian government in terms of what happens to world oil prices, but we are working with other partners about what collective action that we can take in relation to oil prices and mitigating the shocks that can occur. That’s on the issue of oil prices. I would note that our gas security mechanism and the memorandum that we have for the required supply of gas into the Australian domestic market, has proved highly effective ... in keeping gas prices in Australia under control, to the tune of up to about 75% lower than they might have otherwise been as a result of what we’re seeing in Europe. What does that mean? That means electricity prices are lower. What does that mean? It means ... those businesses which could otherwise be completely overwhelmed by such a surge in gas prices and put them at great risk, have been able to continue their operations and remain highly competitive. And so we are monitoring the impacts on energy prices and working with the IEA and minister [Angus] Taylor will have a bit more to say about that later today. Morrison has been asked about the lacklustre response to the Ukrainian situation from India (a historical ally of Russia). The prime minister has had to work a careful line here when responding given how integral the Indian-Australian population is to Australia. Reporter: Unlike other countries, India has said they’re remaining neutral, there will be no sanctions. They’re a Quad partner of ours. Are you concerned the Indians may – through lack of action – be aiding, abetting or encouraging, in your words, Vladimir Putin? Morrison: I wouldn’t refer to them in the same context I made remarks about China. China voted with Russia in the National Security Council of the UN. India did not do that. The debate that China and Russia voted to prevent proceeded and was not obstructed by India. All countries have different levels of engagement with Russia ... and so I’m respectful of that, but my position is very clear - I think it is important for like-minded countries to take the strongest possible action, because one day it’s a country like Russia threatening the border and seeking to invade Ukraine, and the next it could be countries in our own region seeking to do the same thing. My response and Australia’s response will always be principled and consistent. Reporter: What would those further sanctions potentially look like, if we were to go to the next stage? Morrison: If I was in a position to be announcing what they were, I’d be doing that. I tend not to telegraph what our next actions are, but I can assure you that we have all options on the table when it comes to our diplomatic and other economic sanctions. Morrison says the sanctions against Russia will have a minimal impact on Australian businesses as we do not have a huge amount of direct trade with the country. Firstly, our trade with Russia is quite minor compared with many other countries. In making the decisions yesterday, the Treasury secretary attended that meeting and gave us advice we could impose these sanctions with minimal impact on Australian businesses but it is important under the autonomous sanctions legislation there is a period of time for businesses to make adjustments to their arrangements as appropriate. We are not overly concerned when it comes to the direct impact of sanctions. Why? Sanctions are intended to impact those they’re directed towards, not towards those imposing them. That’s the point of sanctions and how they’re conducted. The most potent form of those sanctions are the targeted ones to the individuals that is now possible because of the stronger laws my government passed to enable us to do just that. I’ve seen the commentary that has come from others who don’t sit in national security committees of Cabinet and don’t have the benefit of the intelligence and advice and information and the staged responses the government is engaged in. They’re at liberty to make their contributions and comments but I would simply say that Australia will continue to take a very careful, strategic and staged response to this crisis. We have plenty left in the tank when it comes to further actions we would take if and when the violence is escalated by Russia. We will continue, I think, to follow a very disciplined path on this, not reactive. Scott Morrison: On the issue of cyber security, there has been a pattern of cyber-attacks against Ukraine and that continues now. Malicious cyber activity could impact Australian organisations through unintended interruption or unmaintained cyber activities. We are not aware of any current or specific threats against Australian organisations, but are adopting an enhanced cybersecurity posture, and we have been for sometime now, and increased monitoring of threats will help reduce threats to Australian organisations. The Australian Cyber Security Centre recommends that organisations urgently adopt an enhanced cyber security posture. This should include reviewing and enhancing mitigation and measures. Login and detection systems should be fully updated and apply additional monitoring that their networks. Organisations should assess their preparedness to respond to any cyber security issues. The prime minister has once again dismissed the statement made by the Russian embassy in Australia which suggested Australia has turned a blind eye to aggression in the Donbas region from the Ukrainian side. I also want to make a few comments about the statements made by the Russian ambassador. The Russian ambassador was called in to speak to the secretary of Foreign Affairs. The suggestion that somehow Russian soldiers crossing the border and entering Ukraine [are peacekeeping] is deeply offensive to anyone who has pulled on a uniform as a peacekeeper across the world, which so many countries in the Pacific have as well. They’re not peacekeepers. They’re invaders. That’s how we see it and we’ll call it out. If they don’t like it, that’s tough. There is no justification for Russia’s aggression in Ukraine and any attempt to create some pretext for it is offensive. Morrison says he hopes Australia’s sanction against Russia will deter an invasion of Ukraine but doesn’t expect it will. Now, I note that many have said, ‘do you think that this will lead to Russia pulling back?’ I would hope so, but I don’t expect so. The reason we’re doing this is there must be a price for the unprovoked, unlawful, unwarranted, unjustified attacks and threats and intimidation that has been imposed by Russia on Ukraine. This cannot be a consequence-free action by Vladimir Putin and the Russian regime. It should send a message to any other regime out in the world that if you go down this path, if you seek to coerce and bully others, then the world should stand together in targeting those who are directly at the centre of these activities, and this is incredibly important. There must be consequences for violent coercive and bullying behaviour. Morrison: This is important under legislation because that gives the opportunities for businesses that have had legitimate operations and business interests in Russia and in the affected territories of Ukraine to be able to make changes to their arrangements. So these are significant sanctions, but we obviously have to give Australian companies and individuals the time to go and make changes to their arrangements in an orderly way. We are working very closely, especially with the United States and the United Kingdom, on our list, and our list is longer than the eight that I’ve just mentioned and we will be working closely to develop the case that will enable us to take further actions against others. We won’t hesitate when we’re in possession of that information to take that extra step. We’ve already had a wider package of sanctions on persons and entities in reserve. Scott Morrison confirms the governor-general has signed off on a new tranche of sanctions targeting prominent individuals in Russia. I’ve just returned from a meeting of the Executive Council with the governor general where my government has signed the amendment to the sanctions regulations which creates the framework to target sanctions against individuals and I stress individuals who are in a situation where they are able to support a regime and act in the interests of Russia to the ends that they are supporting the measures that we’re seeing in the Ukraine. This is important legislation. It is targeted legislation. It adds a whole new tool to our toolkit when it comes to dealing with this illegal, unlawful behaviour. It is a tool that we’re implementing in partnership with our allies and like-minded countries particularly the United States and the United Kingdom. This will be the first tranche of measures that we expect to take. We are taking actions against eight members of Russia’s Security Council, a series of banks and financial institutions that I indicated yesterday and extending existing sanctions on the transport, energy and telecommunications and oil and gas and mineral sectors to Donetsk and Luhansk. This is getting us the scope to cover people and entities of strategic and economic significance to Russia. So that gives us a broad remit in order to take targeted action. So, the sanctions we’re putting in place aren’t just what you would have seen in the past against a nation more broadly. This goes direct to those individuals who are at the heart of this bullying and aggressive behaviour. It targets their financial interests. It prevents them from travelling. It stops them from moving money around. It stops them from coming and having holidays in countries such as Australia or going shopping in Harrods or doing the things of that nature and trying to live their lives as if they have nothing to do with the violence and bullying and intimidation that they are supporting from the Russian regime. The sanctions will become law tomorrow and they will take effect at the end of March. Morrison: I spoke to Ukraine’s prime minister last night. He was extraordinarily grateful for the position that Australia has taken and reached out to say thank you. He was very appreciative of the work that we’re doing to support the Ukraine community here in Australia. And just to remind everyone, if you’re in Australia, a Ukrainian citizen and your visa runs out by 30 January, we will extend it by a further six months. We’ve taken all the visa applications of Ukrainian citizens and put them at the top of the pile and I’ve asked them to be resolved as quickly as possible so those Ukrainian citizens might come to Australia. So we’re working to deal with many of the humanitarian issues that may evolve from this. And we’re working with Poland and other countries who will end up, probably, taking large numbers of displaced persons. We’ve dealt with this before with Kosovars who had temporary accommodation in Australia. We’re taking those measures but we’re also sending a message to any bully, any thug anywhere, that you can’t use threats of violence to get countries to bend to your will. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, is speaking now. Let’s have a listen in. And the softball campaign interviews continue! Victorian parliament having a normal one this morning. A reminder that we are waiting for the prime minister to step up for a media conference in about ten minutes or so. Qantas has posted a $1.28bn pre-tax loss in its half-year financial results, as the airline blames lockdowns in the second half of last year and the Omicron variant for hitting travel confidence at the end of 2020. Qantas group – which includes budget carrier Jetstar– also posted a $622m statutory loss before tax – its fourth consecutive half-yearly loss. However, it managed to further reduce its net debt to $5.5bn, down from $5.9bn at the end of June. Revenue losses since the start of the pandemic grew to more than $22bn. In announcing the result on Thursday, Qantas indicated it would also offer 1,000 shares in the company to approximately 20,000 employees, as part of its staff “recovery and retention plan”. Domestic lockdowns in the second half of last year, the impact of the Omicron variant, and “continued international restrictions” meant the airline was operating at just 18% of its pre-Covid levels during the last six months of the year. Western Australia’s unexpected delayed border reopening was also blamed. Qantas chief executive, Alan Joyce, said that while there had been “a sharp rebound in travel demand” from October to December, the uncertainty of the Omicron wave carried over into January. Joyce said surveys of frequent flyer members showed an intent to travel rising in the fourth quarter, and that the airline had seen “a sharp uptick in international ticket sales in the past few weeks: We’re very conscious of the support and patience shown by customers and shareholders as we all wait for travel conditions to stabilise. In the meantime, we’ve done a lot of work to put this company in the best possible position to deliver. Employees across the Qantas Group have lived through enormous challenge and uncertainty over the past two years. Many have been stood down for extended periods of time and we’ve asked them to accept a wage freeze to help our company get through an unprecedented crisis that many other airlines didn’t survive. When Jannine Scott first joined her daughter Bethany on the national disability insurance scheme, it was “life-changing”. The scheme funded in-home support workers for Scott, who has a spinal cord condition, and paid for a power wheelchair and other assistive technology: I am sitting in my wheelchair at the moment and, without that piece of equipment, I would have been housebound much, much sooner. But the effort it takes to engage with this part of the government now is becoming wildly unreasonable. Like a growing number of people who are complaining about what the federal opposition claims are “stealth” cuts to the NDIS, Scott said her NDIS experience took a dark turn. You can read the full report below: Some 1,200 Victoria police officers and protective service officers have been working without proper authorisation for up to eight years. Chief commissioner Shane Patton and police minister Lisa Neville are holding a press conference to explain the “administrative error”, which they say they became aware of on Tuesday. In the past, deputy commissioners were able to appoint acting assistant commissioners, who were able to swear in new police officers. But when the Victoria Police Act 2013 came into effect in mid-2014, a delegation from the chief commissioner was required to allow deputy commissioners to appoint assistant commissioners: So what that means that on a number of occasions since 2014 to around September last year, acting assistant commissioners commissioners on occasions have sworn in police officers and protective services officers, without having the valid powers to do so. Some 1,076 police officers, 157 PSOs and 29 police custody officers will need to be sworn in again. Patton: We’ve gone through quite a complex scenario and seeing anyone who’s rostered on today on any of the shifts today starting from six or seven this morning, and we’re prioritising those. They will be sworn in and that swearing in should be occurring anytime around now and throughout the rest of the day ... Those officers won’t be allowed to perform any duties or do anything further, other than maybe do a bit of correspondence for an hour or two at the most before they actually get sworn in ... We hope to scoop up most of them the next couple of days. Neville says the government will introduce legislation to state parliament next week to retrospectively ensure all decisions that have been made prior to these to the re-swearings have validity going forward. Patton: I expect there’ll be no one going ramifications for any of the police officers involved in this matter. Once the legislative provisions have been remediated, and they’ve been acting in good faith. They’ve been performing their duties in the belief that they had the requisite powers and as a result of that we will continue to indemnify those officers in accordance with government policy for indemnities. Let’s duck over to Scott Morrison’s Today Show interview (which, due to the magic of pre-recorded radio interviews) aired at the same time as his chat with ABC AM: Host Karl Stefanovic: Let’s be brutally honest. Europe has hit Russia with the equivalent of a wet lettuce leaf, and has the US under Joe Biden completely lots its swagger? Morrison: Well, look, I’m not going to lecture Europe. They’re the ones that are closer to this, any more than I’d welcome Europe lecturing Australia about our security interests in this part of the world and the decisions that we make about our security interests … Were they to have troops deployed in Ukraine, it would have been their people, their soldiers, and, you know, they’re obviously decisions they have to take about what’s in their best interests. The United States, as a Nato partner, joined in that. But from our point of view, we have to second a very clear message that people who treat international borders and international law like this needs to be singled out, isolated and called out, and that’s what I’ve been seeking to do. It’s not enough just to say, “Well, we’d like them to step back,” and, “We’d like them to step back,” and, “We’d like them to not pursue this.” We have to denounce specifically that they have no just cause here, Russia. There is no provocation from Ukraine. There is no legitimate interest Russia is pursuing there. Scott Morrison! Could you please just do one interview at a time! It would make it so much easier to blog! Scott Morrison was asked if he had told the Russian ambassador to “pack his bags” when he was called in to speak to the government yesterday. No. And we are taking just one step at a time. And we announced the sanctions that we are putting in now and this morning I’ll be meeting with the governor general to confirm those arrangements on the regulatory changes under the Autonomous Sanctions Act. And that will enable us to begin targeting specific individuals in relation to the sanctions we’ve announced and that this will be just the start. As yet we haven’t seen the full-scale invasion take place in Ukraine and let’s hope that that still is averted. But Russia is at peak readiness for such a full-scale invasion. That’s our advice and so that means that things are imminent. They need to be under no doubt that any suggestion there’s some pretext for what they’re doing any suggestion that they have some legitimate claim here that has to be completely denounced. This is unprovoked, unwarranted. This is a sheer act of bullying, threats, intimidation and aggression against the neighbour and Ukraine should be called out as such. Scott Morrison has told ABC radio that he is “used to bullies”, dismissing the Russian embassy to Australia’s statement released last night: They’ll spread all sorts of misinformation. We’ve seen all this before. I completely reject that. I mean, these points that were made by the Russian ambassador when they were called in yesterday, and informed of the position Australia was taking, I think, is very firm very clear. And in speaking to Ukraine’s prime minister last night, it’s greatly appreciated by a country that has been threatened by an autocratic bully on its own borders. The Australian government will implement a raft of sanctions against Russia, insisting there “must be consequences” for Moscow’s military actions along its border with Ukraine and recognition of separatist-controlled regions in the east of the country. Scott Morrison unveiled the “first tranche” of sanctions yesterday, bringing Australia in line with the US, UK and European allies’ initial responses to President Vladimir Putin’s actions in relation to Ukraine. Australia’s sanctions would target specific Russian individuals, corporations and industries in the hope of pressuring the Russian government to stop “behaving like thugs and bullies”, Morrison said. Here’s what we know about Australia’s new sanctions on Russia, what they’re designed to do, and what their impact might be: Energy minister Angus Taylor has been asked on ABC radio if the Coalition government will fast track energy grid upgrades to integrate more renewables: We’re doing it now … we’ve made some very significant decisions working directly and indirectly with the private sector … we saw it ahead of time. Former foreign affairs minister Julie Bishop has supported comments made by the current and former chiefs of Asio that the national security agency shouldn’t be used as “a partisan political football” in the lead-up to the federal election. The comments came after extraordinary scenes in federal parliament last week, when the prime minister, Scott Morrison, called a senior Labor frontbencher a “Manchurian candidate”, implying that he was a puppet being used by an enemy power – in this case China. Australia’s domestic spy chief, Mike Burgess, hit back, saying weaponising national security was “not helpful to us” and that Asio was “not here to be politicised, it should not be”. Burgess’s comments were then echoed by former spy chief Dennis Richardson, who said the Morrison government was serving China’s interests by politicising national security and by “seeking to create the perception of a difference [between the major parties] when none in practice exists”. Bishop, who served as minister for foreign affairs under Tony Abbott and Malcolm Turnbull, and was deputy leader of the Liberal party for 11 years, supported the comments of Burgess and Richardson on ABC TV’s 7.30 on Wednesday night, saying: My concern is that foreign policy and national security should always be as far as possible bipartisan and that we need long-term consistency, particularly national security, so that our security and defence and intelligence agencies can do their work. Now, of course, there can be debates and I know that the government is focusing on Labor’s track record on defence spending. They are legitimate questions and no doubt the opposition’s commitments to defence spending will be an issue in the next election. But I would be heeding the words of the Asio director because, if he says it’s not helpful for the agencies, for national security to be used as a partisan political football, then that’s not in Australia’s national interest either and that should be an approach taken by all parliamentarians. The Australian government should consider building up to six conventional submarines to bridge the gap before the nuclear-powered submarines under the Aukus plans are ready, a new report says. Under the trumpeted Aukus partnership, the US and the UK have promised to help Australia acquire eight nuclear-propelled submarines, but Scott Morrison has indicated the first of these might not be in the water until about 2040. The government plans to extend the life of Australia’s ageing Collins class submarines in the meantime. The Australian Shipbuilding Federation of Unions warns in a report published today that the Royal Australian Navy faces a potentially dangerous “capability gap”. The federation – funded by the Australian Manufacturing Workers’ Union, Australian Workers Union, Electrical Trades Union and Professionals Australia – says the transition to a force of eight nuclear-powered submarines will take two to three decades: Despite extending the life of the Collins-class submarines by 10 years, they are projected to be withdrawn from service at 24-month intervals from 2038. From a strategic and operational standpoint, the RAN could be left with no submarines capable of being deployed, leaving our armed forces with a significant capability gap. This conflicts with Australia’s increasingly high strategic threat and would undermine national security. The report calls on the government to take immediate action to build at least four, and as many as six, conventional submarines in Australia to ensure there is no capability gap and to save “thousands of highly skilled jobs”. The proposed design is not detailed in the report, but options could include building an “evolved” version of the existing Collins class submarine. Given Australia’s history of long lead times on major defence projects, the report suggests what could be politely described as a highly ambitious timeframe: The order of up to six conventional submarines will take one to two years to complete detailed planning and achieve government approval before contracts can be awarded. Within two years of the contract being signed, manufacture of the submarines should start, which would be in 2026. Following Australia’s strong rhetoric condemning Russia’s actions in Ukraine, the Russian embassy in Australia has put out a scathing statement, accusing the federal government of “encouraging the xenophobic bullies based in Kyiv” and turning a blind eye to Ukraine’s actions in the east: In the wake of the recognition of the Donetsk People’s Republic (DPR) and Lugansk People’s Republic (LPR) by the Russian Federation, Ambassador Alexey Pavlovsky was summoned to the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade to be presented with a strong protest. At the same time, the Australian government announced a new package of unilateral sanctions. In this respect, the following should be noticed. Contrary to what the Prime Minister of Australia asserted today, Australia does not always stand up to the bullies. Canberra has been totally indifferent to the discrimination of the Russian speakers by the radical nationalistic regime in Ukraine and to the plight of civilians in Donbass living for years under blockade and constant shelling from the Ukrainian military. Recently discovered evidence show that people often couldn’t even properly bury the dead. In alignment with its key partners, Canberra has played its part in supporting and encouraging the xenophobic bullies based in Kyiv. Angus Taylor: There’s no question that this is putting supply pressure on the world and people are feeling it on the pump ... We’ll continue to do everything we can to take those pressures away wherever possible. Oil prices have skyrocketed after Russia ordered troops into eastern Ukraine, surging towards US$100 with the potential to go even higher if things keep escalating. Federal energy minister Angus Taylor is discussing this issue with ABC radio and has been asked if Australia would consider sanctions on oil as part of its response to Russia: We have to make sure our sanctions have the right, targeted impact … we have to make sure we are able to contain prices at the bowser as best we can … We’ll continue to put pressure on Moscow … it’s not acceptable to have thugs and bullies in the global community. David Koch: Ukraine is not in our backyard. China is. It has always had eyes on Taiwan. Do you think they are watching this closely and the world’s reaction to Russia as they have Taiwan in the back of their mind? Scott Morrison: I believe China is of course watching this very carefully and that is why I have been at pains to say that China needs to take as strong as a position as other countries in denouncing what Russia is doing. We need to be clear, there is no pretext, there is no provocation, there is no just cause that Russia is seeking to pursue, I have seen the statements made by the Russian ambassador in Australia and I completely reject them. Cyber attacks are occurring again in Ukraine and we know that Russian troops are there and already moving, and we cannot have it stand that there is somehow justification for this, and I welcome the fact that China has so far said that tensions should be de-escalated but they need to go further and announce threats of violence and any suggestion that there is any provocation for this. Bullying, where ever it is occurring and particularly in our own region, is something that I and my government have stood up against. Koch: So we are saying that China should not even think about Taiwan? Morrison: We have always said so and it is important that they seek to play to a much larger global role, with the responsibilities that go with that, to denounce bullying and threats of violence against other countries for the purpose of seeking to control them. That is what coercion is! For we cannot do much in terms of sanctions because we don’t have really big trade ties with Russia, unlike Europe. Sunrise host David Koch has asked the prime minister to explain why Australians should care about what’s happening in Ukraine: Most Australians could not find Ukraine on a map. It is not in our backyard, why do we need to take a tougher stance? Scott Morrison: This is about the sovereignty of countries, we have got a very large country in Russia which is bullying and threatening its neighbour and telling them the decisions that they have to make ... This is not how the world should work. This is not how the rule of law and international law can work. Ukraine itself is not a member of Nato but, even so, when you have a country that is bullying and seeking to use force and threats of violence to get its own way against another country, that is not something that Australia could ever support. Prime minister Scott Morrison has told Sunrise that the “invasion has effectively already begun”, condemning Russia’s actions in Ukraine. Morrison says he spoke with the Ukrainian prime minister last night: He is appreciative of his support from around the world and the reason he wanted to speak to us was to thank us ready for our strong stance. And we will work with him and neighbouring countries, particularly Poland, where we have people right now providing consular support into Ukraine. We have got some 38,000 Australians here in Australia who will be very concerned about the situation in the Ukraine, with Ukrainian heritage, about 1,400 Australians in Ukraine itself. The situation remains at the most extreme level and the invasion has effectively already begun. We completely reject the claims that Russia has made in relation to Ukraine and the territories that they have come and occupied and the world has to continue to stand strong on this and the Ukrainian prime minister was very appreciative of the strong stand, particularly Australia had taken on a range of sanctions. Queensland is battening down amid fears heavy rainfall will reintensify and continue to pummel the south-east, reports AAP’s Robyn Wuth. Intense rainfall from a slow-moving system has battered the region, triggering wild flash flooding that has claimed at least one life. The body of a 63-year-old woman was found submerged in a vehicle after it was swept into raging storm waters west of Eumundi on the Sunshine Coast yesterday morning. Grave fears were also held for a 54-year-old man whose motorcycle was found near Gympie as rescuers combed waterways for the missing rider. The deluge from the slow-moving weather system yesterday dumped record rainfall, with more than 400mm falling in some areas in hours. After weeks of drenching summer rain, catchments could not cope with the downpour. Queenslanders have been warned the south-east is still in the line of fire, with predictions that up to a month of rain could fall today. Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk said: This has the potential to be a significant rainfall event for south-east Queensland ...Since many catchments are now saturated, there is an increased risk of dangerous and life-threatening flash flooding over the coming days. The Bureau of Meteorology issued a general flood warning for south-east Queensland, with fears the system will reform and reintensify. Queensland Rail says it’s likely the Sunshine Coast line won’t return to normal for several days. Replacement busses will be in place and passengers are being asked to allow for up to an hour of extra travel time. The south-east coast and the Wide Bay-Burnett region bore the brunt yesterday with Burnett, Burrum and Cherwell, Mary, Noosa, Pine, Caboolture, Brisbane, Logan and Albert, Condamine rivers beyond capacity, as well as rivers and creeks on the Gold and Sunshine coasts. Seqwater said emergency flood releases from the Somerset and North Pine dams were possible in the next 48 hours. The Leslie Harrison, Lake Macdonald (Six Mile Creek), Poona, Ewen Maddock, Cooloolabin dams are already spilling. Good morning, everyone, it’s Matilda Boseley here with you. There is plenty to get through so let’s start in Prague where foreign affairs minister Marise Payne has spoken out against Russia overnight. She told Czech reporters that it was an “obscene perversion” for President Vladimir Putin to speak of Russian soldiers acting as “peacekeepers” in Ukraine: Any suggestions that there is a legitimate basis for Russia’s actions are pure propaganda and disinformation ... The assertion by President Putin of Russian soldiers acting as peacekeepers is indeed an obscene perversion of the noble and vital role that generations of peacekeepers have played across the world. Payne added that Australia would not hesitate to impose more sanctions if Russia escalated tensions. This comes after Russia recognised the separatist regions of Donetsk and Luhansk as independent territories. Overnight Ukraine declared a state of emergency and told its citizens in Russia to leave while Russia began evacuating its embassy in the capital of Kyiv in the latest signs that a full-scale Russian invasion could be imminent. Heading back to Australian shores, from today six- to 11-year-olds are eligible for the Moderna vaccine after experts signed off on the expansion of the immunisation program. The Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation has recommended the vaccine after approval last week by the Therapeutic Goods Administration. Jabs will be available to children from Thursday, with the approval broadening the previous recommendation which was for children aged 12 and up. Each vaccine will be half the adult dose and children will need two doses spaced eight weeks apart. A second dose can be given as early as four weeks from the first in certain circumstances, including if a child is immunocompromised. With that, why don’t we jump right into the day? It’s going to be a big one.An elderly man who sparked a police manhunt when, acting out of love, he kidnapped his “sweetheart” from a West Australian aged care home has been killed in a car crash just two days after his partner died. Ralph “Terry” Gibbs, 80, died on Wednesday morning when his vehicle hit a utility on the Bruce Highway south of Bowen in Queensland. His death came 48 hours after his partner of 15 years, Carol Lisle, 84, died in the aged care facility south of Perth from where Gibbs had removed her in early January. Gibbs was driving back to his home in Queensland when involved in the crash. He had just found out about Lisle’s death. The driver of the second vehicle, a 60-year-old local man, was airlifted to hospital in a serious condition. Gibbs’ daughter Rochelle Palmay said it was an accident. “He had been on the road for long hours, he was told of her death while he was driving,” she said on Thursday. “I think he was emotionally tired and I don’t think he had slept enough.” Gibbs was returning from Perth, where he had been handed a seven-month suspended prison sentence on Friday in Perth magistrates court after pleading guilty to unlawfully detaining a person with a mental illness. Lisle, his long-term partner, had been suffering from dementia and Parkinson’s disease. Gibbs wheeled Lisle out the door of Mercy Place Mandurah in January and tried to drive her across Australia’s notoriously dangerous outback in heatwave conditions. The couple was stopped an hour from the Northern Territory border and Lisle was flown to hospital. Gibbs was subsequently charged and issued a restraining order. Palmay, who is one of Gibbs’ five surviving children and lives in New Zealand, said the pair had been inseparable for 15 years. “They met at a ballroom, they spotted each other across the floor,” Palmay said. “Dad came up to Carol and asked her to dance and they never stopped dancing since. “They were such a beautiful couple, always social, always entertaining, a full-of-life couple. The type of couple people love to be around. They’re just lucky they found each other. How many people get to find true love at the end of their life.” Palmay said her father was always upbeat, sang and played the ukulele. He loved travelling with Carol and camping across the country. “People are so fortunate when they find that kind of love,” she said. “They had it. It should not have ended like this.” Lisle had been living in the WA aged care facility since last year after her goddaughter, Belinda Hodgkinson, travelled to Queensland and took her back to the state. Hodgkinson had known Lisle her whole life, her parents were friends and they lived just suburbs away from each other when she was growing up. Hodgkinson described Lisle as a vivacious socialite who loved life and people. “She just brought it all together,” Hodgkinson said. “She was always making everyone laugh and happy. The nursing home said she had the most visitors of all the residents. She was very loved.” She said Lisle wanted to leave Queensland and claimed Gibbs didn’t always look after her properly. Hodgkinson and Gibbs had been in a long-running dispute over who should care for Lisle. “She was very loved by family and friends and we were just trying to give her quality of life at the end, which she didn’t receive from him. That was proof – what he did.” Palmay refuted this claim – saying he never mistreated his partner. Lisle had been placed in the Mercy Place Mandurah aged care home in March 2021 by the State Administrative Tribunal under a guardianship ruling which Gibbs was challenging. Covid restrictions meant he had only been allowed into WA to visit her on four occasions in that time. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Outside court last Friday, Gibbs told reporters he was worried he would never see her again. “I fear I might never see my little girl again, she is fading quickly,” he said. Gibbs said that in the nursing home “all day every day she says, ‘Please take me out of here, please take me out of here,’ and when I would leave to go home she would say, ‘Can I come with you?’ She even wanted to walk to the airport.” Magistrate Raelene Johnston agreed Gibbs acted out of love when he took her but said his actions were “extremely dangerous”. “I accept that you believe you were acting out of love and that you were acting out of care for your partner and that you wanted to be with her, and you believed that she wanted to be with you,” Johnston said when sentencing Gibbs.The Australian prime minister has promised “further waves of sanctions” against Russians including hundreds of members of parliament as he condemned Vladimir Putin for the brutal and unprovoked invasion of Ukraine. Scott Morrison said the Russian president had chosen war and Australia would “band together” with the international community to “ensure there is a cost for this violent, unacceptable and egregious behaviour”. But the Ukrainian embassy’s head of mission in Australia wants the federal government to do more, calling for the Coalition’s sanctions to “significantly expand”. The invasion was condemned by both sides of politics in Australia, with the Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, saying it was “a grave moment for humanity”. Australia and its allies must hold Russia to account for the “shameful act of aggression”, he said. Within minutes of Putin’s short televised address announcing a “special military operation” about 5am Ukrainian time on Thursday, explosions were heard near major Ukrainian cities, including the capital Kyiv. Ukraine’s government introduced martial law in response to what it said was “a full-scale invasion”. Morrison, speaking after briefings from Australian intelligence and security officials in Sydney, said the Russian government had “launched a brutal invasion, unprovoked, on Ukraine, and should be condemned for doing so”. “Right now, our thoughts are very much with those in Ukraine – those who are enduring a terrible invasion as the bombs fall and the shelling continues and the bullets are fired, as special forces from Russia are moving towards Kyiv and tanks are rolling in all around their borders,” Morrison said. A day after announcing sanctions on eight members of Russia’s national security council, Morrison said the government was applying measures on an additional 25 people. “This includes army commanders, deputy defence ministers and Russian mercenaries who have been responsible for the unprovoked and unacceptable aggression,” he said. Sanctions would also be applied to four entities involved in the development and sale of military technology and weapons, he said. Australians would be banned from dealing with a further four financial institutions. “There will be further waves of sanctions as we identify those responsible for these egregious acts, including – as I discussed this afternoon with the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade – moving on over 300 members of the Russian parliament.” Morrison stopped short of expelling the Russian ambassador, Alexey Pavlovsky, from Australia, saying it was important to maintain channels of communication “even in moments of terrible conflicts such as this”. Morrison did not immediately detail which individuals and entities the sanctions would apply to. A list could be released publicly in the coming days, once the Australian assets of those being targeted are frozen or cut off. The prime minister and the foreign minister, Marise Payne, said in a joint statement that Putin had “fabricated a feeble pretext on which to invade”. “Russia’s disinformation and propaganda have convinced no one,” they said. Volodymyr Shalkivskyi, the Ukrainian embassy’s head of mission in Canberra, told ABC’s 7.30 program his government appreciated any help provided by foreign nations but sanctions “can change the situation”. “We will ask our partners to significantly expand sanctions against Russia,” he said. “We hope that there will be a next stage of sanctions that will cover more people who are involved in the aggression against Ukraine. It will be different financial and energy institutions of Russian origin and Russian oligarchs who have a significant influence on the Kremlin.” Shalkivskyi said Ukraine’s government would “defend our country”. “We were warned, we had time to prepare.” The Australian government has said it stands ready to support internationally coordinated action to respond to any price or supply shocks in energy markets. Morrison said while Australian officials still had no evidence of any state-sanctioned cyber-attacks on Australian targets, the Australian Cyber Security Centre and the corporate sector were prepared for the possibility. He urged the estimated 1,400 Australians who remain in Ukraine to leave if safe to do so and to register with Dfat. The prime minister said his thoughts were with Australians of Ukrainian descent, and also with Australians of Russian descent, who he said “will also be feeling terrible about these events”. The attack on Ukraine follows Putin’s announcement of a “special military operation” which the Russian president claimed was needed to achieve the “demilitarisation” of the country. Putin argued “a hostile anti-Russia is being created on our historic lands”. But Albanese said Putin’s attack on Ukraine was “wholly unprovoked and without justification” and the Russian government alone bore responsibility “for the bloodshed and suffering that will follow”. Albanese and the shadow foreign affairs minister, Penny Wong, said the attack would have broader ramifications. “It is also a contemptuous attack on one of the core principles of the post-World War II order, which is that all UN members shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any state,” they said in a statement. The Victorian opposition leader, Matthew Guy, who has family in Kharkiv, said: “Australian Ukrainians watch with horror at the invasion of a European democracy by the Putin dictatorship.” Public buildings in Melbourne’s CBD are to be lit up in the blue and yellow of the Ukrainian flag in a show of support to the people of Ukraine. The state premier, Daniel Andrews, said it would be “a distressing time for Victorian Ukrainian and Russian communities”. Russia’s invasion of Ukraine saw investors dump assets deemed to be relatively risky, sending stocks lower across the Asia-Pacific, while prices of bonds, oil and gold rose. Australia’s benchmark ASX200 share index tumbled almost 3% on Thursday, ending at 6,900.6 points for the lowest close this month. It was the worst day in about 17 months and erased $73bn from the market’s value, the Australian Financial Review reported. Bourses across the region posted similar falls of 2-3%, with Singapore’s 2.9% decline the largest intraday slide since mid-May. US futures were pointing to falls at 2% when Wall Street reopens later on Thursday. The Australian dollar fell about half a US cent for the day to 71.9 US cents. The Russian rouble is more akin to rubble, dropping 5.8% to a record low 86.12 per US dollar, Reuters reported. Investors bought up government bonds from Australia, the US and elsewhere, pushing prices up and yields lower. Many commodities, though, were in demand as investors speculated that sanctions and disruptions could limit supplies. Brent crude oil breached $US100 a barrel price for the first time since 2014, raising the prospect that Australian motorists will soon have to dig even deeper to pay for fuels that are already at record levels. Economists, such as Saul Eslake, have been wary about predicting much fallout for the Australian dollar, noting the local economy had a strong head of steam coming out of the Covid disruptions. More expensive energy, as well as turmoil on financial markets, could dim consumer confidence, they say. Food prices will also be worth watching – and could stoke inflationary pressures. A Bloomberg gauge of agricultural commodities hit a record high on Thursday. Earlier on Thursday, the Australian government revealed it would wait until the end of March to bring into force the sanctions that specifically curb trade with the two Ukrainian regions now recognised as independent by Putin. However, the initial sanctions on eight members of Putin’s security council will take effect from midnight Thursday.The stories of the Northern Irish writer Wendy Erskine, though colloquial and streetwise, are largely traditional in approach. She doesn’t mess the reader around. There are no games or tics, unless you count a taste for the adjective “sleek”. The titles in Dance Move, her propulsive and pleasurable second collection, tend to identify a character or characters (Mrs Dallesandro, Gloria and Max) or an emotional atmosphere (Memento Mori), dabbling at their most extreme in the meta-fictional (Bildungsroman) or double-edged – Nostalgie refers both to a song and the emotions it stirs, Cell to a faction and the virtual imprisonment entailed by membership. Even when Erskine begins with an unexplained allusion (“the night before”) or glimmer of intrigue (a man saying something not “entirely true”), the facts straighten themselves out soon enough, and just as often a situation is set down with unselfconscious baldness: “He was there as visiting professor of film”, “For the last nine years Linda and Rae had been having a takeaway together on a Friday night”. The collection’s title is borrowed from one of the stories, though with a shift from the plural suggesting a desire for unity or cohesion. If anything serves to realise this function, beyond the Belfast backdrop and the use of the third person, it’s the emphasis on the unlived life. These are ghost stories of a kind, with alternative possibilities occupying the role of spectre. The opening tale, Mathematics, begins with a reference to the “remnants of other people’s fun” that the hotel cleaner Roberta keeps in her bedside drawer, and the closing story, Secrets Bonita Beach Krystal Cancun, ends with Rae asking Linda, “What do you think that looked like?” In between are many acts of wondering, speculation, daydreaming, fanciful forecast (“He’d have a Porsche Carerra at some point”). Rhonda, in Golem, about two couples at a country wedding, imagines absconding with her brother-in-law: “It was endlessly sunny with Edgar and sometimes they lived in a house she had seen in an interiors magazine that belonged to a professor at Stanford; a house in Palo Alto, all greenness and beautiful wood.” Erskine’s characters devote much of their energy to these acts of magical thinking – wishing that a child hadn’t died, or had been born to begin with, that a fleeting encounter had lasted longer, that potential hadn’t remained untapped, that “cosmic order” would displace the “patternless” and “meaningless”, or the “arbitrary rules” of everyday life. Temporary experiences provide a short-term way of trying on another self or sizing up another life, and also a breeding ground for future reverie. In Mrs Dallesandro, a wealthy middle-aged housewife recalls a teenage love affair back in County Antrim and a time when she “had ideas then about doing all sorts of things”. In Gloria and Max, an academic gives a woman a lift to a Christian film festival “in some godforsaken spot”, and long afterwards remembers “a stained pink anorak, her hand on his arm”. Erskine certainly doesn’t vindicate her characters’ fantasies or indulge their moments of self-pity. At times the punishment can be severe. Caro, in Cell, loses 25 years to the hollow promises of political utopianism. In Nostalgie, Drew, a former pop singer who works in IT, employs tortuous logic to justify accepting a compromising gig – and is repaid with regret. Gillian, in Memento Mori, had all along been “dreaming of” someone like Tracey, and Tracey’s mother had always hoped she’d meet someone like Gillian, but their relationship is brought short. Rhonda’s vision of California bliss with Edgar is suddenly “vaporised” when she sees him wearing slip-on shoes. As a writer, Erskine is confronted by a similar quandary – discipline and control on one side, freedom and possibility on the other. Sometimes she keeps things too simple, and makes her intentions too plain. Nostalgie, which ends with Drew at a slot machine trying to lose his tainted commission, is a 10-page parable, a cautionary tale about temptation and short-term thinking. Gloria and Max is a sketch. On the other hand, Golem feels overburdened with perspectives and backstory. But in the best stories – Mathematics, Cell, Memento Mori – Erskine’s unflashy effects accrete, achieving genuine cumulative power. She identifies what is most fruitful about her characters’ predicaments – the emotional core, the most resonant ironies – and traces with rapt and infectious attention their doomed if valiant attempts to shimmy away from the real. • Dance Move by Wendy Erskine is published by Pan Macmillan (£14.99). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.A famous Russian independent journalist called me for a quote after Russia launched airstrikes all over Ukraine. We have never met but she started begging for forgiveness for what her country is doing and may do to mine. Both of us are experienced reporters and used to covering hard stories and conflicts. We talked, and we cried. So it begins: 5am. Kyiv, Kharkiv, Odessa, and all along the 2,000km-long Russian-Ukrainian border. I am in touch with friends and colleagues all over the country who are awake and hearing the explosions. A possible attack on 24 February was mentioned by the government before. A few hours before, in the middle of the night, my husband – also a journalist, but not a war correspondent – decided to drive to the office of a friend who is on duty to pick up bulletproof vests “before it starts”. What, where? I have reported on the war before, so I am used to the sound of shelling. I know that a loud bang, a missile, a military explosion can be heard from far away. While trying to identify places and directions, it looked as if Russia was hitting military targets and military airports, which Ukraine’s president later confirmed. He also said Ukrainian air defence was working. Prior to this morning’s full attack, I heard from the military about a particular object to be targeted in Kramatorsk and near Kharkiv if things happen. This knowledge calmed me down. It led me to believe the army knew what to expect. I was one of those who until the very last moment could not accept the notion of a full-scale invasion with airstrikes on our major towns. Putin’s speech was sickening, but still there was a logical, if fictional, justification for a limited Russian operation. The full-scale attack on Ukraine destroys even that. I am talking to people, doing interviews, but in between I am packing and drawing water into buckets – just in case. I said to my husband, who has never been to war, do not go out on the balcony. He jokes: finally he will be allowed to smoke inside. I run a media organisation, I am not supposed to do breaking news. But now I have to. It’s my choice but feels like a duty. I received messages from friends abroad, from as far away as Chile, asking should I really keep reporting. Just a day before I cancelled a prestigious fellowship in Vienna to go to the eastern frontline instead. I covered the conflict there for eight years. For me, there is only one place to be. I read messages and receive news that other towns are under assault, and slowly more clarity emerges. Some of the news about Russian marines in Odessa turned out to be untrue. The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, who a few hours earlier recorded an emotional speech to Russian citizens urging them to stop the war, issued a new statement. He made a reference to a famous anti-military song from the second world war: “Do Russians Want War?”, and added, “The answer is on you”. In the new one-minute statement he urged us to stay at home, don’t rush, but be strong. At 6.30am, in between everything, I send a message to the people with whom we should have gathered for an event today – human rights defenders, some MPs and officials. It’s a one-word message: “cancelled”. Each of them is awake and we give and offer support. I feel very emotional. We hear messages of possible air attacks. Yet the rest of the city remains calm. We hear the sound of police, but not military sirens. The parochial continues. Journalists write that the subway still works, while many decide to drive to the western part of the country. The Ukrainian railways inform us that trains going west are running. I told my Russian journalist friend about our mood. For years I have been reluctant to compare any dictator to Hitler, or any war to the second world war. The comparison, to me, seemed exaggerated, even vulgar. But what other analogy is there? With no reason, in an act of pure madness, an old-fashioned air assault has been inflicted on a neighbouring country. I said that to my Russian colleague, and tried very hard not to show how my voice was trembling. She asked for forgiveness again. There is a famous phrase, “4am Kyiv is bombed”. Every Ukrainian and Russian kid knows it. That’s how the announcement of the German bombardment of Kyiv in 1941 sounded. And here we are: 24 February, 5am Kyiv is bombed by Russia. I am happy to hang up my call. I do not want my fellow journalist to hear me crying. And then my sister calls. I knew she would, it’s me the family and my mother turn to when there is trouble or they need to know what is going on. For two-and-a-half hours from the start of the invasion, they were sleeping. I didn’t dare call them. I really didn’t want to. I wanted to prolong the peace for them, if only for a few hours. Nataliya Gumenyuk is a Ukrainian journalist specialising in foreign affairs and conflict reporting and author of Lost Island: Tales from the Occupied Crimea Join a panel of journalists, hosted by Michael Safi, for a livestreamed event on the Russia-Ukraine crisis. On Thursday 3 March, 8pm GMT | 9pm CET | 12pm PST | 3pm EST. Book tickets hereFormer New South Wales deputy premier John Barilaro has started working with Sydney property developer Coronation Property, just weeks after leaving parliament. The company, which said it had $1.4bn worth of projects under way, and a further $5bn in the pipeline, will employ Barilaro as its executive director. The appointment was revealed after the NSW parliament’s ethics adviser, John Evans, tabled his advice on the appointment to parliament on Thursday. The letter said Barilaro had advised the office that he had accepted the role of executive director with “responsibilities across all aspects of the business”. Barilaro also advised that “there may be some level of engagement with both state and local government” in the role. Although Coronation mostly does work in the private sector, Evans said the company has some unspecified work from the state government. Parliamentarians must seek advice if they intend to undertake employment within 18 months of leaving office. Evans has approved Barilaro taking the job but imposed conditions that he must not use information acquired in the course of being a minister or through his attendance at cabinet. Barilaro is also barred from communicating any of that information to a third party for financial gain. A further condition has been imposed that for 18 months from his last day in ministerial office, Barilaro “should not become personally involved in lobbying government officials, on behalf of Coronation in relation to [his] portfolio responsibilities held during the last two years of ministerial office”. Barilaro’s new job follows news that former premier Gladys Berejiklian has taken an executive position with telecommunications company Optus. However unlike telecommunications, which is regulated by the federal government, regulation of property development is entirely the province of the state and local government. The involvement of the state government extends beyond policy matters to decisions on zonings and approvals of major projects, though some of the more contentious approvals are now sent to the Independent Planning Commission for assessments which are made public. This followed a decade of scandals under the previous Labor government over the state government “calling in” projects where they hit resistance from local communities and pushing them through. Donation laws were also overhauled after concerns were raised about the influence of donors in the property industry on state government decisions. The state government is also a major property owner in the state. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Coronation’s current developments include a terrace house development in Ashbury, a $52m apartment block in the CBD of Parramatta and an 850-unit development over five buildings in Merrylands. Coronation recently also completed the redevelopment of the old paper mill site on the Georges River at Liverpool. It includes retail areas and 882 apartments. The development of Liverpool took off after the state government lifted the height restrictions in the area in 2015, allowing for a major transformation of the centre. Coronation Property is owned by John Landerer, a well-known lawyer and Sydney businessman, and Joe Nahas, who has been in the property industry for 20 years. Last week Landerer sold his Vaucluse mansion for a reported $62m, making it the sixth most expensive sale in the country. Comment has been sought from Barilaro and Coronation.Vladimir Putin has ordered Russian forces to attack Ukraine and invaded the country amid warnings from leaders across the world that it could “spark the biggest war in Europe since 1945”. We would like to hear from people in Ukraine about the situation in the country. You can share news tips or experiences, direct with our journalists, by getting in touch below. Share your views and experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below, anonymously if you wish, or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. Please note that while we’d like to hear from you, your security is most important. We recognise it may not always be safe or appropriate to record or share your experiences – so please think about this when considering whether to get in touch with the Guardian. IP addresses will be recorded on a third party webserver, so for true anonymity use our SecureDrop service, however anything submitted on the form below will be encrypted and confidential if you wish to continue. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.In a step that world leaders have said could “spark the biggest war in Europe since 1945,” Vladimir Putin has ordered Russian forces to attack Ukraine and invade the country. We would like to hear from people who are leaving Ukraine or have left in recent days due to the situation. How and when did you make the decision to leave? Where are you going? Have you encountered any issues while leaving the country? We’d also like to hear from foreign nationals who have chosen to stay in the country. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Indigenous leaders who mobilized Arizona voters to help elect Senator Kyrsten Sinema say the centrist Democratic lawmaker can no longer count on their support, as communities feel betrayed. Sinema was elected in 2018, halfway through Trump’s term, amid growing alarm at the rollback of voting rights and environmental protections that disproportionately affect tribal communities. Sinema entered the Senate after six years in Congress, having beaten her Republican opponent with 50% of the vote, thanks in part to the large turnout among Indigenous Americans in Arizona. Two years later, another record turnout among the state’s 22 tribes was crucial in flipping Arizona from red to blue and securing Biden’s path to the White House. But Sinema’s record as a senator is under mounting scrutiny after she and West Virginia Democrat Joe Manchin sided with Republicans to keep the Senate filibuster rule in place, effectively killing legislation designed to counter an onslaught of voting rights restrictions in states across the country. The sweeping voting rights reforms include the Native American Voting Rights Act (Navra) , which would allow tribes to determine the number and location of voter registration sites, polling places and ballot drop boxes on their reservations. Navra is widely supported by tribal nations, but if the filibuster remains intact Democrats need 10 Republicans to vote in favor of the bill. Sinema supports the voting rights legislation, but it has no chance of passing unless the filibuster – the Senate tradition designed to allow the minority party to prolong debate and delay or prevent a vote – is removed. Jonathan Nez, president of the Navajo nation, the largest tribe in the US, told the Guardian: “We’re disappointed in the senator. She’s on the national stage due to the Native American vote and large turnout among Navajo people. If she doesn’t deliver on what’s important to us, I’m sure there’s another candidate who will.” Nez added: “There is much frustration among voters, the Native American voting rights act is very important to us given the way the state of Arizona has been chipping away at our voting rights.” Nationally, there are 574 federally recognized American Indian tribes and Alaska Native Villages, accounting for about 1.5% (4.5m) of the total population. This includes 22 tribes in Arizona, including the Tohono O’odham nation, the Hopi tribe, three Apache tribes and the Navajo nation, whose territory extends into Utah and New Mexico. Just over 27% of Arizona is governed by tribal sovereignty. The political culture varies from tribe to tribe – and some in Arizona have publicly voiced support for Sinema – but those in Indigenous communities are less likely to be registered to vote than other groups due to a number of historical barriers. Indigenous Americans did not have the right to vote until 1948. Longstanding structural obstacles, including poor roads, scarce public transit options and limited postal and translation services, have restricted their participation in elections. In recent years, Arizona and several other states have passed laws and regulations that make voting even harder for Indigenous Americans – and other underserved communities who tend to vote Democrat. This includes restrictions on early-voter locations, mail-in ballots and ballot collection drives, which legal experts say disproportionately affect ruralIndigenous voters. The US Senate has also thwarted two bills Republicans had previously blocked four times with a filibuster – the Freedom to Vote Act and the John Lewis Voting Rights Advancement Act. Navra, which does have some bipartisan support, would ban states from closing or merging polling sites on reservations without tribal consent, and would require states with voter identification laws to accept tribal ID. Sinema’s support of the filibuster has undermined a mammoth effort by grassroots activists to mobilize Indigenous voters, according to Tara Benally, field director of the Rural Utah Project, a nonprofit that mobilizes underrepresented voters in rural Arizona and Utah. Benally said: “Our community outreach workers spent hours upon hours registering and gaining the trust of voters in the run up to the 2018 and 2020 elections after decades of being pushed aside at the local, state and federal level. “Senator Sinema has completely undermined what we did and betrayed her voters. I highly doubt people will vote for her again unless by some miracle she changes her values and stops working against those who elected her.” About 10,000 new Indigenous voters were registeredin Arizona ahead of the last presidential election – which Biden won by just over 10,000 votes. In 2020, voter turnout on the reservations ranged from 41 to 71% compared to 29 to 57% in 2016. Torey Dolan, an Indigenous fellow at the Indian Law Clinic at Arizona State University, said: “Sinema got the lion’s share of the votes on the reservations; they played a significant role in getting her and Biden elected. Her opposition to removing the filibuster means a death knell for Navra, and that has left a sour taste in a lot of people’s mouths here.” She added: “[Going forward] it will be hard to encourage people to register when they don’t see their votes fulfilling the hopes and promises placed on them.” Sinema voted with Donald Trump 63% of the time as a member of the House (2016 to 2018) and 26% of the time as a senator (2019 to 2021), according to FiveThirtyEight. Voting for the filibuster was the first time she voted against her party since Biden took office. In addition to voting rights, Biden’s $1.75tn sweeping economic recovery and social welfare spending initiative is also in serious trouble. The Build Back Better (BBB) bill includes funding for affordable housing, healthcare, nutrition, education grants and child support – basic services which are disproportionately lacking in tribal communities due to the US government’s failure to comply with treaty obligations. Unlike towns and cities, tribes cannot raise money through property taxes as reservation lands are held in trust by the federal government. The BBB also includes $550bn to tackle greenhouse emissions, the country’s largest ever climate crisis investment. It builds on other major infrastructure investments, such as the American Rescue Plan, that have benefited tribal communities. Unlike Manchin, who outright opposes the bill, Sinema has signaled support for the White House’s BBB framework but has not committed to voting for it in its current form. Hannah Hurley, Sinema’s spokesperson, said: “Kyrsten remains laser-focused on delivering lasting solutions for tribal communities across Arizona, and thanks to strong partnerships with tribal leaders she’s delivered historic investments improving tribal roads and bridges, ensuring cleaner water, deploying broadband, helping tribes tackle climate change challenges, and strengthening health care resources. She will continue to work with tribal communities in Arizona expanding economic opportunities and ensuring the federal government honors its obligations.” But Eric Descheenie, former Arizona state house representative for the district which includes the Navajo nation, said Sinema faces a major trust issue. “The climate change agenda needs help from senators like Kyrsten Sinema, who represents some of the most influential tribes in the land, and needs to do a better job heeding the wisdom of our people … The problem is, no progressive can trust her,” Descheenie said.You could be forgiven for turning up your nose at tinned fish in the UK. Until recently, it has been more reminiscent of school lunches than restaurant menus: cheap, dry and mushy. But that is changing fast, thanks to retailers and chefs importing high-end, artisanal cans from the continent. The contents of these – think large, gleaming flakes of bonito tuna and silvery slippers of sardines bathing in olive oil – are about as far removed from sandwich fillers as a grass-fed steak is from Spam. At Spring-to-Go, the deli version of Skye Gyngell’s fine-dining restaurant, the chef offers small-batch, limited-edition seafood from the “tin-to-table” brand Pyscis. At Prawn on the Farm, a Cornish outpost of the London fish restaurant Prawn on the Lawn, Rick and Katie Toogood offer a separate menu of tinned fish, sourced from Rockfish, a British tinned seafood brand launched in November by the Devon-based chef Mitch Tonks. Tinned fish is so in that it has featured in Vogue, which called the Los Angeles-based tinned fish brand Fishwife “the stylish, sustainably sourced tinned fish you want in your kitchen”. “Total [tinned] fish sales have nearly doubled over the past two years,” says James Robinson, a product training manager at Brindisa. “It has been remarkable growth.” For years, the Spanish restaurant and wholesaler was one of the only importers of premium tinned fish to the UK. “Premium tuna (rod- and line-caught bonito del norte and yellowfin) and anchovies have driven this increase, to retailers and direct-to-consumer sales.” All come from Ortiz, one of Spain’s oldest canning factories, notable for its jazzy blue, yellow and red packaging. Is the trend for fish from a tin a pandemic-fuelled flash in the pan – the result of regrettable stockpiling – or a nostalgic craving for retro foodstuffs? Patrick Martinez, who started his business Tinned Fish Market in Liverpool in 2018, doesn’t think so. He says there has been a palpable shift in the public’s appreciation of the European culture of conservas, the centuries-old craft of preservation through canning. “At the beginning, people asked: ‘How can you sell this at these prices?’ It took a lot of explaining,” he recalls, recounting how he would tell customers about the fishing villages where fish is landed, carefully selected by the canning factory, cooked and canned by hand, often all within 24 hours. “Now we have the opposite: we have people with a lot more knowledge coming to the stall, asking for very specific things, like tinned squid stuffed with rice.” Last year, Martinez opened stalls in the London foodie meccas of Borough and Broadway markets, which speaks volumes. “It’s sustainable, delicious, convenient and healthy,” says Martinez. These days, it can also be beautiful. Unlike the bland, monotonal supermarket standard, high-end tins tend to be adorned with either vintage illustrations of people or produce, or more modern, graphical designs. They could be given as gifts or used as decorative embellishments. “An interior designer told me she’d recommend people store their tins on open shelves, so people can see them,” says Lucas Gracias, the founder of Sardina, an online deli that sells tinned seafood from across the Iberian peninsula. As with natural wine, the popularity of which has also risen in recent years, the classy, vivid labels are perfect for an age in which the aesthetics of what we eat appears to matter more than ever. In short, canned seafood is social media catnip – but that doesn’t explain the interest from chefs, nor the repeat custom reported by retailers. “The artwork does grab the attention of people, but then hopefully they eat it,” says Gracias. If the contents didn’t live up to the cover, he argues, they wouldn’t come back. Perhaps our previous reluctance to embrace tinned fish can be explained by the almost uniquely British misconception that tinned food is worse than its fresh equivalent. “What we lack is the Spanish and Portuguese understanding that ‘fresh’ and ‘preserved’ foods are not intended to be mirrors of each other,” says Robinson. “Instinctively, people in the UK think fresh mussels or mackerel are better than tinned, whereas in Spain they understand that they are not equivalents.” Indeed, tins are often – because of the time and trouble involved in canning quality fish – more highly prized by other Europeans. In Britons’ defence, this is unsurprising. The UK does not have a long history of canned food, unlike Portugal, France or Spain, where the warmer climate necessitated preservation. It was only when rationing was introduced during the second world war that canned food began to dominate Britain’s supermarkets. “It fitted well with a system of stockpiling and central planning, so rations of tinned products were generally more liberal than those of fresh meat and fish,” says Mark Riddaway, the author of Borough Market: Edible Histories. Even after the war, fresh food remained scarce, resulting in “an entire generation being raised on Spam and tinned pilchards. These were not premium products,” he says. “Volume and cheapness mattered much more than the quality of the products and the food-safety standards at the canning factories. Some of the canned foods inflicted upon the nation were virtually inedible.” When Tonks wanted to launch a British brand of canned fish, he couldn’t find people with the requisite skills. “Our fish is caught and landed in Britain, in Brixham market, but then we have to ship it to Spain,” he says. This is done in small quantities alongside commonly exported products, to reduce the carbon footprint. In Spain, skilled artisans, many of whom are the third or fourth generation in their family to practise this craft, gut, fillet and cook the fish, “then lay it in the tin by hand, too, so it doesn’t all break apart”. This manual attention to detail is one of many reasons quality tins of fish are more expensive. “It is a much cheaper process to fillet the fish by machine, but it will break up into smaller pieces,” says Gracias. “It is also cheaper to just cook the fish in the tin, but the tin will [negatively] affect the flavour. Our producers steam, bake or cook the fish over charcoal first, to enhance the taste, before placing it in the can and heating it gently to seal it.” While industrial-scale factories – largely in Asia – use brine or sunflower oil for preservation, small, traditional canneries use organic or extra-virgin olive oil. “With time, the fish absorbs more and more of the oil,” says Tonks, who, like Martinez, is introducing the concept of vintages to Rockfish customers. “The two-year-old tins are fantastic,” observes the Quo Vadis chef Jeremy Lee of the sardines he buys from Brindisa. He would happily eat them “by the fistful, just as they are”. The merits of good olive oil (or tomato sauce) are myriad. As well as improving the quality of the fish over time, they mean you can benefit from the nutrients in the oil or sauce, as well as from the fish. The sustainability of canned fish is compelling, too. It reduces waste, while the strong, umami flavour of anchovies and sardines means a little goes a long way. “You get a lot of umami from less animal protein by using this tiny amount of fish,” says Jack Clarke, a sustainable seafood advocate at the Marine Conservation Society. “In the US, 31% of fresh fish bought by consumers is thrown away,” he adds. “Tinned fish lasts [almost] for ever, at ambient temperatures.” It is also, Tonks points out, a good way of preserving during times when there is a seasonal glut – in summer, for example, when sardines overeat because there is more plankton around. Of course, canned fish is not carte blanche from a sustainability perspective. “Just because a tin has charming ‘olde worlde’ artwork and costs £14 doesn’t translate into being sustainable,” says Clarke. On the contrary, “some of these fancy ranges have cuttlefish and octopus, which are rated red [“fish to avoid”] in our Good Fish Guide.” That said, plenty of premium brands offer sustainable options – and, in terms of contents, coolness and cultural value, they are certainly a different kettle of fish to the pilchards that might have once been served up by your nan. Tinned fish recipes Anchoas y alcachofas ahumadas Paulina Irzyk, head chef at Andanza, London This pintxo is the perfect smoky, salty snack with a cold beer or glass of wine. Place chargrilled artichokes in alioli. Top with Cantabrian anchovy fillets in olive oil – the best you can find – and season with smoked Spanish paprika. Garnish with fresh pomegranate seeds, layer with slices of sourdough toast and finish with ajillo – olive oil, parsley and garlic – to give this little dish a truly Spanish accent. Cornish pilchard bruschetta Paul Ainsworth, chef and restaurateur, Cornwall Take five pilchards (I use the Pilchard Works) out of the tin and pat any excess oil off them. Make a salsa with two spring onions, ½ chilli, 10g coriander, six basil leaves and 20 cherry tomatoes, then season with salt and pepper. Drizzle four slices of sourdough bread with extra-virgin olive oil and chargrill. Spread your salsa on top of the toast, then place the pilchard fillets over the salsa and finish the dish with some chopped coriander and olive oil. Pork with tinned tuna sauce Anna Tobias, chef-owner at Café Deco, London Pound one garlic clove and some thyme leaves. Add 30ml olive oil and season. Rub this over the pork loin, then place in a baking dish (fat side down) and cook for 45 minutes, turning over after 20 minutes. Leave to cool completely. Make the sauce by putting a tin of tuna, an egg yolk and the juice of ½ lemon in a food processor. Season, then blend to a puree. With the motor still running, drizzle in 250ml olive oil until the thickness of yoghurt. To serve, thinly slice the pork, slather over the sauce and scatter with capers and whole tinned anchovies. Roasted winter tomato panzanella with tinned sardines and fresh basil Ben Tish, chef and food writer, London Halve 12 ripe vine tomatoes. Sprinkle with salt, sugar, thyme and chilli flakes, then drizzle with sherry vinegar and olive oil. Roast for 30-40 minutes at 180C (160C fan/350F/gas mark 4), cool, then stir in kalamata olives and chunks of two-day-old sourdough. Leave for 30 minutes, for the bread to soak up the juices. Toast 1 tsp fennel seeds in a dry pan over a medium heat. Arrange 12 tinned sardine fillets on top of the tomatoes. Scatter with parsley, mint, toasted flaked almonds, rocket, the fennel seeds and the zest and juice of ½ lemon. Tinned mackerel shawarma Mitch Tonks, chef and restaurateur, Devon Shred cabbage, red onion and some green chilli and mix, then grate garlic into some yoghurt and toss the lot together. Lay out a flour tortilla and spread with hummus, place the cabbage on top, then add tinned mackerel, a sprinkling of za’atar or cumin, a squeeze of lemon and some pomegranate seeds. Wrap the whole thing up like a shawarma. • The Guardian aims to publish recipes for sustainable fish. Check ratings in your region: UK; Australia; US.The pandemic changed everything about our lives: how we worked, socialised, travelled. Dealing with so many changes at once was a mental challenge for us all. As Covid-19 fizzles out, and things go back to “normal”, some of these pressures will ease as life becomes more recognisable. But the end of a pandemic will require an adjustment, just as the beginning did. For a start, we are not entering the same “normal” that we left – and we are not the same people we were then. Some of us will face lingering mental health problems, including those who have developed severe, chronic grief over the loss of loved ones, or people who have developed post-traumatic stress disorder because of experiences with the disease. A new vocabulary of psychological terms has blossomed during the pandemic. “Cave syndrome”, a fear of going out among the vaccinated; “coronaphobia”, an intense fear of catching the virus; and “Covid stress syndrome”. These neologisms provided labels that helped people to better understand their experiences and the experiences of those around them. But the terms, having served their purpose, will probably fall by the wayside once the pandemic is over, to be replaced with more conventional psychiatric labels – “agoraphobia’”, “adjustment disorder” – as described in the latest edition of the psychiatric bible, DSM-5-TR, due to be released next month. Meanwhile, pandemics typically do not have clean, neat endings. Restrictions in England might be ending on Thursday, but it is unlikely that you’ll wake up one morning to news reports declaring that Covid has gone. It may take months or longer for some people to reassure themselves that the pandemic is truly over, and even longer for some to relax into activities that were fraught with risk for two years. Many may suspect that the “end” of the pandemic is more a political construct than anything else. As pandemic fatigue set in, people became increasingly tired and frustrated with government restrictions on travel and socialisation. The growing weariness with Covid motivates some people, especially those who see the threat as overblown, to protest against remaining restrictions. Governments initially clamped down on people flouting the rules, but it gets hard to enforce these rules with good conscience when it turns out so many politicians are openly ignoring them, such as by holding illicit garden parties. Community-wide fatigue with Covid and rising protests are likely to be factors fuelling government decisions to lift restrictions and allow people to live their lives as before. As a result of all this, the “roaring 20s” scenario – a promised post-pandemic party time – seems increasingly unlikely. As the current pandemic gradually fizzles out, people will resume their previous lives. There will, perhaps, be celebrations of some kind when the WHO declares that we have entered a vaguely defined “post-pandemic period”, which is how it described the end of the 2009 swine flu pandemic. However, the WHO has mistakenly declared outbreaks to be over in the past: for example, in 2015 and 2016 it wrongly declared that an Ebola outbreak was over, finally getting it right the third time. For Covid, we can look forward to entering a “post-pandemic period”, with all the uncertainty the term implies. Covid will still be circulating in communities and people will have to decide for themselves, based on their risk tolerance, whether they should wear masks, go to crowded social gatherings and so on. This uncertain status quo will take some adjustment, just as it did during the protracted end of past pandemics such as the 1889 Russian flu and 1918 Spanish flu. In the months and years ahead, the emotional legacy of Covid will become clearer. The mental health toll may not be apparent for some years. Nevertheless, the research strongly suggests that most people will bounce back, and some will grow as human beings – a phenomenon known as post-traumatic growth. This involves growing through adversity as people learn to become more resilient and develop a deeper appreciation for everyday things in life, such as our connections to friends and family. The pandemic has also taught us the importance of developing resilience – the ability to manage the stressors, large and small, in our lives. Resilience may be one positive legacy of a very tough couple of years. Steven Taylor is a professor and clinical psychologist at the University of British Columbia, and author of The Psychology of PandemicsBecca Losch wore goggles and a mouthguard. She did exercises to strengthen her knee ligaments. Yet the prospect of a head injury barely crossed her mind. In 2012, while a student at a New Jersey high school, she was hit in the back of the head by a lacrosse ball during a warm-up drill before a game. She does not remember falling to the ground, being helped up by teammates and carrying on. The next six months were a blur of pain, confusion and frustration. Before her concussion, Losch was an energetic honour student who played lacrosse, basketball and soccer. Her health deteriorated so gravely that she struggled to read, write, walk up stairs and brush her teeth. She became too unwell to attend school, enduring migraines, eye pain, photosensitivity, insomnia, nausea, exhaustion, dizziness, tinnitus and an inability to focus. That autumn she was referred to the concussion programme at the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center and slowly improved under treatment plans which included retraining her brain to improve her balance and vision problems. After a year of homeschooling – cycles of 10 minutes of verbal tuition, then five minutes’ rest – Losch was able to return for her senior year, dictating essays into an app, graduating on time with honours and going on to attend college. Now she wears headgear every day: a $30 ice pack bought from Amazon that she wraps around her head to soothe her migraines. Losch is convinced that her devastating injury would have been far less serious if she had worn a hard helmet, which was forbidden by the rules. “My doctors are pretty confident, especially where I was hit, on the back of my head, that it would have significantly decreased or I wouldn’t have had the injury at all,” she says. The firm, dense rubber ball can travel at speeds far greater than 60mph but hard-shell helmets and face masks are obligatory in US boys’ lacrosse while flexible headgear is optional for girls (goalies aside). Among other important differences, some forms of body checking are allowed for boys over 12. The rules divergence can be traced to sexism as the sport grew in the 1930s, when contact sports were viewed as inappropriate for women. Yet a 2015 study of concussions in college and high school football, soccer, lacrosse and ice hockey found that women’s lacrosse had the second-highest incidence rate after football. That year, Florida became the first state to mandate headgear in girls’ high school lacrosse, a decision that met with widespread resistance within the sport. No other states have followed so far, even as evidence mounts of the potential value of headgear. A 2020 study led by Dawn Comstock of the Colorado School of Public Health examined high school lacrosse head injuries from 2008-09 to 2018-19 and estimated that 44.7% of girls’ concussions could have been prevented had they worn the same helmet as the boys. “For boys, athlete-athlete contact was the most common mechanism of concussion accounting for 66.4% of all concussions, while stick or ball contact accounted for 23.5%,” the authors wrote. “For girls, stick or ball contact accounted for 72.7% of all concussions, while athlete-athlete contact accounted for 19.8%.” A major study of 357,225 games and practices published in 2021 by University of Florida Health also indicates that headgear can have a significant protective effect in female high school lacrosse. Researchers found that states without headgear mandates had a 59% higher concussion rate compared to Florida. The disparity rose to 74% during competitions, since games are more dangerous than training sessions. Knowing little about the sport, Rob Stolker had no initial objection when his two youngest daughters asked him in 2014 if they could play lacrosse. He asked the coaches why the girls did not have helmets and shoulder pads like the boys on the adjacent field. “They said, ‘girls don’t wear helmets’, just matter-of-factly. I didn’t understand it then, I still don’t understand it now.” He researched the issue and decided not to let his daughters play. After discovering there were no approved headgear options he founded Hummingbird Sports, one of only two women’s lacrosse headgear manufacturers whose equipment meets certification requirements implemented in 2017 by the governing body, USA Lacrosse, after years of research and development. Stolker is a member of the Brain Safety Alliance, a headgear advocacy group. Defenders of the status quo often question the effectiveness of headgear in preventing body-to-body concussions and cite dubious fears that improved protective equipment will inspire a “gladiator effect”, an attitude shift that induces the kind of rough contact more often seen in the male game. “It is complete bunk. To people outside it doesn’t make any sense,” Stolker says. Losch’s injury resulted from an accident, not deliberate aggression. Strict enforcement of the rules by officials and coaches ought to discourage recklessness, and helmets are likely to be most effective against the stick and ball injuries that the 2020 analysis suggests are most common in the female game. The Florida study findings cast doubt on the “gladiator effect” theory. Stolker believes that by continuing to treat male and female players differently the sport is placing tradition over safety: “That is the way it is, 100% that’s the issue here,” he said. “There’s a feeling [among parents] that organisational leaders are looking out for the safety of their girls and that’s what clearly doesn’t happen.” Ann Kitt Carpenetti, vice-president of lacrosse operations at USA Lacrosse, disagrees. “If we had just done nothing that would be fair,” she says. “We have invested dollars and been thoughtful about our approach. We haven’t ever said that we are closed off to policy change.” She points out that USA Lacrosse mandated eyewear in the female game in 2004-05 and contributed funding for the Florida analysis. “It’s the first study of its kind on a novel piece of headgear. It has had some benefit,” Carpenetti says, but “is it conclusive enough to make everybody have to wear it? I think there is a lot of support within the research community as well as in the game community to continue to ask questions… We’re proponents of making evidence-based decisions and that’s what we’re going to continue to do.” As coaches, officials and local and state associations digest the Florida report, the topic is likely to spark debate in the summer, the time of year when rule changes are proposed and agreed ahead of the next season. Losch now lives in New York and works in pharmaceutical advertising. She takes Botox injections every three months to help with her daily migraines. “That has significantly improved my quality of life. Prior to that, every time the weather changed or if I had to be on the computer for an hour I would get a migraine to the point where I was vomiting,” she says. “I try not to let it hold me back, still kind of have a life. I’ll be in pain whether I’m home or if I’m out, so I just kind of keep going.” She is optimistic that headgear will eventually be mandated in girls’ lacrosse. “That would be lovely,” she says. “I don’t want anyone else to have to go through this.”A pleasant North Carolina day in December 2019 began with Commissioner Don Garber appearing in Charlotte to officially award the city an MLS franchise. Also at the event was David Tepper, the billionaire owner of the newly minted Charlotte FC and the NFL’s Carolina Panthers. The day ended with Tepper surrounded by crazed Charlotte FC fans – literally day one fans – at a brewery where it wasn’t easy to identify who among the crowd was the man cutting the $325m expansion fee check. Charlotte FC were little more than a theoretical concept on that day. Eight months ago, the team had no coach. Three months ago, they had only a handful of players. Five weeks ago, the coaching staff and players met together for the first time. Pandemic be damned, Charlotte FC are here. And if they don’t yet have your attention, they soon will as they aim to set a new MLS single-game record for attendance with just under 75,000 at Bank of America Stadium on 5 March for their home opener. It didn’t happen by accident, nor did it come with a little frustration along the way. “I feel good, I feel positive,” Charlotte FC’s sporting director Zoran Krneta says. “I mean, this is a group of players that saw each other for the first time three weeks ago. No one knew each other, more or less.” Charlotte certainly haven’t been boring during their time in the limelight this offseason. They have acquired a number of intriguing players, such as Spanish central midfielder Sergio Ruiz; Christian Fuchs, who won a Premier League title with Leicester City; and rising talents from South America including Ecuadorians Jordy Alcivar and Alan Franco, plus Brazilian teenage forward Vinicius Mello. A few weeks after preseason opened, though, Charlotte had filled just one of their three Designated Player spots, places reserved for stars exempt from the league’s salary cap rules. With Tepper’s billions and grand ambitions, fans had expected a little more than their one designated player so far, Poland striker Karol Swiderski. Charlotte’s head coach, Miguel Angel Ramirez, seemed to expect more too. Ramirez was blunt in a video that went viral, choosing the phrase “estamos jodidos”, which can be politely translated from the Spanish as “we’re screwed.” Ramirez’s comments came in the same week that Charlotte’s $6m deal to acquire Venezuela international Darwin Machis fell through at the last minute when the player was reportedly in Charlotte ready to be unveiled. The club is understood to have pulled out as Machis has a court case active in Spain that centers around a bar fight. Another deal, for Poland international Kamil Jozwiak, collapsed around the same time, after the winger was injured playing for Derby County. That disappointment came a couple of weeks after a potential league-record bid to acquire USA winger Paul Arriola fell short. “I know that the fans might be a little bit less patient, and we’re frustrated too,” Krneta says. “I think that’s part of the game. This is a game full of emotions, full of passion. When the things are not going the way you want them to go, you express frustration and passion. We have everything under control, everything is positive.” Those fans are going to show up in force. Charlotte are aiming to set a new MLS record for single-game attendance. That record is particularly sought after because the current top 10 list for MLS attendance is dominated by their southeast rivals Atlanta United. At time of writing, the club are on track to accomplish their goal, looking at a likely sellout of just under 75,000 fans. “Honestly, I had some sleepless nights,” admits Nick Kelly, who was recently promoted to CEO of Tepper Sports &amp; Entertainment after serving as Charlotte FC president. “Look, to be perfectly honest, it was extremely challenging [aiming to set the attendance record]. To create a game in which you’re going to want to be there and be part of history – yeah, it’s old school marketing – but we really wanted it too. And the building we’re in, we’re the only team that can do it.” Charlotte have already sold more than 20,000 season tickets, a figure comparable to the entire capacity of some other MLS stadiums. The club will share Bank of America Stadium with the Carolina Panthers, and the venue has undergone a $50m upgrade to accommodate Charlotte FC, including locker rooms specifically built for the soccer team. Capacity will be reduced to 38,000 for most of the team’s home games, with fans restricted to the lower bowl and club sections. Despite a passionate fanbase and the club’s sky-high ambitions, Ramirez’s “estamos jodidos” quote has raised fears that Charlotte may struggle to match Atlanta United, who won MLS Cup in just their second season. “We just want to be competitive and build, that would be a successful season for us,” Krneta says. “We cannot predict how much we will win, lose or draw, this is a long season. For me, I want Charlotte to be a place that teams don’t want to play because they know they will get a tough game. The rest? We’ll have to see what happens.” It all starts on Saturday when they travel to DC United, before their home opener a week later, followed by a trip to Atlanta United. “This is a part of history, it won’t happen again,” Kelly says. “We did it in the middle of a pandemic, we did it in one year. We should be proud of it.” He pauses briefly. “But, man, we can’t fall off a cliff from the highest high to the lowest low. We can’t roll out to Atlanta the next week and get smoked.”Joe Biden’s faltering effort to tackle the climate crisis faces a further, potentially devastating, blow on Monday in a supreme court case that experts warn could severely restrict any future US government attempt to limit planet-heating emissions. The court has agreed to hear a case brought by West Virginia, supported by 18 other Republican-led states, that takes aim at the Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) ability to issue strict regulations to curb pollution from fossil fuel-fired power stations. The decision by the conservative-leaning court to even consider an argument about a hypothetical regulation that hasn’t been proposed by the EPA has surprised onlookers. It is also an ominous sign for the authority of a Biden administration already frustrated over major clean energy legislation that has stalled in Congress due to opposition from Republicans and centrist Democrats such as West Virginia senator Joe Manchin. “This is a vitally important case that will define future federal action on climate change issues,” said Judith Enck, former EPA regional administrator and president of Beyond Plastics. “Congress seems unwilling or unable to address the climate crisis. Federal agencies need to be able to take action.” Even if Biden and his allies in Congress are able to pass the climate elements of the Build Back Better Act, which includes hundreds of billions of dollars in support for wind and solar energy and electric cars, most analysts say executive action to slash pollution from power plants, cars and trucks will still be needed if the US is to meet its emissions reduction goals and avert disastrous climate change. West Virginia’a lawsuit, filed last year and supported by various fossil fuel firms and rightwing groups, argues that the EPA shouldn’t be able to issue rules that “are capable of reshaping the nation’s electricity grids and unilaterally decarbonizing virtually any sector of the economy” and claims that Congress alone should decide on regulation of this scope. “This case is much more than about climate change, it gets down to who makes the decisions, should it be an unelected body of bureaucrats or should Congress provide the clear signal,” said Patrick Morrissey, attorney general of West Virginia, a state that’s a traditional epicenter of the now ailing coal industry. The Biden administration has pointed out there is no current EPA climate regulation on coal plants, meaning that there is no case to argue at all. “Petitioners lack standing to invoke this court’s jurisdiction because they are not injured,” the administration has argued in its brief. It’s unusual for the supreme court to hear a case where there is no active rule to challenge, according to Richard Revesz, a leading expert in environmental law at the New York University School of Law. “It surprised me they took this case, this would be an excellent candidate for dismissal,” he said. “In normal times, when the court wasn’t so skeptical of regulation, this case would’ve been dismissed. It would have a pernicious consequences if it were allowed because it could severely restrict agencies’ ability to regulate and these power stations are such big emitters.” The case has a tangled history that highlights America’s jarring absence of any climate regulations on the US electricity sector, which is responsible for a quarter of the country’s emissions, even as it has set emissions standards for the pollution spewed out by cars and trucks. In 2015, Barack Obama’s administration sought to remedy this via the Clean Power Plan, which aimed to restrict emissions from coal-fired power plants, only to be immediately challenged by Republican-led states and, in a highly unusual move, blocked by the supreme court before it took effect. Donald Trump’s administration then crafted a far weaker replacement for this rule that was itself struck down by the courts, with Biden so far declining to resurrect the original Clean Power Plan, or any more stringent alternative, in its place. West Virginia and its allies hope to curtail any future attempt by the EPA to become far more assertive in its interpretation of the landmark Clean Air Act, which requires power plants to use the “best system of emission reduction.” Environmental groups, which have lined up to oppose West Virginia’s claims, worry that the case is a further example of a rightwing judicial system intervening to toss out rules it does not like with the justification that they are too large, with damaging consequences for the climate crisis. Earlier this month, a Trump-appointed federal judge in Louisiana blocked the Biden administration from accounting for the real-world costs of climate change. “Even though there is no rule in place, the case is important because coal companies and their allies are attempting to get the supreme court to establish a broad precedent that meaningful protections for public health and the environment should be scrutinized and discredited on judicial review,” said Sean Donahue, counsel for Environmental Defense Fund. “Petitioners’ damaging legal theory would threaten our nation’s ability to protect clean air, clean water, and safe food for all people.” To some onlookers, the case is an unwanted further complication to a challenge that already has little time to waste. “There is no more time to delay curbing greenhouse gas emissions and finding solutions for a more equitable and just clean energy future,” said Carol Browner, former administrator of the EPA and now chair of the League of Conservation Voters.All Europe must have awoken this morning and heard the news with horror. Sometimes history refuses to die. The fate of 44 million Ukrainians at the mercy of Russia and its vast army is appalling to contemplate. Indeed, so wild and mendacious are the utterances of Vladimir Putin in the past 24 hours that they suggest a dictator deranged and out of control. It is precisely the danger that was forecast by strategic theorists at the dawn of the nuclear age. As of this morning, Putin’s declared intention is to “demilitarise” Ukraine and assert Russia’s de facto sovereignty over the Donbas east of the country. The latter is chiefly an exaggeration of what Russia has done covertly since 2014. The former is hard to see other than as formal conquest. This is no longer some border dispute or separatist uprising, but the concerted assault of a great power on a substantial neighbour. Ukraine’s friends and sympathisers have been fulsome in offering comfort and “support”. Ever since 1989, western Europe has been eager, perhaps over-eager, to welcome former Soviet bloc countries into its embrace. Many thought this a mistake. Offering Nato and EU membership up to Russia’s border was certain to inflame that country’s well-known sense of insecurity, but the risk was taken. At the same time any idea of including Ukraine and Georgia in that embrace was rightly thought a risk too far. Putin has now grotesquely proved that risk. Russia’s attack on Ukraine might be thought an aggression so outrageous as to outrank any consideration of treaties and alliances. But though the west has offered Kyiv ferocious moral support and will of course respond with humanitarian aid, it has been adamant that it is not obliged by Nato to fight in its cause. That must be sensible. But at such times words must be used with care. Belligerent support can look uncomfortably close to hypocrisy – as some Ukrainians are pleading. The west must distinguish outright condemnation of Russia from crowd-pleasing verbal aggression. Reality is sober. For Nato’s armies to go to war with Russia in Ukraine would for sure escalate to an atrocious cost in lives and destruction. We should also remember that the west and Nato have a dreadful recent record of such interventions, of an inability to judge their worth and when and how to end them. No war is like any other. Ukraine is not Cuba or Afghanistan or Syria – any more than Putin is a Hitler or Kyiv’s inhabitants Nazis. I heard not one speaker in Britain’s parliament this week counselling sobriety or peace. Belligerence – even from Keir Starmer – had not just the best tunes but the only ones. Inflicting that pathetic and ineffective weapon of modern interventionism, sanctions, is not toughness but the opposite. It is pretend toughness – short of actually getting tough. That is the danger. The shriller the threats, the more cowardly seems the refusal to fight. This is not yet a critical moment in relations between Russia, or at least its leader, and the west. It is critical in relations between Russia and a Ukraine with which it has had a long and historically turbulent relationship. There is, or was, a way out: the Minsk agreement of 2015 between Kyiv and Moscow, recognising Donbas autonomy. The failure of both sides to implement Minsk is the cause of the present collapse, but it cannot become the cause of some wider European conflagration. Serious talk is now known to be taking place on how to reach Putin, thrashing demented in his isolated citadel. He apparently listens to almost no one, but he does listen to China’s Xi Jinping and a tiny circle of rich cronies. It is obscene that peace in eastern Europe should depend on such people. But they must be reached. That is the true failure of European diplomacy over the past 30 years. Simon Jenkins is a Guardian columnist Join a panel of journalists, hosted by Michael Safi, for a livestreamed event on the Russia-Ukraine crisis. On Thursday 3 March, 8pm GMT | 9pm CET | 12pm PST | 3pm EST. Book tickets hereFrom 24 February, people in England will no longer be legally required to self-isolate, whether they come into contact with someone with Covid or test positive themselves. We would like to hear your thoughts on whether you are planning to go out after testing positive for Covid. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Prince Harry has launched a libel action days after the Mail on Sunday published claims about problems with his security arrangements. Court filings show Harry made a claim against Associated Newspapers Limited (ANL) on Wednesday afternoon. The claims are reportedly related to an article published by the Mail on Sunday under the headline “Revealed: How Harry tried to keep his legal fight over bodyguards secret”. The Duke of Sussex is also bringing privacy claims against News Group Newspapers, which publishes the Sun, and Mirror Group Newspapers, now Reach, which publishes the Mirror, over alleged phone hacking and unlawful information gathering. Prince Harry, 37, is also involved in litigation against the Home Office over his security arrangements when he is in the UK. The prince lost his taxpayer-funded police protection when he and Meghan, the Duchess of Sussex, stepped back from royal duties in 2020. The couple privately fund their security in the US, where they now live. The prince is challenging the Home Office decision not to allow him to personally pay for police protection for himself and his family while in the UK. Harry wants to bring his son, Archie, and daughter, Lilibet, to visit from the US, but his lawyers say he and his family are “unable to return to his home” because it is too dangerous. This follows an incident in London in the summer of 2021 when his security was compromised after his car was chased by paparazzi photographers as the prince left a charity event. Meghan previously brought a successful privacy claim against ANL over articles which reproduced parts of a “personal and private” handwritten letter to her estranged father, Thomas Markle. She was awarded £1 nominal damages, along with an undisclosed sum in damages for copyright infringement, which she donated to charity, after winning her case. ANL was also ordered to issue a front-page apology and pay the duchess’s legal costs. An appeal by ANL was dismissed by senior judges in December last year. A spokesperson for Harry said: “I can confirm the duke has filed a complaint against Associated Newspapers Limited.” Associated Newspapers Limited has been approached for comment.Taking up a new job can feel daunting – especially if you’re already well established in an industry you love. But as we all know, it’s often the scariest decisions that turn out to be the most rewarding. The Department for Education’s new further education (FE) teacher recruitment campaign aims to attract skilled industry professionals from a number of key sectors, including construction, engineering and manufacturing, legal, finance and accounting, digital/IT and health and social care. Teaching in FE is a unique prospect, with benefits aplenty – from flexible, part-time contracts (which mean you can teach alongside your current job), to earning while you train. It’s a great way to share your skills, and change lives without changing careers. Intrigued? We spoke to six industry experts turned FE teachers to hear their first-hand experiences … ‘I feel like I’m giving a lot back’ If you’d told a young Andy Foulks that one day he’d become an FE teacher, he’d have thought you were mad. “To be honest with you, even when I was driving to the interview, I was thinking: ‘Do I really want to do this? Is this too much of a change? Am I capable of standing up in front of a room full of people and delivering a subject?’” But this year, the 53-year-old entered his eighth year with Truro and Penwith college, where he’s the industrial lead for engineering. It comes after a 30-year career that saw Foulks work his way up from a toolmaker apprentice to a technical engineer. During his time in industry, he helped recruit and train more than 50 apprentices, and enjoyed watching them develop. Foulks spotted an engineering teaching job advertised at Truro and Penwith and decided to go to the interview to find out more. They offered him the job before he’d even made it back home. “It’s increased my faith in young people,” he says. “I feel like I’m giving a lot back to the engineering world, which I’ve had a successful career in.” Foulks clearly takes great pride in his job, which is hardly surprising, as some of his former students have gone on to work at Rolls-Royce and companies as far afield as Dubai. “I enjoy building students’ confidence and developing them not just as engineers, but as people as well. It’s just good to see them grow.” ‘It’s given me a new lease of life’ The great thing about accountancy is the opportunity to work anywhere, says Anthony Mackin. The 57-year-old spent most of his professional life working in accounting in the media and third sector, before becoming self-employed – which is how he stumbled into FE. “I had some spare capacity,” he says. “So when I heard that the local FE college was looking for a part-time accountant I was keen to find out more.” Mackin attended a recruitment evening at Hopwood Hall college in Greater Manchester, where he was encouraged to also speak to the business lecturers who had a vacancy for someone to teach accountancy. He ended up applying for both jobs and was offered the lecturing role. “I always say I didn’t get the job I initially thought I wanted, but I got the job I needed,” he says. “It’s given me a new lease of life. I was in my 50s when I started teaching in FE and I feel so lucky that someone saw that potential in me.” Mackin now splits his time between Hopwood Hall college teaching professional accounting qualifications and University Campus Oldham, where he teaches third-year students studying for accountancy and financial services degrees. He’s also part of Hopwood Hall college’s teaching and learning champion group, developing innovative teaching strategies. “It’s surprised me how many opportunities there are in further education,” he says. “If you’re looking for a rewarding career where you’ll constantly be growing and developing, while making a positive difference to students, then I would recommend it to anybody.” ‘Now I go home happy’ Moe Dhanji was looking for a new challenge when he left the construction industry to retrain as a teacher. After studying for his teaching qualifications part-time, Dhanji joined Peterborough college as an FE lecturer, working his way up to become the curriculum lead for technical construction over the next eight years. “Very few bricklayers get the chance to go into management, but there are a lot of opportunities in further education,” he says. “Society has a view that if you’re not academic, you go into the building trade, you start believing you’re not good enough to do anything else. Luckily my wife pushed me to make the move. She could see how much I loved it.” Now eight years into his FE career, it is clear Dhanji has found his calling. “You get a sense of pride building something but I get so much more satisfaction teaching someone else,” he says. “I have students who say if they weren’t in construction, they’d be in jail. They’ve turned their lives around. “I was born to teach and I have never ever looked back,” he adds. “There was something missing in my life when I worked in industry. Everything had become money-oriented and I didn’t have any job satisfaction. Now I go home happy. It’s an amazing thing. If you like working with people, you have to do it.” ‘If the shoe fits, it’s a lovely shoe to wear’ Donna Green was at school when she realised she wanted to be an engineer. Sadly, she was discouraged by her teachers who told her it was a boy’s job. She went into administration instead and it wasn’t until she was in her mid-30s that she had the chance to retrain as a computer-aided design (CAD) designer at an electrical engineering company. “I got there in the end,” she says. “It seems crazy now that I just accepted that.” Green spent eight years in the company’s technical drawing room, combining work and study in the final four to take her Higher National Diploma (HND) at college. Once she’d finished the course, the head of the department asked if she’d ever thought about teaching in FE. She hadn’t, but jumped at the chance. “I am very creative but I’m also a people person, and a design office is a bit like being in a library. It’s very quiet, everyone’s concentrating,” she says. “I’m a chatter.” Green describes the early days of working in FE as a “baptism of fire”, but 11 years later, she’s the operations manager for engineering at Isle of Wight college, and is particularly keen to champion the women in her class. “What I love about further education is the students have chosen to specialise. You can see that joy when they realise education doesn’t need to be a burden,” she says. “Teaching is a vocation, but if you do take it on and the shoe fits, it’s a lovely shoe to wear.” ‘You have the chance to inspire a whole generation’ Most people slow down when they retire, but having spent 22 years as a barrister, Naeem Siraj decided to try his hand at teaching in FE, aged 58. “I had become very despondent about the state of the law; that profit was being put before the pursuit of the right answer,” he says about his last few years in practice. “I felt that our future lies in these young minds, and if we train them well enough, with integrity and an appreciation of the power of the law, they will turn into fabulous lawyers.” He went on to teach undergraduates at Leeds City college, before settling at Barnsley college, teaching law at level 3. “Being able to instil that passion and interest in the law from an early age is so important,” he says. “It’s fantastic to see the recognition in their eyes when they understand the legal principles I’m explaining to them.” After spending six years in FE, Siraj has just retired for the second time, and now looks back fondly on his second career. “I’ve certainly never regretted it,” he says. “You have the chance to inspire a whole generation. I met some wonderful young people and got a great deal back.” ‘It’s such a creative, rewarding job’ Ellisha Soanes has always been a champion for diversity and inclusion. The 32-year-old spent 10 years working across the health and social care sector, from supporting looked-after children and people with disabilities, to domiciliary care and the probation services. “I learned the importance of empowering people from all backgrounds and making sure they had a voice,” she says. After becoming a mum, Soanes longed for more flexibility in her career so she could balance her family life and her work supporting young people. “The hours in health and social care can be quite long, and a friend suggested teaching in FE – I was already running training in safeguarding and person-centred care so it felt like a good fit.” Six years later, she’s the equality, diversity and inclusion coordinator at West Suffolk college, in Bury St Edmunds, which has become the first in the UK to teach Black history all year round. Soanes also recently won the Association of Colleges’ president’s award for her contribution to equality and diversity. She still teaches health and social care, and says her industry experience has been invaluable. “It’s such a creative, rewarding job,” she says about FE. “As Nelson Mandela said, education is the most powerful weapon we have to change the world.” If you have relevant experience working in industry, you can start teaching in FE with no formal teaching qualifications – and you can even teach alongside your current job. To find out how you can change lives without changing careers, head to teach-in-further-education.campaign.gov.ukMatthew Cappell has had to get used to proving himself. At just 24, he found himself teaching an evening carpentry class to students some 20 years older than he was. “I think they were a bit surprised when I walked in,” he says. “But after I demonstrated a skills test – cutting skirting boards on a jig by hand – they realised I knew what I was doing.” Fast-forward 10 years and Cappell is now the head of the construction school at Moulton college in Northamptonshire, making him one of the youngest on the leadership team. Despite progressing quickly up the ranks, teaching in further education (FE) is actually Cappell’s second career. He spent seven years working on building sites all over the country until the recession hit. “I’d never even thought about teaching,” he says. “But in 2010 my boss said he didn’t have as much work for me any more and Rugby college offered me a few days as a technician. Pretty soon they asked me to work five days a week and it just spiralled from there. “To be honest, I wasn’t expecting it to take off the way it did, or to enjoy it as much as I have.” Cappell’s own experience at school was a tale of two halves. He attended an all-boys’ school in Coventry and enjoyed it, but in year 10, he was diagnosed with dyslexia. “I could read pretty quickly, but I’d always had trouble spelling and with grammar. Getting the diagnosis was a relief, everything made a bit more sense and I got a bit of extra time in exams, which helped me process the questions better.” After school, Cappell enrolled at Rugby college to study carpentry. “I was like a duck to water, I loved it,” he says. “There’s obviously some theory involved, but I liked that there was something tangible coming out of every class.” Once he qualified as a carpenter, Cappell quickly expanded his knowledge to help with bricklaying, tiling, fitting kitchens, plastering, and more, in building sites of all sizes countrywide. “It was something different every day.” But there were downsides as well – the time away from home was not always welcome, and then work started to dry up when the recession hit. Getting a job in FE seemed like a good way to pass some time until things picked up again. As a technician, Cappell was initially responsible for maintaining the safety of the class machines and pre-cutting the timber for students to use. He quickly progressed to helping teach practical lessons and evening classes. He moved between the sites of the Warwickshire College Group and Coventry college, where he spent time as a National Vocational Qualification (NVQ) workplace assessor, visiting students working on building sites. “It was really nice to see learners in their workplaces, putting the skills we were teaching them at college to good use,” he says. Although he had no formal teaching qualifications when he started, Cappell has since completed the Certificate in Teaching in the Lifelong Learning Sector (CTLLS), Training, Assessment and Quality Assurance (TAQA) and Internal Quality Assurance (IQA) qualifications. He took these alongside his teaching and all were paid for by the college. ‘I’m designing a curriculum that gives the industry and my learners what they need,’ says Cappell In his role at Moulton college, he combines more than 11 years of FE experience with his passion and knowledge of his sector, managing 30 staff and being responsible for approximately 600 students. “Everything construction-related falls under me – carpentry, bricklaying, plumbing, electrical maintenance operations, stonemasonry, furniture and construction management,” he says. “It’s making sure I’m designing a curriculum that gives the industry and my learners what they need.” And when he gets the chance to be in the classroom, he’s there like a shot. “I still love it. I’m really keen to meet the next generation of carpenters coming in.” Cappell’s story might sound exceptional, but he believes the skills you develop working in construction are perfectly transferable to teaching in FE. “When you’re working on site, you have to be resilient, you have to be organised. It might rain or materials might not turn up, so you have to find something else to do. And that can happen in teaching. You have to have that ability to problem solve and think on your feet.” For anyone who’s keen to share their skills with FE learners, his advice is simple: “Do it. Just jump in wholeheartedly. As long as you’re confident and you can talk about your subject passionately, students will respond to you. “It’s giving back really, isn’t it?” he adds. “Someone took the time to teach you, it’s now time to pass those skills on. I love meeting students who come into class thinking they can’t do something, seeing them progress and then getting that sense of achievement. It’s very rewarding.” Your skills are more valuable than you realise. If you have relevant experience working in industry, you can start teaching in FE with no formal teaching qualifications. To find out how you can change lives without changing careers, head to teach-in-further-education.campaign.gov.ukChristian Nunez Fuentes’s path into further education (FE) has been one of twists and turns. Brought up in Peru, at the age of 22 he moved to the UK to study English – a language he proceeded to learn from scratch. That led to a 13-year career in retail IT, initially as a technician and then as a business account manager and supervisor, in areas such as customer service, logistics and sales. Deciding it was time for a change, in 2016 Nunez Fuentes set up his own web design company. At the same time he took a Higher National Certificate (HNC) and Higher National Diploma (HND) in computing and systems development at Bedford college, an FE provider based in the town of the same name. It was the head of computing at Bedford college who suggested he might want to make more of his knowledge by teaching in FE alongside running his business. It was an idea Nunez Fuentes embraced with enthusiasm. Part of his web business already involved tutoring, and while he was studying, others on his courses often turned to him when they didn’t understand something. And so, for the past three-and-a-half years, Nunez Fuentes has been a “dual professional” – working four days a week at Bedford college alongside running his business, all while studying for his PGCE with the University of Bedfordshire. Working in the industry as well as teaching lets Nunez Fuentes keep on top of the latest developments, benefiting his students Nunez Fuentes’s job at Bedford college makes full use of the range of skills he acquired in industry: he teaches development, website design, ecommerce technologies, marketing strategies and project management to students from levels 1 to 5 (equivalent to higher national diploma or foundation degree). He likes to incorporate lots of practical work, including gaming, into his lessons to “break out from the normal monotonous old-fashioned way of teaching”. For example, outside of teaching the theory of how to design a webpage and complying with user requirements, he sets learners practical exercises. “The activity consists of designing a webpage about a specific subject. This way, students learn how to create different layouts using different images to produce the page for a specific product or service. “After designing a page, it’s time for coding. This is another hands-on practical activity where they not only learn to code the page step by step, but they also gain a realistic experience creating and building a webpage/website using real software and resources.” His favourite thing about working in FE is the variety. “Even though you prepare the lessons very similarly, every day is different,” he says. “You have to adjust to the mood in the room, and sometimes you have to improvise to grab the group’s attention. That’s what I like – it’s challenging sometimes but it’s very interesting. Time goes really quickly.” And it’s not only his days that are diverse, but his learners too; while most students on the full-time courses are aged between 16 and 20, on the part-time commercial courses the oldest student is about 50. “The way the youngest learn, the middle range of adults learn, and the older ones learn, is completely different,” he explains. “They have different ways of taking in and retaining information, so you need to change the way you teach, or the way you convey a message, so they can understand.” Although it’s a full week – Nunez Fuentes works 32 hours at the college and all day on Friday on his business – he enjoys the flexibility of the job. He has three children, aged 13, nine and four, and has arranged his working hours so that he can pick them up from school. He also likes the fact that his holidays are generally the same as theirs. “Sometimes as parents, you get to a point where you find you want to develop your career but you are scared to do something completely new,” he says. The great advantage of teaching in FE, he explains, is that it offers you a fresh way to use the skills you have acquired in industry and, like him, you can even teach alongside your current job. Continuing to have one foot in industry has not only benefited Nunez Fuentes – allowing him to stay up to date with all the latest industry developments – but also his students. He’s been able to provide work experience for some of his learners, and runs a student competition to design a webpage for a real business; the winners not only receive a prize but have the opportunity to work with the company to develop their website. That has been really satisfying, he says, “because I can see the fruits of what I’ve been teaching them”. Still at a relatively early stage of his FE career, Nunez Fuentes’s immediate goal is to become a course manager. Ultimately, he’d like to run his web design competition on a larger scale and, after a few years, perhaps work on helping the government reform the curriculum. For now though, he’s relishing the flexibility and range of his portfolio career. “I’m really happy with what I’m doing now, because I get to have time with my family, and get to enjoy what I’m doing as well,” he says. “If you are a person who is bored of the monotony of a normal day-to-day job, this is a great opportunity to change lives while still working in the sector you love.” Your skills are more valuable than you realise. If you have relevant experience working in industry, you can start teaching in FE with no formal teaching qualifications. To find out how you can change lives without changing careers, head to teach-in-further-education.campaign.gov.ukAsk Rosa Wells to list the highlights from her career teaching in further education (FE), and she’s spoiled for choice. There’s the young man she supported to do a higher national certificate (HNC) in electrical and electronic engineering, who then secured his dream job in Formula One, and the student she encouraged to go to university, who now has a master’s in engineering leadership. She’s also particularly proud of the mature students she’s helped balance studies with their family life, and the recent honour of being awarded a technical teaching fellowship for outstanding achievement in science and engineering. “I remember going out for dinner with friends a few years after I started teaching in FE, and they all said they wished they had a job they loved as much as I loved mine,” she says. “I feel so lucky to have found such a rewarding career.” Wells grew up in Birmingham and started her professional life in the aerospace manufacturing industry. She was always fascinated by how things worked, and as a young child was constantly taking her toys apart with a screwdriver. Aeroplanes in particular captivated her. “I didn’t understand how these huge aircraft got into the sky. When I was about 10, I decided I wanted to be a pilot because then I’d find out how they worked. A family member who was an engineer said: ‘Well, pilots don’t know how they work but engineers do.’ So that was it. Engineering it was.” Straight after A-levels, Wells secured a year-long industrial placement through the Engineering Development Trust, joining Lucas Aerospace, which manufactured the electronic engine control system for Rolls-Royce. She impressed her team so much that the company paid for her to do an aerospace engineering degree in Manchester, while working for the company over the summer holidays. Later she worked in France, researching whether the noise pollution of aircraft could be reduced by adjusting the shape of the jet engine’s nozzle. But neither manufacturing nor research felt like the right fit. “Manufacturing was about interacting with lots of people and problem solving, but I didn’t really find it stimulating enough,” she says. “Research was very interesting and stimulating, but I really missed the people.” ‘It’s really important that we’re not just offering courses that students want to do but training that will develop into careers,’ says Wells Back in the UK, Wells found herself thinking about how much she’d enjoyed helping her peers with their studies at university, and started to wonder if teaching could be the answer. “I knew people who taught in FE and they encouraged me to give it a go.” With no previous teaching experience or qualifications, she was offered a job at Fareham college, near Southampton. Wells joined as an engineering lecturer, teaching in mechanical, electrical and aeronautical engineering for 18 hours a week. At the same time, she began studying part-time for a PGCE in post-compulsory education and training, funded by her employer. “I instantly loved teaching in FE, but it was totally different to what I expected,” she says. “For one thing, there’s a huge diversity in the level and experience among the students. I was teaching 16-year-olds right the way through to 40- or 50-year-olds. But I enjoyed that challenge. I had to think about how to plan interesting lessons that would engage all learners at all levels. I learned to ride the highs and lows when one lesson worked really well and the next didn’t quite hit the mark.” Today, Wells is the executive director for employment, skills and IoT (Institute of Technology) at Solihull College and University Centre. It’s a hybrid role that combines teaching students to develop their apprenticeships, projects and work-based learning portfolios, with leading the regional IoT, which coordinates the colleges and universities in Birmingham and Solihull to support the manufacturing and engineering sector. “It’s really important that we’re not just offering courses that students want to do but training that will develop into careers,” she says. “And it’s not just about supporting the engineers of the future, but also about helping our existing engineering workforce to upskill as well. Because the college now teaches from level 1 (pre-GCSE) up to degree level, we’ve often got learners who have really specialist experience in certain sectors or technologies who can help our other students. It’s about building that whole cycle of learning, making sure you draw people in to enhance the experience for others.” As well as landing dream jobs with F1, Wells’ students have gone on to do master’s degrees, degree apprenticeships, and work with prestigious companies such as Rolls-Royce, Aston Martin Lagonda, and National Express. One even joined the British bobsleigh team after studying for a BTec engineering diploma. Despite having worked in FE for 15 years now, Wells is as passionate about engineering as ever, and is keen to encourage others in the industry to share their skills. “If you love engineering, you’re a natural problem-solver who is inquisitive and analytical, and that’s exactly what we need in FE,” she says. “Colleges can be really flexible and will support you with training; you don’t need a teaching qualification to start, we’re always interested to see what experience people can bring to our learners.” For Wells, FE has offered a level of career satisfaction she feared she’d never find. “Knowing you’re changing learners’ lives, getting to know them, hearing about the challenges they’ve faced and what they want to achieve, has been brilliant,” she says. “I’ve loved learning how to be innovative with my teaching and working collaboratively to continuously improve. I’ve found something I absolutely love.” Your skills are more valuable than you realise. If you have relevant experience working in industry, you can start teaching in FE with no formal teaching qualifications. To find out how you can change lives without changing careers, head to teach-in-further-education.campaign.gov.ukIt began in darkness soon after 4.30am local time. There were distant explosions in the Ukrainian capital, Kyiv, and the whine of car alarms. A nation shook itself awake. What had been foretold by western governments, by experts, and – late in the day – by the country’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, was actually happening. Russia was attacking and invading. Vladimir Putin’s apparent goal: the subjugation of a nation, a culture, a people. It was unthinkable in the twenty-first century. And yet, with imperial swagger, Russian troops, tanks and planes were on the move. The disaster unfurled itself on a grey, ordinary Thursday morning, sprinkled by rain. By 5am friends and loved ones were ringing each other, peering into their phones, making life and death decisions. Stay or flee? Some packed and got ready to leave; others took refuge in apartment block basements. An underground garage began to fill up in Yaroslaviv Val, close to Kyiv’s historic golden gate, dating back to the eleventh century and to Kyivan Rus, a pre-Moscow dynasty. A family arrived. A mother shepherded her two bleary-eyed children to safety. The children were carrying colouring books, scant defence against Russian missiles. By breakfast the scale of Russia’s multitudinous military assault became clear. Putin’s ambitions, it turned out, went well beyond the Donbas region, whose separatist territories he recognised earlier this week. They included practically the entire country: east, south, north and even west. The port city of Mariupol on the Sea of Azov; the city of Kharkiv, home to 1.4 million people; Odesa on the Black Sea and Kherson; Ukrainian-controlled towns and villages on the Donbas frontline – all were being pulverised and bombed. Russia was clinically targeting Ukraine’s defences: aerodromes, military bases, ammunition dumps. It was shock and awe, done with a ruthless indifference to human cost. Amid this grandiose onslaught there were moments of normality. A few Kyiv residents emerged to walk their dogs. Queues formed outside cash machines. Most cafes were closed but Aroma Coffee had opened as usual, selling croissants and take-outs. The mood was one of shock, fear and quiet disgust that Putin – without reason or rational pretext – had decided to unleash war. “Russia is 100% wrong,” said Viktor Alexeyvich, speaking in the capital’s Maidan Nezalezhnosti square. Behind him was the city’s independence monument, a marble column once topped with a statue of Vladimir Lenin. Perched on top – at least for now – was a woman with a rose branch in her arms, symbolising Ukraine’s independence, beneath a golden capital. What would he do now? “I’ve going to take my grandson out of the city. And then I will come back,” he said. “I don’t have any weapons but I’m ready to defend my country. Maybe the national guard will help.” Alexeyevich said he had rung his son when he heard the first explosions and turned on the TV. He had watched President Zelenskiy address the nation, introduce martial law, and urge citizens to be calm, he said. “Putin is the aggressor here. He’s invade Ukraine because we don’t want to live under his strictures, his model.” The normally-busy square full of tourists and shoppers was sparser than usual. A few people waited in the rain for a municipal trolley-bus. For months, Kyiv’s pro-western government has said Ukraine will resist Russian attack and occupation. It says the country’s armed forces are in better shape than in 2014, when they wilted under superior Russian firepower. On paper, this is true: Ukraine has 220,000 troops, 400,000 veterans with combat experience and modern weapons recently supplied by the US, UK and other allies. Ukraine’s operational command reported some early successes on Thursday in beating back attacks from the rebel-held cities of Donetsk and Luhansk, run for the past eight years by Moscow’s loyal proxies. And yet the cars streaming out of Kyiv told their own story. From early in the day the streets were jammed, as civilians sought a way out – to Zhytomyr, west of the city, and from there to Lviv and the Polish border. Traffic on the boulevards moved slowly. There was no panic as such but an awareness that the window to leave was beginning to close. Reports suggested Russian formations were advancing to the capital from Belarus and the north, two hours’ drive and 160kms away. They had broken through the international check-point and – seemingly – were trundling Kyiv-wards through a primordial landscape of pine trees and swamp. It seemed Belarus was facilitating war on Kyiv too. Oleg Olegovich, a 30-year-old officer in the Ukrainian army, said he had been summoned at 4am to come in for work. His office was in the centre of Kyiv. “Civilians are leaving. But we will stay,” he said. Could Ukraine defeat mighty Russia, with its vast air power and Black Sea navy? “We will smash them,” he said. “The military is in good shape, our communications are working.” Lyudmila – a young city police officer who had popped out for coffee – said she would carry on. “I didn’t sleep last night,” she said. “I tried to sleep before work but I couldn’t manage it.” “Cheerio,” she said with a smile. Nearby, the trade union building overlooking the Maidan played the Ukrainian national anthem on a loudspeaker. Few were around to hear it. It played a key role in the Euromaidan protests in 2013 and 2014 against the country’s pro-Russian president Viktor Yanukovych. The uprising saw Yanukovych flee to Russia. Since then the country had moved in an emphatically pro-EU and pro-Nato direction. Putin responded in 2014 by annexing Crimea and kickstarting a pro-Russian revolt in the east. Eight years on, he seems determined to stop Ukraine’s westward integration forever. His tactics are familiar from Russia’s bloody wars in Chechnya: brute military force. President Zelenskiy – a TV star and comedian before he turned to politics – was still in Kyiv and at work, his press service said. Historians may rebuke him for failing to prepare Ukraine for an inevitable Kremlin attack. But in a speech on Wednesday evening – the eve of invasion as it turned out – Zelenskiy addressed the Russian people directly. He reminded them of Ukraine and Russia’s joint ties – of family, friendship and of love – telling them that the portrait painted by Russian state TV of a fascist Ukraine bore no resemblance to its vibrant, modern and tolerant reality. It was his finest hour. Zelenskiy’s personal fate and that of the country he leads remains unclear. It seems likely Russia will demand his capitulation and replacement with a pro-Russian puppet administration. For the moment he is in power – just. Meanwhile, Kyiv’s familiar rhythms continued. The bells of St Michael’s domed monastery tolled the hour, as they have for centuries. The baroque building sits across the square from Saint Sophia cathedral, an eleventh century building done in vivid turquoise. Locals protesting outside the now-empty Russian embassy on Tuesday pointed out wryly that when it was constructed Moscow was a mere forest. The square’s children’s playground was empty, home now to a few jackdaws and a stray dog. Europe was at war. The world – two decades into the century – had reached a crisis that was likely to reverberate well beyond the early overcast hours of invasion and predation. It was Mikhail Bulgakov in his masterful novel The White Guard, written almost a century ago, who dubbed Kyiv the City, with an upper case C. The City will endure. But it seems only a matter of time before it has new, harsher masters.Winning tip: Manic drums, Uruguay The Montevideo carnival, which runs from January into early March is a well-kept secret with far fewer tourists than Rio’s more famous event, and has its own unique traditions and history. I stumbled on it when backpacking a few years ago. I had settled downto sleep in a hotel when the manic banging of drums followed by singing and dancing in the streets below kicked off a month of carnival celebrations. All of the capital’s barrios have samba contests, gigs, poetry readings and outrageous costume parades. The carnival has its origins in slavery times and features a lot of candombe – a music and dance genre created by the descendants of liberated African slaves. Nick Join the throng, Salvador, Brazil Nothing prepared me for Salvador’s carniva, the world’s largest street party. For five days and nights the city’s streets are packed with more than a million revellers dancing to all kinds of Brazilian music. The scale can feel overwhelming at first, especially when a gigantic trio elétrico (a truck equipped with a colossal sound system and a 10-piece band on top) thunders by with hundreds of people dancing, singing and pogoing in its wake. The only thing to do is warm up with few a few beers, then take the plunge and join the throng for an absolute riot of a time. Alex Robbins Pelting oranges, Italy A few years ago, an Italian train strike left me stranded in Ivrea, 30 miles north of Turin, but I was lucky enough to be there during carnival and ended up staying the weekend to enjoy the wild festivities and atmosphere. The climax of street dancing, parades eating and drinking was the Battle of the Oranges. Using surplus oranges traditionally imported from Sicily, the townspeople pelted a few costumed leaders dressed as a local tyrant and his family from the 12th century. The festival celebrates Ivrea’s freedom from this evil man. The cruel ruler was about to rape a local miller’s daughter, but she escaped and decapitated him (as you do): the oranges are said to represent the tyrant’s testicles. A girl is chosen each year to represent the daughter. This year’s event starts on Saturday (26 February) and finishes on 1 March. Gonca Party hub with dragons, Malta For a close encounter with ancient traditions, drop into a Maltese Festa celebrating the village patron saint. Staying in Qormi in 2018, I accidentally caught the feast of Saint George in late June over an initially baffling few days. Every night red-shirted paraders passed through the square beneath the apartment windows, carrying a statue of the dragon slayer through the narrow streets to the sound of a brass band and fireworks. Strings of lights and bright red tapestries hung from flaking baroque buildings. On the festa’s last night, our little square turned party hub, all swaying red shirts and music, while temporary statues were pedestalled using precarious ladder rails. A rowdy secret carnival. Culann Robinson Carnival on two wheels, Cambridge The Reach Ride, a mass 11-mile cycle ride from Cambridge to Reach Fair, is a new tradition meeting a very old one. Reach Fair was granted its charter by King John in 1201. Taking place originally on Rogation Monday and now on the first bank holiday in May, it is opened at noon by the mayor of Cambridge, who then throws pennies to the crowd. There are fairground rides, market stalls and entertainments, including dancing by the Devil’s Dyke Morris Men. Their name comes from the Anglo-Saxon earthwork which stretches 7½ miles from Reach to Woodditton. The next Reach Fair is on 2 May. All cyclists are welcome and encouraged to dress up according to themes. Sharon Pinner A feeling for Fasching, Germany Held around Ash Wednesday (2 March this year), Fasching, the German carnival season, is a staple Teutonic calendar highlight (key dates are: Fat Thursday, which is today, 24 Feb; Shrove Monday, 28 Feb; and Fat Tuesday, 1 March). Traditionally, the Catholic regions celebrate with the greatest intensity, with Kölner (Cologne) Karneval (finishes 2 March this year) almost certainly the biggest. However, its less-famous cousin is in Heidelberg, where witches, jesters, the local mayor and up to 100,000 others parade through the Altstadt towards the cathedral, many in medieval costume, and all to a thumping techno beat. Sadly this isn’t taking place this year once again because of Covid. Tim Moss Universal fun, Florida The Mardi Gras at Universal Studios, Orlando, is amazing. I’ll never forget my late husband roaring with laughter as he caught the strings of beads the characters on the floats throw to the crowd. There are daytime and night parades as well as concerts, scavenger hunts and themed foods. I can’t wait to go again with my grandson. This year it runs until 24 April. Diane Out of the pan, into the fire, Trinidad Trinidad is the mother of Caribbean carnivals, a riot of music, brilliant costumes and wining (or dancing) in the street. For me, though, the highlight was Panorama, the steel pan band competition away from the main procession. Established in 1963, it’s taken incredibly seriously by the island’s 80 or so pan bands, with qualifying competitions taking place all year. For the final, on the Saturday of carnival, bands of up to 200 musicians create music that’s both exhilating and orchestral in its scope. I meant to pop in for just a short time but was mesmerised by band after band and stayed long into the night. Gloria B Colombia with a taste of the Caribbean The origins of Barranquilla’s huge carnival, which starts on the Saturday before Ash Wednesday (26 February this year), are shrouded in mystery. But it’s known that it really became a thing in the 19th century and may have been started – before then – by slaves. It’s now a huge celebration of different cultures and people and their music, blending African and South American styles, culminating in mourning for the death of “Joselito Carnaval” – not a real person, in case you were wondering. The food is fantastic – a real Caribbean influence on the already varied Colombian fare, though I can’t pretend I ever really took to fried catfish. I still feel somewhat stunned by my visit to this sultry, intensely colourful city during carnival – visually and aurally – but most of all by the sheer vitality of the people. Jock Top crop, Barbados A few years ago I visited Barbados for a once-in-a-lifetime holiday with various family members in midsummer. I hadn’t heard about the Crop Over Carnival – which this year takes place between 27 July and 2 August. My sister’s husband said we should pop along to Bridgetown and check it out. We were reluctant to take a day off from the beach but soon got into the spirit of things. Incredible scenes ensued, possibly fuelled by regular infusions of local Banks beer. It was Grand Kadooment Day, the culmination of the whole affair. The festival itself began centuries ago in sugar plantation times and some traditions endure – there’s a King and a Queen of the Crop for starters. In Spring Gardens I lost my companions for quite some time. And I quite like soca music now. HenriettaThe quiz master is away, recuperating from his recent exertions at the Winter Olympics. Fortunately, before he left, he passed a crumpled piece of paper into the hands of one poor overworked member of Guardian production staff, and said, “This will probably do.” Before you are 15 general knowledge and somewhat less topical questions than usual. There is still a hidden Doctor Who reference to spot among the wrong answers and, of course, along the way you’ll meet some of your favourite familiar friends from the quiz. It is just for fun and there are no prizes, but let us know how you get on in the comments. The Thursday quiz, No 44 If you think there has been an egregious error in one of the questions or answers, please feel free to email martin.belam@theguardian.com but remember, the quizmaster’s word is always final, and genuinely he is away so we might just all have to live with it if there are any disputes.British Gas has said energy supplies to its 8 million customers are guaranteed, despite Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, but declined to comment on what soaring prices might mean for household bills. Russia, which launched a full invasion of Ukraine on Thursday, is responsible for a third of Europe’s natural gas and about 10% of global oil production. About a third of Russian gas supplies to Europe usually travels through pipelines crossing Ukraine, and there are fears retaliation against economic sanctions on Russia could disrupt supplies. “What we have made quite clear is that when we make a commitment to gas and electricity for customers we deliver on that,” said Chris O’Shea, chief executive of Centrica, the parent company of the UK’s biggest energy supplier. “We can deliver everything to consumers that we said we would.” The escalation of the crisis in Ukraine, which world leaders fear could spark the biggest war in Europe since 1945, sent the price of oil above $100 a barrel for the first time since 2014 and resulted in a 40% rise in the price of gas. O’Shea, who said he would not take his £1.1m annual bonus in acknowledgment of the soaring energy bills facing consumers, refused to comment on what the invasion might mean for bills. “It is unprecedented what we see at the moment,” he said. “I don’t think it will help anyone to speculate what this might mean [regarding prices]. We have to wait and see how this might unfold, it is absolutely unprecedented, we will have to wait and see.” His comments came as Centrica reported a £767m pre-tax profit last year, compared with a £577m loss in 2020, helped by the £2.3bn sale of its Direct Energy subsidiary and the benefit of higher commodity prices at its oil and gas exploration business. O’Shea defended the bumper year, saying that in line with its performance, the company had significantly increased its tax payments, to almost £500m. “Pre-tax profits across the globe are taxed highly so governments get their fair share,” he said. “Our tax bill is up almost £500m, there has been a huge tax windfall for governments. The vast majority has quite rightly gone to governments.” The company also said it had paid back £27m it received in 2020 through the UK government’s coronavirus job retention scheme. British Gas has taken on more than 700,000 customers from energy suppliers that have gone bankrupt because of soaring wholesale energy prices – the total is now at 29 – meaning last year was the first since 2010 it added customers overall. Centrica said up to 1,000 roles would be cut this year, the last stage of a reorganisation that started in 2020 to remove 4,000 positions.If Terry and June had wrestled with ennui, the result might have resembled An Hour and a Half Late, a two-hander that comes close to confronting the terror of an unfulfilled life before skating blithely over it. Peter (Griff Rhys Jones), a west London tax consultant, is ready for dinner, if only his wife, Laura (Janie Dee), would shake a leg. How can he hustle her off to an evening of jovial conversation with friends, however, when she is using words such as “chasm” and “precipice” to describe her life? As they bicker comically, their marriage threatens to unravel, beginning with the discovery that Laura didn’t have an affair after all … Though the pair touch on pertinent topics, such as the sexist expectations that left Laura no option but to “dwindle to a wife”, the humour rarely graduates beyond sitcom level: quinoa, media studies degrees and man-buns are all offered up for derision. Matters improve with two slapstick set-pieces, including an erotically charged duet of squeaking floorboards. Jones’s late comedy partner, Mel Smith, starred in Gérald Sibleyras and Jean Dell’s comedy back in 2006, but while the play predates Yasmina Reza’s God of Carnage, it has also been superseded by it. Whereas Reza showed the collapse of etiquette leading to savagery among the bourgeoisie, An Hour and a Half Late pulls back from that brink at every opportunity. Dee captures Laura’s scattershot thought processes but never convinces as a former political radical; Jones starts out frazzled and doesn’t have many other places to go. What they do convey is the couple’s mutual affection. The irony is that Peter and Laura’s showdown reveals not hidden fissures but deep-rooted solidarity. They seem interested in, and amused by, one another in a way that renders all other obstacles moot. If the message is that wealthy white couples in big houses have problems too, it could hardly have come at a worse time. The pay-off – that someone else will always clean up after the rich – would have more punch if this production felt like an indictment of complacency as opposed to a nice long soak in the stuff. At Theatre Royal, Bath, until 26 February, then touring.I’ve been praying for Facebook’s collapse ever since it attained liftoff. In a 2007 article, I predicted that “your creepy ex-co-workers will kill Facebook” by demanding to know why you won’t “friend” them, prompting an exodus to the next platform. That was the social network cycle back then: a new network opens, and you and the people you genuinely like enjoy a rollicking group chat until all the people you have to pretend to like show up. That’s the double-edged sword of products that rely on “network effects” – the economists’ term for a product that gets better when more people use it. Sure, you might join Facebook because your friends are all there (and more people might sign up because you’re there), but that also means that every time your friends leave Facebook, it’s a reason for you to leave, too. My prediction failed. For a decade and a half, Facebook resisted the fate of all the social networks that preceded it. In hindsight, it’s easy to see why: it cheated. The company used investor cash to buy and neutralize competitors (“Kids are leaving Facebook for Insta? Fine, we’ll buy Insta. We know you value choice!”). It allegedly spied on users through the deceptive use of apps such as Onavo and exploited the intelligence to defeat rivals. More than anything, it ratcheted up “switching costs.” “Switching costs” is another economic term: it means “the price you pay when you switch from one service to another.” Switching from Facebook to a rival means saying goodbye to the communities, friends and customers you hang out with on the platform. Normally, tech has really low switching costs: want to change from T-Mobile to Verizon? Just port your number. Your friends don’t even have to know you did; they can still call you and you them. Tech’s rock-bottom switching costs are what kept the industry so dynamic in its early days. Microsoft could deploy an army of corporate salespeople to turn Microsoft Office into an industry standard, then Apple could come along and reverse-engineer the Office formats and make the interoperable iWork office suite. That means that Windows users could switch to the Mac and open their Word docs in Pages, their Excel spreadsheets in Numbers and their PowerPoints in Keynote. It’s different for Facebook. The company’s ascendancy coincided with an overall concentration in the tech sector, and, with it, laws that protected winners of the latest round of the interoperability wars from new challengers. Apple was able to reverse-engineer its way out of the Microsoft Office trap, but woe betide a company that tries the same trick on Apple – try to make a program that lets you run iPhone apps on an Android device, or read the media files you buy in Apple’s book, movie or music stores, and you will quickly discover that the law is now on the sides of the giants, not the upstarts. That same legal shift is how Facebook has kept its switching costs high. Fifteen years ago, it was safe to make a Facebook-MySpace bridge that would let you leave MySpace but stay in touch with your friends there by scraping your MySpace inbox and moving the waiting messages to your Facebook inbox. Try to build one of those bridges today – blasting an escape tunnel through Facebook’s walled garden – and Facebook will sue you until the rubble bounces. But high switching costs have their limits. If you make your service terrible enough, a certain number of users will find the cost of switching preferable to the pain of staying. And as users leave, network effects start to work in reverse: though every user that joins makes your service more valuable, every user that leaves makes the service less valuable. If you’re only on Facebook to stay in touch with a small group of friends, each one of those friends who departs makes it easier for you to make the jump, too. And once you go, it’s even easier for the rest of the group to bail. This is very bad news for Facebook. After years of slowing US growth, Facebook just experienced its first-ever US shrinkage, which precipitated a $230bn stock crash, the largest in global corporate history. Though most of Facebook’s users are global, its US users generate far more profit than users in the rest of the world. Losing a US user is expensive. Even more important: the US is Facebook’s home base, and its US user base is its main bargaining chip in resisting US regulation, and in securing US support in its regulatory battles abroad. Speaking of regulatory battles abroad: Facebook is on the brink of having its business model declared illegal under the European Union’s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR). Fending off that scenario will depend on vast capital expenditures and friendly European regulators, and Facebook’s running short on both. Oh, and Europeans are Facebook’s second most valuable users. Admittedly, when a company’s shares decline, it’s not like the company itself has lost any money – those losses hit shareholders, not the business itself. However, Facebook’s costs and share-price are intimately bound together, thanks to tech firms’ reliance on stock grants as a way of scoring a discount on their wage-bills. Engineers, lawyers, and other high-paid, in-demand professionals are glad to take much of their compensation in stock, betting that the company’s share price will balloon and that they can cash out their shares and keep their winnings, thanks to the tax-preferred status of capital gains – in most of the world, the wages you earn for doing useful work are taxed at a much higher rate than the winnings you get from lucky bets on stocks. Even before its stock fell off a cliff, Facebook was mired in a multi-year hiring crisis. Nobody wanted to work for Facebook because it’s a terrible company that makes terrible products that everyone hates and only use because the company has rigged the system to punish users for switching. Facebook was already paying a wage premium, offering sweeteners to in-demand workers in exchange for checking their consciences at the door. Those sweeteners mostly took the form of shares, which means that all those morally flexible “Metamates” got a hefty pay-cut when the company’s stock price fell off a cliff. Expect a lot of them to leave – and expect the company to have to pay even more to replace them. Companies with falling share prices can’t use share grants to attract workers. Facebook is now famously trying to pivot (ugh) to virtual reality to save itself. It’s an expensive gambit. It’s going to alienate a lot of its users. It’s going to alienate a lot of its in-demand workers. It’s going to freak out a lot of regulators. Meanwhile, the switching costs for people who want to jump ship keep getting lower. It’s not merely that fewer and fewer of the people you want to talk with are still on Facebook. Even if there’s someone whose virtual company you can’t bear to part with, lawmakers in the US and Europe are working on legislation that would force Facebook to allow third parties to “federate” new services with it. That would mean that you could quit Facebook and join an upstart rival – say, one by a privacy-respecting nonprofit or even a user-owned co-op – and still exchange messages with the communities, customers and family you left behind on Facebook’s sinking ship. For 15 years, I’ve been waiting for Facebook to suffer the fate of every network-effects-driven success story – to experience the precipitous decline that is triggered by people leaving the service and taking the value they brought to it with them. Facebook now has to somehow retain users who are fed up to the eyeballs with its never-ending failures and scandals, while funding a pivot to VR, while fending off overlapping salvoes of global regulatory challenges to its business model, while paying a massive wage premium to attract and retain the workers that it needs to make any of this happen. All that, amid an exodus of its most valuable users and a frontal regulatory assault on its ability to extract revenues from those users’ online activities. Stein’s Law holds that “if something cannot go on forever, it will stop.” Facebook can’t go on forever. Cory Doctorow is a science fiction author, activist and journalist. He is the author of many books, including the forthcoming book Chokepoint Capitalism, with Rebecca Giblin, about monopoly and fairness in the creative arts labor market. In 2020, he was inducted into the Canadian Science Fiction and Fantasy Hall of FameBoris Johnson’s chief of staff, Steve Barclay, has said the UK will respond to Russia’s attack on Ukraine with “overwhelming” sanctions, as the prime minister prepares to address the nation about the crisis. Speaking to MPs at Westminster, Barclay said he was appalled by what he called “an unprovoked attack” and the UK and its allies would respond decisively. He added that the prime minister would address parliament later, “to outline the UK response, including overwhelming sanctions”. After speaking to the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy,early in the morning, the prime minister said: “This is a catastrophe for our continent.” He said the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, had “chosen a path of bloodshed and destruction”. The foreign secretary, Liz Truss, said she had summoned the Russian ambassador “to meet me and explain Russia’s illegal, unprovoked invasion of Ukraine”. She is expected to speak to her counterparts in various countries throughout the day. Following a meeting of the government’s emergency Cobra committee at 7.30am on Thursday, Johnson is expected to give an address to the nation, followed by a call with G7 leaders in the afternoon and a statement in the House of Commons at 5pm. Ukraine’s president declared martial law, while Russia’s military said it had targeted Ukrainian airbases and other military assets and not populated areas. A Downing Street spokesperson said the Cobra committee meeting, chaired by Johnson, discussed the response to the “horrific attacks”. Britain, in common with other Nato allies, has said it will not fight Russia, because Ukraine is not a Nato member. But the UK has supplied arms to Kyiv and has already announced limited economic sanctions. The UK previously said it expected Russia to launch an invasion along “multiple axes” – aimed at Ukraine military forces in the east of the country and above all, the capital, Kyiv, in what could be a bloody attempt to force a change of regime. Western officials have said they expect Russia to seek to encircle Ukraine’s major cities and rely on the FSB intelligence service to deliver them with limited fighting. The US has warned key Ukrainian figures could be targeted in this phase. In a statement posted on Twitter at 4.53am, Johnson said he had spoken with Zelenskiy to discuss “next steps”. He said: “I am appalled by the horrific events in Ukraine and I have spoken to President Zelenskiy to discuss next steps. President Putin has chosen a path of bloodshed and destruction by launching this unprovoked attack on Ukraine. The UK and our allies will respond decisively.” A Downing Street spokesperson said Johnson had assured Zelenskiy the west “would not stand by as President Putin waged his campaign against the Ukrainian people”. “The prime minister said he hoped Ukraine could resist and that Ukraine and its people were in the thoughts of everyone in the United Kingdom during this dark time,” the spokesperson said. The Foreign Office minister James Cleverly promised there would be an “unprecedented” fresh set of sanctions imposed on Russia for the “appalling decision” to invade Ukraine. He accused Putin of “recreating some kind of tsarist, expansionist Russia” and being driven by ego as well as a “foolish attempt to write himself into the history books”. Cleverly said on Sky News that the Russian stock market had already dropped 30% in value. In London, the FTSE 100 also fell 2.5% to 7,311.69 as Europe awakened to news of the Russian invasion. Gen Sir Richard Shirreff, a former senior British army officer, told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: “Absolutely there is a possibility that we as a nation will be at war with Russia. Because if Russia puts one boot-step across Nato territory, we are all at war with Russia – every single member of the Nato alliance.” Keir Starmer, the Labour leader, cancelled a speech on the economy in Huddersfield and called for Johnson to unveil the “hardest possible sanctions” against all those linked to Putin. After the government was criticised for what were derided as weak sanctions announced by the prime minister on Tuesday, Starmer urged the prime minister to “match our rhetoric with action”, and added: “The influence of Russian money must be extricated from the UK.” Britain’s ambassador to Ukraine urged UK nationals to leave the country immediately. Melinda Simmons wrote on Twitter: “We advise GB nationals to leave Ukraine immediately if you judge that it is safe to do so from your location. Please call +380 44 490 3660 if you need assistance.” Putin announced the action during a televised address early on Thursday morning, saying the move was a response to threats from Ukraine. He said Russia did not have a goal to occupy Ukraine, but that the responsibility for bloodshed lay with the Ukrainian “regime”. He also warned other countries that any attempt to interfere with the Russian action would lead to “consequences they have never seen”. The UK’s defence secretary, Ben Wallace, described Russia’s actions as “naked aggression against a democratic country” and said no one had been fooled by the Kremlin’s “false flags and fake narratives”. “The Russian Federation has today further violated Ukrainian sovereignty,” he said. “Despite the efforts of the international communities, Russia has chosen conflict. No one has been fooled by the Kremlin’s false flags and fake narratives. “This is naked aggression against a democratic country which had dared to express a different aspiration than being a supine neighbour to Russia. No one should forget this day. Putin thinks this land grab is about securing his legacy – it will be, but not the one that he wishes.”Choreographer Ben Duke and his company Lost Dog are on a winning streak. After unconventional takes on Paradise Lost and Romeo and Juliet, they bring us a Dickens-inspired story that’s complex but to the point, funny and full of feeling. As in those previous works, Duke considers a classic text – and the human emotions within it – by fabricating a whole new vantage point. For A Tale of Two Cities, we arrive long after the action of the final page. Our guide is little Lucie Manette (Nina-Morgane Madelaine), who escaped from Paris in the throes of the French Revolution with her mother, also Lucie, and father Charles Darnay, and has plenty of questions about why. Now grown up, Lucie is making a documentary about her family, unpeeling secrets her parents have been withholding for years. While uncovering the story in retrospect, themes bubble to the surface: about our responsibility for the actions of our forebears and whether we can escape our pasts. In a chatty intro, as tightly packed as Dickens’ dense text, Lucie suggests we draw a family tree on our programmes to keep track of the characters. A basic overview of the plot in advance is probably useful, but you are soon absorbed into her investigation by the script’s dry asides, light marital bickering and out-loud laughs. Lucie’s video camera is not a prop but instrumental in the scene-making. As she interviews her parents, the live feed is projected on to the roof of a semi-ruined house on the stage – the dance between the bodies in front of us and the screen allows for sudden changes of focus or slips into memory. Duke has mastered a way of working that seamlessly crosses forms. This is finessed theatre, without being actorly; Duke uses dance (and music) only when necessary, to vivify the storytelling or a mental state – when Madame Defarge (Temitope Ajose-Cutting) discovers her sister has been raped, she buckles at the core then the softness escapes her body until it’s an empty machine. It’s rare to see all these elements used so skilfully, non-gratuitously, with pacing that pulls in the viewer, even if you already know the facts before Lucie does. It’s a work that deserves to be widely seen, not only by dance audiences or Dickens fans. At the Place, London, until 5 March, then touring.Jason Robinson has led a series of emotional tributes to dual-code rugby legend Va’aiga Tuigamala after his death at the age of 52. Tuigamala, known globally as “Inga the Winger”, played for the All Blacks at the 1991 Rugby Union World Cup before switching to represent his native Samoa in the 1995 Rugby League and 1999 union World Cups. In total, he won 19 caps for the All Blacks in rugby union and 23 for Samoa and two caps for Samoa in rugby league. Having arrived in the United Kingdom from New Zealand in 1993, Tuigamala played 102 games for Wigan Warriors during five seasons at the club, scoring 62 tries. He won three league titles with Wigan and two Challenge Cups before returning to union, where he made 126 appearances for Wasps and Newcastle Falcons, scoring 180 points. Robinson, who played with Tuigamala at Wigan in the 1990s, wrote on social media: “Absolutely heartbroken! I owe so much to this amazing man! Literally helped change my life when he came to ⁦@WiganWarriorsRL⁩ from NZ.” Wigan Warriors will hold a minute’s silence before their Super League match against Huddersfield at the DW Stadium on Thursday evening. The club’s executive director, Kris Radlinski, said: “Every now and then a player comes along who touches the heart and soul of every single fan, player, coach and administrator – Inga was one of them. He was one of the most exciting rugby players to play either code. His presence on the rugby field was huge. As a teenager, he gave me the most precious thing that anyone could, time. We would spend hours on the field doing one on one’s together. It is a very sad day for the club. Rest in peace my friend.”A voluntary phasing out of lead shot in the UK has had almost no impact according to a report, with 99.5% of birds killed found to contain the toxic metal. While other industries have been forced to phase out lead, with the material banned from paint and fuel decades ago, shooters are still allowed to use it despite the fact it could poison soil and wildlife. In 2020, the British Association of Shooting and Conservation announced that it, along with other shooting groups, wanted to phase the use of lead out by 2025, and urged its members to start switching. But scientists from the University of Cambridge found there had been no change since this ambition was stated. Their study last year showed that 99.4% of recovered pheasants contained lead shot. This year, the amount has marginally increased to 99.5%. The study, published in Conservation Evidence, states: “We found that 99.5% of the 215 pheasants from which shotgun pellets were recovered had been killed using lead ammunition. We conclude that the shooting and rural organisations’ joint statement and two years of their considerable efforts in education, awareness-raising and promotion, have not yet had a detectable effect on the ammunition types used by hunters who supply pheasants to the British game meat market.” The scientists obtained 336 whole birds or oven-ready prepared carcasses from 70 businesses of various types, and at least one shot and/or shot fragment was recovered from 215. Chemical analysis then found that of the 215 pellets analysed, lead was the principal element in 214 pellets. Wild Justice, a wildlife campaign group, said “Another 12 months of zero progress from the shooting industry. All talk and no action. UK governments should simply ban the use of lead ammunition rather than let this charade continue.” Research by the Wildfowl and Wetlands Trust showed that between 50,000 and 100,000 wildfowl die in the UK each year as a result of ingesting lead from used pellets. Despite being highly toxic, the pellets are often mistaken for food by wildfowl. A further 200,000 to 400,000 birds suffer welfare or health impacts, and animals that predate on wildfowl can also suffer. Some shooters complain steel is more difficult to use, as it is lighter, spreads less and has denser shot patterns, resulting in less margin for error in gun handling and trigger timing. Others are concerned that older guns cannot safely be used with steel shot, meaning they will have to buy a new one. The government is currently considering plans to ban lead, and Waitrose announced in 2019 that it would not be stocking game meat shot with lead pellets. Adrian Blackmore, director of shooting at the Countryside Alliance said: “The Countryside Alliance remains firmly committed to a voluntary transition away from lead shot and single-use plastics for all live quarry shooting using shotguns by 2025. We are only two years into that five-year transition period; a period during which we have had to live with the Covid pandemic. Cartridge manufacturers are also committed to this. However the industry has been under immense pressure due to disrupted global logistics supply chains and commodity shortages caused by the ongoing Covid-19 restrictions.”Southern Water is offering discounts on bills to some people engaged in a non-payment protest campaign over raw sewage discharges, in an apparent concession to the boycott. The non-payment protest, which was backed by Sir Bob Geldof, began because of anger at the level of untreated sewage discharged into coastal waters. It came after the water company was fined a record £90m for discharging billions of litres of raw sewage into the seas of Kent and Hampshire from 2010-15. An Environment Agency investigation is ongoing into more recently alleged illegal discharges. Those refusing to pay their bills include a local Conservative councillor, Ashley Clark. Earlier this month Clark was offered a 50% discount on his bill of £158.63. In a letter to the company, Clark has accepted the discount. He said: “This I accept on the basis … that it is proper to make a contribution in respect of the times that sewage in this area was treated in accordance with expectations. “It remains my contention that it is wholly inappropriate to contribute in respect of releases that prudent action and timely investment would have largely prevented.” Clark said despite Southern Water explaining the difficulties of surface water ingressing into treatment works, he believed the matters should have been addressed following privatisation a generation ago. He said that over a six-month period covered by his bill there were 49 days of sewage pollution alerts. Julie Wassmer, an author from Whitstable who is also a non-payer, said she had yet to be offered a discount but that a 100% concession had been offered to a resident in east Kent. She said: “Now that the company has given a 50% discount on the original demand to one boycotter, and offered concession to another resident in Kent, then clearly the company must offer the same concession to the remaining boycotters. “In the interest of fairness, Southern Water should offer a 100% discount to all 4.7 million wastewater customers the company serves across Sussex, Kent, Hampshire and the Isle of Wight.” Donna Howden, the head of customer services at Southern Water, said: “We cannot comment on the individual circumstances of any customer. We support customers who are going through tough times, including [through] payment holidays, special tariffs, debt write-offs, bill reductions and grants for household items. “Southern Water currently provides over 126,000 customers with some form of financial assistance, an increase of 21,000 since the start of the pandemic. Last year we provided over £12.5m worth of support. Ultimately, it is the bills customers pay which enable us not only to carry on providing water at the turn of a tap and taking wastewater away but to invest to protect the environment and boost local economies.”In her book entitled Schadenfreude: The Joy of Another’s Misfortune, the author and academic Dr Tiffany Watt Smith argues that it is “part of how we cope with inferiority or our own failures”. She and others view it as a natural reaction. A study by the psychologist Mirella Manfredi from the University of Milano-Bicocca illustrated that your brain has decided you are going to laugh at, say, someone tripping over or even scoring three own goals in a football match whether you like it or not. The latter happened to the New Zealand Women’s centre-back Meikayla Moore in the first half of their game with the United States in the SheBelieves Cup this week. A perfect hat-trick. As it turns out only one of them – the third – approached anything close to Jamie Pollock levels of hilarity. The others were just a bit unlucky – but nevertheless it is quite the achievement. “A hat-trick of own goals. This is tremendous.” I tweeted. It didn’t go viral, I was a little behind. I didn’t come up with anything clever – such as Adam Hurrey’s “Does the match ball get to put her on its mantelpiece?” Not everyone, however, found it funny. One correspondent quote-tweeted my post with the response: “Imagine suffering what is probably the worst day of your career and having people tweet about how tremendous it is for clicks. Expected better from you @maxrushden that player might well be in a dark place today. #BeKind #DoBetter” My instant reaction to this was scorn. No one likes being told they’re wrong or unkind. No one likes being patronised to hashtag do better. Elite sport is brutal. There is no place to hide. People choose to do it. And it’s only a game. But did he have a point? Clearly it wasn’t “tremendous” for the player. I hadn’t even considered her feelings in my haste to join to the latest viral moment – she looked distraught as she was substituted before half-time. And it’s quite hard to argue that any tweet is doing anything other than looking for clicks. The first thing to address is the obsession with social media – and quite possibly my low-level addiction. What is my actual aim in posting this, or anything? The dopamine of retweets, a desire to be part of a conversation, a need to be ‘relevant’? I find myself in the baking aisle in the supermarket unable to remember what my wife has asked me to get seconds before because my mind is taken up wondering whether I am a bad person and whether/how I should respond to someone who expects better from me. Second, is the reaction different because it’s a woman making a mistake (or three mistakes) on a football pitch? Had Harry Maguire done it – it’s always Harry Maguire in these hypothetical situations – would the response be the same? Lucy Bronze said after the last World Cup the increased scrutiny on the women’s game had come as a bit of a shock to the players. More eyeballs means more praise for England’s excellent showing in the Arnold Clark Cup, for the predatory instincts of Ellen White, and the unlikely goalscoring exploits of Millie Bright. But it surely also means we laugh when it’s funny. That said, I haven’t been watching the SheBelieves Cup at all. So do I have the right to laugh about one moment from it? The difficulty here is that alongside the reasonable and considered responses on Twitter coming to my defence came those tedious and depressingly expected ones: seeing this clip as conclusive “proof” that the women’s game isn’t any good and that “you can’t laugh at anything any more”, while yelling snowflake in permanent caps lock at my correspondent. I don’t want to be the mouthpiece for that crowd. I don’t want to be on the Joe Rogan side of this culture war. The question then remains whether it’s ever OK to laugh at own goals and gaffes. Maybe Danny Baker and Nick Hancock spent the 90s causing untold, unknown damage to Wayne Hatswell, Chris Brass and Peter Devine. Was You’ve Been Framed a hate crime? Should I stop watching that video of the gameshow contestant catapulting a watermelon into their own face from point-blank range? We should consider the role social media plays in catapulting anything – not just watermelons – around the world so quickly. Even if Moore hasn’t turned on her phone or logged into Twitter or Instagram in the past few days she’ll know that the football world has seen the footage. She is known for that, and not for her previous 49 caps or her club career in Germany and now Liverpool, or her advocacy for LGBTQ+ inclusion in sport. On countless occasions, I’ve trotted out the cliche that footballers are human beings too – with emotions and feelings just like the rest of us – because, well, it’s true. And being human means footballers will act differently to this kind of thing – some will laugh it off, some won’t. You imagine that the mental fortitude to make it at this level helps. You hope Moore is surrounded by a supportive squad. I hope she gets promoted to the WSL with Liverpool and shines next season. As Thomas Tuchel said of Romelu Lukaku: “It’s not the time to laugh about him and make jokes about him. He’s in the spotlight of course but we will protect him.” Yet I laughed heartily at his seven touches against Crystal Palace. If he starts on Sunday in the Carabao Cup final, you’d imagine Liverpool fans will count every touch he makes quite loudly. I want to be kind, I want to do better, but I still want to laugh at own goals. Maybe it’s enough to just say my brain made me do it against my will. I resolve – again – to spend less time on Twitter. I reach for the banana bread cake mix, put it in my basket and head for the checkout.20. Somethin’ You Wanna Know (1992) Far sassier than your standard early 90s slow jam, blessed with a laconic Lisa “Left Eye” Lopes rap: let rumour-mongers and spreaders of “crap street yap” beware! Somethin’ You Wanna Know is the sound of a band already far more sophisticated than their cartoonish early image suggested. 19. Get It Up (1993) A track that’s aged noticeably better than Poetic Justice, the Tupac/Janet Jackson movie it soundtracked, Get It Up brilliantly slows down the synth riff from the Time’s 1981 Prince-produced version, turning it into a sleazy electronic buzz. TLC, meanwhile, sound as if they’re having a hoot with its party-starting lyrics. 18. This Is How It Works (1995) Also from a movie soundtrack – this time Waiting to Exhale – This Is How It Works is TLC at their most lubricious: a demand for men to “take time out your fantasies” and consider instead what the lady might enjoy that ends with Left Eye giving detailed instructions on the matter. Distinct hint of G-funk about Babyface’s production. 17. Silly Ho (1999) A perfect example of late 90s R&amp;B pushing at sonic boundaries, with producer Dallas Austin possibly operating under the influence of Timbaland. The beat stammers, the backing track is made out of buzzes, metallic clanks and whoops, and the hook hammers itself into your brain while the lyrics preach total female independence. 16. Dirty Dirty (2002) Patched together from unreleased Left Eye solo tracks after her death, 2002’s 3D was – by TLC’s standards – a relative flop. That doesn’t mean there’s not great stuff there: the frantic Dirty Dirty’s Timbaland-produced, Missy Elliot-featuring, Kool and the Gang-quoting mayhem being an utterly thrilling case in point. 15. Switch (1994) Switch demonstrates what a leap forward CrazySexyCool was from TLC’s debut. From its buoyant-but-subtle use of a guitar sample from Jean Knight’s Mr Big Stuff to the understated vocals, to the chunk of Rapper’s Delight Left Eye coolly swipes during her verse, it just sounds supremely confident: a band who know they’re hitting their stride. 14. Hat 2 Da Back (1992) Videos saturated in neon and primary colours; the gimmick of attaching condoms to your sunglasses: you can see why people thought TLC initially dealt in “kiddie-cute hip-hop”. But that undersells how good their debut album frequently was: the single remix of Hat 2 Da Back is raw and writhingly funky. 13. Sumthin’ Wicked This Way Comes (1994) Produced by Organized Noize – and featuring a fantastic guest appearance from OutKast’s André 3000 – CrazySexyCool’s darkest moment broods both on the state of the world and personal issues: having pleaded guilty to arson, Left Eye was in rehab for most of the album sessions. Grinding distorted guitar deep in the mix underscores the mood. 12. Girl Talk (2003) Girl Talk features the most arresting opening line in TLC’s catalogue – “You see, I had this brother who was mad at me / Cos I told my homegirl that he wasn’t packin’” – as well as the equally great diss “thinkin’ you got powers like Austin but you’re more like Mini-Me”. If the sound is indebted to Destiny’s Child, the insistent catchy chorus makes up for it. 11. What About Your Friends (1992) What About Your Friends is the early TLC at their most poppy: it’s just a great song, powered by an immense breakbeat (made by combining samples from James Brown and Sly &amp; the Family Stone’s Sing a Simple Song). Its remix, meanwhile, introduced the world to TLC’s fellow Atlanta natives OutKast. 10. Red Light Special (1994) “It’s kinda rock’n’roll,” offered T-Boz about Red Light Special, which perhaps tells you more about the preponderance of guitar solos on it – and the raunchiness of the accompanying video – than the song itself: an ultra-classy, beautifully written slow jam that very nearly topped the US chart. 9. Damaged (2003) The killer track from the uneven post-Left Eye album 3D reunited T-Boz and Chilli with Austin, the producer they worked with on their debut album. An acoustic guitar driven ballad that prickles with distrust and paranoia, plus a hint of the Stylistics in its flickers of electric sitar, it should have been a huge hit. 8. Baby-Baby-Baby (1992) Kept off the top of the US charts by Boyz II Men’s End of the Road – ironically the handiwork of the same producers Babyface, LA Reid and Daryll Simmons – Baby-Baby-Baby is quintessential early 90s pop-R&amp;B. If you’re in search of something tougher, the beat-heavy Left Eye-featuring Remix Rap version is for you. 7. Diggin’ on You (1994) A perfect pop ballad and a perfect lazy summer anthem, Diggin’ on You hits a perfect sweet spot between smoothness – the melody is beautifully turned, T-Boz and Chilli’s vocals creamy – and something tougher, provided by the snapping rhythm track, punchily loud in the mix. 6. I’m Good at Being Bad (1999) Apparently inspired by Nirvana’s use of dynamics (T-Boz was a fan), I’m Good at Being Bad keeps wrongfooting the listener, slipping from a radio friendly MOR ballad to tough hip-hop and back again, throwing in snatches of Donna Summer’s Love to Love You Baby and what sounds like a melodic echo of TLC’s own Waterfalls along the way. 5. Ain’t 2 Proud 2 Beg (1992) Improbably, the influence of production team the Bomb Squad lurks around TLC’s debut single. The verses and intro are tricked out with bursts of atonal noise that could have stepped off a Public Enemy album, before the whole thing resolves into a sweet pop chorus: an arresting way to introduce yourself. 4. No Scrubs (1999) Whether you take the lyrics as a sisterly broadside against deadbeat men or – less loveably – a latterday show-me-the-money equivalent of Gwen Guthrie’s Ain’t Nothin’ Goin’ on But the Rent, No Scrubs is a completely undeniable single: every melody feels like a hook, the whole thing works to perfection. 3. Creep (1994) Left Eye apparently didn’t want Creep released, feeling its lyrics about countering a boyfriend’s cheating with some of your own were too passive: “[Creeping] is ripping families apart / The leading cause of a broken heart,” she snaps on the remix, at odds with the song’s message. Luckily, she relented: a fabulous song, beautifully produced and sung, Creep is one of 90s R&amp;B’s crowning glories. 2. Unpretty (1999) For a 23-year-old song, Unpretty feels weirdly current: its messages about beauty standards, self-image and mental health – inspired by T-Boz’s brush with sickle-cell anaemia – are far more common in pop today than they were in 1999. Moreover, it coats them in the loveliest tune that TLC ever recorded. 1. Waterfalls (1994) To be honest, there is barely a cigarette paper between the top four songs on this list in terms of quality, but let’s plump for Waterfalls, not merely because it’s a brilliant song, or because Organized Noize’s production doesn’t feel like it’s dated at all in the decades since it was released, but because it was a genuinely bold single to release. Behind the nailed-on chorus lurk stark lyrics about murder and Aids that effectively make Waterfalls a protest song, including a bleak, personal rap by Left Eye about missed chances: “Dreams are hopeless aspirations in hopes of coming true.”Nine million low income families will be £500 a year worse off on average after the planned below-inflation increase in universal credit and other means-tested benefits are introduced in April, experts say. The Joseph Rowntree Foundation (JRF) said setting benefit rises at last September’s 3.1% level, when inflation is forecast to hit 7% by April, would result in widespread hardship, push 400,000 people into poverty, and ratchet up pressure on households hit by the cost of living crisis. Couple families with children who are on low incomes, both in work and out of work, would experience a real terms cut of £500 a year, while pensioner couples would lose £540 a year, according to the JRF analysis. It comes four months after a £1,000 cut to the incomes of households on universal credit when the £20 a week top-up to help claimants deal with the extra costs of Covid was withdrawn, and will hit families just as soaring energy bills start to bite. JRF estimates that the net cost of uprating benefits by 7% would be £7.5bn. “At a time when the case for support could not be clearer, the government is choosing to further erode the value of benefits that are already wholly inadequate,” said Peter Matejic, deputy director of evidence and impact at JRF. He added that this was another cut for millions of people when the value of out-of-work benefits was at an all time low. “There can be no justification for this. Our social security system should protect people from harm, not put them in danger,” he said. Meanwhile, a Tory peer and former minister has urged the government to support struggling families in the form of cash top-ups paid via universal credit, which he called a “really efficient way of directing funds to the poorest”. Lord Freud said it was a mistake to cut the £20 a week top up to universal credit in October when it was “clearly needed”. Freud, who oversaw the introduction of universal credit while minister for welfare reform in the Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) between 2010 and 2016, also savagely criticised government policies such as the two-child limit on benefits and the benefit cap introduced during his time in office. Freud told an audience at the Legatum thinktank on Wednesday that the two-child limit was “vicious” and an “excrescence” that – like the benefit cap – should be scrapped. He also criticised cuts to local housing allowance support for low income tenants in the private rented sector. Freud, who was promoting his memoir, Clashing Agendas, of his time at DWP, said those policies – and other cuts such as those to disability benefits – had been forced on a reluctant DWP by the Treasury as the price of introducing universal credit. The JRF said too many families were already going without essentials because of increases in the price of food and other basics. The removal of the energy price cap in April could increase low-income families’ gas and electricity bills by an average of £566 a year. It is calling on the government to upgrade benefits in line with the Bank of England’s February forecast of 7%. “At the very least this would stop this real-terms cut to benefits and protect families on the lowest incomes from the worst impacts of rising costs.” The government is understood to favour maintaining the September inflation reference point for benefit uprating on the grounds that this would ensure balance and consistency over time. A government spokesperson said: “We know this has been a challenging time for many people, which is why we’re providing support worth around £12bn this financial year and next, to help households with the cost of living. “This includes putting an average of £1,000 more per year into the pockets of working families via changes to universal credit and boosting the minimum wage by more than £1,000 a year for full-time workers.” Jonathan Ashworth, the shadow work and pensions secretary, said: “Working people and families have already been hit by the £20 cut to universal credit, rocketing heating bills and price rises in the shops. “At a time when so many are struggling, the cost of living crisis is set to be exacerbated by further deep real-terms cuts to support like universal credit this April. These are choices by ministers who refuse to acknowledge that inflation will cause devastating hardship for so many.”Boris Johnson has said that “a vast invasion is under way, by land, by sea and by air” in Ukraine, as he promised to impose “massive” sanctions that would “hobble” the Russian economy. Speaking as world leaders scrambled to respond to the attacks that began early on Thursday, the UK prime minister said Russia had “attacked a friendly country without any provocation and without any credible excuse”. He said Russia must not be allowed to succeed. “Diplomatically, politically, economically, and eventually militarily, this hideous and barbaric adventure of Vladimir Putin must end in failure,” he said. Johnson said Ukraine had for decades been a free country, able to determine its own destiny. “We and the world cannot allow that freedom just to be snuffed out. We cannot and will not just look away. “This act of wanton and reckless aggression is an attack not just on Ukraine. It is an attack on democracy and freedom in eastern Europe and around the world,” he said. In a deliberate reference to Neville Chamberlain, the prime minister remembered for underestimating Hitler’s murderous intentions in the 1930s, Johnson said Ukraine was “not in the infamous phrase some faraway country of which we know little”. Chamberlain used those words when Germany was allowed to annex the Sudetenland – then part of Czechoslovakia – in 1938, in exchange for a promise of peace. In contrast, Johnson said “we have Ukrainian friends in this country; neighbours, co-workers”, telling the Ukrainian people: “We are with you, we are praying for you and your families and we are on your side.” Johnson also made a direct appeal to the Russian people, saying: “I cannot believe this is being done in your name or that you really want the pariah status it will bring to the Putin regime.” The prime minister said the details of financial sanctions would be coordinated with the UK’s international allies. He called for the west to end its dependence on Russian oil and gas as part of its response to the crisis. Oil and gas prices have rocketed in response to the attacks, auguring a sharp increase in fuel and domestic energy prices in the UK. Johnson gave the televised statement after a meeting of the government’s emergency Cobra committee at 7.30am. He is expected to join a meeting of G7 leaders later, before addressing MPs at 5pm to set out details of the sanctions package. Keir Starmer, the Labour leader, said the sanctions should leave the Putin regime isolated, “its finances frozen, its ability to function crippled”. He called for Johnson to “make a clean break with the failed approach” to handling the Russian leader, saying that Nato responses to past incursions into Georgia, Crimea and Donbas had “fed his belief that the benefits of aggression outweigh the cost”. Starmer also called for the UK to stop being “a safe haven for the money that Putin and his fellow bandits gained by stealing from the Russian people”. He added: “This must be a turning point in our history. We must look back and say that this terrible day was actually when Putin doomed himself to defeat.” Meanwhile, an acrimonious meeting was held in Whitehall after the foreign secretary, Liz Truss, summoned Russia’s ambassador to the UK, Andrei Kelin. A UK Foreign Office source said Kelin “spouted the usual propaganda” but that Truss was “having none of it” and told him he “should be ashamed of himself”. The source added the foreign secretary had told Kelin the international community would “rally around Ukraine” and that Russia had turned itself into “an international pariah”. Johnson faced criticism from across the political spectrum earlier this week for introducing a package of sanctions many MPs, including in his own party, felt were too weak. Tom Tugendhat suggested the limited sanctions announced on Monday may have encouraged the Russian president. “What that did, I’m afraid, was it didn’t deter, but encouraged, because it gave the suggestion or made clear that we weren’t wiling to do anything serious,” the chair of the foreign affairs select committee told the BBC’s Today programme.Doctors have accused Sadiq Khan of betraying his commitment to view pollution as a social justice issue, as they handed in a letter to his office calling for him to cancel a major new road tunnel. The Silvertown tunnel will pass beneath the Thames between Greenwich and Newham, one of London’s most deprived riverside boroughs. Experts say it will massively increase air pollution faced by some of the capital’s poorest people. Holes have already been dug either side of the river and components for the boring machine, which will dig the four-lane tunnel, are being transported to the northern end, with drilling due to begin this spring. According to TfL estimates, it will cost about £2bn over 30 years, making it Khan’s biggest infrastructure project as mayor of London. On Thursday morning, doctors gathered in their scrubs at the Greater London authority’s new headquarters in Newham, where they handed in a letter, signed by 125 health workers, telling Khan there was “no excuse” not to cancel the tunnel. Silvertown, the letter said, would “funnel traffic, including heavy freight vehicles, into areas of deprivation which already suffer disproportionately from so many adverse social determinants of health. “You, as mayor of London, have the power to cancel the Silvertown tunnel. There is no excuse not to. It makes no sense and is a health and environmental hazard. We urge you to put a stop to it, to invest the money in projects that will benefit people’s health and reap the rewards of savings to the NHS that such beneficial policies would bring.” The action came exactly a week after the mayor had convened a summit on clean air in London’s capital, where he had said it was the poorest Londoners, least likely to own a car, who suffered the most from air pollution. “For me the issue is very simple: it’s one of social justice,” he said. Dr Jackie Appleby, who helped coordinate the letter, said she could not see how Khan could reconcile his position on pollution and social justice with building the tunnel. “The Silvertown tunnel is completely contrary to his position,” the Newham GP said. “If he really thinks that air pollution is a social justice issue he needs to stop the Silvertown tunnel – end of. Because there is no doubt that that tunnel is going to bring more pollution into Newham. “Kids in Newham already have lungs that are 10% smaller than kids who live in less polluted parts of the country, and we also have 40,000 excess deaths a year from air pollution across the UK. We don’t know how many of those are in Newham but there will be a disproportionate number of them, obviously, because air pollution is higher. “So we’re hoping he’s going to reconsider [and] actually think about investing the money in more healthy options.” Last June, a report from the Oxford Institute for Energy Studies, backed by some of the UK’s leading climate scientists, found that the development was incompatible with the Greater London authority’s aim to become carbon-neutral by 2030. Seb Dance, the deputy mayor for transport, said the mayor was taking “bold action” to improve London’s air quality. He stated that the Silvertown tunnel would “massively reduce the chronic congestion problems” associated with the nearby Blackwall tunnel, which has frequent closures leading to congestion. “Both tunnels will be tolled and, when combined with our overall policy of reducing car use across Greater London in favour of active and public transport options, the Silvertown tunnel will help reduce congestion and poor air quality around the Blackwall Tunnel area without increasing the volume of traffic crossing the river.” This article was amended on 24 February 2022. An earlier version said that the tunnel connected Woolwich and Newham: in fact it connects Greenwich to Newham.Bill, 62, Edinburgh Profession IT consultant Voting record Bill has predominantly voted Conservative, but describes himself as a “liberal Conservative” rather than “a hang-’em-high, shoot-’em Conservative”. In the referendum he voted leave Amuse bouche Bill has walked the glaciers of Mont Blanc Helen, 56, Roswell, Midlothian Occupation Lecturer in mental health nursing Voting record Helen, originally from Sunderland, describes herself as “very left-leaning”. In the last general election she voted Labour. In the referendum she voted remain Amuse bouche In 2016 Helen went on – and won – Think Tank, a BBC quizshow For starters Helen He told me he’d just got two rescue cats so I immediately warmed to him. I support a charity that rehabilitates disabled animals that have been hit by cars in places like Romania, brings them over here and makes little wheelchairs for them. Bill Helen is a far more generous person than I am; she’s just one of life’s good people. She does good stuff. The big beef Helen It was a veggie place – I had the veggie haggis, which was fab. He had hummus and olives, then the risotto. I’m vegetarian, and think it’s cruel to slaughter animals for meat when we don’t need it. Bill I enjoy meat. So long as the animal is well cared for, and killed humanely, then I’m fine eating it. Helen We had a conversation about battery hens. I think it’s appalling – all hens should be free to roam. Bill It would be better if hens were free range. But if you ban battery farming – which is obviously cheaper – you take away choice from poorer people, who then can’t afford so many eggs. As a liberal Conservative, I like choice. Helen I would ban hunting altogether. There’s something unhealthy about people getting dressed up and having rituals and killing something; it’s like some bizarre cult. Bill Hunting is part of controlling vermin, and animals that prey on farm animals. You want to control foxes, because they worry sheep and chickens. Helen We have built on land the animals used to run about on. There are urban foxes because we’ve taken their land away – they have nowhere else to go. Bill There is a balance in nature, and these activities are part of maintaining that balance in the most natural way. For afters Helen I’m totally opposed to Trident. We need to take a pacifist stance. I’m a member of the Peace Pledge Union. This mutually assured destruction stuff we had in the 80s – “I’ve got more nuclear weapons than you, I can blow up the world six times, you can only blow it up three times” – they just need to listen and realise how ridiculous it is. Bill If I thought we had the choice not to have them, I wouldn’t. But if we withdraw from the debate we weaken the broadest thing we stand for, which is the western way of life. Not the Chinese way of life, not the Russian way of life – they are not democracies. If we had to defend our democracy I would rather have them than not have them. Trident is a necessary evil. Helen We talked about nuclear power, too. I know we can’t just close all the nuclear power stations overnight, but instead of building new ones we should put the money into renewables. I’ve got solar panels on my roof. Bill Great – but we live in Scotland where the sun goes down at 3.26 in the afternoon and doesn’t come up till 8.40 in the morning. Sharing plate Helen We are always going to have wind and waves – we need to develop a system where we can store that power. Bill I agreed that the real challenge is storage. I have invested in some companies that generate hydrogen from renewables for that very reason. Takeaway Helen We had very little in common, but were respectful of each other. The food was good. He said he really enjoyed the meal. That’s how you get through to people: you don’t scream at them outside supermarkets, you take them for a veggie meal! Bill We live in completely different circles. Helen is far more virtuous than I am. But the easiest thing to do is to sit in your bunker and reinforce your already set beliefs. Don’t. Get out there and talk to people – it’s a vital part of human society, and better than throwing bricks. Additional reporting: Naomi Larsson • Bill and Helen ate at Hendersons, Edinburgh Want to meet someone from across the divide? Click here to find out moreWhich England players strengthened their Euros hopes? Top of the list has to be Jill Scott. Sent to Everton on loan last season and to Aston Villa this season, it would be easy to think the the 35-year-old midfielder’s England days were numbered. Far from it. Against Spain’s Barcelona-heavy midfield Scott was instrumental. The Chelsea defender Jess Carter showed her versatility, operating as a centre-back and left-back across the three games, and performed well. Hannah Hampton’s clean sheet and assured debut against Spain will have helped her edge closer to the third goalkeeper spot. SW Most notably, a quartet comprising two key partnerships. Millie Bright, Alex Greenwood, Leah Williamson and Keira Walsh were always going to be in the squad but all four strengthened their case for starting the biggest games. While Bright and the helpfully left-footed Greenwood formed an excellent central-defensive axis, Williamson and Walsh showed they can serve as a fairly formidable “double six” combo in Sarina Wiegman’s apparently preferred 4-2-3-1. It seems Williamson has completed her transition from defence to midfield anchor but she is able to seamlessly revert to the rearguard should Wiegman switch to three at the back mid-match. Meanwhile Scott has reminded everyone that she remains an integral part of the squad. LT Have anyone’s prospects been harmed? No one performed particularly badly but a number struggled for minutes despite heavy rotation. Jordan Nobbs produced moments of brilliance against Spain but gave away possession a little too frequently and is struggling to find the form that made her nailed on to start for Arsenal before her ACL injury. Manchester United’s Katie Zelem did not play and is yet to build on her one cap. Meanwhile, Nikita Parris has not replicated her deadly Manchester City form at Arsenal or for England since a stint with Lyon. Steph Houghton is yet to play under Wiegman because of injury and City revealed on Thursday that she recently had achilles surgery and would “return to training in the near future”. Her chances have been dented by the performances of Bright, Williamson, Carter, Greenwood and Rachel Daly and, with Lotte Wubben-Moy a short-term absentee, the centre-back options look strong and difficult to break into. SW Injured internationals often joke that they become regarded as “better players” while sidelined but the opposite could, unfortunately, be true for Houghton. Even if she returns to the squad this summer, she seems unlikely to break up the Bright-Greenwood axis. Although it was good to see Houghton’s City teammate Lucy Bronze return at right-back after a lengthy injury layoff, a defender still to return to full match fitness emphasised that she is often better going forward than defending. Phil Neville experimented with Bronze in midfield with mixed results and Wiegman may wonder if she could be better as a wing-back. It sounds like heresy but is there a chance Bronze may not automatically start every game at the Euros? LT What did we learn about the team’s Euros chances? It is hard to take a huge amount from a series of tight friendlies. Germany had 12 key players missing owing to injury and Covid, and 12 of Canada’s squad play in the US, which is off-season. However, matches against three nations ranked in the top 10 have offered the clearest look at whether England can challenge the best. The answer? Yes they can and, more importantly, there are significant signs of growth. The defensive issues that blighted Neville’s tenure look as if they are being ironed out and the team are creating chances. That is a solid platform. SW Although the picture remains pretty opaque there was further evidence that England’s improvement under Wiegman is no illusion. But, despite playing their best football for a long time, they remain very much a work in progress and aren’t always great at seeing out games they should win. Moreover this promises to be an extremely strong Euros featuring particularly powerful opponents in Germany, France, Sweden, the Netherlands and an improving Spain. The good news for the Lionesses is that Wiegman, having led the Netherlands to Euro 2017 glory and the final of the 2019 World Cup, is one of those adaptable coaches eminently capable of finding a way to win. And in Fran Kirby and Lauren Hemp England possess two outstanding attacking talents. LT What are the biggest lessons for England? England had scored goals aplenty under Wiegman before this competition – 53 in six games – but were wasteful in a number of those matches. Against tougher opposition the team need to be more clinical. Wiegman is yet to get the best out of the world-class creator Kirby and that could be critical in that regard. Playing wide against Germany the Chelsea forward struggled. It is a role she plays often at club level but as part of a much more dynamic front three who bounce off each other. Against Germany she provided the assist for Ellen White when she drifted more centrally and was most effective when later moved into that position behind White, with more of a free rein. SW Concentrate, concentrate, concentrate. The collective defensive focus is showing signs of considerable reassuring improvement from the latter days of Neville’s tenure when key players developed an unfortunate habit of switching off at vital moments but they need to maintain it. Meanwhile Wiegman will surely want to keep White, her most reliable goalscorer, swaddled in cotton wool. White’s understudies are infinitely less ruthless and far from convincing. LTIn 1908, Robert Nathaniel Dett became the first African American to gain a bachelor of music degree at Oberlin College in Ohio. The Canadian-born Dett later studied at Harvard and in Paris with Nadia Boulanger, and he went on to become one of America’s most respected teachers, composers and conductors. In 1930, his choir performed for President Herbert Hoover on the White House lawn, and made a tour of Europe that included several concerts in London. In 1937, the premiere in Cincinnati of his “sacred cantata” The Ordering of Moses was broadcast nationwide by NBC, though the transmission was halted halfway through, supposedly because of “technical difficulties”; the real reasons have never satisfactorily been established. Subsequent performances of the work have been few, and it has taken almost nine decades for The Ordering of Moses to reach the UK. The British premiere was given by the City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra and Chorus conducted by Joshua Weilerstein, with Nadine Benjamin, Chrystal E Williams, Rodrick Dixon and Eric Greene making up the quartet of soloists. Dett compiled the text of his cantata from the Old Testament, telling of the Israelites’ enslavement in Egypt, and how Moses was instructed by God to lead his people to freedom. It’s a vivid piece of musical storytelling, a sequence of impassioned solo arias and dramatic choral numbers, always underpinned by pungent orchestral colours that progress steadily from the dark despair of the opening, strikingly coloured by cello and bassoon, to the brassy exuberance of the final moments, when Moses and his sister Miriam lead the Israelites in a celebration of their freedom. The melodic shapes and cadences of spirituals permeate the music, and on Go Down Moses in particular, act almost like a leitmotif throughout. The choral models range from Elgar and Coleridge-Taylor, perhaps even to Walton’s Belshazzar’s Feast (first performed just three years before The Ordering), and one wonders whether Tippett knew of Dett’s work, though in A Child of Our Time he uses spirituals as “found objects” rather than as part of the musical fabric. The performance under Weilerstein, who had begun the concert with suitably rowdy performances of Charles Ives’s Variations on America, in William Schuman’s orchestration, and the Symphonic Dances from Bernstein’s West Side Story, was persuasive and the singing thrillingly committed, even if some of the words from the soloists were not as clear as they could have been. Surely it won’t be another 85 years before The Ordering of Moses is heard again on this side of the Atlantic. • To be broadcast on BBC Radio 3 at a future date.More than 80 Florida manatees are currently in rehab centers across the US as officials and conservations work to rescue a population that has been hit hard by starvation. The data, released by the Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission and US Fish and Wildlife Service on Wednesday, underscores the peril facing the manatees, and comes amid a major conservation effort that includes a feeding program distributing 3,000lb of lettuce daily at a site by the Florida coast. Manatees are facing an uncertain future. Their preferred food, seagrass, has been depleted because of water pollution; since 2009, about 46,000 acres of natural seagrass has been destroyed. Last year saw a record 1,100 Florida manatee deaths , far exceeding the annual average and topping the previous record in 2013 of 830 deaths. The first two months of 2022 alone have already seen more than 300 deaths, and conservation groups have sued the federal government over the die off. Now, a massive feeding effort is underway to address this issue. In December, state environmental groups announced a feeding site at the Florida Power &amp; Light, the state’s largest electric utility, putting up $700,000 for a “temporary field response station” to feed the manatees at its plant in Cape Canaveral on the east coast. That program has so far distributed about 63,000lb of donated lettuce to as many as 800 manatees at a time, according to the Associated Press. “The eyes of the world are on this,” said wildlife commission chair Rodney Barreto ahead of the project’s launch. “We’ve got to get it right.” The state government has funded $1.2m for treatment of the 82 starving manatees currently in rehab, and there are other organizations such as SeaWorld rescue program that are assisting with additional funds, according to the Independent. However, the measures are merely a “Band-Aid” to the bigger issue, Earthjustice, an environmental law organization said in December. Others have said that stopping seagrass depletion is fundamental to solving the problem. Florida state representative Randy Fine recently called out new legislation introduced by Tallahassee politicians that favors real estate developers over the starving manatee population, giving developers the option to pay and dredge up natural seagrass. Elizabeth Forsyth, an Earthjustice attorney, has called on the United States Environmental Protection Agency to urgently address the manatee die off before its too late. “If watching manatees starve isn’t the tipping point for the EPA to step in, I don’t know what is,” Forsyth said in a December statement. The Associated Press contributed reportingGood morning. After weeks of threats and failed attempts at diplomacy, Vladimir Putin launched a broad Russian military offensive targeting Ukraine at around 5am Ukrainian time today. World leaders warn this invasion could spark the largest war in Europe since 1945. Within minutes of Putin’s short televised address, in which he announced a “special military operation” to “demilitarize” and “denazify” Ukraine, the country was under attack from cruise and ballistic missiles, with explosions heard near major Ukrainian cities, including the capital Kyiv. Though Putin said that Russia did not intend to occupy Ukraine, he added a chilling warning to other nations in his address: “To anyone who would consider interfering from the outside: if you do, you will face consequences greater than any you have faced in history. All relevant decisions have been taken. I hope you hear me,” he said. What we know so far The initial wave of strikes appeared to involve cruise missiles, artillery and airstrikes targeting Ukraine’s military infrastructure, airbases and border positions. The first casualties have been reported. At least eight people have been killed and nine were wounded by the Russian shelling. It’s unclear if any were civilians. Russia-backed separatist rebels were reported to be attacking Ukrainian positions around the self-proclaimed republics of Luhansk and Donetsk about two hours into the attack. Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, announced martial law had been declared across the country in the immediate aftermath of the first wave of strikes. Western leaders have responded with fury to Russia’s actions, with Joe Biden accusing Putin of choosing a “premeditated war that will bring a catastrophic loss of life and human suffering”. “Russia alone is responsible for the death and destruction this attack will bring, and the United States and its allies and partners will respond in a united and decisive way,” Biden said. With Europe dependent on Russia for about 40% of its natural gas supplies, concerns that Russia could use its gas supplies to hurt Europe are well founded. European gas prices have since jumped more than 40%, with the global stock market plunging against the backdrop of the invasion. Follow our business live blog for more updates. US and UK intelligence believe Russian-backed hackers are behind another insidious new strand of malware, raising more concerns of potential Russian cyber-attacks against Ukraine as Russia utilizes every tool at its disposal. As western leaders look to toughen up economic sanctions, however, they may find that a swift economic victory against Russia is unlikely. Meanwhile, in the United Kingdom, a small but growing number of Ukrainians are making plans to go back to their homeland to fight. “The reality is that no one except Ukrainians will defend Ukrainian land,” said Marta Mulyak. For live updates on the situation in Ukraine, follow our live blog. In other news … Nearly two years after Breonna Taylor was killed in a botched police raid, the trial began for the only Kentucky officer charged criminally in the case. As most of the American west remains mired in drought, the federal government won’t deliver water to farmers in California’s agricultural belt, which produces roughly a quarter of the nation’s food. Biden has interviewed at least three potential supreme court nominees – all Black women – and is expected to reveal his decision by the end of this month. Stat of the day: there were almost 24 maternal deaths for every 100,000 births in 2020 The number of mothers dying during pregnancy, childbirth or the year after increased in the pandemic’s first year, continuing a decades-long trend that disproportionately affects Black people. In 2020, there were almost 24 deaths per 100,000 births in the US, while the rate was 20 per 100,000 in 2019. Meanwhile, among Black people, there were 55 maternal deaths per 100,000 births, almost triple the rate for white people. Don’t miss this: the question of Donetsk and Luhansk Before last night’s invasion, Putin had announced earlier this week that he was recognizing the independence of the two separatist regions of Ukraine, Luhansk and Donetsk, known collectively as Donbas. Their leaders, Denis Pushilin and Leonid Pasechnik, have seen their political profile rise in Russia in the days since, leaving little question for analysts over who was truly in control. “The Russian leadership coordinated everything and nothing was left to chance,” said the political analyst Konstantin Skorkin, a Luhansk native who focuses on the region. Climate check: the climate research publisher consulting for the fossil fuel industry Elesvier, a Dutch company behind many renowned peer-reviewed scientific journals, including the Lancet and Global Environmental Change, is also doing consultancy work for the fossil fuel industry to help increase oil and gas drilling and publishing books aimed at expanding fossil fuel production. Last Thing: baby talk Can actors tread the boards if they can’t actually walk yet? Babies have been cast in film and television for decades now, but in the West End of London, some directors are taking the risk of putting the most temperamental of thespians on stage. Sign up First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comConservative MPs have called for the UK to increase military aid to Ukraine, including the former cabinet minister David Davis, who said the UK should consider providing air support to the Ukrainian armed forces. Boris Johnson said western allies “will agree a massive package of economic sanctions designed in time to hobble the Russian economy” – expected to be outlined to House of Commons at 5pm on Thursday. But Davis said that even the most “ferocious sanctions … are no longer a deterrent, they are a punishment” and that the invasion of Ukraine meant Vladimir Putin had “effectively declared war on the west”. Davis tweeted: “Therefore if we do not provide military support, more than 40 million Ukrainians will go from living in a democracy to living under a brutal dictatorship. “It is far too late to get boots on the ground, but it is not too late to provide air support to the Ukrainian army, which may neutralise Putin’s overwhelming armoured superiority.” Davis said the air support should be confined to the airspace over Ukraine, and based on a request from Ukraine’s president, saying this “should be perfectly legal under almost any interpretation of international law”. He added: “There are no zero-risk options. If we do not act militarily, then Nato will be significantly weakened and we must fear for the safety of every state that borders Russia.” Tobias Ellwood, the chair of the defence select committee, said a Nato division should have been stationed in Ukraine as a deterrent. Ukraine is not a Nato member, but has requested membership. “If Kyiv falls, history will ask why the west didn’t do more?” Ellwood told the BBC. “Six months ago I called for a division, a Nato division, to be moved into Ukraine. That is what Ukrainians were requesting, and that would have deterred this invasion. “That would have been enough to make Putin think twice. But we didn’t do that, we actually did the opposite. We declared that we would not send any Nato troops into Ukraine. We parked that away.” The former minister Stephen Hammond also called for the UK to consider using further military deterrent. “We must stand with Ukraine at this time of continental crisisand ensure Russian aggression does not go unpunished. We must work with our allies to impose tougher sanctions and a no-fly zone,” he said. Russia has significant advantages in air power: its total air force has 1,172 combat aircraft against Ukraine’s 124, according to the International Institute for Strategic Studies thinktank. Ukraine has sought to modernise its military over the past year, receiving Javelin anti-tank missiles from the US, shorter range anti-tank weapons from the UK and a small number of TB2 drones from Turkey. However, the bulk of its equipment dates back to the Soviet era and will be familiar to Russian generals. Alicia Kearns, a Conservative MP and former senior communications officer at the Ministry of Defence, said Britain providing defensive support in Ukrainian airspace should be “on the table and under discussion”. She said this would not be a move taken lightly, as it could mean Russia “shooting British airmen and women out of the sky”. Kearns said the move would be contingent on “meaningful intelligence” suggesting it would “be effective” at curtailing the Russian advance. “We know that Putin has a lot of anti-aircraft ground-to-air missiles,” she said. “He might not have any qualms about taking out British troops. If we went in, it would have to be with other Nato allies – a great number. “The alternative is, of course, the UK could put anti-aircraft missiles in neighbouring countries, but that also runs the risk of taking us into overt war with Russia. Kearns added it was “too late to put boots on the ground” but that if Russian troops continued their advance on Kyiv, the UK should consider cyberstrikes on the Kremlin and state firms “within the week”. She also suggested Turkey should be encouraged to deny the Russian navy passage through the Bosphorus straits, a key access point between the Black Sea and Mediterranean. Tom Tugendhat, the chair of the foreign affairs select committee, said weak sanctions such as those announced on Monday “just encourage others to believe we are weak because we’re clearly not willing to do anything serious. “So what that did, I’m afraid, on Monday was it didn’t deter but encouraged, because it gave the suggestion or made clear that we weren’t wiling to do anything serious. “If we are going to do sanctions, as I say, we need to do them extremely hard and extremely early.”The European court of justice has been advised that British nationals living on the continent do not keep the advantages of EU citizenship now the UK has left the bloc, in a blow to campaigners fighting to keep more of their rights after Brexit. Anthony Collins, an Irish advocate general at the court, said in an opinion published on Thursday that British nationals “who enjoyed the benefits of union citizenship do not retain those advantages following the UK’s withdrawal from the EU”. The Luxembourg-based court is expected to issue a formal ruling on the case in June, which was brought on behalf of a retired civil servant, Alice Bouilliez, who has lived in south-west France for 37 years. It usually follows its advocates’ advice. “Of course it’s disappointing,” Bouilliez, 62, a former Foreign Office official, said. “There is still a chance that this advice will be modified or even reversed, but it is upsetting. The opinion does seem quite cut and dried.” Bouilliez had based her case on the loss of her voting rights in local and European elections, arguing that EU citizenship was a fundamental status that should not be withdrawn without consent when there were serious consequences for people’s rights. Under the terms of the Brexit withdrawal agreement, the estimated 1.3 million UK citizens legally resident in one of the EU’s 27 states at the end of the transition period are eligible for permanent residence, protecting their most basic rights. But the withdrawal agreement did not secure several rights that British nationals enjoyed as EU citizens, including the right to vote and stand in local and European elections and the right to live and work outside their EU country of residence. Julien Fouchet, a French lawyer representing Bouilliez, said he was “very disappointed” with the announcement but emphasised that in 25% of cases the court did not follow the preliminary opinions of its advocate general. “Our arguments were not heard,” Fouchet said. “The advocate considers nationality is the essential criterion, that residence does not count. He seems to think UK citizens can easily apply for dual nationality, but that is very far from always being the case.” He said the opinion was “over-simplified” and “a big step backwards for the European Union. I consider EU citizenship to be one of the most significant achievements of the union. Its loss entails considerable consequences.” Fouchet said he had hoped voting rights would have been retained, pointing out that Bouilliez, who he said could not apply for French citizenship because of her oath of allegiance to the Queen as a Foreign Office employee, was not able to vote in the Brexit referendum because she been out of the UK for more than 15 years. Collins argued in his opinion that EU citizenship was additional to, and did not replace, nationality conferred by member states, that British nationals ceased to be EU citizens after Brexit, and that the loss of citizenship rights was “one of the consequences of the sovereign decision of the UK to withdraw from the EU”.There’s a crack from floor to ceiling in Birmingham’s Ikon gallery. Luckily, some workers are on the job fixing it. They’ve left a brush, a dustsheet and paint-spattered blue overalls while they get lunch. But is it really safe to hang Renaissance masterpieces by the 15th-century artist Carlo Crivelli in a space that’s in this much disarray? It’s OK. The museums that have lent their treasures can relax. This is a witty bit of trompe l’oeil by artist Susan Collis. I watched her draw the crack in just two strokes with a steady hand and eye that might have impressed Crivelli himself. She has also made the brush, whose little encrustations of muck are precious stones, and the sheet and coat whose stains are embroidered. It’s a good joke because Crivelli himself is a whiz with trompe l’oeil. His Virgin and Child with a kneeling Franciscan friar, lent by the Vatican Pinacoteca, no less, on the other side of the same wall, has a brilliantly realistic crack painted into the marble on which the Virgin rests her feet, a dark rotting bloom of entropy. You don’t expect to see an art installation that flirts with chaos in the middle of a Renaissance exhibition. What do you expect? Hard work, perhaps. A heavy catalogue. This show does have a proper catalogue but everything else about it stands the conventions of old-master shows upside down. And that’s the way Crivelli would have wanted it, you feel. His sly sense of humour delights in undermining his own purportedly religious works. Across the top of the Vatican picture is a swag of apples, pears and shiny olives, with no symbolic purpose at all, apparently just there because he liked painting them. They are more real than the Virgin and Child: real enough to touch, to taste, it almost seems. Seeing a painting like this outside a museum or stately home, in a white space designed for new art, frees it. You look at it as if the artist were alive. And he is absolutely our contemporary, even though he died around 1494. Crivelli was a naughty man. He came from Venice but had to leave this mighty republic after sleeping with another man’s wife: he was thrown in jail for six months as an adulterer. Clearly the husband had enough status to make his life in Venice impossible, for when he got out of prison he headed south and made a career in small cities along the Adriatic coast. His sexuality gleams from the first painting here, a small picture of Mary Magdalene that gives her narrowed eyes and long sensuous fingers. She’s not in the least repentant. How did he get away with it? I suspect the exiled, sophisticated Venetian Crivelli saw his small-city clients as naive rubes who were too dumb to know he was mocking them. So long as they got the right number of saints and the requested quantity of gold leaf in their sacred commissions, they didn’t ask why the female saints were so eroticised or why he kept putting pieces of fruit everywhere. The exhibition takes its title from The Vision of the Blessed Gabriele, in which a local saint of the city Ancona prays fervently in the foreground with beady eyes of piety almost popping out of his head. Behind him is a rocky landscape receding to a view of Ancona by the sea. In the sky floats his golden vision of the Virgin. But above that hang Crivelli’s beloved fruits, out of scale, out of place – and just to stress their disruptive nature, they cast shadows on to the sky behind them. That is, this is just a painted sky, and the fruits hang in front of it. This is more than a bit of fun. Crivelli places an ironic question mark over his depiction of Gabriele’s vision. It’s just an icon for a church. The real world, in the shape of those fruits, is far more substantial, in Crivelli’s eyes. The trompe l’oeil games and that exuberant passion for a reality too big to be held in one picture or belief system go into joyous overload in his 1486 masterpiece The Annunciation, With Saint Emidius. We are on the streets of Ascoli Piceno, that is celebrating its freedom from Papal rule. It’s full of triumphal arches, pink loggias and marble decor. It is also full of gratuitous details: a peacock perches on a balustrade below two precariously balancing potted plants, while exquisitely painted objects on a shelf distract from the Virgin Mary praying. Even the doves gathering on a high perch, while perfectly justifiable as symbols of the holy spirit, look more natural than spiritual. And in the foreground, for no reason, are the fruit and veg. Crivelli is a dazzling and mercurial artist but he painted a lot. The National Gallery alone owns 25 works by him. This exhibition makes a virtue of its small venue by being astute and selective, showing the National’s best Crivellis – including the Vision and Annunciation – alongside choice treasures from the V&amp;A and Vatican. One loan didn’t turn up due to Brexit and Covid, so they’ve incorporated the empty wall space into Collis’s witty, sympathetic installation. Carlo Crivelli: Shadows on the Sky is at Ikon gallery, Birmingham until 29 May.How bored are you with people asking how bored you are with people asking if reality has become impossible to satirise? ritasueandbob I’m extremely bored. But I don’t think it has. A lot of people have forgotten that life is real. It’s not something you can invent and occasionally rewrite. Life is something you’re stuck with, to deal with head on and not hide from. How would Malcolm Tucker, Ollie and Glenn advise Boris Johnson and Keir Starmer? TimJefferies To Keir Starmer, they would say: “Just be yourself, whatever that is. Dig deep, find out who you are and be that.” To Boris, they’d say: “Whatever you are, be the opposite. Don’t be yourself. Any personality trait that you are currently manifesting, could you please reverse that? Do your utmost not to be the person you are.” When writing The Death of Stalin, was it hard to strike the balance between historical accuracy and humour? readherring123 The more true stories we discovered, the more we thought: “Let’s put them in,” because that’s where a lot of the tragedy and comedy comes from. We discovered that Stalin’s overpromoted son lost the national army ice hockey team in a snowstorm and tried to replace them with his friends because he was too scared to tell his father – they were terrible. I spent a lot of time in the edit trying to tread the line so that the comedy supports the tragedy, but doesn’t undercut the drama. I wanted the audience to feel uneasy watching the film, because that’s what most people at the time felt on a daily basis. I wanted to recreate that sense of rumbling unease. Was The Death of Stalin really banned in Russia, Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan? NoMoreMrNice Yes. It got a certificate to be shown in cinemas [in Russia], but they suddenly withdrew it, in a very Soviet move. It became the most talked-about film in Russia and the most illegally downloaded film in Russian history. The Personal History of David Copperfield is a wonderful film. Any plans to film another Dickens novel? Xanthe It’s at the back of my mind, but I want to get away from the usual suspects, like Oliver Twist and Great Expectations, and look at others with meaty stories, such as Little Dorrit or Martin Chuzzlewit, which is a great satire of the US. What do you think of the criticism that colour-blind casting miseducates people about historical racism by presenting a world in which it seems that race doesn’t exist? Quidist I never came across that criticism, but if it was there, then fine. I don’t have an agenda. I don’t say: all films must be made this way. I wanted to make something that was fresh, vivid, contemporary and not just a historical artefact. We wrote and shot The Personal History of David Copperfield not long after Brexit, with all the language about closing borders, exclusion and turning people back. That’s not how I regard Britain. I regard Britain as very open, generous and welcoming, with a rich ethnic mix that we should celebrate. Also, from a practical point of view, I want to be able to choose the best cast available. I don’t want to stick up a notice that says: “Casting for David Copperfield, whites only,” because that strikes me as very inefficient. I want be able to draw from 100% of the talent pool. I have a friend who says one day you will call a press conference and announce everything that has happened since 2016 was scripted by you. Is that true? JacobJones Yes, I’ve booked the Four Seasons Total Landscaping in Pennsylvania. I’ve hired Rudy Giuliani and he’s going to announce that everything since 2016 has been a wind-up, for charity. You said in 2014 that the licence fee should be abolished in favour of a subscription service, along the lines of HBO. Do you still hold that view? WhitbreadBighead Well, I said that the BBC should introduce a subscription service internationally to take the pressure off the licence fee domestically. If the BBC was making money selling itself royally around the world, that would keep the licence fee as low as possible for domestic users. We know the licence fee is going to have to end, because we watch television in a different way now. But we have to come up with a system that still allows the public service broadcasting remit: local community service, education, children’s programming, fantastic documentaries, risk-taking dramas and working with writers and performers from all around the country. What the BBC does very well is connect us. We found that during the pandemic. There’s only so much high-end production drama you can watch – and Netflix and everyone are great at making those. But I don’t think Netflix would have come up with things as intrinsically British and idiosyncratic as The Great British Bake Off or The Repair Shop. If they offered you the post of director general of the BBC, what changes would you implement? PS: I am not Nadine Dorries, so this isn’t a job offer. OhReallyFFS Well, Nadine, I’d put on a suit, look the part, talk about strategy, 360 development and enhancing the vision for the broadcasting landscape while preserving the public sector with public broadcasting priorities. But primarily I’d tell the government to fuck off. The BBC is meant to be an independent broadcaster, funded by the licence-fee payer, not the government. The government shouldn’t be telling the BBC what to do, so they should just fuck off. I probably wouldn’t last beyond day one in the job.. Who would you rather have dinner with, [the Alan Partridge characters] Jed Maxwell or the late Tony Hayers? seoulsaint82 I would love to challenge Tony Hayers with programme ideas, because he was of a generation of TV executive who exudes a sense of the BBC’s ethos, but is never confident enough to have an opinion. I’d enjoy sitting Hayers down and firing questions at him like: what do you think of This Country? What do you think of Toast of London? Why do you think Alan Partridge has remained so loved for more than 30 years? MountainAspect Everyone knows someone like him, someone they work with or a relative, but it’s never yourself. No one has come up to me and said: “Oh, I love Alan Partridge. It’s me.” Obviously, Steve’s transformation is amazing; he just inhabits the character. But we didn’t overdo it. We did an Alan thing every four years. He’s in the media, so he’s sort of reinvented himself to capture where the medium is going, whether it’s radio, TV, YouTube or podcasts. He’s a monster, but a monster we are familiar with and can cope with. Exactly what was supposed to be in the drawer in Alan Partridge’s room at the Linton Travel Tavern? lescud Well, both Steve and I know, and it’s very funny, but I think if I told you … I did tell someone once at a live event. It’s very, very specific, so I’m sure my answer is somewhere out there on the internet. Do you write in a lightning, white-heat flash, or is it squeezed out, considered, pruned, edited and primped? Adnilsetab A bit of both. Like all writers, I keep putting stuff off. That’s why I like writing with other people, because the leaps of logic that take you to the funny happen a lot quicker when you’re in a room with two or three other people. Have you still got OJ Simpson’s confession? TheSpleen42 No! The props people took it off me. It was boxed up somewhere in the BBC at Television Centre , but now that’s a block of flats. I don’t know where it is. Peter Capaldi, Lewis Capaldi, Sharleen Spiteri, Paolo Nutini, Tom Conti, Jack Vettriano, Lou Macari … how come the Scots with Italian roots punch so well above their weight? PeteTheBeat Fantastic diet, great weather … Italians in Scotland are one of the earliest national groups that settled after the first world war, so they have deep roots. My mother’s parents came over after the first world war and my father after the second world war. Maybe it’s that we’re boisterous, but because the weather is so miserable in Scotland we stay indoors, get creative and pour all our emotional energy into something else. When Scotland play Italy in the Six Nations, who do you support? Readout_Noise Italy are so terrible that I cynically go for Scotland. In the World Cup, it’s the reverse. I interviewed you for a newspaper piece in 1989 where we discussed the moribund state of TV comedy and you said that it needed somebody to shake it all up. I had no idea you were thinking of yourself. What gave you the confidence? Did you ever think that your career would turn out as spectacularly? Captainsnort That must have been while I was doing BBC Radio Scotland. Not long after, I went off and became a comedy producer in London. I had a weird mix of feeling underconfident, in that I was very shy, but I was sure that I could do something in comedy, however niche. I don’t know if I was talking about myself in that interview. But, as a listener and viewer of comedy, I remember thinking: this needs a good punch. Which is easier? Writing comedy or standing for parliament? sometimelater I don’t know. I’ve only done one! I did nearly get into the Treasury. I sat the civil service entrance exam and got through to the final interview, but in the end they turned me down because they thought I wouldn’t take it seriously enough. That was probably wise. I’d have gone absolutely off my head and would probably have invented some weird perverse taxes, just to annoy people. As the world has changed dramatically in the last 20 years, isn’t it time The Armando Iannucci Shows returned to help us make sense of it all? Troughton22 I’d like to do a film version, although not necessarily with me in it. I don’t think I’m that great a performer. But looking at behaviour and absurdity comes closest to who I am. I enjoy that sense of storytelling, where everything is real except one thing is barking mad. Satirists should be the scourge of the establishment – feared and hated. Do you worry about becoming a court jester who exists only to gently mock but never seriously challenge the king? ByDogHasDohDoze I’ve never really called myself a satirist. I know other people call me that because of The Thick of It. But is Alan Partridge satire? I just make funny stuff. I don’t get up in the morning and think: “Who shall I satirise today?” Having said that, I do write stuff that I’m passionate about, even if it makes me angry. Tony Blair taking us into a needless war got me angry, and that’s what made In the Loop. My Covid poem is a response to the anger and frustration about how I felt the last two years have been handled. So as long as I can preserve my own personal sense of effrontery, then I feel I’m doing what I want to. • Armando Iannucci will be live in conversation at the Glasgow film festival on 6 MarchThe cost of the Southeastern trains accounting scandal has now risen to more than £80m, the franchise’s former operator Go-Ahead has revealed. The government stripped the transport group of the right to run one of Britain’s biggest networks in September for a “serious breach of trust” after discovering that £25m of taxpayer’s money had been retained by the Southeastern franchise over five years from 2014. After further investigation, the full amount owed to the Department for Transport has been established as £51.3m, with discrepancies dating back to 2006. Go-Ahead has also set aside a further £30m for an expected fine from the DfT, although the government has yet to confirm any penalty. Publishing its delayed full-year results for 2020-21, postponed for an audit after the scandal emerged, Go-Ahead also revealed it may have to pay the DfT a further £21.3m related to the franchise, in a disputed profit share agreement. Go-Ahead said this was a quite separate commercial negotiation rather than any further “breach”. Go-Ahead commissioned what it described as an independent review, led by the chairs of the group and Southeastern co-owner Keolis, that found “serious errors had been made” over several years, and that “by failing to notify the DfT of certain overpayments or monies due to the DfT, LSER [London &amp; South Eastern Railway] breached contractual obligations of good faith”. Investigations found £27m, rather than £25m as originally thought, was taken in the breaches first discovered at Southeastern, relating to overpayments for track access on HS1. Another £17.3m was wrongly pocketed by LSER in overpaid subsidy from the DfT between 2006 and 2020, which will be repaid with £7m interest. Go-Ahead’s new chief executive, Christian Schreyer, said “mistakes were made by the business”, adding that “a detailed independent report has been provided to the government and we are optimistic of reaching a settlement soon”. The group’s interim chief financial officer, Gordon Boyd, said Go-Ahead did not know if it was under investigation by the Serious Fraud Office. Schreyer said the firm’s own inquiries had gone beyond LSER, including the neighbouring Thameslink, Southern and Great Northern franchise, and governance would be overhauled across the group. He said: “We have deeply investigated also GTR [Govia Thameslink Railway] and not found any matters of concern.” He said Go-Ahead was in “constructive talks” with the DfT to continue running the GTR network when its deal expires at the end of March. Passenger groups said they would take legal action to stop Go-Ahead being awarded a further contract to continue running GTR. Bring Back British Rail and the Association of British Commuters accused the government of burying the report on the investigation into Southeastern’s alleged seven-year “serious breach of trust”. Go-Ahead has also suffered problems in its ventures in Europe, having to make provisions for £36m in wrongly understated losses in Germany, and a £76m loss in Norway where government support for Covid losses has been pared back and the new government has said private firms could not bid for rail contracts. Despite it all, Schreyer said that Go-Ahead was “in good shape”, as it reported increased operating profits of £115.5m for the year.Bonuses are back for Lloyds bankers, after annual profits jumped more than fivefold last year. The banking group said it was reintroducing bonuses for staff with a pool worth £399m, having scrapped payouts due to the impact of the pandemic a year earlier. The decision reflected the stronger economic outlook and the bank’s higher profits, Lloyds said. It also confirmed that higher bonuses would be handed to staff who deal with customers. Meanwhile, the bank revealed that it had 21 bankers on its payroll earning more than €1m (£835,000) a year, up from 17 staff a year earlier. One unnamed banker earned between €4.5m and €5m last year. That is more than the £2.5m paid to ex-chief executive António Horta-Osório, who stepped down last April. Its new boss, Charlie Nunn – who took over in August – was paid £1.3m, including a £349,000 bonus. Lloyds said it had frozen unpaid bonuses for a trio of former bosses over charges linked to the HBOS Reading scandal, given they were in leadership positions during a failed compensation scheme that was later deemed “neither fair nor reasonable”. It has resulted in a re-reviewing of compensation for victims in a scheme known as the Foskett Panel. The suspension is understood to affect more than £1m worth of bonuses that were set to be paid to Horta-Osório this year. The decision also affects Lloyds’ former chief financial officer George Culmer and ex-chief operating officer Juan Colombás. In total, the bank took a £790m charge related to the HBOS Reading controversy which saw business customers pushed into distress or failure after they were loaded with unmanageable debts and fees between 2003 and 2007. It brought its total remediation charge – linked to dealing with past misconduct – to £1.3bn for 2021. Lloyds said “significant uncertainties remain” around the total financial impact of the HBOS Reading scandal and that it continued to support the dual set of reviews, including into how Lloyds handled the controversy. “We continue to support the independent Foskett Panel re-review and Dame Linda Dobbs’ independent review process as we work to bring this matter to a conclusion,” Lloyds said. But the group, which owns Halifax and is the UK’s largest mortgage lender, still reported annual profits of £6.9bn, significantly higher than the £1.2bn reported for 2020. While the increase was partially due to higher income, the biggest impact came from the reversal of loan loss charges throughout the year. Lloyds released a total of £1.2bn worth of loan loss charges throughout 2021. That is compared with the £4.2bn it had been forced to put aside in order to offset a potential jump in loan defaults during the pandemic. However, despite the surge in profits, Lloyds failed to meet average analyst forecasts for £7.2bn in profits. Lloyds shares were down 9% on Thursday at 47p each. That was despitehigher shareholder payouts, with Lloyds announcing a dividend of 1.33 pence a share, bringing the total ordinary dividend for the year to 2p per share. It also announced a share buyback programme worth £2bn. With news overnight that Russia had invaded Ukraine, Nunn confirmed that UK banks had “been working closely with the government in the last few weeks”, including to make sure they had the right policies in place to enforce sanctions against Moscow. Major lenders including Lloyds, Barclays and NatWest met Treasury minister John Glen on Wednesday afternoon to discuss the impact of sanctions, as well as the risk of cyber-attacks from Russia. Nunn said that although the outlook “remains uncertain”, particularly in light of new Covid variants and the impact of inflation on customers’ finances, he was “confident that the group is well-placed to deliver increased returns”. The news came as he laid out a new strategy for the bank, which will mean focusing on areas including wealth management, while growing its market share in business banking, expanding its range of consumer products such as motor finance, and increasing income from larger corporate clients.Key workers will be literally centre stage in a new cycle of nine short plays celebrating roles that are crucial to society but often underappreciated by those in positions of power and influence. A “community cast” of 80 people aged between 16 and 96 will join professional actors on stage for The Key Workers Cycle at the Almeida theatre in north London in March. The 30-minute plays will be performed in groups of three, with all nine plays performed on the final day of the run. They feature teachers, funeral directors, care workers, refuse collectors, midwives, delivery drivers, women’s centre workers, supermarket staff and public transport employees. The plays take inspiration from medieval mystery plays that told stories from the bible and were often performed in cycles that could last several days. Moving from town to town, the pageants drew local people into performances. Francesca Beard, who has written Face the Music: The Social Care Workers’ Play, drew on her experiences of working with All Change, a community arts programme, in a north London care home. “I’ve built relationships with care workers, the people who give us dignity at the end of our lives, people who have a great calling for caring, but are rarely honoured by society,” she said. “If we’re lucky, we will all be old one day and we’re all going to need help. We’ll be vulnerable and in need of care just as when we were children. Not having a proper conversation about this in society is madness.” Her play was akin to a tone poem, she said. “It’s about age, kindness, values, society, beauty, gracefulness – and anger. I didn’t feel I could do that naturalistically. I want people to come out with an emotional understanding of the play.” Five care workers will take part in the play – three on stage and two whose voices have been recorded – plus 10 to 12 people in their 70s, 80s and 90s who are involved in Well-Versed, All Change’s company of older people. The Full Works: The Funeral Directors’ Play was written by Josh Elliott after conversations with a local family firm. “I became fascinated by what they do, it’s so multi-skilled. They’re scientists, make-up artists, barbers, stylists and therapists,” he said. His play focuses on a veteran funeral director teaching his grandson the skills of the trade as they prepare a body for burial. “It’s the last moment of caregiving. It made me think about my own death, and it’s good to know there is someone right at the end to be there for you and your family.” Eno Mfon has written More Than We Can Bear: The Women’s Centre Workers’ Play, which emerged through conversations with workers supporting women who have experienced the criminal justice system. Mfon partnered with Clean Break, a women’s theatre company that works in prisons and in the community. Her play centres on a support worker “trying to set boundaries, to separate work from personal life, but who has a never-ending sense of responsibility,” she said. The play has “lots of different threads, strands that weave together to become a testament to these women and how important their jobs are”, said Mfon. “The play tries to acknowledge that the load we’re carrying is heavy, but we’re carrying it together.” Ten members of Clean Break appear in the play. Stephanie Bain, co-creative director of the Almeida project with Dani Parr, said: “During the dark days of the pandemic, while everything around us was uncertain and precarious, one thing emerged with clarity: that when the theatre finally reopened, we needed to find a way to celebrate those people who kept the country afloat throughout the lockdowns and who continue to keep the world running. “Now the brilliant anecdotes, the sense of humour, the stories of struggles and joys that came from writers’ conversations with key workers will be brought to life on the stage.”Rolls-Royce has announced its chief executive Warren East will stand down at the end of this year, shocking investors who wiped £1.5bn off the market value of the aero-engine maker. The 60-year old, appointed CEO in 2015 to turnaround a business beleaguered by years of scandals and a string of profit warnings, said that “this is the right moment to look to the future”. The surprise news rattled investors, as Rolls-Royce’s board announced the start of a hunt for a successor, with shares in the company plummeting as much as 18% giving it a market value of $8.1bn. The announcement overshadowed the company’s full-year results which showed that the engine-maker has weathered the worst of the pandemic and returned to profit last year. A £124m profit for 2021 compared with a loss of £3bn in 2020, when income, derived from the hours its engines are flown by airline customers, plummeted as the travel industry was grounded at the height of the pandemic. Rolls-Royce remained cautious on its outlook for this year saying it expected to generate “modestly positive” free cash flow this year. The company said it has achieved its restructuring target of £1.3bn savings, made in part by axing 9,000 jobs, a fifth of its global workforce. “We have achieved the benefits of our restructuring programme a year ahead of schedule, positioning civil aerospace to capitalise on increasing international travel,” said East. “It is a privilege to lead Rolls-Royce – it’s a job which I thoroughly enjoy. There have been challenges, but we have built on the cultural and organisational improvements we have made to work through them, deliver on our commitments and create a better business.”A court in Islamabad has sentenced to death the tycoon’s son who raped and murdered Noor Mukadam, a case that sparked outrage in Pakistan. Mukadam, 27, the daughter of a former Pakistani diplomat, was held captive, tortured and beheaded in July last year by Zahir Jaffer, a member of a well-known industrialist family. Jaffer, 30, a Pakistani-American citizen, is thought to have attacked Mukadam after she refused his marriage proposal. Two household employees of Jaffer, a guard and a gardener, were both sentenced to 10 years for abetting the murder. The court heard they had blocked the young woman’s attempts to leave the luxury mansion. Jaffer’s parents, who had faced charges in connection with covering up the killing, were acquitted by the court. After a lengthy trial that began in October, Judge Ata Rabbani on Thursday sentenced Jaffer to be hanged. Shaukat Ali Mukadam, Noor’s father, said the verdict was a “victory for justice” and thanked the media for keeping the matter alive. “Today, an exemplary punishment has been given to the main accused. Today, my daughter’s soul will be content to some extent. We are happy as far as the principal accused is concerned,” he told reporters outside the courtroom. Prosecution lawyer Shah Khawar said: “Justice has been served, and today’s verdict will empower Pakistani women at large. We will challenge the acquittal of his parents at the higher court.” The murder, and the efforts to protect the wealthy killer, had caused outrage in Pakistan where, despite high rates of brutal violence against women, there are low conviction rates, with most perpetrators going uncharged. According to AGHS Legal Aid Cell, a rights group providing free legal representation for marginalised groups in Pakistan, the conviction rate for cases of violence against women is less than 3%. Rights groups hailed the verdict and called for the higher courts to maintain the decision in the face of any appeal. “Justice has been served today. We demand the higher courts will maintain the sentence and dismiss Jaffer’s appeal,” said Farzana Bari, a women’s rights activist. A recent report by Human Rights Watch (HRW) said: “Violence against women and girls – including rape, murder, acid attacks, domestic violence, and forced marriage – is endemic throughout Pakistan. Human rights defenders estimate that roughly 1,000 women are killed in so-called ‘honour’ killings every year.” Jaffer, who can appeal against the verdict, was thrown out of the court several times during his trial for his behaviour, and his lawyers frequently carried him to proceedings in a wheelchair or stretcher to show he was not “mentally sound”. • Information and support for anyone affected by rape or sexual abuse issues is available from the following organisations. In the UK, Rape Crisis offers support on 0808 802 9999 in England and Wales, 0808 801 0302 in Scotland, or 0800 0246 991 in Northern Ireland. In the US, Rainn offers support on 800-656-4673. In Australia, support is available at 1800Respect (1800 737 732). Other international helplines can be found at ibiblio.org/rcip/internl.htmlWhen Andy Warhol and Jean-Michel Basquiat’s debut show of collaborative paintings premiered in 1985, it was panned by the critics. Notoriously, the New York Times’s Vivien Raynor labelled the twentysomething street artist Basquiat a “mascot” for the ageing pop art pioneer Warhol. The critical reaction drove the artists apart and they barely spoke again before Warhol’s death only 18 months later. Just three years after the exhibition, Basquiat would also be dead at 27 from a heroin overdose. The last time I spoke to Broadway star Jeremy Pope, in early 2020, he was promoting his debut major TV role in Ryan Murphy’s Hollywood, a big, brassy reimagining of 1940s Tinseltown. He was softly spoken but palpably excited, even in the midst of the rapidly developing pandemic. Once the reviews started to come in, Hollywood – like Warhol and Basquiat’s show – was the subject of a critical thumping. The Guardian labelled it a “crushing disappointment” for its revisionism of 1940s Tinseltown, while Variety deemed it a show with “little worth saying”. Two years on, Pope is speaking to me over video call, framed by a pair of loud, mushroom-patterned curtains that have been provided as part of his digs on London’s South Bank. He is in town for the next three months playing Basquiat in a new play by The Two Popes writer Anthony McCarten, directed by the Young Vic’s artistic director Kwame Kwei-Armah. The play, The Collaboration, tells the story of that ill-fated 1985 exhibition and co-stars Paul Bettany as Warhol. So, how was it reading the Hollywood reviews and then inhabiting Basquiat during his own critical turmoil? “I’m a Cancer, so I’m sensitive,” Pope says with a smile. He seems careful to remain magnanimous, lest the critics have something to latch on to. “We do what we do because we love it and I think that should be good enough, rather than being based on someone’s subjective opinion.” He pauses. “But that’s what art is, it is a conversation. Regardless of what someone says, you have to show up the next day and tell that story on stage because you believe in it. I choose to hope that one person is affected in a positive way [by Hollywood], the same way I was affected when I read the script.” Pope is no stranger to accolades, just as he is to criticism. Back-to-back lead roles in Moonlight writer Tarell Alvin McCraney’s tale of self-discovery, Choir Boy, and Ain’t Too Proud, a jukebox musical about the Temptations, earned him two nominations at the 2019 Tony awards. It made him only the sixth person in the 73-year history of the Tonys to be up for two gongs in one season. To tackle Basquiat, though, is a new challenge. “He was a mysterious soul whose image and images are so available, but the person behind them can be an enigma,” Pope says. Rather than get bogged down in the biographies, Pope has instead been turning to Basquiat’s art as the key to understanding the man. “There was such a direct connection from his mind and his heart to the canvas. It seems the most honest and most true expression of him.” If Basquiat is an enigma, so is his relationship with Warhol. The pair first met while Basquiat was a teenager in the early 80s, frequenting Warhol’s Factory studio and trying to get a glimpse into its celebrity social set. A lunch date set up by the art dealer Bruno Bischofberger in 1982 then sparked the beginnings of a friendship and collaboration that would span the next three years. Warhol had seen his star wane throughout the 1970s, while Basquiat was the subverting street artist recently brought into the gallery world and primed to deliver new intrigue. It made for a potent combination, one that the artist Keith Haring described as “each [artist] inspiring the other to outdo the next”. Speculated as being either a vampiric attempt by an older artist to maintain relevance, or the tale of a mentorship sullied by public disapproval, playing such a complex dynamic could surely bring its own complications between Pope and his onstage sparring partner Bettany? “I’m not just saying this because we’re currently living across the hall from each other, but Paul has been such a light and has embraced me in a way that isn’t required for work,” he says. “We have both committed to playing these men and we’re digging deep – when we’re not rehearsing, we’re spending evenings going through the script and getting to the heart of the relationship.” It is a steadfast connection they will be exploring for some time to come – the play has already been picked up for a film adaptation, with the pair reprising their roles – and one that Pope believes Basquiat and Warhol also once had. “There was so much love in their relationship,” he says. “There are so many photos of them just clowning together or getting pedicures and you can’t deny that there was a true foundation of friendship and respect for each other.” So how did a handful of reviews then prompt Basquiat to stop visiting Warhol for their regular painting sessions at the Factory, and for the pair to ultimately stop speaking before Warhol’s sudden death in 1987? “Because what people say and how they view you determines how you can provide for yourself, especially for Jean as a Black man trying to make it in a white art world,” Pope says. That pressure of maintaining relevance as a minority artist is something that Pope relates to today. “There is a cost to being an artist and it is carrying the weight of the Black and queer communities I represent,” Pope says. “It can feel heavy acknowledging that responsibility. Often I wonder, am I doing enough? Or, how can I do more?” And it was the proliferation of these questions that Pope believes led to Basquiat’s own downfall. “His addiction began because there was this pressure to stay relevant and it wasn’t about fame; it was about having a stake in the conversation and being seen,” he says. For Pope, though, it is in the work of playing others that he comes to a sense of solace in himself. “I’m in the healing business, since art can heal and change the way that you think,” he says. “Playing Jean has made me feel free, which is a beautiful thing as an artist. I feel taken care of and I just hope that people who come to see us can feel loved or healed, too.” And what of those pesky critics? “This experience is something that I’ll cherish for ever – it has been fucking thrilling,” Pope says. “No review can change that.” The Collaboration is at the Young Vic, London, to 2 April. *** Brushes with genius Jonathan Jones selects his favourite dramatic representations of artists Doctor Who: Vincent and the Doctor (2010) Tony Curran is a genuinely believable Van Gogh in this moving Doctor Who story. The Doctor and Amy can’t change history to stop his suicide but take him to today’s Musée d’Orsay, where he hears Bill Nighy’s critic praise him as one of the greatest artists ever. Tears. Frida (2002) Salma Hayek broke away from conventional roles to play the visionary Mexican artist in a film that aches to do justice to her pain, disabilities and defiance. Julie Taymor’s direction is sometimes too pretty for its own good but Hayek does imagine her way into being Kahlo, in all her rage and generosity. Mr Turner (2014) It took the quirky originality of writer-director Mike Leigh to find dramatic material in the private, ungiving character of English landscape painter JMW Turner. But Timothy Spall brilliantly inhabits this fish out of water in Regency society, a working-class genius in a posh milieu. Red (first performed 2009) The profoundly unhappy abstract expressionist Mark Rothko is another difficult character to fictionalise but John Logan’s play focuses on a spectacular emotional turning point, when a commission to decorate a Manhattan restaurant drove the painter (in a role first played by Alfred Molina) into agonies of moral disgust. Caravaggio (1986) There are some accidentally comic moments in Derek Jarman’s deliberately Brechtian and unrealistic life of the painter and murderer who took baroque Italy by storm, but Nigel Terry’s Caravaggio and his model, played by Sean Bean, make the artist’s queer courage explicit as he negotiates Rome’s palaces and mean streets.Medication abortion accounted for the majority of all abortions for the first time in US history in 2020, a new analysis by the Guttmacher Institute has shown. Sometimes called the “abortion pill”, medication abortion is a two-drug treatment that is approved to terminate a pregnancy up to 10 weeks gestation or less. The drugs, sold under the brand name Mifeprex, have accounted for an increasingly large share of all abortions in the US since its introduction in 2000. In 2020, the proportion of all pregnancies terminated with medication in the US jumped to 54% from 39% in 2017. Experts believe the increase was driven by the Covid pandemic and updated FDA regulations, which allowed the medication to be prescribed via telemedicine. “We are seeing more people using medication abortion and some of that may have to do with the pandemic and being able to protect themselves from Covid,” said Elizabeth Nash, interim associate director of state issues at the Guttmacher Institute, a leading reproductive rights group. “Accessing medication abortion means [people] don’t have to travel long distances, take time off of work and arrange for childcare,” said Nash. “That’s important too”. What’s more, pandemic-era regulations that allowed for telehealth prescribing and mailing of abortion medication meant many people did not have to face aggressive protesters or harassment outside clinics. “Because so many abortion patients are low-income, are Black and brown individuals, are young people, are LGBTQ individuals – people who have been systematically oppressed and faced barriers to accessing healthcare – being able to get access to abortion through telehealth is incredibly important,” said Nash. Growing use of the “abortion pill” is also seen as a threat by anti-abortion campaigners, who have pushed state laws restricting access to the medication and made abortion medication the subject of online disinformation campaigns. Such campaigners would not be able to confront people seeking abortions if they are not forced to go to clinics. Anti-abortion campaigners have been emboldened by a forthcoming supreme court decision, which is expected to severely restrict abortion rights by striking at the landmark 1973 Roe v Wade ruling, which found a constitutional right to terminate a pregnancy and invalidated dozens of state abortion bans nationally. A decision is expected in June. The findings about medication abortion are part of a larger set of research conducted by Guttmacher. Every three years, the institute surveys all known abortions providers in the US. The survey is not expected to conclude until later 2022. The estimated proportion of medication abortion was derived from an early analysis, and is not expected to fall below 50% even when all survey data is in. Medication abortion is regarded as very safe, and uses mifepristone, followed by misoprostol. The drugs were introduced in 2000. By 2016, more than 3 million American women had taken the drug with 19 deaths reported, an effective mortality rate of 0.00063%. By contrast, giving birth poses a risk of death 14-times higher, according to a New England Journal of Medicine commentary article (the author received an unrestricted grant from Danco Laboratories, the maker of Mifeprex). In April 2020, as the pandemic shut down healthcare facilities across the country, the FDA temporarily allowed telemedicine prescribing and mailing of mifepristone. The decision was made permanent in December. In 2022, 16 states have so far introduced restrictions on mifepristone, including seven states which have introduced legislation to outlaw medication abortion entirely. Thirty-two states already limit the healthcare providers who can prescribe medication abortion to doctors, even as providers such as nurse practitioners may also manage patient’s health. In 19 states, the prescriber must be present at the time mifepristone is administered, effectively barring telemedicine prescribing. In addition to legal restrictions, medication abortion has become the subject of disinformation campaigns by anti-abortion organizations, many of whom advertise “abortion reversal” protocols. The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists has described so-called abortion reversal “unproven and unethical”. The only high-quality, randomized controlled trial to be conducted on the treatment was halted in 2019 when three women suffered severe hemorrhaging and had to be hospitalized. Guttmacher released a second analysis showing it became significantly harder for low-income women to access birth control during the pandemic. A three-state survey in Arizona, Iowa and Wisconsin found between 30% and more than half of women faced delays or barriers in obtaining contraception. Those obstacles were exacerbated when women faced financial hardship caused by the pandemic.Serco bemoaned “wildly unfair” criticism of its role in the much-criticised NHS Covid-19 test-and-trace scheme, as the outsourcing firm reported increased full-year profits that could fund more than £100m in shareholder rewards. The company said it had won £700m in Covid-related contracts worldwide in 2021, taking its total pandemic-related income to £1.1bn. This includes about £623m of UK taxpayers’ funds, according to a National Audit Office report, for work including managing a fifth of the UK’s Covid testing sites and operating contact-tracing call centres. Serco has become a focal point of public ire about the test-and-trace scheme, which was allocated a budget of £37bn, with £14bn spent by June last year, mostly on testing. Criticisms include allegations of poor performance by contract-tracing staff working for the company’s subcontractors. In a written statement, Serco’s chief executive, Rupert Soames, said “much of the criticism was wildly unfair and bore little relationship to the facts, but it was still unsettling to our colleagues to see their hard work being called into question”. But he gave investors better news, hailing the company’s “outstanding” increase in revenues and profits, which could fund more than £100m in rewards for shareholders. Annual revenues were up 14% to £4.4bn, with operating profit 21% higher than last year at £216m. Investors were treated to a 72% increase in their full-year dividend, with their 2.41p-per-share payout for the year worth £29m. The company promised to “continue on our path” of increasing returns to shareholders, including through share buybacks to a value of up to £90m. Soames, a grandson of Winston Churchill, said Covid contracts with the UK, Australia and other countries had “provided a short-term uplift to revenues and profits”. He added that the experience had “left an enduring legacy of a much more capable and efficient organisation, strong customer relationships, and lower debt”. Critics of Serco’s involvement in the government’s Covid response have pointed to its mixed record on public works, the use of subcontractors and a blunder in which it inadvertently revealed the email addresses of contract tracers. Soames said last year that much of the criticism was motivated by ideology. “There are some people who philosophically do not believe the private sector should be doing this sort of thing,” he said. For the year to the end of March 2020, Soames and Serco’s then chief financial officer, Angus Cockburn, earned £7.4m in pay, including £5.5m in bonuses. The size of this year’s package, which will include the first year of the pandemic, is expected to be announced next month when the company publishes its annual report.The best line so far in The Marvelous Mrs Maisel – the Emmy award-winning comedy drama about a New York-50s-housewife-turned-standup-comic – isn’t a joke she delivers in a set on a dingy club stage. It isn’t even one of the endless, off-stage zingers by creator Amy Sherman-Palladino (also behind Gilmore Girls). It is, in fact, the searing three-word reply that Midge (Rachel Brosnahan) fires at her husband, Joel (Michael Zegen), halfway through season one, when he asks why she won’t give their marriage another shot: “Because you left.” In that moment, Mrs Maisel becomes the ultimate single woman’s icon. In a world that measures her success and identity by her marital status, she makes the decision to be a single mother and blindly embrace whatever is ahead. While the social stigmas attached to being unmarried might have relaxed since Midge’s time, the reality today is this: in 2019 five hospital trusts and six clinical commissioning groups banned single women from accessing IVF; our prime minister once said the children of single women are “ill-raised, ignorant, aggressive and illegitimate”; single people feel priced out of owning a house while couples have a double income; and – take it from someone who knows – if you’re not standing on a soapbox shouting “single, fierce and independent!”, friends and family assume you’re sitting at home feeling sad with the cat (or without the cat, because the landlord won’t allow it). Midge’s message is a reminder to know your self-worth, forget about societal expectations and take no shit. There’s also the fact that she’s very, very funny and unafraid to constantly crack the punchlines – another defiance, this time of the “women aren’t funny” trope (again, something that female comedians still face today). They are the very reasons why, say, a single woman might have felt completely uplifted while rewatching the series for a third time in lockdown after heartbreak. Because, when Joel left, Midge turned her assumed failures into her biggest strengths – and the real Mrs Maisel arrived. When her husband left her for his 21-year-old secretary Penny Pann, Midge laughs at him. “A girl who doesn’t know how to use an electric pencil sharpener?” she guffaws. “Grab some pens on the way out – you’re gonna need them.” Rather than chase after her husband , she downs a bottle of Yom Kippur wine and ends up stumbling on stage in a comedy club, performing a monologue about what has just happened. She establishes a knack for seamlessly snappy, observational standup that is brutally personal – a true talent for turning trauma into triumph. Rather than taking Joel back just to please everybody else, Midge takes a chance on herself as a single woman for the first time and gives this comedy thing a shot. What’s more, she does it despite society’s prejudice against divorced women. She ignores her father Abe (Tony Shalhoub) when he laments: “I’m no fan of Joel, but you need a husband”. She carries on, despite her mother, Rose (Marin Hinkle), demanding to know what Midge did wrong to cause her poor husband to leave, then walking around every room in the apartment, wailing: “Oh shiiit”. Over the following three seasons, we see gutsy Midge continue to defy society’s expectations of how a single woman should act. Comedy quickly becomes a career goal and she does everything she can to make it happen. She embraces a new female friendship with her agent Susie (Alex Borstein) – her total opposite, and someone she might not have even spoken to while married, but with whom she forms a beautifully odd and respectful working relationship (“Look at you – it’s like a dollop of whipped cream grew a head,” Susie quips to nail their dynamic). Midge swallows her pride, moves back in with her parents and seizes control of her income for the first time, taking a job at a department store and recording radio adverts for extra money, all while gigging most nights. She even ends up in a position where she can buy back her old apartment on her own (a little unrealistic, especially in today’s market, but let’s roll with it). As the show goes on, we see her increasingly act in a way that shows us that there are more important things in life than having a partner. In season two, Midge falls for Dr Benjamin Ettenberg (Zachary Levi) – the most perfect man ever to be written down on paper – only to call off their engagement because she realises she doesn’t want the relationship to compromise her comedy (in fairness, he is far too good a person to be used as material by his wife on stage every night). She also sleeps with Joel a few times, divorces him, drunkenly marries him again, then leaves things open. Things are inevitably complicated with the father of her children, who did a bad thing but isn’t necessarily a bad person. This time, though, their relationship is all on her terms, and married life is clearly no longer her ultimate goal. Then there’s the comedian Lenny Bruce (Luke Kirby – TV’s most underrated sex symbol) who becomes a mentor, friend and subject of a will-they-won’t-they storyline. “You’re living in a hotel? Who are you? Willy Loman?” Midge jibes when they very nearly sleep together in season three – but don’t, because, once again, she doesn’t want a sexual relationship with a man to hinder anything or rock the mutual respect they have for each other as comedians. Sure, Midge isn’t as perfect as her impeccable veneer. She often makes decisions that some might consider unwise or selfish, such as leaving her children for six months to go on tour with Shy Baldwin (Leroy McClain) in season three (she also takes minimal interest in their day-to-day lives). But to be a woman forging a career during that period – especially a woman in comedy – selfishness was a necessary and sometimes vital tool. Another questionable move was the uncomfortable set that gets her kicked off Shy’s tour; in not realising how her jokes about Shy’s sexuality might have crossed a line, she shows that she is still often unaware of her privilege. But Midge does what she set out to do – she becomes a standup comic. There have been so many times where she could have given up – the cancelled gigs, the non-payments, the constant sexist remarks, the offers of an easier married life with a doctor or an ex – but she keeps on going. In today’s digital age where burnout culture is the norm and women are still expected to work longer hours than men, her warrior approach is extremely relatable. Particularly as she remains true to herself while developing, saying what she wants to say on stage, always parading an outstanding wardrobe of outfits, regardless of how grimy the venue is – and making sure she turns down career opportunities that conflict with her values. In the opening act of the fourth season, which has just launched on Amazon Prime, it’s clear that Midge is done with men dictating her life. With no money, no apartment and no work lined up after being sent away from the tour, she’s out for revenge – and why the hell not? They say that anger is an unattractive trait, but Midge isn’t here to sit pretty and please anymore – and neither are women today. “I stood there, I watched that plane fly away and I realised that once again a man has stepped in and fucked up my life,” Midge tells her crowd. “I know – that’s life, shit happens, you should be the bigger man and let it go … Well, I’m a woman – so fuck that.”Andrew Marr has promised to ruffle feathers when he launches his new LBC radio show next month by taking advantage of the freedom he has gained by leaving the BBC. The former BBC political editor will host his own hour-long programme at 6pm between Monday and Thursday. He previously said he was looking forward to “getting my voice back” after being freed from the BBC’s impartiality requirements. While the national broadcaster is increasingly cracking down on any presenter who dares to express even a mild personal opinion, stations such as LBC are hitting record ratings by encouraging their hosts to take provocative political stances. Marr said: “I’ve always thought journalism is about breaking stories, ruffling feathers and having some fun on the way … Anyone wanting bland, safe, wearily predictable journalism is strongly advised to look elsewhere.” The announcement means Eddie Mair, another former BBC presenter, will have to give up the final hour of his LBC show to make way for Marr. The BBC has been hit hard by the increasingly competitive market for political journalism in the UK which has seen deep-pocketed commercial media companies poach BBC presenters. Earlier this week Global, the media company that owns LBC, hired Jon Sopel and Emily Maitlis from the BBC to host a new podcast – while Rupert Murdoch’s News UK made large offers to hire BBC staff for its TimesRadio station and forthcoming talkTV service. Marr’s LBC show will also be broadcast live as a video stream, another indication that the division between radio and television is increasingly blurred. Marr gave up a £340,000 salary when he left the BBC but will now hold a variety of jobs, including the New Statesman’s chief political commentator and presenting a show on LBC’s sister station Classic FM. While BBC staff are required to declare outside earnings from paid speaking gigs, there is no such scrutiny for employees of commercial organisations. It is not only on-air talent jumping ship from the BBC but also the behind-the-scenes producers. Marr’s show will be put together by former BBC staff, including ex-political programming boss Rob Burley, who oversaw Marr’s Sunday politics show, as well as Newsnight producer Matt Harris.Former co-stars of the late actor and comedian Jerry Lewis have accused him of sexual assault and sexual harassment. The women all met Lewis when he was at the height of his Hollywood career. In an investigation by Vanity Fair and accompanying short film, they allege Lewis – who died of natural causes in 2017 aged 91, had mistreated them. The story and film are based in part on interviews conducted by Emmy-winning Allen v Farrow film-makers, Amy Ziering and Kirby Dick, who have been investigating Hollywood’s long history of abuse. They found that some of the most explosive accusations involved Lewis. Among those interviewed are Hope Holiday, who starred alongside Lewis in The Ladies Man, Jill St John, who starred opposite Lewis in Who’s Minding the Store?, Anna Maria Alberghetti, who worked with him on Cinderfella, Karen Sharpe, who played Lewis’s love interest in The Disorderly Orderly, Oscar-nominated writer Renée Taylor, and singer Lainie Kazan. Sharpe, now 87, alleged that after a costume fitting in his office in 1964, Lewis physically assaulted her. “He grabbed me. He began to fondle me. He unzipped his pants. Quite frankly, I was dumbstruck,” she said. “I put my hand up and said, ‘Wait a minute. I don’t know if this is a requirement for your leading ladies, but this is something I don’t do.’ I could see that he was furious. I got the feeling that that never really happened to him.” Sharpe alleged that after she rebuffed Lewis, he refused to rehearse with her and forbade the entire production, bar the director and assistant director, from speaking to her. “If anyone speaks to you … we’ll be fined,” a crew member allegedly told her. Holiday, 91, said she had known Lewis since she was 13 but was in her early 30s when he allegedly invited her to his dressing room, locked her in and began to “talk dirty” and masturbate. “He said, ‘You’ve got a great figure, you’ve got nice boobs, you’ve got lovely legs. That’s what I like to see,’” Holiday said. “I didn’t know what to do, so I just sat there. I wanted to leave so badly. I wanted to get out of there, and I couldn’t.” She said the incident made her depressed. “I didn’t want to go on dates. It wasn’t good.” Holiday said her friends urged her to report Lewis to the Screen Actors Guild but she was too afraid. “He was very big at Paramount. I was under contract to him and to Paramount, and I didn’t want to shake the boat. I figured I’ll just keep my mouth shut.” Taylor, 88, said she was in her 20s when Lewis arranged a meeting for her with Paramount executives, who immediately asked her if she was “one of Jerry’s Girls”. When she said no, she alleges they began speaking crudely about her anatomy and that of Lewis. “They said, ‘Well, how big is your pussy? Jerry has a salami and will use it on a girl’,” Taylor said. Lewis’s comedy and singing duo with Dean Martin propelled him to stardom on par with Frank Sinatra and Elvis Presley. He married singer Patti Palmer in 1944 and the couple had six children together. He later adopted another child with his second wife, SanDee Pitnick. In 1959, at the age of 33, he signed a seven-year contract with Paramount for $10m, the largest contract of its kind between a studio and performer at the time. The Vanity Fair film, titled The Dark Side of a Hollywood Icon, was released on Wednesday.The Chelsea owner, Roman Abramovich, was identified by the Home Office in 2019 as having links to the Russian state as well as to “corrupt activity and practices”, a Labour MP has told parliament, suggesting the UK should seize his assets and bar him from owning the football club. Chris Bryant told MPs he was quoting from a Home Office document leaked to him, and asked why nothing more had been done about Abramovich’s UK assets given this official verdict. Raising the issue of tier 1 visas, the sort held by Abramovich, which allow very rich people to invest in the UK, Bryant directly quoted a section of what he said was the Home Office document. “I’ve got hold of a leaked document from 2019, from the Home Office, which says in relation to Mr Abramovich: ‘As part of HMG’s [Her Majesty’s government] Russia strategy aimed at targeting illicit finance and malign activity, Abramovich remains of interest to HMG due to his links to the Russian state and his public association with corrupt activity and practices,’” Bryant told the Commons. He went on, still quoting the document: “‘An example of this is Abramovich admitting in court proceedings that he paid for political influence. Therefore HMG is focused on ensuring individuals linked to illicit finance and malign activity are unable to base themselves in the UK, and will use the relevant tools at its disposal, including immigration powers, to prevent this.’” Bryant added: “That’s nearly three years ago. And yet remarkably little has been done. Surely Mr Abramovich should no longer be able to own a football club in this country? Surely we should be looking at seizing some of his assets, including his £150m home, and making sure that other people who have had tier 1 visas like this are not engaged in malign activity in the UK?” Abramovich, who made his fortune acquiring newly privatised Russian oil assets following the end of the Soviet Union, bought Chelsea in 2003 and has put enormous sums into the club. In 2018 he withdrew his application for a new UK investor visa, amid worsening links between the UK and Russia. Abramovich has an Israeli passport and has since travelled to the UK using that. A week ago the government said it was ending the tier 1 visa system over concerns it allowed people to invest “dirty money” in the UK. On Tuesday, speaking to the Commons as he announced a first wave of measures against Russia over its invasion of Ukraine, Boris Johnson said Abramovich was “already facing sanctions” because of links to the Russian state. However, Downing Street later said the prime minister had made an error, and formally corrected the record. Abramovich has vehemently disputed reports suggesting his alleged closeness to Vladimir Putin and Russia or that he has done anything to merit sanctions being imposed against him. Bryant cannot be sued for quoting the report and its claims about Abramovich, as statements in the Commons are protected by parliamentary privilege. Abramovich’s representatives were contacted for comment.A cyber report published by intelligence agencies in the UK and US on Wednesday has attributed insidious new malware to a notorious Russia-backed hacking group. The findings come as Russia launches an invasion of Ukraine. The joint research was published by the National Cyber Security Centre in the UK and US agencies including the National Security Agency. It warned that a Russian state-backed hacker group known as Sandworm had developed a new type of malware called Cyclops Blink, which targets firewall devices made by the manufacturer Watchguard to protect computers against hacks. The sophisticated virus can withstand typical remedies including reboots, the report said. The findings come as the UK and US, allies to Ukraine, are on high alert for Russian state-sponsored hacks. The agencies added that their statement was a “routine advisory” not directly linked to the situation in Ukraine. However, the US cybersecurity firm Mandiant said the announcement was a reminder of the damage that could be inflicted by Sandworm, which has been blamed for the devastating NotPetya attack on Ukraine in 2017. John Hultquist, a vice-president at Mandiant Threat Intelligence, said Sandworm remained a “capable and clever” adversary. “In light of the crisis in Ukraine we are very concerned about this actor, who has surpassed all others we track in terms of the aggressive cyber-attacks and information operations they have conducted,” he said. “No other Russian actor has been so brazen and successful in disrupting critical infrastructure in Ukraine and elsewhere.” Ukraine has suffered a string of cyber-attacks that Kyiv has blamed on Russia. Moscow, which is caught up in a mounting confrontation with the west over Ukraine, has denied any involvement. Wednesday saw a massive distributed denial of service (DDoS) attack that targeted websites of Ukraine’s government and banks. “At about 4pm, another mass DDoS attack on our state began. We have relevant data from a number of banks,” said Mykhailo Fedorov, minister of digital transformation, adding that the parliament website was also hit. Ukrainian authorities said this week they had seen online warnings that hackers were preparing to launch major attacks on government agencies, banks and the defense sector. Wednesday’s hack was consistent with the country’s tactics to distract and disrupt adversaries while “providing a level of plausible deniability”, said Rick Holland, chief information security officer at the cybersecurity firm Digital Shadows. “Russia didn’t just decide to invade Ukraine this week,” he said. “Military planners have prepared for this campaign years in advance. Disinformation, false flags, DDoS attacks, and destructive wiper malware are a part of Russian military doctrine; the battle plans have been drawn up and are now being executed.” The White House said on Wednesday that it was in touch with Ukrainian authorities about their cybersecurity needs, in the wake of the fresh cyber-attack, which the US government has not yet attributed. “We are in conversations with Ukraine regarding their cyber-related needs including as recently as today and we’re going to move with urgency to assess the nature and extent of this, what steps need to be taken, and therefore a response,” the White House press secretary, Jen Psaki, said. Reuters contributed reportingA previously unpublished novel by Leonard Cohen is due for publication this autumn. Written in Montreal in 1956 – the year Cohen published his first poetry collection – A Ballet of Lepers focuses on “toxic relationships and the lengths one will go to maintain them”, according to a press release. As detailed in the Cohen biography Various Positions by Ira B Nadel, the 91-page book “tells the story of a 35-year-old sales clerk who takes in his elderly grandfather” to live together in a cramped boarding house … The grandfather is given to fits of violence, and the narrator (who remains unnamed) finds an awakening violence within himself.” It opens with the lines: “My grandfather came to live with me. There was nowhere else for him to go. What had happened to all his children? Death, decay, exile – I hardly know.” The novel demonstrated “a growing sense of Jewish history and tragedy”, wrote Nadel, a theme that would develop in Cohen’s subsequent poetry, and reflected the “difficulties that Cohen faced with his own senile grandfather, although without the degree of violence”. The book was originally rejected by two publishers. Cohen, who died in 2016, once said that A Ballet of Lepers was “probably a better novel” than his celebrated first novel, The Favourite Game, published in 1963. The new publication of the novel will be accompanied by 15 short stories and the script for a radio play from Cohen’s archives, all written between 1956 and 1961, and titled A Ballet of Lepers: A Novel and Stories. The works explore themes “from shame and unworthiness to sexual desire in all its sacred and profane dimensions to longing, whether for love, family, freedom, or transcendence”, and “probe the inner demons of his characters, many of whom could function as stand-ins for the author himself.” The collection was assembled by Cohen scholar Alexandra Pleshoyano, who has written an afterword. Robert Kory, trustee of the Leonard Cohen family trust, said: “Leonard said before his death that his life’s true masterwork was his archive, which he kept meticulously for the benefit of fans and scholars one day to discover. I’m pleased that, with this book, his readers and listeners can begin that rich journey.” Canongate will publish A Ballet of Lepers: A Novel and Stories in the UK on 11 October 2022.Hello Fight to vote Readers, I have an update in my reporting on the case of Pamela Moses, the 44-year-old Black Lives Matter Activist in Memphis who was sentenced to six years in prison for trying to register to vote. The case has attracted significant national attention because many see Moses’ sentence as too severe and a clear example of disparities in the US criminal justice system. The prosecution’s case is built around the argument that Moses knew she was ineligible to vote because she was on probation, and people on felony probation in Tennessee cannot vote. Indeed, a few months before she tried to register, a judge had issued an order telling Moses her probation was ongoing. But nevertheless, prosecutors argued, she convinced a probation officer into signing a form saying she was eligible to vote and then knowingly submitted the document knowing it was false. “You tricked the probation department into giving you documents saying you were off probation,” W Mark Ward, the judge who sentenced Moses, said in January. Moses, for her part, told me she did not know she was ineligible and her lawyers have said she went to the probation office genuinely seeking clarity about whether she could vote. A new email I obtained through a public records request adds to evidence undercutting the claim that Moses tricked the officer. In September 2019, just two days after a probation officer mistakenly signed a certificate telling Moses her probation was complete, officials at the Tennessee department of corrections investigated how exactly their employee made the error. Their investigation didn’t find that Moses had deceived a probation officer, but rather that the officer had made a good-faith mistake. The review found that the probation officer – referred to as Manager Billington – spent about an hour investigating whether Moses was still on probation. Billington came across a note in Moses’ file noting that in 2016, she had been placed on supervised probation for two years. Even though the system said that Moses remained on unsupervised probation, Billington thought this was a mistake. The person who handled the file, he believed, forgot to close out the case when the supervised probation ran out. That’s why he ultimately signed Moses’ voting certificate saying her probation had expired in 2018 and she was eligible to vote. “Manager Billington advised that he thought he did due diligence in making his decision,” Joe Williams, an administrator in the department of corrections, wrote to Lisa Helton, a top department official. “Manager Billington failed to adequately investigate the status of this case. He failed to review all of the official documents available through the Shelby county justice portal and negligently relied on a contact note from a court specialist in 2016.” Williams went on to note that if Billington had looked harder, he would have found additional documents, issued in 2019, that said Moses was on probation. Williams conceded that it was “tedious” to find some of that information. “The information that Manager Billington had at the time he signed the Voters Restoration was insufficient to reasonably affirm that an offender was off supervision.” The email says that Moses waited in the lobby of the probation office and seemed impatient while Billington investigated. It does not suggest that Moses bore responsibility for the mistake. “They acknowledged that the mistake was theirs in this letter,” said Blair Bowie, an attorney at the Campaign Legal Center, who is providing information to Moses’ defense on voting rights restoration issues. “This really runs contrary to the prosecution’s characterization of the incident as Ms Moses tricking the probation officer.” Claiborne Ferguson, the attorney who represented Moses during her trial, said he had not seen the email before I showed it to him Wednesday morning. He said it was consistent with Billington’s testimony during Moses’ trial in which he accepted responsibility for the error. Amy Weirich, the district attorney prosecuting the case, declined an interview request. “I gave her a chance to plead to a misdemeanor with no prison time. She requested a jury trial instead. She set this unfortunate result in motion and a jury of her peers heard the evidence and convicted her,” she said in a statement. Any acknowledgment of an error from the probation department is potentially significant because it challenges the argument that Moses knowingly voted illegally, experts said. “Mistake of fact is never a defense. But one of the major exceptions is if you’re relying on someone who is officially responsible for telling you whether you’re breaking the law or not then you’re not guilty of a crime,” Bennett Capers, a former federal prosecutor who is now a law professor at Fordham University, told me. When he sentenced Moses, Ward dismissed the idea that an error by the probation department meant Moses wasn’t guilty of a crime. Such an argument, he said, is like saying “a person who obtains money from a bank by posing as another person is not criminally responsible because the bank should have discovered the fraud and not given the money to the thief.” Steven Mulroy, a law professor at the University of Memphis who specializes in criminal and election law, told me he didn’t think that analogy was appropriate. “She was honest about who she was, and she knew that probation would check her records,” said Mulroy, who is also running for district attorney. “A better analogy would be the central bank branch said she had insufficient funds for a check; she doubted it and thought it might be a mistake. She went to her actual bank branch, who checked their records, said she had sufficient funds, and issued her a money order which she then tried to cash.” After reviewing the email, I asked the department of corrections whether it believed Moses had deceived its employee. An agency spokesperson didn’t answer directly. “I can only say that the officer did not conduct a complete review and should not have signed the form, said Dorinda Carter, a department spokesperson. “Corrective action was taken against the officer who mistakenly completed the form.” Bowie said the case spoke to wider problems with the confusing process people with felonies have to go through to get their voting rights restored. “The cost of those mistakes is always paid by the person trying to restore their voting rights,” she said. Brandon Dill contributed reporting from Memphis Also worth watching … A North Carolina court approved new state legislative maps, as well as a new congressional map for 2022, after the state supreme court struck down GOP-authored plans because they were too gerrymandered. The Pennsylvania supreme court also adopted a new congressional plan. The Texas lieutenant governor, Dan Patrick, caused delays in the processing of absentee ballot requests by telling supporters to send their requests to the state, not local election officials.These dark days got darker. And tonight [22 February], when Jeff [Fielder, Lanegan’s long-term guitarist] called, so thoughtfully, at first I did not believe him. I did not want to believe him. After a time, the tears came. Now leaden body with heart in boots, my world is for ever changed. I hope your final journey after arduous battle was kind and graceful enough, Old Scratch. And I pray grieving loved ones left behind in time are soothed and heal. I will for ever cherish your memory in my heart. People said we were beauty and the beast. Yet I witnessed your beauty and I could frequently inhabit beast. Light and dark. Angel and devil. Of our records, you said you were “happy for me to do the heavy lifting”. Yet you brought my songs to life. Yes, even the so-called “butt naked” ones, with timbre so beautiful. I loved you especially on those. You breathed mystical air into the songs of many, your own, QOTSA; poetic, incessant collaborator, I could not nail you down as I might. There’d be times we’d be offered main stage at a whopping festival and you’d turn me down precisely to play the same festival in the smallest tent. I dared never assume anything about you. You could be intimidating and scary some days and kept me on my toes. And yet we enjoyed appreciation and our time and there was nothing finer or more spiritually rewarding for me than to sing with you. Or hear you sing. Even on the evenings you were jonesing like the roadrunner to get away from the Neumann, out the vocal booth and in front of a Clippers game. Or every night backstage after the ceremonial defluffing of the pants. “Let’s do this!” you’d say. There’d be days in 2006 and 2007 when I’d live in dread of that phone call, or fear switching on the radio to hear the news that was so lovingly delivered tonight. You chose to stay with us back then and that was no small miracle. Said our songs were keeping you alive. I wish they had still. Fifty-seven is too young. Men loved you, women wanted to be with you, but you were more of a big brother to me. And I the tolerated kid sister. You were my study in the great dark man of which, in the words of Quentin, there are none. You were my Heathcliff, my fantasy. I pulled all-nighters in my flat in reclusive monk mode writing songs for you. It was an honour and gift. On producing our records, I was, in your words, a “benevolent dictator”. Though in truth I just could not help or stop myself; you were that inspiring. A bit too young and uncool for grunge, I missed Screaming Trees and Nirvana and all that, but oh boy did I love Bubblegum and I’ll Take Care of You. To play organ for you live on Brook Benton, my heart was zinging! And we would talk about our old bands and all the fighting. And we would laugh. I never bought into the debaucherous rock’n’roll tales of you then, nor can I bear to read headlines now. You were simply my friend. To me and many. You would speak to me of dear ones, like Jeffrey Lee Pierce. When we first spoke, you had written lyrics to accompany my music and sang Why Does My Head Hurt So? down the telephone. You could literally sing the phonebook. When I flew to Los Angeles to finish recording Ballad of the Broken Seas with you, you were out on day release from lockdown rehab and clearly in a lot of pain. And yet I sensed I was the source of great amusement to everyone at the studio, as such an innocent little Scottish pipsqueak, but that was OK. You were one of the funniest people I’ve ever met and also one of the grumpiest, too, which is saying a lot, because I thought I was the grumpiest. Until I met you. You were the most generous tipper. In a diner one day, somewhere in the boonies, you really made the waitresses smile! Backstage somewhere in Berlin, when we were having a share, I was grousing and you said how surprised you were that I wasn’t a junkie. I knew what you meant. Thanks for writing on my birthday last year (for the first time!) and telling me you miss me – which you had said at other times before. Sometimes in the past I felt you indifferent, but I sure miss you too in this strange new world. Have peace now. Be free. See you again for one last concert together in the furnace or sky. Sueños con los angelitos, dear friend, you are loved and missed. • This article was amended on 24 February 2022. It was Jeff Fielder who broke the news of Lanegan’s death to Isobel Campbell, not Jeff Barrett, as an earlier version stated.Unless Andris Nelsons is intending to record “Die Nullte” (the D minor symphony Bruckner composed in 1869 between the first and second numbered works), this will be the final instalment in his cycle with the Leipzig orchestra, which has unfolded in parallel with his Shostakovich series across the Atlantic in Boston. Like the previous instalments, the performances of the First and Fifth Symphonies are taken from concerts in the Gewandhaus over the last three years, and like the previous instalments, too, the set is bulked out with bleeding chunks of Wagner, in this case the Prelude and Liebestod (without the soprano soloist) from Tristan und Isolde. The First Symphony was first performed in 1868, but Bruckner revised the score in the early 1890s, though the changes he made were relatively slight. It’s that final version that Nelsons conducts, and its generally extrovert nature well suits his approach to Bruckner – buoyant and as transparent as the scoring allows. He’s at his most convincing in the outer movements, in which his refusal to over-emphasise any detail and willingness to allow the music to flow as naturally as possible pays dividends. There are moments in the slow movement, though, when he appears to get carried away by the lyrical beauty of the music and the way in which the velvety Gewandhaus strings shape it so that the performance loses direction and, temporarily at least, its focus. Such lapses are an intermittent problem in the great spans of the Fifth Symphony, too, but they do have to be balanced against the sheer beauty of much of the performance; the magical opening bars of the first movement, emerging almost surreptitiously out of silence and steadily coming alive, set the standard of refinement for what follows. Nelsons may downplay the majesty of some of Bruckner’s climaxes, but his view of the work is undeniably an individual one. This week’s other pick Christian Thielemann had hardly completed his Bruckner cycle on DVD and CD with the Dresden Staatskapelle than he began another, this time with the Vienna Philharmonic for Sony Classical, and scheduled to be completed in time for the composer’s bicentenary in two years’ time. The Second is the third symphony to appear, in an account that is as secure and all-embracing as one would expect from a conductor who regards Bruckner as a central pillar of his repertoire, and an orchestra with a peerless pedigree in performing these works. Thielemann’s approach is never heavy-handed or over-emphatic, but its traditional solidity contrasts sharply with Nelsons’ performances, which are, I suspect, ones more likely to convince the Bruckner agnostics.With Vladimir Putin’s invasion of Ukraine under way, the Kremlin’s grip on the gas taps and pipelines that supply heat and electricity to millions of homes and businesses in Europe is all too apparent. Gas is already in tight supply globally and has reached record market price highs in recent months. In the UK, this has triggered an energy crisis, including the collapse of multiple electricity suppliers and a rise in household gas and electricity bills that has contributed to a growing cost-of-living squeeze. That pressure could be about to increase. As Russia began its assault on Ukraine, prices rose again. The UK benchmark was up 32% to 281p per therm on Thursday, while the closely watched Dutch future gained 31% on contracts for March delivery. One analyst predicted UK household energy bills could surge past £3000 later this year. So, could Europe’s energy crisis become a catastrophe? How vulnerable are the UK’s gas supplies? “We must collectively cease the dependence on Russian oil and gas that for too long has given Putin his grip on western politics,” Boris Johnson said on Thursday. The good news, for the UK’s security of supply at least, is that less than 5% of our gas comes from Russian imports. About half comes from vast, though rapidly dwindling, North Sea reserves. Another third is sourced from Norway, while the rest comes in via pipelines connecting the UK to Europe, or in the form of liquefied natural gas (LNG), which is transported by tankers typically from Qatar or the US. All of this means, according to a report by the Oxford Institute of Energy Studies, that Britain is “unlikely to face a physical shortage of supplies”. The bad news is that Russia typically supplies 30-40% of Europe’s gas, meaning it still wields huge influence over prices, which are already eye-wateringly high. The UK’s market is closely connected to markets in Europe, so a price rise in Germany or the Netherlands means British suppliers must pay more to get hold of it. In January, the US bank Goldman Sachs said it expected gas prices to be twice as high as normal until 2025 and that was before Russia launched its attack on Ukraine. On Thursday, analysts at Investec said they believe the gas and electricity price surge of recent days could force the regulator Ofgem to take the household bills price cap “soaring above £3000”, hot on the heels of this month’s 54% increase to £1971. Nor can the UK turn to stored reserves of gas for relief from market prices. Storage capacity is very low by international standards since British Gas’s owner, Centrica, shut down the Rough facility off the coast of Yorkshire. How vulnerable are Europe’s gas supplies? Very. Russian gas flows into Europe via a complex network of pipelines that run through Ukraine, Belarus and Poland to Germany, including Yamal and Nord Stream 1. From Germany, pipelines carry gas to the rest of western Europe and through to the UK. If war in Ukraine were to damage or choke off those supply lines, it could cause severe market volatility and a shutdown of European factories to help conserve gas. “It’s possible to use other routes, particularly the Yamal pipeline through Poland and Germany,” said Michael Bradshaw, professor of global energy at Warwick Business School. “But that depends on Russia being willing to do that.” Does the UK government have a contingency plan? So far, the government has stuck to the line that “thanks to our diverse mix of nuclear, natural gas and renewable technologies, the UK has one of the most reliable energy systems in the world”. But while security of supply does not appear to be at risk, price pressure could have huge ramifications. The efforts of the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, to help households cope with rising costs involves giving them £200 off their energy bills, with this “loan” paid back at a rate of £40 a year over five years from 2023. The idea is that part of the cost is postponed until markets return to normal. If the Ukraine conflict is prolonged, prices could remain higher for longer, meaning bills will still be high when households have to start repaying the government. When it comes to securing alternative supplies, LNG from the US and Qatar is one option. Officials were reportedly in talks late last year with Qatar over a deal that could result in the gas-rich nation supplying extra cargoes of gas in the event of an energy emergency, according to the Financial Times. But the government denied requesting that Qatar act as a “supplier of last resort”. Bradshaw warns that if LNG become a fallback option for Europe and the UK, particularly amid increasing demand for it in Asia, the maths might not add up. “The problem might then be that there isn’t enough LNG to make up for shortage of pipeline gas,” he said. “We’re in uncharted territory.” How high could gas prices climb? At 280p per therm, UK short-term gas prices are already more than seven times higher than this time last year and Tom Marzec-Manser, a senior gas expert at ICIS, thinks they could return to the record levels above 450p, reached in December last year. “I don’t think it’s unreasonable to believe that gas markets could return to the highs we saw late last year if things were to escalate to the point that gas supplies were affected,” Marzec-Manser said. For now, a few lucky breaks have helped to keep soaring gas markets in check, he added. Gas demand in Asia is lower, which allowed Europe to receive a record number of LNG deliveries from January. However, a major gas supply disruption could be enough to cause gas prices to soar back to record levels and the weather is always a factor. “We’ve got to hope we don’t have another cold spell,” said Bradshaw.In the wake of what the Nato secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, described as Russia’s “fully fledged invasion of Ukraine”, the west has to decide how to respond to what France’s Emmanuel Macron has called a turning point in European history. Yet can the west now offer Ukraine more than a mixture of prayers, sanctions and diplomatic demarches? Throughout this conflict western intelligence has shown it has been able to predict Putin’s next step, but less capable of stopping it. Boris Johnson told the Ukrainian people “we are with you”, but what this western solidarity means in practice is now up for debate. The 30-nation Nato alliance will stick to its pledge that it will never send forces to protect Ukraine as a non-Nato member. Backbench Tory calls to give Ukraine air support have no support in Nato. Instead the west will test Russia’s resolve through tough sanctions and by some countries providing arms if there is a resistance. The coordinated sanctions in Washington, London, Berlin and Brussels being announced on Thursday are billed as massive, but Putin sits on a $600bn (£450bn) war chest and will benefit from oil prices soaring past $100 a barrel. That makes him less dependent on the west to raise capital than five years ago, and such is his dominance of the Russian media that the chances of internal protests pressurising, let alone toppling, the 69-year-old president look minimal. The oligarchs may complain if sanctions are placed on them, but Putin is in too deep to retreat. One London-based diplomat said this week after viewing Russia’s televised and cowed national security meeting: “We used to talk about Putin’s inner circle. There is no inner circle. There is only Putin.” Another said: “The only thing that will change Russian public opinion is the mothers of Russia seeing the bodybags.” Nikolai Petrov from the Chatham House thinktank warned “all infrastructure of political opponents and opposition has been destroyed, making it much easier for the Kremlin to to mobilise public opinion”. Dire predictions by the British of Putin being mired in a battlefield quagmire will now be tested. Many Ukrainians appear on western media to attest that Putin has underestimated Ukraine’s will to fight. They insist they will not tolerate a puppet government loyal to Moscow. But the long queues of traffic fleeing Kyiv in the westward direction speaks to another story. It is as likely that Ukraine’s prisons will be filled with dissidents. In the short term there will be a debate, including in Germany, about whether to arm the resistance, with some Green party and CDU leaders already advocating this. The German foreign minister, Annalena Baerbock, at the weekend said this was not the moment for Germany to make a 180-degree turn on such a strategic policy. Yet the debate is live. The former German defence minister Annegret Kramp-Karrenbauer said: “I’m so angry at us for historically failing. After Georgia, Crimea and Donbas, we have not prepared anything that would have really deterred Putin.” Keir Giles, also from Chatham House, urged the west to be cautious. “Looking at Russia’s 100% success record on suppressing resistance movements in territories it has occupied – often using medieval levels of savagery and inflicting terror on the civilian population – we ask what would aid to a resistance achieve and would it make the situation better worse or better.” The images of destruction in Aleppo, Grozny and Afghanistan show how merciless the Russian military can be. Stoltenberg has said that it is a matter for individual nations to decide the help they provide to any resistance. But the risks are high. In his speech announcing the invasion, Putin warned outsiders tempted to interfere that there would be “consequences you have never encountered in your history” – a chilling veiled reference to nuclear war. There is also a danger that an insurgency would exacerbate a refugee crisis likely to be triggered across central Europe. Plans are in infancy in the EU’s Frontex border agency to prepare for the arrival of hundreds of thousands of refugees. Some diplomats are optimistic that, unlike with Syria in 2015, there will not be a political backlash, pointing out many Ukrainians have already been welcomed to Europe. As many as 15,000 Ukrainians already live in Berlin. But autocrats have learned that refugees are weapons of war. The British foreign secretary, Liz Truss, has clearly indicated that there is a serious risk that Putin, judging by his words, will not stop at Ukraine, but wants to restore Russia’s empire, and remove western forces from all former Warsaw pact countries. Ben Wallace, the defence secretary, said Putin had gone “full tonto”, and almost every western politician who returned from Moscow was disturbed by his demeanour and inability to focus on realistic solutions to the crisis. It means once Ukraine is swallowed by Putin, Russia will be able to station forces – land, air and missile – in bases in western Ukraine as well as Belarus, which has effectively lost independence. He may not invade the Baltic states, but he is in a better strategic position to demand a retreat by Nato to Warsaw pact boundaries and a land corridor through Poland to link Kaliningrad, the headquarters of the Russian Baltic fleet. It will mean high defence spending, less dependence on Russian energy and more troops on Nato’s frontiers. Finland and Sweden may seek to join Nato. If Putin wanted less Nato, he may get more. Finally, the west has to confront questions about the validity of the whole postwar diplomatic security architecture. On Wednesday night UN diplomats gathered to condemn Russia at an emergency meeting, one chaired by Russia, this month’s presidents of the UN security council. It symbolised the degree to which the UN has become utterly compromised. But there may have been one diplomatic voice in New York that will disturb the west most – that of the Chinese envoy. In his brief remarks he remained studiously on the fence, refusing to condemn Russia and knowing the west’s anguish may provide it with nothing but opportunities ahead.Women in England will be able to access abortion pills more easily for the next six months, but the temporary “pills by post” scheme brought in because of Covid will then be scrapped in September. Maggie Throup, the public health minister, confirmed on Thursday that women seeking to terminate a pregnancy by taking the two pills involved at home would lose that right at the end of August. Abortion law was amended in March 2020, as the coronavirus pandemic was unfolding, to allow women in England to be sent and take both pills at home instead of having to take the first at a clinic or hospital. The change was introduced at a time when much NHS care was being disrupted to ensure that women seeking a termination could still get one without needing to go to a health facility. In a written ministerial statement Throup said the arrangements that were due to end next month would be extended until midnight on 29 August. But she added: “The government will end the temporary approval put in place at the beginning of the pandemic that allows women to take both pills for early medical abortion up to 10 weeks gestation at home.” The pre-pandemic system will return from 1 September. It required women who had decided to have an early medical abortion to have an initial consultation with a clinician and take the first pill in a healthcare setting before being able to take the second one at home. However, Wales announced it was taking a different approach, giving women a permanent right to take both pills at home. “I am satisfied that the arrangements are safe and bring significant benefits to women and girls who wish to access abortion services, with reduced waiting times enabling them to access the help they need more quickly than would have been possible under the previous arrangements,” said Eluned Morgan, the health minister in the Welsh government. “The benefits to the NHS are also significant, with a reduced number of appointments being required.” Doctors, midwives, pro-choice groups and abortion providers want the government to continue letting women in England take both pills at home. They include the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists, the British Medical Association (BMA) and the Royal College of Midwives. The British Pregnancy Advisory Service (BPAS) has called that scheme a “safe, effective and world-leading service” and warned of “disastrous” consequences for women if it was axed in September. “If at the end of this six-month period the government were indeed to revoke legal permission for this service it would be a shameful betrayal of women and a decision devoid of both evidence or justice,” said Clare Murphy, the BPAS chief executive. Ending telemedical abortion care “would force vulnerable women in the most difficult if circumstances, who cannot access in-clinic treatment, to resort to illegal methods again and face criminal sanctions as a result” for buying pills illegally online, added Murphy. Procuring an abortion or helping someone have one remains a criminal offence despite the Abortion Act 1967. Requests from women in the UK to buy pills online has fallen by 88% since the scheme began in 2020, research shows. Dr Zoe Greaves, the chair of the BMA’s medical ethics committee, said the decision “puts the wellbeing and safety of women at risk. Those most affected by this change will be those who are at greatest risk of harm, including women who are victims of sexual violence or domestic abuse and the financially vulnerable. “It is a decision which puts politics before women’s health.” Robert Winston, the fertility pioneer, has urged ministers to continue with the scheme, saying home abortions are safe and make it easier for women to have an early termination. Throup said the decision to scrap the scheme in September would be kept under review. But sources at the Department of Health and Social Care indicated they would resist pressure to make the pills-at-home scheme permanent. The Society for the Protection of the Unborn Child, an anti-choice group, said that letting women receive abortion drugs without an in-person consultation was “reckless and deadly”. The future of the scheme has reportedly led to disagreements involving ministers and civil servants. Lord Kamall, the technology minister, recently called it “this difficult decision”.On Saturday night, flushed with the glow of the stunning 3-2 win at Manchester City, Antonio Conte declared that his Tottenham players were the best group he had worked with in terms of attitude. On Tuesday lunchtime, the manager cut a relaxed and contented figure at a media briefing, suggesting that his relentless messaging about mentality, the need to suffer, to live and breathe the job – particularly the lows – were getting through. To those in attendance, it seemed like a turning point in Conte’s near four-month tenure. After the home Premier League losses to Southampton and Wolves, a penny had dropped with the players and Conte wanted to throw all his energy behind the shift in momentum. Now this. On the stereotypical miserable night at Burnley on Wednesday, Spurs and Conte reverted to type; the team following a thrilling high with another fist-eatingly frustrating defeat – their fourth in five league games, going back to the one at Chelsea on 23 January – and Conte overcome by darkness and rage. Perhaps it was the pre-match hope that made it even worse but, in a remarkable display of soul-baring, Conte said that he could not go on this way. He would not close his eyes and continue to collect his massive salary while sure-footed strides forward proved elusive. “Maybe in this moment … I don’t know … I’m not so good to improve the situation,” he said. It was the latest in a long line of eruptions and the first thing to say is that Conte has form for being extremely outspoken after matches, when he feels the blood run hot. It has tended to be after losses – remember NS Mura in the Europa Conference League or the first leg of the Carabao Cup semi-final at Chelsea – but, in a sense, he did something similar after the win against City, going over the top in the other direction. Conte will surely calm down. The wild swings are a part of him. That was the hope at Spurs on Thursday and he is due to face the media as normal on Friday afternoon. Yet there was something else about his Burnley meltdown, something new and troubling. It was the pronounced sense of helplessness, the resignation. As always in these situations, given Conte’s reputation as the arch politician, it is tempting to wonder what he is trying to leverage. Previously, leading up to and during the January transfer window, there was the feeling or fear that if Conte did not get the signings he wanted, he could quit. But what now? January did not go as Conte would have wanted, with the club missing out on their priority targets: Adama Traoré went to Barcelona and Luis Díaz joined Liverpool. They were able to shed a clutch of unwanted players, chiefly Tanguy Ndombele, Giovani Lo Celso, Bryan Gil and Dele Alli, and they added Rodrigo Bentancur and Dejan Kulusevski to make the squad “more complete” – in Conte’s words. But January has gone and the summer is a long way away. It feels a little early for Conte to begin applying the pressure for the grander rebuild (although far from inconceivable that he would do so) and it is simply on him to work with what he has got for the final three months of the season. Is Conte nervous that he does not have enough? Yes. It is probably the main driver behind his outburst at Burnley because do not read too much into him turning the mirror to face himself. He does not doubt his own ability. He never will. It is not him, it is them. The players have to dig deeper. Conte has said that the prospective manager of a club can make his assessments from the outside but there is no substitute for seeing the players on the training pitch. It is when the truth presents itself and Conte appears to have realised pretty quickly that the technical levels of those he inherited was rather lower than he had hoped for. Even when the team went unbeaten in his first nine league games, winning six, he warned that they had struggled repeatedly. Conte’s biggest problem and the one that has led to the greatest friction with the board is the speed at which he and they would like to drive the squad from the current transitional period. It is similar to the one that Mauricio Pochettino found upon his arrival as the manager in 2014; there will be bumps in terms of results. Conte wants finished article signings, experienced players to make an immediate difference – which is expensive – but, so far, he has been given a couple of prospects in Bentancur and Kulusevski, albeit decent ones. In all honesty, what did Conte expect? Under Daniel Levy, Spurs have always sought to be shrewd in the market, taking players with the potential to develop over a longer period. The issue of whether the notoriously demanding and impatient Conte would be a fit for Spurs has always hung over his appointment. There has been the feeling for some weeks that Conte might not last beyond the summer transfer window. The potential for conflict over signings and squad reshaping is high. Could Conte walk out before then? The threat has never been greater and yet he has to know that his reputation would not escape damage were he to do so. It would be a dereliction. So far at Spurs, his scorched earth style has had mixed results and, to some people, he went too far at Burnley. It is not just them. It has to be him, too.Michael Molineaux, who has died aged 62 of a cardiac arrest, was an independent man of great integrity and principle. As a lawyer, he was admired and respected for his intelligent and perspicacious mind, and renowned for solving the most complex problems. Born in Blenheim, New Zealand, he was the youngest of three children of Barbara (nee Kirby), and Paul Molineaux, a judge. As a small boy, Michael was mischievous, testing boundaries and needing to understand how everything worked. Toys and mechanical objects were frequently taken apart and sometimes reassembled. The family moved to Western Samoa in the 1960s when Michael’s father was appointed attorney general there. Returning to New Zealand, Michael attended Medbury school and then Christ College, both in Christchurch. Outside school, Paul introduced Michael and his brother, Chris, to fly-fishing – a gift from their father that would remain with them for their entire lives. Michael was an exceptionally gifted student and sportsman. Aged 16, he went to the University of Canterbury, Christchurch, gaining an MSc in engineering geology (1984). He gained a master’s in soil mechanics from Imperial College London (1986). Unconventionally at the time, Michael then turned his mind to law, doing a conversion course and law finals, then a master’s in law at Queen Mary and Westfield College in London. He practised as an intellectual property lawyer at Allen &amp; Overy (1991-99), where he and I met (I am also an IP lawyer), and we became life partners. In 2001 he became a partner of the law firm Haarmann Hemmelrath, then head of intellectual property for Marconi (later part of Ericsson) from 2005-09. Michael loved travelling and experiencing different cultures. In the 90s he was part of an Operation Raleigh expedition engaged in an engineering project in Zimbabwe. He also travelled extensively in Sri Lanka. Spiritually, he read widely and developed an interest in Buddhism – he had taken Buddhism apart in his head, put it back together and it made sense to him. We lived in Wandsworth, south London, before relocating to Basel, Switzerland, in 2010. Michael was a warm, generous and highly intelligent man, who thought deeply about all matters. He needed to understand how it all worked. Always with a twinkle in his eye, he had a wonderful sense of humour. He is survived by me and by his sister, Janet. His brother, Chris, died shortly after Michael.One of the side effects of watching a recent history true-scam show like Super Pumped, the high-octane, wearisome Showtime anthology series whose first season tracks the rise and fall of Uber’s disgraced CEO, Travis Kalanick, is to wonder in every scene: did this really happen? Or, in the case of Super Pumped specifically: is this dialogue heavily embellished or do tech CEOs flying too close to the sun on a jetstream of cash just sound this deranged? Kalanick, played with gusto by Joseph Gordon-Levitt, is a ball of jumpy, narcissistic energy who speaks in comically grandiose terms. “We fuck the status quo, alright?” he says to his staff. He spins a cease and desist order from the city of San Francisco as “VALIDATION OF OUR STATUS OF DISRUPTORS”, in a shouted speech to the whole office. He draws a huge smiley face on the order with red Sharpie, because “WE ARE IN THE WORLD-CHANGING BUSINESS!” Super Pumped: The Battle for Uber, from Billions co-creators Brian Koppelman and David Levien and based on the book of the same name by New York Times tech reporter Mike Isaac, resembles that gleeful, Sharpied kiss-off. The eight-part series paints a stark portrait of Silicon Valley greed, carelessness and win-at-all-costs betrayals with winking, ambitious flourishes – baroque gamesmanship, ample profanity, fourth-wall breaking, gonzo explainers (the whole palette borrows heavily from Adam McKay’s the Big Short). Quentin Tarantino serves as a discordant, sparsely used narrator. Venture capitalists mull over pitches with anvil-heavy lines like “a unicorn will take flight in this sector”. But the confident style feels, as the show draws on, paper thin, adding little to what is already known about people who would do anything for profit. Super Pumped loosely traces the genuinely wild rise of Uber, founded in 2009 by Garrett Camp (Jon Bass) and Kalanick, but its real emotional arc, so much as one exists, is Kalanick’s tempestuous relationship with investor/mentor Bill Gurley, played with a laconic Texas drawl by everyman actor Kyle Chandler (think Coach Taylor, but a billionaire). Gurley meets Kalanick as he’s still licking his wounds from a past start-up failure, leaning heavily on his mom Bonnie (Elisabeth Shue, too young for the role) and starter girlfriend Angie (Annie Chang). Gurley is skeptical of Kalanick’s bombast (in one the show’s more effective flourishes, enactments of Kalanick’s embellishments fade to green screen, then a recounting of the the unflattering, mundane truth.) But he’s sold on Uber’s potential, thus funding an accelerating merry-go-round of aggressive growth, scandal, weaseling out of said scandal, repeat. In the five episodes available for review, Super Pumped rifles through Uber’s many PR debacles: the “boob-er” comment, the undisclosed spying on drivers, the dubious finances; the time senior executive Emil Michael (Babak Tafti) floated the idea of surveilling critical journalists; Uber’s toxic culture of sexism and sexual harassment exposed by Susan Fowler’s (Eva Victor) viral 2017 blog post and subsequent memoir, Whistleblower, relayed in fourth wall-breaking narrative. Same for the video of a belligerent Kalanick arguing with Uber driver Fawzi Kamel (Mousa Hussein Kraish, one of the only drivers depicted in the series) in 2017. It’s a quirk of timing that Super Pumped premieres within the same month as Netflix’s Inventing Anna, on “Soho grifter” Anna Delvey; Apple’s WeCrashed, on the rise and fall of WeWork; and Hulu’s The Dropout, on Theranos and convicted fraudster Elizabeth Holmes. All four series tackle highly publicized scandals of the mid-2010s that fall somewhere on the continuum of ruthless capitalism to full-scale scam. The appeal of all of these headline-to-screen shows is the chance to see known facts glossed and dramatized with celebrities, to have insight into the whims of the ultra-rich, and to enter the board rooms we otherwise would not have access to. On that count, Super Pumped mostly delivers. The episodes are stuffed with the bread and butter of building a Silicon Valley unicorn, compulsively rendered in the language of war to the point of redundancy: battles (competition) and armies (drivers) and weapons (illegal surveillance); deals made, rejected, or outright sabotaged by Kalanick’s egomaniacal whims. As Uber grows and disrupts, it courts ever stronger enemies: taxi and livery groups, transportation departments, international governments and a who’s who of real-life Silicon Valley figures played for no more than name recognition, with the unfortunate exception of Uber board member Arianna Huffington (Uma Thurman, a cringey caricature of the HuffPost founder.) At its best, Super Pumped pokes at the dubious ethics of Silicon Valley – even the guys ostensibly trying to do the right thing, such as Gurley’s determination to allow drivers to collect tips, are ultimately focused on the bottom line. But it’s a discordant, tiring watch. The show’s imitation of the “no bullshit” obscenity of bro-y Silicon Valley, in both language and style (boardroom dynamics rendered as a video game smackdown, for example) wears to the point of parody, and begins to undermine its critique. The same dynamic plays on repeat: Kalanick is aggressive and uncompromising; Gurley tries to rein him in; Kalanick mostly wins, somehow; the drivers, mostly offscreen with the exception of Kamel, lose. Presumably, the end of the season will depict Kalanick’s 2017 ouster in a board coup led by Gurley. The road to that breakdown will likely prompt many a google search, but as a series of recreations, Super Pumped buys into the same view of business as Uber: a game to be won or lost, with a trail of destruction in its wake. Super Pumped: The Battle for Uber starts on Showtime on 27 February with a UK date to be announcedThe US high school musical has become something of a phenomenon and this one has many of the elements you might expect. A sexual awakening? Check. Cheerleaders? Check. A boy-meets-girl romance? Well, not exactly. Adapted from the 1999 film of the same name, the story follows Megan, the head cheerleader who appears to have it all. She’s popular, smart and has an American football-playing boyfriend. “Being 17 is swell,” she sings. But when her friends and parents suspect she is a lesbian, they ship her off to True Directions, a rehabilitation camp to get her back on “the straight and narrow,” where her future starts to become less clear. Alice Croft gives a stellar performance as Megan. Twee and unassuming, she is initially reluctant to accept her sexuality. “I can’t be a lesbian, I’m a cheerleader,” she squeals to the audience’s delight. Her singing, at first aptly syrupy sweet, really starts to show its range in the second act. As she discovers her “new colours”, impressive belted high notes bolt out of her as if desperate to be released. The cast of 12 could benefit from a little more space than they have on the relatively small stage at the Turbine. Squashed together on David Shields’s pink Barbie dreamhouse-like set, they quickly change costumes, multi-role and dance to the highest quality – but all their hard work appears a little rushed with so much for them to carry. Too many indistinguishable, repetitive scenes mean that the musical doesn’t reach its potential. There are a few standout numbers: the song Step 2: Pink and Blue has a catchy chorus with some amusing choreography where the students are forced to learn a physicality for their birth genders. But the slower ballads written by Bill Augustin and Andrew Abrams are forgettable and hamper the pace of an already lengthy musical. Still, this is a story that deserves attention. Gay conversion practices continue to be legal in the UK. Although the musical is rooted firmly in comedy, it shines a light on the horrors of such unethical treatments. And entertaining it certainly is. Performed by a cast with boundless talent, you can’t help but want to cheer. • But I’m a Cheerleader: The Musical is at the Turbine theatre, London, until 16 April.OH TOTTENHAM, HOW COULD YOU (PART MLVII) The Fiver, wise beyond its beers, realised a long time ago that nothing good could come from us reaching for unattainably high standards, which is to say high standards. Pep Guardiola is not like that, and that’s his problem. The Catalan comes across as one of those perfectionists to whom the slightest flaw in his work triggers agonising reflections, leaving him Edvard Munching into the bathroom mirror, screaming like a pained circus oddity. So just imagine how Guardiola suffers from reminders that Manchester City’s bogey team are Tottenham Honking Hotspur, for goodness sake. On Wednesday Guardiola had to watch Liverpool demolish both Leeds United and the small goal difference advantage that City had enjoyed over their closest rivals as Jürgen Klopp’s team pulled to within three points at the top of the table. But the most galling result for Guardiola came at Turf Moor, where the Ben Mee Team fought for a precious victory that underlined the absurdity of Spurs’ win at City last weekend. As the scoreline flashed up on the screen, you could easily picture Guardiola turning to his £100m gardener, Jack Grealish, and pleading with him to make it all make sense. Of course, Guardiola was not the only manager driven to distraction after Spurs’ latest Spursiness. The London troupe’s own ringmaster, Antonio Conte, was so bewildered that he found himself questioning everything he thought he knew about himself, football and stereotypes about temperamental sorts. “No one deserves this type of situation,” whimpered Conte to English media a week after complaining that interviews translated from Italian media often tended to make him seem like a fickle galoot. “I came in to try to improve the situation in Tottenham but maybe in this moment, I don’t know, I’m not so good to improve the situation,” he continued. “I’m trying to do everything to change the situation but the situation is not changing,” he waahed before intimating that he may be prepared to flee Spurs if something or other doesn’t change. “Someone has to speak about the race for the fourth place, and the reality from the last five games is we have to pay attention to not fight for the relegation zone. This is the truth. This is the reality. When this type of situation happens, maybe there is something wrong. I don’t want to close my eyes, I want to take my responsibility, if I have the responsibility. I am open, I am open for every decision because I want to help Tottenham. From the first day I arrived here I want to help Tottenham. I repeat: I am too honest to close my eyes and continue in this way, and also take my salary. But it’s not right in this moment.” LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE Join Simon Burnton from 5.45pm (GMT) for hot Big Vase clockwatch coverage, while Paul Doyle will be on hand at 7.45pm for Arsenal 1-1 Wolves. QUOTE OF THE DAY “It is maybe a little bit of a surprise that I have come in, but do not be put off by that. I am here for a reason: to make Bradford City a team people want to come and watch – and are proud to watch” – Ailsa from Home and Away is back, baby. Despite having never managed outside the Premier League, he takes over at Valley Parade with the team 15th in League Two. FIVER LETTERS “Would Danny Hylton and Cameron Jerome scoring for Luton at Stoke have the oldest combined age of any two goalscorers for a Championship side? Jerome is 35, Hylton 32, making them 67 years young. They certainly made the evening worthwhile for Mark Crowther, who’s cycling to every Luton away game this season for charity. Just the 111 miles in seven-and-a-half hours yesterday” – Yvonne Fletcher. “As a fellow Sunderland fan, reading Matt McILraith’s comments on Meikayla Moore’s own-goal hat-trick (Tuesday’s Fiver letters) brought back, again, our similar nightmare. In 2003, Sunderland scored four goals against Charlton, yet we lost 3-1. We scored three own goals in only seven minutes. And, looking at our current position, it has gone downhill since then” – Phil Davison. “Jack Wilshere going back to Arsenal as coach after proving himself an Aarhus legend (yesterday’s News, Bits and Bobs) would surely warrant a Fiver name of Jack Wilshere’s Aarsenal?” – Gerry Rickard. “Being from the USA! USA!! USA!!! and also being quite old and decrepit (64), I have never heard of Wolf Alice (yesterday’s last line). I have decided I kind of like them. Always come to The Fiver for the jokes (?), stay for the music recommendations” – Joe Pearson. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Phil Davison. RECOMMENDED LISTENING Fear not, Football Weekly Extra is here for you. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS Uefa will move this season’s Big Cup final from St Petersburg, with an extraordinary meeting called for Friday to confirm Russia is being stripped of the showpiece following the invasion of Ukraine. Labour MP Chris Bryant has told parliament that Chelsea owner Roman Abramovich was identified by the Home Office in 2019 as having links to the Russian state as well as to “corrupt activity and practices”, suggesting the UK should seize his assets. Schalke will remove sponsor Gazprom from their shirts. “It will be replaced by lettering reading ‘Schalke 04’ instead,” said the Bundesliga club. Benfica’s Roman Yaremchuk has been showing off a Ukrainian coat of arms after scoring the equaliser in their 2-2 Big Cup draw with Ajax. “This is our country, our history, our culture, our people and our borders,” he said. “I would like to thank our defenders for their courage. Glory to Ukraine.” Manchester United are counting their Anthony Elangas again after he salvaged a 1-1 Big Cup draw at Atlético Madrid. “I told you how calm and cool I am, and whenever I am given an opportunity I want to repay the manager,” he roared. “We played without conviction, without aggression and that is why we were struggling,” wailed Ralf Rangnick. Diogo Jota has recovered from ankle-knack but Roberto Firmino’s abductor-gah will rule him out of Liverpool’s Milk Cup final with Chelsea. England’s Women are celebrating winning Le Arnold Clark Tournoi after beating Germany 3-1. “We got lots of information about ourselves and where we are in our style of play,” cheered coach Sarina Wiegman. And Peterborough have appointed Grant McCann as manager for the second time, with his first match against Hull, who unceremoniously dumped him earlier this month. STILL WANT MORE? Is it OK to laugh at a player scoring a hat-trick of own goals? Max Rushden grapples with his conscience. Suzanne Wrack and Louise Taylor pick over the lessons learned from England’s Arnold Clark Cup triumph. Sid Lowe on a rare unsuccessful outing for Cristiano Ronaldo against Atlético in Big Cup. Tom Bogert profiles Charlotte FC, the newest team in MLS. There’s nothing wrong with grown adults wearing replica shirts, reckons John Earls. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! GET ON THISWhen they opened nearly 250 years ago the town’s church bells rang out, the local militia fired their field guns in salute and about 30,000 awestruck spectators turned up to cheer. Today the Grade I-listed Bingley Five Rise Locks in West Yorkshire are still considered one of the true wonders of Britain’s waterways and can, thanks to a major restoration project, carry on lifting boats up and down the Leeds to Liverpool canal for years to come. Workers have spent the last month replacing the giant gates at two of the five locks. At 7 metres’ tall and weighing six tonnes, they are among the tallest lock gates in the UK. They form part of the steepest flight of locks in Britain. There is a magic about them, said the former lock keeper Richard Moore, part of the team restoring the site. “When you’re at the top looking down it does look huge, it looks scary,” Moore said. “But it’s only a 60ft rise really. It is just so impressive in terms of the engineering and the scale. It is a beautiful thing. When you see people’s reactions going in … it’s like a fair ride.” For many it is daunting but lots of help is always on hand. No narrowboat can go through the locks without a lock keeper, and even though they have taken down the “you must obey the lock keeper at all times” sign, people are still expected to follow instructions. It can take 30 minutes to get a boat down the locks and 45 minutes to get up. At busy times there are queues, the result being sometimes that if a boat arrives in the afternoon it might not get through until the next day. The new lock gates have been hand-crafted using traditional methods at the Canal and River Trust’s specialist workshops at Stanley Ferry in Yorkshire. The locks are considered one of the greatest feats of canal engineering of their day and are Grade I-listed, the same as York Minster – only 2.5% of listed buildings are Grade I. They sit on a waterway that was once one of England’s most important transport links. In the 18th century when the canal arrived in your town or village it was something to celebrate, said William Froggatt, a heritage adviser to the trust. “What tended to happen was the price of coal went down significantly and in those days coal was the thing – you cooked your food, you heated your house … industry was increasingly using coal. A boat could carry 40 tonnes of coal as opposed to a horse and cart which could perhaps carry one tonne. “The canal was a cause for celebration anyway but a structure like this would have been out of anybody’s experience.” They were – and remain – quite something to see close up. When they opened in March 1774 a report in the Leeds Intelligencer said the locks were among “the noblest works of the kind that perhaps are to be found, in the same extent in the universe”. The lock repairs are part of the charity’s wider £55m winter restoration programme across the 2,000-mile network of historic canals and rivers. “I think these things are worth preserving and maintaining not just because they exist, but because people built them whose names in the main we’ve forgotten,” said Froggatt. “I think it is worth it in their memory as much as anything else. We are respecting their work and I hope people will respect our work in 100 years’ time.”The loss of a loved one can have a profound impact on humans, affecting everything from sleep patterns to appetite. Now researchers say they have found similar behaviour changes in dogs who have lost a canine companion. While the team say it is not clear if the findings can be described as grief, they say the work potentially indicates an overlooked welfare issue. Dr Federica Pirrone of the University of Milan, who is one of the study’s authors, said: “Dogs are highly emotional animals who develop very close bonds with the members of the familiar group. This means that they may be highly distressed if one of them dies and efforts should be made to help them cope with this distress.” Expressions of grief are not unique to humans: great apes, dolphins, elephants and birds are among species that have been observed to take part in rituals around death and appear to mourn. Writing in the journal Scientific Reports, Pirrone and colleagues describe how they analysed the responses of 426 Italian adults who completed a “mourning dog questionnaire” online to investigate how canines experience grief. All of the participants had experienced the loss of one of their dogs while at least one other dog was still alive, and the questionnaire looked at the behaviour and emotions of the owner and their surviving dogs after the death. The results reveal that 86% of owners said their surviving dogs had shown behavioural changes after the death of another canine in the household. Pirrone said: “Overall, dogs were reported to play and eat less, sleep more and seek more for owners’ attention.” She said the results did not appear to be affected by the level of attachment between the owner and their dog or whether they humanised their pets, suggesting the owners were not simply projecting their grief. The team said the changes did not turn out to be linked to how long the dogs had lived together or whether the surviving dogs had seen the corpse. The researchers said there were a number of possible explanations for the findings, including that the death may have disrupted shared behaviours for the surviving dogs. “In support of this hypothesis we found that if dogs used to share food during life, the surviving dog was more likely to reduce her/his level of activities and sleep more after the loss,” the authors wrote. The results also revealed behavioural changes were stronger for dogs that were reported to have had a friendly relationship with the animal that had died, or who had been their parent or offspring. “Most likely this means that the surviving dog has lost an attachment figure, who provided safety and security,” said Pirrone. Human emotions may also play a role: increases in the surviving dogs’ levels of fear and a reduction in food consumption were associated with greater suffering, anger and psychological trauma in the owners in response to the death. “This means that there might have been some form of emotional contagion or of social transmission of fear, that is common in social species as part of an adaptive coping strategy with potentially dangerous circumstances,” said Pirrone. The team said, however, the finding could also be linked to owners’ perceptions of the surviving dogs’ behaviour or emotions. Pirrone said the definition of “grief” in dogs, as for young children, was not straightforward. “Dogs do form emotional bonds, and hence the loss of a companion animal in their household can be expected to cause behavioural changes, like those we recorded in our study, which overlap what we normally interpret as being grief and mourning,” she said. “Of course, based on our results we still cannot tell whether these dogs were responding only to the ‘loss’of an affiliate, or to their ‘death’ per se.” Prof Samantha Hurn, a social anthropologist at the University of Exeter, said it was important to understand what a dog may experience upon the death of a canine companion, but added the study had limitations, including that owners were not always good at reading dog behaviour, while the use of questionnaires involving scales for such a subjective issue may limit the conclusions that can be drawn. She said: “In the course of my own research I have experienced many dogs and other animals behaving in very different ways, but ways which nonetheless suggested to me that they were emotionally impacted by the death of a close companion.”We must do what we can to contain Vladimir Putin’s aggression in Ukraine. But we also need to be clear-eyed about it, and face the costs. Economics can’t be separated from politics, and neither can be separated from history. Here are eight sobering realities: 1. Will the economic sanctions now being put into effect stop Putin from seeking to take over all of Ukraine? No. They will complicate Russia’s global financial transactions but they will not cripple the Russian economy. After Russia annexed Ukraine’s Crimean peninsula in 2014, the US and its allies imposed economic sanctions which slowed the Russian economy temporarily, but Russia soon rebounded. Since then, Russia has taken steps to lessen its reliance on foreign debt and investment, which means that similar sanctions will have less effect. In addition, the rise of cryptocurrencies and other digital assets allow Russia to bypass bank transfers, which are the control points for sanctions. Bottom line: the sanctions already imposed or threatened could reduce Russia’s gross domestic product, but only by a few percentage points. 2. What sort of sanctions would seriously damage Russia? Sanctions on Russia’s enormous oil and gas exports could cause substantial harm. Russia produces 10 million barrels of oil a day, which is about 10 percent of global demand. It ranks third in world oil production (behind the United States and Saudi Arabia). It ranks second in natural gas (behind the US), according to the US Energy Information Administration. 3. Then why not impose sanctions on them? Because that would seriously harm consumers in Europe and the US – pushing up energy prices and worsening inflation (now running at 7.5% annually in the US, a 40-year high). Although the US imports very little Russian oil or natural gas, oil and natural gas markets are global – which means shortages that push up prices in one part of the world will have similar effects elsewhere. The price of oil in the US is already approaching $100 a barrel, up from about $65 a year ago. The price of gas at the pump is averaging $3.53 a gallon, according to AAA. For most Americans, that gas-pump price is the single most important indicator of inflation, not just because they fuel their cars with gas but because the cost is emblazoned in big numbers outside every gas station in America. (The biggest beneficiaries of these price increases, by the way: energy companies like Halliburton, Occidental Petroleum and Schlumberger, which are now leading the S&amp;P 500. Anyone in favor of putting a windfall profits tax on them?) 4. Will stronger sanctions weaken Putin’s control over Russia? Possibly. But they could also have the opposite effect – enabling Putin to fuel Russia’s suspicions toward the west and stir up even more Russian nationalism. The harshest US measures would cause the average Russian to pay higher prices for food and clothing or devalue pensions and savings accounts because of a crash in the ruble or Russian markets, but these might be seen as necessary sacrifices that rally Russians around Putin. 5. Any other foreign policy consequences we should be watching? In a word: China. Russia’s concern about the west has already led to a rapprochement with China. A strong alliance between the two most powerful world autocracies could be worrisome. 6. What about domestic politics here in the US? Foreign policy crises tend to drive domestic policy off the headlines, and weaken reform movements. Putin’s aggression in Ukraine has already quieted conversations in America about voting rights, filibuster reform, and Build Back Better – at least for now. Large-scale war, if it ever comes to that, deadens reform. The first world war brought the progressive era to a halt. The second ended FDR’s New Deal. Vietnam stopped Lyndon Johnson’s Great Society. Wars and the threat of wars also legitimate huge military expenditures and giant military bureaucracies. America is already spending $776bn a year on the military, a sum greater than the next 10 giant military powers (including Russia and China) together. Wars also create fat profits for big corporations in war industries. The possibility of war also distracts the public from failures of domestic politics, as the Spanish-American war did for President William McKinley and the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq did for George W Bush. (Hopefully, Biden’s advisers aren’t thinking this way.) 7. Could the sanctions lead to real war between Russia and the west? Unlikely. Americans don’t want Americans to die in order to protect Ukraine (most Americans don’t even know where Ukraine is, let alone our national interest in protecting it). And neither Russia nor the US wants to be annihilated in a nuclear holocaust. But international crises such as this one always run the risk of getting out of hand. Russia and the US have giant stockpiles of nuclear weapons. What if one is set off accidentally? More likely: what if Russia cyber-attacks the US, causing massive damage to US utilities, communications, banks, hospitals, and transportation networks here? What if Russian troops threaten Nato members along Ukraine’s borders? Under these conditions, might the US be willing to commit ground troops? Those who have fought ground and air wars know war is hell. Subsequent generations tend to forget. By the eve of the first world war, many in America and Britain spoke of the glories of large-scale warfare because so few remembered actual warfare. Today, most Americans have no direct experience of war. Afghanistan and Iraq were abstractions for most of us. Vietnam has faded from our collective memory. 8. What is Putin really after? Not just keeping Ukraine out of Nato, because Nato itself isn’t Putin’s biggest worry. After all, Hungary and Poland are Nato members but are governed in ways that resemble Russia more than western democracies. Putin’s real fear is liberal democracy, which poses a direct threat to authoritarian “strongmen” like him (just as it did to Donald Trump). Putin wants to keep liberal democracy far away from Russia. Putin’s means of keeping western liberal democracy at bay isn’t just to invade Ukraine, of course. It’s also to stoke division inside the west by fueling racist nationalism in western Europe and the United States. In this, Trump and Trumpism continue to be Putin’s most important ally. Robert Reich, a former US secretary of labor, is professor of public policy at the University of California at Berkeley and the author of Saving Capitalism: For the Many, Not the Few and The Common Good. His new book, The System: Who Rigged It, How We Fix It, is out now. He is a Guardian US columnist. His newsletter is at robertreich.substack.comThe Co-operative Bank has more than tripled its bonus pot for bankers after a “milestone year” that resulted in its first profit in a decade. The ethical lender, which has struggled to turn a profit since 2011, announced it was paying bankers a total of £13.3m in bonuses for 2021, compared with a £4.2m bonus pot shared among its more than 3,200 staff in 2020. Its chief executive, Nick Slape, who is the sixth boss to run the bank over the past nine years, said the payouts were “completely appropriate” given the lender’s return to profit. “There’s been a huge amount of effort 24/7 to make this happen, so I think is appropriate,” he said. “The bar has been set for 2022, and if we don’t deliver … then that won’t be the sort of number you see [next year].” Slape took home a bonus worth nearly £1.2m, bringing his total pay to £2.4m for 2021. The bank’s annual pre-tax profit of £31m, up from a £104m loss in 2020, marks the first time it reported a profit since 2011, when its earnings were £54m. The bank benefited from a jump in mortgage applications and well as its cost-cutting programme last year. Like other banks, it also put aside much smaller amount of cash to help cushion the blow from the pandemic, compared with 2020. The strong financial performance suggests the bank is starting to emerge from its near-decade of troubles. The depth of its financial difficulties first came to light in 2013 when a £1.5bn hole was discovered in its accounts following its disastrous takeover of the Britannia building society in 2009. The problem resulted in the bank being rescued by a group of hedge funds, which have since taken control of the lender. Its reputation also suffered after the former chairman, the former Labour councillor and Methodist church minister Paul Flowers – nicknamed the Crystal Methodist – pleaded guilty to possession of cocaine, crystal meth and ketamine in 2014. Slape said he expected the bank to report an even higher profit in 2022, which marks the bank’s 150th anniversary. “Our return to profitability and balance sheet growth at improved margins gives us a strong platform for further growth in the years ahead,” he said.Romelu Lukaku is not thinking about leaving Chelsea this summer and is focused on winning back his place for Sunday’s Carabao Cup final against Liverpool. The striker has struggled since his £97.5m move from Internazionale and there is fresh doubt over his place in Thomas Tuchel’s plans after he was dropped against Lille in the Champions League on Tuesday. Chelsea’s attack was more mobile with Kai Havertz leading the line during the 2-0 victory and Lukaku, an unused substitute, could find himself on the bench again. That has led to suggestions in Italy that Lukaku is planning to press for a return there at the end of the season. The Belgian has not looked settled in Tuchel’s system and was dropped and fined after giving an unsanctioned interview to Sky Italia in December. However Tuchel’s team selection against Lille has not caused Lukaku to make any decisions over his future. The 28-year-old remains determined to make a success of his second spell at Chelsea, who are tracking Barcelona’s Ousmane Dembélé, and hopes to convince Tuchel to start him at Wembley. It remains to be seen whether Lukaku can do enough in training to regain his place. He had only seven touches when Chelsea beat Crystal Palace last weekend and has scored only 10 goals this season. Tuchel said he wanted to protect Lukaku after his performance against Palace. The manager explained his decision to drop him by saying that the player was mentally and physically tired. However it is understood Lukaku did not feel tired and considered himself ready to start against Lille. Tuchel picked Havertz, who will be confident of keeping his place after scoring the opener against Lille. The 22-year-old gave Chelsea more fluidity in attack and there was also a fine performance from Christian Pulisic. The American winger scored Chelsea’s second goal and will be hopeful of starting again against Liverpool. There is no shortage of choices for Tuchel, who brought on Timo Werner against Lille. Hakim Ziyech is a doubt with an ankle injury but Mason Mount has returned from ankle ligament damage and Callum Hudson-Odoi is close to recovering from an achilles problem. Chelsea, who have concerns over Mateo Kovacic’s fitness after the midfielder limped off against Lille, are monitoring developments regarding Dembélé. The France forward played for Tuchel at Borussia Dortmund and is poised to leave Barcelona on a free at the end of the season. Dembélé has struggled with form and injuries since joining Barcelona in 2017though there is nothing advanced with Chelsea, who face competition for the 24-year-old from Paris Saint-Germain. Barcelona remain confident of signing César Azpilicueta this summer. However they could be forced to pay a small fee because Chelsea have an option to extend the defenders’s deal, which is due to expire at the end of the season. Chelsea did something similar with Olivier Giroud last summer, triggering a one-year extension in the French striker’s contract before selling him to Milan for £1.7m a month later.Antique props used during filming of the Netflix TV series The Crown have been stolen in an overnight raid in South Yorkshire. Valuables worth up to £150,000 were taken from three vans. They were to be used in scenes starring Imelda Staunton as the Queen. One of the props reportedly stolen was a replica of a rare Fabergé egg which was acquired by the Queen’s grandfather, George V, in 1933. The award-winning show is filming around Yorkshire for its fifth series, which is due to be aired later this year. Netflix confirmed the theft on Thursday but said it did not expect the incident to delay production. A Netflix spokesperson said: “We can confirm the antiques have been stolen and we hope that they are found and returned safely. Replacements will be sourced; there is no expectation that filming will be held up.” South Yorkshire police said the case had been shelved after investigators exhausted all lines of inquiry. A spokesperson said: “Police were called at 4.30pm on Wednesday 16 February following a report of theft from vehicles at Pastures Road, Doncaster. “It is reported that three vehicles containing props used in film and TV were broken into and a number of items taken. “Officers investigated the incident but all existing lines of inquiry have now been exhausted. The case has been filed pending any new lines of inquiry.” The extravagant hit-series is due to return for its fifth instalment at the end of 2022 featuring a new all-star cast as it heads towards coverage of the late 1990s. Staunton takes over from Olivia Colman as the Queen and Lesley Manville will portray Princess Margaret. Elizabeth Debicki moves into the role of Diana, Princess of Wales, previously played by Emma Corrin. The series will reportedly dramatise her headline-making 1995 Panorama interview with Martin Bashir as well as other key events in her later life. The show’s writer, Peter Morgan, has confirmed there will be a sixth – and final – series.By all accounts, The Batman will be a dark, dark movie. Taking its visual cues from Seven, and featuring a protagonist who has a breakdown and finds himself lured into intractable ethical murk by the suffocating power of vengeance, all signs point to the film being three hours of grot and depression and anguish. But wait, have you tried the new The Batman Oreos yet? They’re absolutely bat-licious! You have probably noticed by now, but The Batman is now suffering through one of the weirdest marketing campaigns in recent memory. Here is a film that very clearly views itself as a profound piece of art, drenched in mature themes of violence and alienation. Since Christopher Nolan took the reins almost 20 years ago, Batman has become a near mythical piece of our culture, and The Batman has designs to be the clearest expression of this yet. And there is credible artistic precedent here too. Increasingly, if you make a movie based in the world of Batman, you can expect to win an Oscar. This film is going to be a Serious Piece of Cinema. And yet for some reason its marketing campaign is treating it like Sonic the Hedgehog. Right now, there is no product on Earth that The Batman won’t hitch itself to for a quick buck. The latest of these, according to a press release I received this morning, is the Ring video doorbell. In partnership with Warner Bros, Ring users can now download special Batman replies. This means that, should a stranger visit your house when you’re out, they’ll be greeted with a blast of Michael Giacchino’s doomy The Batman theme, accompanied by a cheery voice exclaiming: “Hello neighbour, looks like we missed your bat signal! Please leave a message!” And that’s just for starters. A couple of Saturdays ago, I took my kids to see Sing 2, which was preceded by five separate adverts for a new, Batman-inspired Nissan Juke. And what is so intrinsically Batman-y about this particular Nissan Juke? It has a bit of yellow under the headlights. Apparently that’s enough. Then there is all the food. The Oreos we have covered; they have a picture of Batman’s face on them, because we all know that nothing is more delicious than wolfing down an effigy of agonising mental torment. Papa John’s is also in on the act. Its pizzas currently come in commemorative The Batman boxes (because who doesn’t love using used food receptacles as keepsakes?) and there is also a new side – black ghost chilli chicken wings – that also apparently have something to do with Batman. Meanwhile, in the US, Little Caesars has made a “calzony” (a kind of folded pizza) that’s shaped like the Batman logo, allowing customers to grab themselves a slice of gooey, unresolved trauma. Caffè Nero has subverted the pattern a little by focusing on the Riddler. It has launched a new hot chocolate, with a mysterious new flavour. If you can guess the flavour – which is to say, if you can stomach spending your money on a product that for the purposes of suspension of disbelief was designed by a nightmarish BDSM goblin – you can win a trip to a theme park. Again, I’m barely touching the sides here. Carhartt has made The Batman coats. Lanvin has made an entire The Batman clothing line, as have Puma and EleVen by Venus Williams. Several brands are making The Batman wristwatches. There are The Batman candles, lipsticks, perfumes, nail polishes and soaps. It’s endless. In fact, the last time I can remember anything like this barrage of promotional tie-ins was when the Sex and the City movie was released in 2008. Back then, the tsunami of official brand partnerships was so towering that the film’s own studio labelled the film “the Super Bowl for women”. But that made some amount of sense. Sex and the City was, at heart, a story about material consumption. There was an element of form and function to the campaign. The Batman, though, is a long, bleak film – in part inspired by the suicide of Kurt Cobain – about inescapable spiritual corruption. Nothing about it makes you want to go out and blow your wages on biscuits. If you squint hard enough, you can understand why this promotional onslaught is happening. Post-Covid, there is now no such thing as a box-office sure thing. Film after film has foundered in recent months, as audiences have chosen to stay away and wait for a home release. Slathering Batman’s image over every conceivable product is a sensible enough way to ensure that people will know the film exists. But, at the same time, unless sales of Nissan Jukes absolutely soar in the next few weeks, perhaps it’s all a little too much.In Jamal Smith’s mind sits a tableau of family he’s never really known. From memories stretched by time, he grasps at fragments of an absent father, an abusive mother, cousins he knew as siblings, and a found family of friends he fears to lose. Jamal is the protagonist of Son of Sin, the debut novel from the prime minister’s literary prize-winning poet Omar Sakr. It begins in western Sydney, where Jamal is being raised by Lebanese aunties, uncles and grandparents – the extended family of his estranged mother, Hala. Guarded by religion and propriety, they keep the past hushed, and brand Jamal as different. But from whispers, the threads of their secrets unfurl, revealing the sprawling traumas that broke them apart. And after a sexual awakening on a holy Ramadan night, Jamal’s struggle to find where he fits compounds. Now he must also confront a dormant, dreaded question of self as a queer Muslim boy. Structured in a sprawling four parts, the novel follows Jamal as he grows older – from teenage years fraught with conflict, to later when he impulsively leaves for Turkey, in search of a homeland and a father he has never known. We follow him as an adult whose mental health is deteriorating, and who hates his job, and watch as his most troubled relationships find various forms of closure. Puncturing Jamal’s present are memories of childhood; of abuse at the hands of his mother, violent punishments by his aunts and uncles, nightmares full of demons and fear, all reminding him he is ibn haram, or a son of sin. At school, Jamal finds solace in a group of friends, all outsiders who don’t really belong: Ilo, a burly Samoan boy who likes to leave his hair long, and Emir, a Bosnian who wears pentagram necklaces and studs. They sit around a lunch table discussing Marvel characters, or walk together sharing headphones, listening to Destiny’s Child. Their friendship is challenged by a transgression of trust, but as the boys grow up, they hold each other close: “The last awkward structures of adolescence were falling away, and they were letting them go without letting go of each other.” Around Jamal’s coming of age, Sakr writes an internal reckoning of race, tradition and identity. But while his protagonist’s story is deeply personal, many children or grandchildren of migrants will know it by heart. Not in the details of its plot, but in the feeling of its very foundations. Because we have grown up with it; stories of steadfast faith, stubborn men, an abandoned home. Of taboos, otherness, shame. But also of finding one’s place. From his aunty’s living room, Jamal watches the 2005 Cronulla riots unfold on the news. A mob of young Anglo-Australians, beers in hand, chant: “Fuck! Off! Lebs!” Bangladeshi students are hospitalised after the mob are unable to distinguish one dark nationality from another. Moments like these, written from Australia’s modern history, point to ripples of racism and rage still in motion today. For Jamal’s aunty, who remembers the struggle of life left behind in Lebanon, calling herself an Australian is enough to be grateful for. For Jamal, being unfairly harassed by police is not a price he can happily pay. But there are moments of belonging too. Outside his aunty’s home as the sun sets over Ramadan, cars pile up, a hungry crowd of family washing on to the street. Around the living room, he laughs with cousins, passing Lebanese food to share. On a beach in Turkey, Jamal makes angels in the sand with a man he falls in love with. On the balcony of their family unit overlooking a street in Mersin, Turkey, Jamal listens to his father and uncle talk over a pan of scrambled eggs and sujuk. Sakr writes moments like these into vivid scenes, and when they are not heavy with the weight of his protagonist’s conflict, they are laced with charm, candor and a vital sense of warmth. Son of Sin is the first Australian novel by a queer Arab Muslim man, according to the book’s marketing materials, and though fictive, Sakr’s own experience is subtly threaded through. The novel comes after his acclaimed poetry anthology, The Lost Arabs, and Sakr’s poetic craft has clearly defined his prose, as he weaves Arabic words with dialogue that rings true and a fluid, lyrical internal monologue. During his first sexual experience with another boy, for instance: He could hear [aunt] Rania hissing in his ears, Ta leon ya ibn haram! Come here you sinful boy! How many times had he heard it? A hundred times, a thousand, more: as a shout promising violence, laced in an affectionate chuckle, a whisper almost to herself, an echo as he was lassoed to her from wherever he’d been, a soft song of ibn haram, ibn haram. Jamal is often at conflict with himself. In his world, to be queer is to sin, to be shamed – and his struggle from within his insular, traditional, religious community exposes the toxic masculinity it maintains. To a young Jamal, the consequence of his sin haunts his sleep with nightmares; visions of angels who carry spiked clubs and speak in unfamiliar Arabic with tongues made of flames. They are Munkar and Nakir – angels of the Muslim belief in the Punishment of the Grave, who test the faith of the newly dead. To an older Jamal, this fear morphs into a cycle of hidden experimentation, self-doubt, self-hate and isolation. He is caught in a liminal space between his family, faith, queerness, Arab-ness, Australian-ness. And Son of Sin is Jamal’s internal fight spilling painfully, and poetically, on to the page – cut through with a hunger to destroy that which oppresses us. Son of Sin by Omar Sakr is out now through Affirm PressWhen husband and wife duo Adam Alhajji and Huda AlSultan started their business Sassi Ice Cream in Adelaide, it was a test run. They wanted to gauge if customers would buy vegan ice-cream with names like Baklawa Dream and Katayef. “We have seven flavours, and it all has some meaning to us, to our Middle Eastern and Saudi background,” AlSultan says. “For example, katayef is based on a pancake we used to eat. It’s stuffed with walnut, desiccated coconut, cinnamon and orange blossom. Some customers say it reminds them of Christmas desserts ... I suppose it’s a way for them to link it to something they already know.” AlSultan has run with that theme. Sometimes she tells customers that their most popular flavour, Tahini Twist, is the “salted caramel of the Middle East”. This initially surprised customers at Sassi, who were familiar with some of these ingredients only in savoury contexts, AlHajji says. “Sage and pomegranate is our second most popular flavour, but most people think of sage as something to include with meat.” More complex than your standard Neapolitan trio, in many parts of the Middle East and Asia, spices (cardamom, saffron), beans (adzuki, kongjaban) and tea (matcha, cha thai) are common ice-cream flavours. Asian flavours such as durian, red bean and matcha used to be a niche offering in Australia, but now Indonesian and Filipino ice-cream shops are burgeoning in major cities; and supermarkets sell Potong red bean ice-cream and Japanese-style mochi. But while Australia’s ice-cream palate has become broader in recent years, Middle Eastern ice-cream flavours and textures, on the other hand, are still relatively rare. Traditional Turkish ice-cream (dondurma) and the stretchy Levantine ice-cream booza use salep – a flour made from orchids – to give it a stretchy, taffy-like texture. This can be difficult to replicate in Australia, because salep is subject to export control in Turkey. For some, it is a good opportunity to adapt. Harun Yalcin, owner of Cuppa Turca Dondurma and Desserts in Melbourne is one of the innovators. To make dondurma, he had to experiment with other plant-based alternatives to salep. When he eventually hit on the right one, it became his trade secret. “Dondurma is made with goat’s milk and it does not have air volume in the mix, that’s why it is more resistant to heat. It does not melt as easily. It is also much tougher and chewier than gelato,” he says. This is evident in how street vendors in Istanbul pull and stretch the ice-cream, transferring it from one cone to another without any spilling. It is a mesmerising sight, as close to 800m views on the Tiktok hashtag #dondurma attests. But it’s something Yalcin only occasionally does in the shop. “Our focus is not so much on the showiness, but the flavour and texture,” he says. “We stick to the traditional flavours like sun-dried figs and pistachios, and we source the ingredients from Turkey.” He’s open to the occasional experiment though – feta cheese and rockmelon, halva and black mulberry sorbet have all made it onto the menu. Compared with salep – or an alternative – it is relatively easy to get all the ingredients for Afghan ice-cream, or sheer yakh – though it can be painstaking to make it the traditional way. Samir Karmand recalls taking six months to learn it from a mentor. He now sells it from his restaurant, Afghan Chapli Kebab in Sydney. “To make sheer yakh, you need cream, pistachio, rose water and cardamom. It must taste fresh, smooth and creamy, with that tinge of yellow that comes from the cream.” “I am a big fan of cardamom,” Karmand says enthusiastically. “I use it in desserts, tea, savoury food.” Karmand makes his ice-cream by hand, boiling the milk with cardamom, letting it cool, and then placing the liquid in a small stainless-steel container, which is dunked in a larger vessel containing ice cubes and salt. He then shakes the ice-cream mix vigorously from left to right until the milk becomes solid. It’s a similar process to churning, but without a machine. “You cannot take shortcuts and you need your whole body to do this work,” he says. Lately he has made a small tweak in the recipe, to adapt to local tastes. “In Afghanistan people like their desserts sweeter compared to Australia,” he says. “So it’s about finding that balance.”The collapse of construction giant Probuild could be just the start of financial trouble across the Covid-ravaged industry as it struggles with soaring costs and project delays, the construction sector’s peak body warns. Probuild, which directly employed about 750 people and had annual revenues of more than $1.4bn, was placed into voluntary liquidation by its South African owners Wilson Bayly Holmes-Ovcon (WBHO) late on Wednesday. Contractors and other workers turned up at sites on Thursday in several Australian cities to collect equipment, including at CSL’s $750m proposed new headquarters in Melbourne. “We are caught up in a set of circumstances not of our making,” a Probuild spokesperson said. “We are working closely with the administrator [Deloitte] on a number of plans to protect our clients, subcontractors and employees. “The Probuild brand is strong and we intend to keep it that way. We have several options for raising the necessary capital to continue as a premium Australian building company. These will all be pursued.” Jon Davies, chief executive officer of the Australian Constructors Association, said ongoing absenteeism because of Covid and rising costs of labour and materials meant more construction firms may soon follow Probuild into administration. “Everyone assumes that everyone’s making bucket loads of money,” Davies said, noting city skylines are often dotted with cranes, and governments talk up the accelerated spending on infrastructure as a spur for economic growth. “The reality is at a higher level the industry is not in good shape,” he said. “In fact, probably the more work [contractors] have, the more exposed they are to these risks.” For now, governments show little sign of stepping in. The Morrison government highlighted wider economic data from the Australian Securities and Investments Commission showing 46% fewer companies entered external administrations in 2021 than in 2019. Probuild itself had also been struggling for some time. In 2020, WBHO entered talks to sell it to China’s state-owned China State Construction Engineering Corporation for a reported $300m. The Australian Foreign Investment Review Board (Firb), however, rejected the proposal after an intervention by the treasurer Josh Frydenberg, citing national security concerns. Guardian Australia approached Firb and Frydenberg. Spokespeople for both said the government “does not comment on the application of the foreign investment screening arrangements as they apply or could apply to particular cases”. After the Firb rejection, WBHO said it “implemented its strategy to downsize the business, and considered other sales options which proved fruitless due to concerns potential acquirers had as to the impact of the regulatory approach to Covid”. Probuild owner cites ‘hard-line’ Covid approach The company, whose motto is “Rely on our ability”, said it was “discontinuing financial assistance” as the potential risk for large mega-building projects now “outweighs the current margins available”. Those risks had intensified because of the “Australian government’s hard-line approach of managing Covid-19”, including border restrictions, snap lockdowns and mandatory work-from-home regulations for many sectors, the company said. “The impact of lockdown restrictions on the retail, hotel and leisure and commercial office sectors of building markets [has] created high levels of business uncertainty in Australia and [has] significantly reduced demand and delayed the award of new projects in these key sectors of the construction industry.” Davies said construction was Australia’s third-largest industry, employing about one in 1o workers. He predicted the wider economy would suffer unless it was placed on a more sustainable footing. In a statement this morning, Deloitte said 18 related companies within the WBHO Australia group had been placed into voluntary administration on Wednesday night. “WBHOA has been a major contributor to the construction sector and the broader economy, including as a direct and indirect employer,” Sal Algeri, who leads Deloitte’s turnaround and restructuring unit, said in a statement. “The Covid-19 pandemic has created challenging trading conditions for many businesses, and for WBHOA, which has also been impacted by certain loss-making projects. “Our immediate focus will be to undertake an urgent assessment of the entities’ financial positions and work with key stakeholders to stabilise the business and projects where possible.”The Northern Territory government has been condemned for a “breach of trust” after NT police confirmed that spithoods and restraint chairs remain in use, despite promises to phase out the “inhumane” devices. NT police data reported by the NT News shows spithoods have been used 27 times since 2018 and 21 of those applications having occurred since 2020. Restraint chairs were used six times on young people in police watch houses between 2020 and 2021, and in one instance was used on a 15-year-old boy in Katherine. While they were used throughout the Territory, the most frequent location they were used was in the Palmerston watch house, where they were used 15 times on children. Guardian Australia contacted NT Police to independently verify these figures but did not receive a response by publication. After events in Don Dale youth detention centre, a 2017 royal commission into the Protection and Detention of Children in the Northern Territory described the use of spithoods and restraint chairs as “inhumane” and recommended their use be ended. In March 2017, the minister for territory families and urban housing, Kate Worden, said in a speech to parliament that the NT government had “done an incredible amount of work to reform the youth justice system”. “We will not reintroduce things like spithoods or strapping young offenders into chairs, and we will not be locking them up 24 hours a day in solitary confinement,” Worden said at the time. Aboriginal Medical Services Alliance Northern Territory (AMSAMT) CEO, John Paterson, said he “felt sick to the stomach” when he learned of the continued use of the devices. “Four years down the track, here we are again, still using them,” Paterson said. “To be putting children through this punitive constraint that can have a lifetime effect on their mental health, trauma and stress. It’s unacceptable.” “There’s other ways and means of treating children when they’re taking into custody.” Chief executive officer of the Northern Territory Council of Social Services (NTCOSS), Deborah Di Natale, said the NT government had previously given assurances that use of spithoods and restraint chairs had ended throughout the territory. “It was a complete surprise to us. We were of the impression the Northern Territory government were following the commitments of the royal commission and they had not been used since the 2017 recommendations were handed down,” Di Natale said. “It’s a broken promise and it’s a breach of trust.” In a statement, NT Police minister Nicole Manison said the government had introduced a new offence in 2020 during the pandemic to criminalise intentionally coughing or spitting on frontline workers. “We are committed to keeping our Police safe from spitting, and we also want them to be safe from any accusation for not providing proper care to people in custody, including at watch houses,” Manison said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “We also have a duty of care to provide a safe environment for anyone who is in custody.” Paediatrician Dr Nick Fancourt who provides health services to children in detention said the use of spithoods and restraint chairs on children was “never appropriate and never necessary”. “This is an alarm bell. It’s the canary in the coalmine telling us there is a bigger problem,” Fancourt said. “People within these systems are so pressured with so much work that we’re falling back on these mechanisms we said we would never use.” “And if we don’t really try to look and address those issues we’re going to end up in a similar place as to where we were in 2016 and 2017.” Aboriginal community health service Danila Dilba, the North Australian Aboriginal Justice Agency, Save the Children Australia and National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Legal Services (NATSILS) have joined NTCOSS and AMSANT in calling for spithoods to be banned at law in the Northern Territory. NATSILS executive officer, Jamie McConnachie, said she was “sick to her stomach” at learning the news and that their use was “indefensible”. “They’re dangerous, they’re humiliating, they’re archaic and they’re notoriously involved in black deaths in custody. They violate international anti-torture laws when they’re used to violate, punish or coerce,” McConnachie said. “We strongly oppose the use of spithoods in all institutional contexts, with no carve outs, anywhere in the country.” UTS Jumbunna Institute research associate Latoya Rule, who has campaigned broadly to ban the use of spithoods nationally, said they were unsurprised at hearing of the continued use of spithoods and that their use was “highly racialised”. “The likelihood of a spithood being used on an Aboriginal child than a non-Aboriginal child is much higher right now, due to the higher level of incarceration,” they said. “If they had the political will, after seeing the torture of people in Don Dale and across the NT, subject to spithoods and their use, they would have banned them on the spot.” Rule, the sibling of Wayne Fella Morrison whose 2016 death in custody is subject to a coronial inquiry, said the Northern Territory government – and every other jurisdiction in the country – should follow the example of South Australia by banning the use of spithoods at law. “If this was happening to non-Aboriginal children, it would have been banned years ago,” they said.I’d never done a reverse park before, and in the empty train station car park, my instructor directed me to reverse in beside the only other car in the area – a grey van. Reverse parking is horrible. I don’t understand why anyone would do it when they can forward park. As I squeezed in beside the van (the equivalent of sitting right next to someone in an empty train carriage), I noticed a hand adjusting the curtains in the back window. “Someone must be living in there,” I said to the instructor. I squeezed out, paid for the lesson, then walked to the station to get a train home to the next town. I noticed a person walking near me. It was the woman from the van. She would have been in her 70s, white hair, an old jumper and skirt, sandals. “That was my first reverse park!” I told her. “I’m going for my licence in eight weeks and if I don’t get it I will be the oldest learner driver in the world.” The woman smiled, then did something truly odd. She came close to me, held out her hand and said, “Take this.” She was trying to hand me a $50 note. Oh no. Please don’t. I once found a $50 note on the ground but no stranger had ever walked up out of the blue and tried to give me money. Particularly not someone who looked like they might need it themselves. “I’m good, thanks. But thank you very much. That’s very kind, but I don’t need the money.” “Please just take it,” she said. “Take it.” I took the money and felt a powerful charge. It seemed to be not just the exchange of cash between two strangers but like something important and elemental had taken place. But I was also baffled – and felt a bit guilty for accepting it. I sat waiting for the bus and started talking to the woman. She was from outback New South Wales and had travelled to central Victoria. She had tried to give money to other people – strangers – “but people don’t want to take it”. She mimed someone putting up their hands and backing away from her like she was crazy. But she just wanted to give people cash. I asked her why she gave money away to strangers and she said that giving made her happy, and that the secret to a good life was not to want more than you have. “If you are satisfied with what you’ve got, you’ll have a good life,” she said. “Too many people want what they don’t have, so they spend their whole life working so they can get the next thing. But that doesn’t make them happy – so they never get satisfied and they are always after more money to get the next thing that might make them happy.” “And it never stops,” I said, getting her drift. “The treadmill. The person is actually never satisfied. I guess that’s capitalism …” She nodded. “I’ve always been happy with what I’ve got – so I’ve never wanted more.” More was surplus, and so she gave away what she didn’t need. And she didn’t need the $50 because she had been sleeping in her van at the station for three nights and so had saved money from van park fees. “You can use the money for your next driving lesson,” she said. We sat in the sun and she told me a bit more about her life. She was travelling around Australia in her van – had been for a few years now – but was getting old, and she was finding being on the road more difficult as she aged. She avoided the big cities, took her time and travelled slow. “The most important thing is your health,” she told me. “You realise that when you get old. You can have all the money in the world but you can’t buy good health. You have to look after yourself. There’s no point having a lot of money if you make yourself sick and stressed trying to get it.” My bus came and we wished each other luck. She walked back towards her van, taking it slow. On the replacement bus service, I became completely undone. The day before I had come back from a three-day silent meditation retreat where for hours in the deep silence in a forest, in the high, clear air, I had money on my mind. I am lucky. I have more than enough – but sitting in silence for hours on end, money thoughts flooded through my mind and refused to recede. There was the car I would buy when I got my licence, and an expensive holiday I wanted, and Sydney property, Sydney property, Sydney property – the mantra that thrummed between my ears, all day, and into the night, when I was meant to be getting clear. Now, as the bus wound up the mountains, I couldn’t stop crying – but couldn’t really tell you why. What happened at the station didn’t feel like a random act of kindness, but something more akin to grace. The money transcended the material and had become totemic, carrying something in it – character, kindness, a way of being in the world that I see so infrequently that the encounter felt holy.The most disadvantaged areas of Melbourne have been hit hardest by Covid-19 deaths during Victoria’s Omicron wave, further underscoring the pandemic’s disproportionate effect on communities with lower employment and income levels, and poorer access to services. Data obtained exclusively by Guardian Australia shows that in Melbourne’s most disadvantaged local government areas (LGAs), Covid deaths occurred at a rate of 26 deaths per 100,000 residents. This substantially outweighs deaths in areas of greater socio-economic advantage. The local government areas of Brimbank, Greater Dandenong and Kingston accounted for 134 of the 943 Covid deaths in the state between 8 December 2021 and 21 February 2022. Brimbank is Melbourne’s second-most disadvantaged LGA and third-most disadvantaged in the state, according to the Australian Bureau of Statistics’ index of relative socio-economic disadvantage (IRSD), which takes into account factors such as employment, income levels, access to education, services and more. It was also the hardest hit LGA overall in this period, with 65 deaths in total, that, when weighted for population, equates to 33.45 deaths for every 100,000 people. In Greater Dandenong, which ranks the lowest in terms of socio-economic indicators, 37 people died, which equates to 24.33 deaths per 100,000 people. George Disney, a social epidemiologist and research fellow from the University of Melbourne, told Guardian Australia the findings were “depressingly predictable”. “If you’re disadvantaged, you’re more likely to be exposed to the disease and you’re more likely to have worse health outcomes,” Disney said. Covid in Australia could be characterised as “a disease of disadvantage”, Disney said. Migrant communities disproportionately hit Data released by the ABS last week showed that Covid deaths since the onset of the pandemic until the end of January this year have disproportionately affected migrant communities, with 6.8 deaths per 100,000 people born overseas, compared with 2.3 for those born in Australia. The 2016 census shows both Brimbank and Greater Dandenong have large numbers of migrants. Just 45% of the residents in Brimbank were born in Australia, and in Greater Dandenong the percentage is even lower, at 36%. Nationally, more than 66% of Australian residents were born here. A non-English language is spoken at home in more than 60% of households in both LGAs. The same is true for about 22% of households across Australia. Just over a third of the people in Victoria who died from Covid in the past three months – 327 people – lived in the 10 most disadvantaged areas of Melbourne, accounting for 34.67% of the overall deaths during the most recent wave of the pandemic. Five of those most disadvantaged LGAs – Brimbank, Casey, Whittlesea, Greater Dandenong and Hume – accounted for 240 deaths from Covid in this period. Disney said the results were unsurprising. He said the issue of workplace entitlements such as sick leave had still not been adequately addressed. “How are we two years into this and we don’t have universal sick pay? The isolation period will disappear – it’s happening overseas. The Covid-specific protections will go, and we’ll just be left with what we had previously. And there are so many people who don’t have protections from sickness,” he said. “We shouldn’t have been surprised that this happened with Covid because it happens with almost every other disease. It’s depressingly predictable. The government could have averted so many deaths if they’d focused on this.” Data echoes Delta wave Many of these areas have repeatedly suffered during the pandemic. Hume and Whittlesea were also among the Victorian LGA’s with the five highest death rates during the Delta wave. Hume, Casey, Brimbank and Whittlesea all have had some of the highest case numbers throughout the pandemic. In the middle of the Delta wave, Hume had already recorded more than 1,500 cases per 100,000 residents while more affluent areas of Melbourne had just 17. The Victorian Department of Health shared data on Covid deaths in 63 local government areas. Of these, 25 had fewer than five deaths during the Omicron wave. Almost 900 deaths were recorded in 39 LGAs – most of them in metropolitan Melbourne. Most of the LGAs with few deaths were in rural areas. Darebin in Melbourne’s north, where 51 people died from Covid, had the highest death rate during Omicron, at just over 34 deaths per 100,000 people. Darebin is ranked 13th lowest on the IRSD scale for Melbourne. The Darebin, Brimbank, Moreland, Monash and Macedon Ranges LGAs all recorded more than 25 deaths per 100,000 people. A report released last year by the Australian Institute of Health and Welfare found that in the first year of the pandemic there were nearly four times as many deaths in population groups of lower socio-economic status compared to those in the highest. Guardian Australia understands 37% of the people who died with Covid in Victoria during the Omicron wave had not received two doses of the vaccine, and about 33% were unvaccinated. A spokesperson for the Victorian Department of Health expressed sympathy for those who had lost loved ones and said: “The data is clear that getting your third dose will significantly reduce your chances of going to hospital, going to ICU or dying from Covid-19. The best thing Victorians can do to protect themselves from Covid-19 is to get their third dose as soon as they’re eligible.” The Guardian sought similar data from New South Wales but NSW Health did not provide it, nor could their representatives describe the methodology used for the publicly available breakdowns of areas in which deaths occurred.It could be argued that the NRL really understands how to build anticipation for its women’s game. That would, of course, be a very generous interpretation of the situation that has led to a 491-day break since the last time an NRLW game was played. The 2021 season, which was originally slated to take place in August and then pushed back to October, was moved to 2022 due to the ongoing impact of the Covid-19 pandemic. NRL CEO Andrew Abdo said at the time that the delay offered an opportunity to commit to the women’s game completely in 2022. “The rescheduling provides us with an opportunity to create a full 12-month calendar for women’s rugby league in 2022 and importantly means our athletes will not have to relocate,” he said. How that plays out remains to be seen, but there will be plenty of eyes on the sport to see how the women’s game is prioritised in a season that will undoubtedly still feel the effects of the pandemic. The reinvigorated competition has farewelled the New Zealand Warriors but welcomes three new teams to the fold – the Newcastle Knights, Parramatta Eels and Gold Coast Titans will make their NRLW debuts this weekend, alongside foundation clubs the St George Illawarra Dragons, Brisbane Broncos and Sydney Roosters. The new teams add some much-needed upheaval to the competition that has been dominated by the Broncos since its inception in 2018. No other team has claimed the premiership and Brisbane have won all three of their grand finals by margins of 10 points or more. The addition of new teams offers the opportunity for talent to be spread more evenly across the league and though the Broncos remain the firm favourites heading into this season, there is hope the competition will begin to even out over the next few years. The expansion of the competition also provides essential opportunities for more players to take the step up to the top level. Throughout its first three seasons, the NRLW had more talent than it could fit into its four teams, particularly when the 2020 competition featured the injection of a number of rugby sevens Olympians whose own tournaments had been cancelled due to the pandemic. While women and girls have had limited opportunities in rugby league until very recently, its sister sport touch football has long been the summer sport of choice for women and girls in the rugby league states of NSW and Queensland. This has created a strong skills base in a wide group of participants that is easily translatable and has provided the NRLW with an embarrassment of riches in talent. However, the ability of the competition to continue to expand and improve depends largely on the timelines for professionalism. At the season launch on Tuesday, Abdo was unable to provide details on when and how the NRL plans to make its female stars full-time professionals. “There are a number of factors that go into that; supply and demand, the level of content, the revenue that allows us to do that,” he told AAP. These are lines that women in sport have become very familiar with: the idea that a women’s competition must be generating profits before significant investment is made – a concept that would be rather unusual in the early phases of most business endeavours. While the bumper year of women’s rugby league, which includes two seasons of NRLW, a State of Origin game and a World Cup, is tremendous in terms of the elevation and profile of the sport, it also raises concerns for players who are juggling careers and family responsibilities alongside training, playing and travelling. Parramatta halfback Maddie Studdon famously revealed in the post-match interview after 2018’s State of Origin match that she had lost her job as a result of her rugby league commitments interfering with her work. As the competition expands without a plan for professionalism in place there will be players who are forced to make the opposite decision – to lose their rugby league career for the sake of a job that allows them to pay their rent. There is much to celebrate about the first of the 2022 seasons kicking off this weekend, including triple headers in the first two weeks of the competition in Newcastle and Brisbane. The action on the field will be exciting and fans will find new favourite players as plenty of debutantes take the league by storm. But in the midst of celebration and joy, the fight for better will also continue. Better pay and conditions to allow the stars to flourish. Better planning for the future to ensure the CEO has answers to the important questions about one of his flagship competitions. And better understanding of the importance of the NRLW itself so that there is never a 491-day gap between games again.If Angel in Realtime is ostensibly an ode to David Le’aupepe’s late father, it reveals itself as a portrait of the son, passing back and forth between grief and searching and understanding, in his father’s wake. In the opening track, You in Everything, Le’aupepe asks of himself: “How do I face the world or raise a fucking kid/Or see beauty in the earth and all its majesty replete/When I’ve spent the better part of my 20s doing self-indulgent bullshit on repeat?” A dozen tracks later, as he contemplates “the sum of a life” in Goal of the Century, he hasn’t found an answer but the path to it looks a little brighter: “Head down I’m writing this shit out/On my phone/A way that I can talk to you/And reach you.” The tenderness with which Le’aupepe speaks of his father, Tattersall, his two brothers (who he only discovered existed after his father’s death), his wife and ultimately of himself, is the defining feature of Gang of Youths’ third album. As a corollary, forgiveness underpins the emotional landscape he draws, though its components suggest it would not have been easy or guaranteed. It is not just forgiveness for his father, who left his first family in New Zealand to find work and made a new life and family in Australia (“Come find me/I’m here today but don’t belong/I’m working ’til the debt is gone”). It is also forgiveness for Le’aupepe’s younger self, who could have or should have said more and thought more. The full complexities of his father’s life, and the wash through several generations, ripple across the songs. The impression created is so vivid that imagined thoughts, like “In the instance of pain, I look straight down at the iris/If the irises fade/I spend days out in the yard/In the absence of rain”, feel truthful. Sure, we are only getting part of the story, but it feels rich with detail and provides the cornerstone to Le’aupepe’s own character, whose loves and second thoughts are chronicled in parallel. A father who abandoned one family and built another who knew nothing of the first, spinning a story of his own childhood that would only be exposed as a myth after his death. The older sons, who didn’t understand why they had been left; and the younger son, now dealing with the guilt of receiving that love the others didn’t get (“I accounted for the miles of attention/That I got but never want nor choose”), and fearing he’d wasted it. There is so much to tell. Would the only way to tell this story be to present it in an equally full, emotional and dramatic rock-as-done-by-sons-of-Springsteen fashion? That has been the Gang of Youths way until now. Well, experimentation is evident here, stylistically and instrumentally. There is early 2000s groove-conscious U2 in Tend the Garden, to balance the Eno-era yearning rock U2 found in Spirit Boy. The kinetic rhythm in Forbearance brings to mind the National, as the other side of the coin from, um, the National in The Man Himself’s euphoric chorus. But there’s not much in the way of structural experimentation, and definitely not sonically. For much of the album, air to breathe is rare, especially the longer the song goes. (Forbearance is a notable exception.) Mostly, sooner or later all the available room is filled with drum loops and live drums, guitars and synths, brass and choirs, strings and piano, marimba and woodwind, sampled voices and sounds of the Cook Islands and traditional Māori instruments. Certainly those songs perform their function: you may punch the air and twirl around the propulsive rhythms in songs like In the Wake of Your Leave and The Angel of 8th Avenue, delivered in the manner of a heartland rock band with the secret desire to be goths. Returner grows from a folkish heel-tapper to a singing-with-fans-in-the-terraces climax. And Unison is layered with tuned percussion, low brass and strings, until the drum loops override any remaining reticence and a Pasifika Bono brings us home. Sign up for the fun stuff with our rundown of must-reads, pop culture and tips for the weekend, every Saturday morning They make all the right moves, the effort writ clearly on the surface of everything, and undoubtedly those packed, hot room concerts will peak regularly with these anthems-in-waiting choruses. But – maybe whisper it – in repetition and volume, these big, bold songs are … perfectly fine. Instead it is the smaller songs that are the album’s standouts: like Brothers, where Le’aupepe hunches over a piano, almost singing to himself. Or Hand of God, which repeats that formula, except towards the end he is joined by gentle sounds of the Auckland Gospel Choir. The closing track, Goal of the Century, goes back and forth in its seven minutes between voice, piano and low-key strings, and full orchestration. It is not a coincidence that the special moments on Angel in Realtime are the ones that best match the album’s particularly personal story, in being both the most exposed and the most simple.Jimmy Kimmel Late-night hosts were on edge on Wednesday afternoon, as Russia was poised to invade Ukraine. Hours after their tapings, they did – Putin ordered a “special military operation” in Ukraine and the Russian military began shelling various targets beyond the two eastern Russian-controlled territories they had previously claimed as independent. In the run-up to one of the worst international crises since the second world war, though, Jimmy Kimmel trained his focus on Fox News host Tucker Carlson, who has been supportive of Russia’s military build-up along its border with Ukraine and especially of leader Vladimir Putin. “What is this really about?” Carlson said on his primetime show this week, in typical nonsense question style. “Why do I hate Putin so much? Has Putin ever called me a racist? Has he threatened to get me fired for disagreeing with him? Has he shipped every middle class job in my town to Russia? Did he manufacture a worldwide pandemic that wrecked my business and kept me indoors for two years? Is he teaching my children to embrace racial discrimination? Is he making fentanyl? Is he trying to snuff out Christianity? Does he eat dogs? These are fair questions, and the answer to all of them is no.” “I see, so in order for you to despise a man who murders his rivals, who murders and poisons people and who’s actively trying to destabilize our country, he has to do something to you personally,” Kimmel responded. “He has to eat your dog.” “I want to see the tape Putin has of him, because it has to be something special,” he added. “I mean seriously, how did we go from being a country that hated communism since well before I was born, how did we go from the country that made Red Dawn and Rocky IV to this? It boggles the mind. “Can you imagine Ronald Reagan turning on Fox News and hearing this?” he joked. Carlson, Kimmel acknowledged, “knows what he’s doing. He knows this is garbage he’s feeding these people who watch him. Between Tucker Carlson and Pam &amp; Tommy, this really is the golden age of talking dicks on television.” Stephen Colbert “Tonight, you really get a vibe right now that the borscht is about to hit the fan,” said Stephen Colbert on the Late Show, as US intelligence pointed to an imminent full-scale invasion (which turned out to be correct within the evening). “Their first clue? The 190,000 troops with the bang-bang sticks and the all-steel shoot mobiles. That warning courtesy of the US state duh-partment,” he quipped. “No one doesn’t see what’s coming,” he continued, though the Kremlin has claimed that rebel leaders in eastern Ukraine have asked Russia with military help to fend off Ukrainian aggression. “Yes, they say Ukraine is the aggressor just like Tokyo is asking for it by taunting Godzilla,” Colbert said. In response to Russian aggression, the Ukrainian government declared a 30-day state of emergency that will, among other things, allow ordinary citizens to carry firearms. “That’s right, this situation is so dire, Ukraine has become Texas,” Colbert noted. Meanwhile, Joe Biden has imposed sanctions on Russia’s two largest banks and on the sons of two of Putin’s closest officials. “If he’s going after children of Putin’s cronies, can I suggest a couple?” Colbert said over a photo of Donald Trump’s sons Don Jr and Eric. Seth Meyers “The entire world is aghast and horrified,” Seth Meyers said of an imminent Russian invasion on Late Night. “The only people who could possibly think this is a good move are those unemployed fringe weirdos who go on small-time radio shows. “You know, like this guy,” he continued, referring to Donald Trump’s appearance on a radio show in which he called Putin’s baseless recognition of two eastern Ukrainian regions as independent “genius”. “How smart is that?” Trump said of Putin’s unilateral decision. “You gotta say, that’s pretty savvy.” “No, you don’t ‘gotta say’ that,” Meyers retorted. “I mean, maybe you gotta say that so someone will pick you up at the Moscow airport when you flee our jurisdiction. “It’s just insane that Trump is still so desperate to praise a bloodthirsty tyrant like Putin every chance he gets,” he added. As for “all those war-mongers like Mike Pompeo and Newt Gingrich and the House Republicans” who have gone on to Fox News and declared Biden’s response “weak” – “your dude is the one who just called Putin savvy and praised his genius. Do you guys even pay attention to what Trump is saying anymore or do you just assume like most of us that he got lost wandering around the 18th hole of one of his golf courses and now he just lives in a sand trap with a bunch of pigeons.”Western leaders have spent the past 20 years trying to guess what Vladimir Putin “really wants”. Very often, it’s enough just to read his words, very carefully. Because usually he means exactly what he says. And in the case of his early morning television address announcing Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, his words and hints about his intentions were truly terrifying. It would be good to start with his warning to the west not to interfere, because just as people like David Davis call for the west to provide air support to Ukraine, Putin had this to say: “Russia will respond immediately, and the consequences will be such as you have never seen in your entire history. All the necessary decisions in this regard have been taken.” There can be little doubt that what he means is that he is prepared to deploy nuclear weapons against any country that takes military action to help Ukraine. He added, with great emphasis: “I hope that my words will be heard.” Apparently not by Davis. As for Putin’s intentions in Ukraine itself, there was a strong indication that he plans to incorporate the Donbas (including the entire Donetsk and Luhansk regions, most of which are still in Ukrainian hands) into the Russian Federation, just as he did with Crimea in 2014. He said that the peoples living in Ukraine (by which he meant the Russians) have the right to make a “free choice”, and added that in 2014 Russia “was obliged to protect the people of Crimea” and that those people then chose to “be with their historic homeland, Russia”. There is no other way to interpret those words than as a threat to annex the eastern regions of Ukraine. As for his declared intention to “demilitarise and denazify” Ukraine, it is hard to see how this could be achieved without a wholesale occupation of the country and change of government. True, Putin denied that his purpose was to occupy Ukraine. But there was a big “but”: there were, he said, “statements” coming from the west to the effect that there was no need any more to “abide by the documents setting forth the outcomes of world war two”. So it’s goodbye Yalta, it seems, as Putin sets about redrawing the map of Europe. So what hope is there that Putin can be deterred from going this far? Inside Russia, opposition voices have been utterly squashed. Politicians who might have led public protests, such as Alexei Navalny, are in prison, and his entire network of activists has been outlawed. Would-be protesters in Moscow were detained as soon as they left their flats. The editor of Novaya Gazeta, Dmitry Muratov, who won last year’s Nobel peace prize, put out a desperately sad statement: “President Putin has ordered our country to start a war with Ukraine. And there is nobody to stop this war. For that reason, as well as grief, I feel shame.” Anyone who watched Monday’s meeting of Putin with his security council will understand Muratov’s despair. This was a gathering of those who in theory advise the president, whose job is to assess options and their outcomes. Not one of them dared step out of line. They knew what Putin wanted them to say and they said it. When the foreign intelligence chief, Sergei Naryshkin, fluffed his lines, he got a tongue-lashing (shown on TV) from the president. A couple of officials did suggest giving diplomacy a few days longer, but they were ignored. Dmitry Medvedev was seen as a flickering light of reason when he swapped the presidency with Putin in 2008-12, but on Monday he too fell into line. There is, literally, nobody in Russia who can stop this war, because Putin has total control. The ostensibly elected parliament – the Duma and the Federation Council – is full of his placemen. The presidential administration and the foreign ministry almost certainly contain doubters, people who might want to point out that invasion is hardly compatible with the president’s statements about Ukrainians and Russians being “one people”. But I would be astonished if any of them offered to resign. Can the west stop him? The history of sanctions, ever tougher and more far-reaching, is ignominious. Putin sneers at them, because he will always put his version of what Russia needs for its security above economic considerations. He also has a huge reserve fund to soften the blow. All wars end in either victory for one side or in a negotiated settlement. Today, the prospect of the latter appears bleak. I find it hard to comprehend why it would have been so wrong to agree to the negotiations Putin wanted last year, to seriously review Europe’s security system, if that had a chance of avoiding the war that has now begun. Surely a neutral Ukraine, safe between its neighbours, would be preferable to war. But the time for that is gone. Putin is now hell-bent on revenge for what he perceives as years of western slights. He alone will decide his neighbour’s fate. Angus Roxburgh is a former BBC Moscow correspondent and consultant to the Kremlin. He is the author of The Strongman: Vladimir Putin and the Struggle for Russia and Moscow Calling: Memoirs of a Foreign Correspondent Guardian Newsroom: the Russian invasion of Ukraine Join a panel of journalists, hosted by Michael Safi, for a livestreamed event on the Russia-Ukraine crisis. On Thursday 3 March, 8pm GMT | 9pm CET | 12pm PST | 3pm EST. Book tickets hereGHAT 1 M. Barley: What borders a river in India? (good for spot of bathing)? (i.e. Bh(ar)at, with g for b, &amp; lit.). 2 A. Chamberlain: Saddle in Himalayas? Tough seat, killing to use ((tou)gh (se)at). 3 W. Drever: See Gandhi thus disposed of in Hindus’ —— (comp. anag. &amp; lit.). VHC T. Anderson: What can be fired repeatedly, consuming flesh finally (h in gat &amp; lit.). T. C. Borland: Grand passion English suppressed in A Passage to India? (g + h(E)at). C. J. Brougham: Lodge being out of reach of water, maybe beaver steps down to river (lodge less lode + hat). J. Grimes: Heading from Ganges boater possibly brings one to this (G + hat &amp; lit.). R. J. Heald: Passing over Indian region containing hill without difficulty, head for this (h(ill) in G(O)a + t, &amp; lit.). P. F. Henderson (New Zealand): Leading feature of Ganges, also area passing through height (G + A in ht; 2 meanings &amp; lit.). J. C. Leyland: Is this entrance for groups seen swimming in the Ganges (comp. anag. incl. g, &amp; lit.). M. Lloyd-Jones: Goldfinch’s wings are beginning to tire in flight alongside river (g, h + a + t). D. F. Manley: Travelling the Ganges? You may have seen this, landing finally (comp. anag. incl. g, &amp; lit.). P. W. Marlow: Some cycling hate piece that goes round hard saddle maybe (hidden and h in gat). T. J. Moorey: Term for path between peaks in Gujarat and Tripura? (h in G, a, T, &amp; lit.). J. &amp; A. Price: Access to Ganges followed by boater perhaps (G + hat, &amp; lit.). Dr S. J. Shaw: What leads Ganges bathers towards water essentially (G + middle letters, &amp; lit.). R. C. Teuton: With an element of guesswork Mastermind champion avoided a pass (g + hat(ch)). J. R. Tozer: Defile Government with rancour, ignoring warning to stop (G + hat(red)). T. West-Taylor: Flight half submerged, landing point in India (a in (fli)ght, &amp; lit.; point = culmination). J. Vincent &amp; Ms R. Porter: Where boater perhaps may be moored by Ganges’ edge (G + hat, &amp; lit.). K. &amp; J. Wolff: Translated, bathing-stair could be Britain’s —— (comp. anag. &amp; lit.). HC D. Appleton, D. &amp; N. Aspland, A. Brash, Dr J. Burscough, C. A. Clarke, T. Clement, Ms S. Curran (France), P. A. Davies, A. S. Everest, H. Freeman, A. Gerrard, G. I. L. Grafton, C. &amp; C. Hinton, M. Hodgkin, T. Jacobs, P. Jenkinson (Switzerland), G. Johnstone, J. R. H. Jones (Spain), A. MacDougall, P. McKenna, C. G. Millin, T. D. Nicholl, D. Price Jones, M. Rees, Dr J. B. Reid, T. Rudd, M. Sloman, K. Thomas, A. J. Varney, Mrs A. M. Walden, Ms S. Wallace, A. J. Wardrop, D. Whisstock (Italy), G. H. Willett. Comments 124 entries, no detectable mistakes. Doubtless the extra challenge posed by Carte Blanche kept the numbers low and discouraged the less determined would-be competitors. It’s one of the specials that places tougher demands on the solver while not rendering the setter’s task any trickier than usual. That said, I will admit to a little extra devilish cunning in placing two 4-letter words and four unches in the top row. No one went so far as to accuse me of wilful deception though! Favourite clue, of 17 nominated at least once, was ‘Sang like a pigeon, holding note’ for INTONED, those for FURLONGS and TIMBÓ coming equal second. It’s a very long time since I last presented you with a Carte Blanche competition, No. 2,157 it was to be exact, though the last three before this one were normal prize puzzles. I assume that it was Ximenes who first had the idea, and I see no reason to discontinue the tradition. You’ve had 24 of them over the years from me so far. This one revived various memories for me, especially of visits to Benares (as I prefer to call it), Kalighat near Calcutta (ditto) and Raj Ghat in Delhi, where Gandhi was cremated. I believe the pyres on the waterfront in Benares burn day and night seven days a week. The other memory recalled for me came from clues (more than a few) which mentioned the late-lamented Bamber Gascoigne (‘Your starter for ten,’ etc), whom I first met as a memorably undistinguished panellist on University Challenge during my student days. I still miss his gently scholarly tones, a far cry from Paxman’s acerbic style. GHAT yielded plenty of good ideas, including variations on ‘Pass in high Atlas’, neat but regrettably just too popular. Thank you anyway for giving me so many excellent offerings to savour.Hundreds of Ukrainians, many clad in their national colours of yellow and blue, have gathered outside the gates of Downing Street in London to protest against Russia’s invasion of their country. While shock, anger and defiance were among the common sentiments, events in the early hours of Thursday morning had also heralded difficult personal dilemmas for many, such as Aleksandra Legosteva, a tech worker, and her mother, Olena, who had come to visit on Saturday. “I don’t want her to go back,” said Legosteva, who told of a largely sleepless night as the family monitored Russia’s invasion and worried about relatives in northern Ukraine who were stockpiling food and other supplies. Like others, she was eager for the UK government to impose “sweeping sanctions” on Russia, while calls for military assistance and British military boots on the grounds were a common refrain among the crowd. Yuriy Yurchuk, 35, a principal singer at the Royal Opera House, said he had been due to perform at Moscow’s Bolshoi theatre in two weeks’ time but that would now not happen. “There’s still a place for talking but there should be a comprehensive response to what is happening in Ukraine, including a military one and also international condemnation. Otherwise what is the UN for?” added Yurchuk. Ukrainian flags, large and small, were scattered throughout the crowd, along with homemade placards variously condemning Vladimir Putin as a war criminal or drawing a link between his regime and that of the Soviet Union. The bishop of the Ukrainian Catholic Eparchy of the Holy Family of London, the Right Rev Kenneth Nowakowski, was among those who had gathered in London. “I don’t want to criticise the British government because we’re grateful for what they’ve done so far but there is so much more that can and should be done now,” he said. “It’s also worth remembering that this is a war that has been going on for eight years now. The rest of the world is now waking up to it and the fact that Putin may not just stop at Ukraine.” While those gathered were almost entirely Ukrainian, a small group of young Russians working in sectors ranging from IT to fashion were also present, though they declined to give their names – such were their concerns at the consequences of speaking out against Putin. “I literally couldn’t look at my colleagues in the eye this morning,” said one woman, who spoke of a feeling of shame. Away from the protests, other Ukrainians in Britain expressed their shock and anger as they struggled to maintain contact with family and friends fleeing from or sheltering in areas under bombardment. Members of the diaspora described their fear on hearing from relatives in Ukraine that their home towns had been bombed in Russian airstrikes. Tetyana Vovnyanko, who lives in London, said close family who live near the city of Uman, between Kyiv and Odesa, have sought safety in the countryside. “I listened this morning to the news that there were airstrikes and a shell landed in the middle of the town centre and a few people were killed,” she said, adding that her nephew and his family in Kyiv had also moved to the countryside. Vovnyanko, co-founder of British-Ukrainian Aid, which supports people suffering from the armed conflict and humanitarian crisis in Ukraine, added: “I’m extremely worried because initially we thought that the attacks will be mostly towards the eastern part of Ukraine, along the frontline. And we thought that possibly there will be airstrikes on Kyiv, as American intelligence services said. “But today we realised that all Ukraine, even relatively distant towns from the frontline, are affected. I had a brief exchange with my PhD supervisor who is living in Odesa. There were airstrikes there and she’s very scared about her life.” Olesya Khromeychuk, director of cultural centre the Ukrainian Institute London, said she spent the night anxiously following reports of Russian attacks across Ukraine. “As we were anticipating, this is all over Ukraine,” she said. “I hear of explosions in my home town Lviv, near the Polish border, which was considered the safest place in Ukraine.” The historian said many of her friends and relatives were trying to get their parents to safety. “None of my friends have left Kyiv yet, although some are trying to get their parents out. Others were in bomb shelters. But people from Berdyansk and Zaporizhia, in the south-east, are trying to leave because it’s been bombed heavily and it’s extremely dangerous to be there.” Petro Kormylo, archivist for the Edinburgh branch of the Association of Ukrainians in Great Britain, said his relatives in north-east Ukraine had reported skirmishes with invading Russian forces. Kormylo, 71, from Dumfries, said two of his relatives had recently joined the territorial defence force, set up by the Ukraine government in January to help the armed forces resist a Russian invasion. “I think on a paramilitary level or partisan level, you’re going to find Ukrainians fighting in skirmishes everywhere. If you can think back to Northern Ireland, it’s going to be 50 times worse than that.”Russia’s invasion of Ukraine in the early hours of this morning was met with disbelief and shock around the world, and caused turmoil in financial markets. If wholesale gas prices stay at the current high level, UK annual household bills could rise to £3,000 in October, said Investec analyst Martin Young. They will go up by 54% to just under £2,000 next month under the regulator’s price cap. Global stock markets have tumbled, with the FTSE 100 index in London falling 3.8% to 7,207 while the Dax in Frankfurt lost nearly 4%, France’s CAC dropped 3.8% and the Italian borsa dropped 4.1%. On Wall Street, the Nasdaq pared earlier losses and is now flat while the S&amp;P 500 is down 0.9% and the Dow Jones has fallen 2%. Brent crude, the global oil benchmark, went above $105 a barrel for the first time since August 2014. It is now at $103.86 a barrel, up more than 7%m while US light crude is trading 5.3% higher at $97.32 a barrel. British gas for next-day delivery has jumped 45% to 310p per therm. European wheat futures jumped 20% to a record price of €344 a tonne, the biggest rise in nine years. Ukraine is the fifth-largest exporter of wheat in the world and considered the bread basket of Europe. This threatens to push already-high food prices even higher. Gold and other precious metal prices including palladium and platinum, have risen. Spot gold gained more than 3% at one stage to $1,969 an ounce, and is now trading at $1,923 an ounce. Aluminium rose over 5% to hit a record high of $3,466 a tonne in London. Palladium, mostly used in catalytic converters for cars, was trading more than 5% higher this afternoon after touching $2,695.57 an ounce in the morning, up 7% to the highest level since August. Russia’s Norilsk Nickel, or Nornickel, is the world’s largest supplier of palladium and a major supplier of platinum. Russia’s rouble hit a record low of 89.60 to the dollar and later traded 7.2% lower at 86.9. It had recovered more after the Bank of Russia said it would intervene to shore up the currency, before falling back again. Russian stocks plummeted as much as 50% when trading resumed on the Moscow stock exchange. The dollar-denominated RTS index tanked 49.93% in early trading, and later traded 39% lower. The rouble-denominated Moex index fell 45% to 1,690.13, and was later down 33%. London-listed Russian companies suffered heavy share price falls, with Sberbank plummeting 72% and Gazprom losing 30%. The biggest fallers on the FTSE 100 were the Russian mining companies Polymetal, down nearly 38%, and Evraz, down 30.3%. As Russian government debt sold off, yields on benchmark 10-year OFZ rouble bonds (which move inversely to prices), rose to 10.93%, the highest since early 2016. Thank you for reading. We’ll be back tomorrow. Bye! - JK The G-7 foreign ministers have published a communiqué on Ukraine-Russia, which ends with these comments: We are also closely monitoring global oil and gas market conditions, including in the context of Russia’s further military aggression against Ukraine. We support consistent and constructive engagement and coordination among major energy producers and consumers toward our collective interest in the stability of global energy supplies, and stand ready to act as needed to address potential disruptions. Economists are digesting the impact of higher energy and food prices -- with gas, oil, wheat and various metal prices jumping on world markets today –– on the global economy. Tatiana Orlova, an economist at Oxford Economics, said: We will incorporate higher European gas, oil and food prices over the medium term in our baseline, as well as more financial market disruption and tougher EU and US sanctions on Russia. The impact of these changes on our forecast for the global economy is significant, cutting 0.2 percentage points from GDP growth in 2022 and 0.1ppts in 2023. We have done our own explainer of how Russia’s assault on Ukraine will affect UK gas supplies. With Vladimir Putin’s invasion of Ukraine under way, the Kremlin’s grip on the gas taps and pipelines that supply heat and electricity to millions of homes and businesses in Europe is all too apparent, write Jillian Ambrose, our energy correspondent, and Rob Davies. Gas is already in tight supply globally and has reached record market price highs in recent months. In the UK, this has triggered a full-blown energy crisis, including the collapse of multiple electricity suppliers and a rise in household gas and electricity bills that has contributed to a growing cost-of-living squeeze. As Russia began its assault on Ukraine, prices surged again. Here are the key points of a paper by the Amundi Institute, set up by Europe’s biggest asset manager Amundi, which has more than €1.4tn under management. Global markets were not pricing in a war scenario and are now adjusting given the magnitude of this military move. It will take time for the situation to settle down. In the meantime, uncertainty and volatility will persist, with the possibility of seeing some excesses to the downside. This is not a time to try to buy the dip, as the market does not yet fully understand the impact of this geopolitical shock. The escalation in geopolitical tensions between Russia and Ukraine adds uncertainty to the global outlook at a time when central banks are acting to fight inflationary pressures. The impact of the Russia-Ukraine conflict is primarily on confidence and through commodity prices in an already-hot inflationary environment. The risk of stagflation globally is now higher (inflation factor gets reinforced while the growth factor weakens), while China is relatively insulated from this, further reinforcing the role of Chinese assets as diversifier. Overall, we believe it is time to keep hedges in place and stay cautious, but not overreact to excesses that we will likely see in the coming days. Some duration, gold and safehaven currencies can provide a cushion to risk assets. Equities, which have ample liquidity, will be the first target of risk reduction for markets and credit will likely follow. Overall, keeping cash buffers and a high focus on liquidity will be key. As we don’t expect a fast resolution of the situation, we see a rising probability of further repricing across global risk premia. Central banks actions will be even more key. Their agendas could change in case of increasing effects on the growth outlook. Meanwhile, Europe could see out the winter on gas reserves if Russian imports stop, according to a German analysis. Here’s our full take on the rouble. UK household bills will rise by 54% to just under £2,000 in April under the price cap set by the regulator Ofgem, but could rise by a further £1,000 in October if wholesale gas prices stay at the current high levels, an analyst at Investec warns. British gas for immediate delivery has jumped 45% to 305p per therm today. On Wall Street, the Nasdaq has fallen 3.5% at the opening bell, dropping 450 points to 12,588. The S&amp;P 500 dropped 1.65% to 4,15 while the Dow Jones industrial average slid 301 points, or 0.9%, to 32,830. Over here, the FTSE 100 is trading 236 points lower at 7,259, a 3.2% decline. The German market has lost more than 5%, the French bourse is 4.3% lower and the Italian market has dropped 4.8%, as investors reacted to the full-scale Russian invasion of Ukraine. The Boston-based biotech firm Moderna has just unveiled a profit before tax of $13.3bn for last year –– its first annual profit –- on the back of its Covid-19 vaccine, after a £747m loss in 2020. Revenues ballooned to $18bn, from $803m in 2020. The vast majority of revenues ($17.7bn) came from the jab, called Spikevax and one of the most expensive Covid shots in the world. This year the company expects to make a further $19bn sales from Spikevax, with additional options of $3bn and “numerous discussions” ongoing with governments for this autumn and 2023. It delivered 807m doses of the vaccine last year to 70 countries. The early studies of the Covid jab were led by the National Institutes of Health, by Barney Graham, deputy director of the Vaccine Research Center at NIH, one of the unsung heroes of the pandemic. He helped engineer a vaccine that potentially saved millions of lives around the world. British Gas has reassured customers that UK energy supplies are safe after the Russian invasion of Ukraine, but would not comment on any bill increases. British Gas has said energy supplies to its eight million customers are guaranteed, despite Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, but declined to comment on what soaring prices might mean for household bills, reports my colleague Mark Sweney. Russia, which launched a full invasion of Ukraine on Thursday, is responsible for a third of Europe’s natural gas and about 10% of global oil production. About a third of Russian gas supplies to Europe usually travels through pipelines crossing Ukraine, and there are fears retaliation against economic sanctions on Russia could disrupt supplies. “What we have made quite clear is that when we make a commitment to gas and electricity for customers we deliver on that,” said Chris O’Shea, chief executive of Centrica, the parent company of the UK’s biggest energy supplier. “We can deliver everything to consumers that we said we would.” Amid a flight to safe-have investments, the pound has suffered a 1.1% decline against the dollar. It has dropped to $1.3378 as investors dumped riskier currencies and bought yen and the US dollar instead. The UK interest rate outlook is another factor. Markets have scaled back expectations for a half-point rate hike next month after Bank of England governor Andrew Bailey said yesterday that markets should not get carried away about the likely scale of interest rate increases, while policymaker Silvana Tenreyro said she saw the case for further modest tightening. Today, the Bank’s chief economist Huw Pill echoed this message, saying the the central bank should seek to bring fast-rising inflation down in a “measured way” and one “that doesn’t disturb the rest of the economy.” Here is our market wrap: UK and European gas prices have jumped 40% today. Reuters has done a handy explainer of why developments in Russia drive European gas prices. Europe gets about 40% of its natural gas from Russia. Most of it comes through pipelines including Yamal, which crosses Belarus and Poland to Germany, Nord Stream 1, which runs directly to Germany, and pipelines that run through Ukraine. Not all countries get gas directly from Russia, but if countries like Germany, the biggest guzzler of Russian gas, receive less, they have to replace it from elsewhere, for example Norway, which has a knock-on effect on available gas for other countries. This explains why news on Russian supplies affects British gas prices in a similar way to European ones, even though Britain gets less than 5% of its gas from Russia –– but Norway is its largest supplier. The European Commission’s president Ursula von der Leyen has said said the EU would be able to cope with some disruption of gas imports from Russia. The Russian energy giant Gazprom said today that gas exports via Ukraine are normal. Analysts expect Russia will continue to supply gas to Europe and pointed to uninterrupted supplies to Europe during the Crimea crisis in 2014/15. Time for a round-up. The Russian invasion of Ukraine has caused turmoil on the ground, and in financial markets. It triggered a sell-off in global stock markets. Prices for oil and natural gas and other commodities such as wheat, along with gold, palladium and other precious metals have surged, as investors fear supply disruptions. They have piled into gold, European and US government bonds, which are seen as safer investments in times of turmoil. Russian assets have sold off, from the rouble to stocks and bonds. UK and European stock indices have tumbled between 3% (FTSE 100 index) and 5% (the German stock market). Brent crude, the global oil benchmark, went above $105 a barrel for the first time since August 2014. It is now at $104.50 a barrel, up nearly 8%. British gas for next-day delivery has jumped 40% to 280p per therm. European wheat futures have jumped 20% to a record price of €344 a tonne, the biggest rise in nine years. Ukraine is the fifth-largest exporter of wheat in the world and considered the bread basket of Europe. This doesn’t bode well for consumers –- food and energy prices are already high. Gold and other precious metal prices including palladium, platinum and nickel, have jumped. Spot gold has gained more than 3% today to $1,969 an ounce. Aluminium hit a record high of $3,443 a tonne in London. Russia’s rouble hit a record low of 89.60 to the dollar but later recovered somewhat to 83.4, still down 2.7% on the day, after the Bank of Russia said it would intervene to shore up the currency. The rouble is trading at 93.7 to the euro, down 2.2%. Russian stocks plummeted as much as 50% when trading resumed on the Moscow stock exchange. The dollar-denominated RTS index tanked 49.93% in early trading, and later traded 34% lower. The rouble-denominated Moex index fell 45% to 1,690.13, and was later down 31%. London-listed Russian companies suffered heavy share price falls, with Sberbank plummeting 61% and Gazprom losing 28%. As Russian government debt sold off, yields on benchmark 10-year OFZ rouble bonds (which move inversely to prices), rose to 10.93%, the highest since early 2016. As Russian government debt sold off, the yield on the Russian benchmark 10-year OFZ rouble bond (which moves inversely to prices) rose as high as 10.93%, the highest since early 2016. The rouble is off its record lows, trading at 84 to the dollar (but still down 3.6% on the day), after crashing to an all-time low of 89.60. The Russian central bank said earlier this morning that it would intervene in the currency markets to shore up the embattled currency. Russian stock markets have fallen to the lowest levels since 2016. As trading resumed on the Moscow exchange, the dollar-denominated RTS index plunged 31%, while the rouble-denominated Moex index lost 27%. Russ Mould, investment director at AJ Bell, explained that the FTSE 100 index in London is down less than other European bourses partly because the UK market has a large weighting towards the energy sector, and oil giants BP and Shell stand to benefit from the surge in oil prices through $100 a barrel. While both these stocks were down in absolute terms, relative to the market they fell by a smaller amount. Interestingly, Shell only dipped 0.4% whereas BP was down by a greater amount at 2.6% which can be explained by its near-20% stake in Russian oil producer Rosneft whose own shares dived 40% on Thursday. The surge in the oil price is terrible news for businesses and consumers, and fundamentally this clarifies one of the key impacts of the Russia/Ukraine war – it will serve to further stoke inflation. Not only will energy bills keep going up, but food prices look set to jump even higher. Ukraine and Russia are both big food suppliers and any disruption to supplies will force buyers to seek alternative sources, which could jack up prices. Investor sentiment was already fragile because of rising inflation and the upwards direction of travel for interest rates, but confirmation of war and the associated alarming news headlines around the world are likely to see equity markets go through a difficult period for longer than people might have previously expected. The sell-off on European stock markets is gathering pace. UK’s FTSE 100 down 189 points, or 2.5%, at 7,308 Germany’s Dax down 3.4% at 14,127 France’s CAC down 3.3% at 6,557 Italy’s FTSE MiB down 3.7% at 25,000 You can follow the latest developments in the Ukraine crisis on our live blog here: Here is our full story on the invasion: And here is an explainer: Russia has invaded Ukraine – what we know so far An index of European banking stocks fell more than 4% this morning, steeper than a 3% fall in the wider Euro Stoxx index. Banks with big operations in Russia took a hammering, including Austria’s Raiffeisen Bank International, down almost 12%, while Italy’s UniCredit fell 6.5% and France’s Société Générale lost 5.3%. European banks are most exposed to Russia, especially those in France, Italy and Spain, which far outstrip US bank exposure, Reuters said, citing data from the Bank for International Settlements. Deutsche Bank and the Munich-based insurer Allianz, two of Europe’s most important financial firms and both with operations in Russia, said they were ready to comply with sanctions. Allianz, Europe’s biggest insurer, said the share of Russian government bonds in its portfolio was “currently very low” and it had recently implemented a freeze on those securities. Deutsche Bank, Germany’s largest lender, has reduced its presence in Russia in recent years, along with other banks. The Lloyds boss Charlie Nunn told reporters on a results call this morning that the UK bank was on “heightened alert” for cyber attacks from Russia, which he said were discussed in a meeting between the government and banking bosses about Russia yesterday. Our economics editor Larry Elliott has looked at why a swift economic victory against Russia looks unlikely (he wrote this yesterday, before Russia’s invasion of Ukraine). Be ready for a long haul. That was the subtext of Boris Johnson’s message to MPs as he committed to toughening up sanctions against Russia. The warning to prepare for a “protracted struggle” was both timely and appropriate. There will be no quick knockout blow because Vladimir Putin has had time to prepare and is well dug-in. On the face of it, it should be an unequal fight. Russia is the world’s biggest landmass but has annual output smaller than Italy’s. Income a head is about a quarter of that in the UK. Russia’s economy has gone through distinct phases since the collapse of the Soviet Union in the early 1990s: an initial shock treatment that resulted in a savage recession and culminated in a financial crisis in 1998; a strong recovery in the first decade of the 21st century on the back of booming oil and gas exports; and a recent period of stagnation as the failure to diversify the economy took its toll. Some 31 Russian companies are traded on the London stock exchange. State-owned banks Sberbank and VTB, along with state-backed oil and gas producers Gazprom and Rosneft have secondary listings here (and their primary listing in Moscow). The shares have tanked this morninng: Sberbank has lost 75% and VTB fell almost 22%. Gazprom is down 36%, Rosneft has dropped 23% and Lukoil has tumbled nearly 44%. The Anglo-Russian minder Polymetal is the top faller on the FTSE 100 now, down 42%, with the Russian mining group Evraz in second place, down nearly 30%. Gas and oil prices are surging. The British day ahead gas contract has jumped 39% to 278p per therm. Brent crude is 6.6% higher at $103.21 a barrel, the highest since August 2014, while US light crude has jumped 6.2%% to $97.75 a barrel. Oil prices have surged more than $20 a barrel since the start of 2022 as the Ukraine crisis rumbled on, with fears that the US and Europe would impose sanctions on Russia’s energy sector, thereby disrupting supplies. Russia is the world’s second-largest oil producer and sells most of its crude to European refineries. It is also the largest supplier of natural gas to Europe, providing about 35% of its supply. Warren Patterson, head of ING’s commodity research, told Reuters: Russia’s announcement of a special military operation into Ukraine has pushed Brent [above] the $100 per barrel mark. This growing uncertainty during a time when the oil market is already tight does leave it vulnerable, and so prices are likely to remain volatile and elevated. There are only three risers on the FTSE 100 in London at the moment, as the blue-chip index slid 197 points, or 2.63%, to 7,300. The top faller is, once again, the Russian miner Evraz, down 30%, which has suffered heavy losses this week. Lloyds Banking Group is also among the biggest fallers, down nearly 8%, despite a five-fold increase in profits. Banking shares are falling across Europe as the Ukraine conflict took a turn for the worse, with full-scale invasion by Russia. Lloyds said it was on “heightened alert” for cyberattacks from Russia. German insurer Allianz said it had frozen its Russian government bond exposure, while Deutsche Bank said it had contingency plans in place. European gas prices have jumped more than 40% after the Russian invasion of Ukraine. Benchmark Dutch gas futures gained as much as 41% to €125 per megawatt hour, the highest level since just before Christmas, according to Bloomberg. They later traded 19% higher at €106.11. German power for March delivery soared as much as 31%, reaching €260 per megawatt hour. For now, there does not appear to be any disruption of oil and gas flows through Ukraine. Aluminium prices in London have hit a record high after Moscow’s invasion of Ukraine, as investors worry about supplies from Russia, a major metals producer, and an impact on production from higher energy prices. Russia produces 6% of the world’s aluminium, and 7% of its mined nickel. Three-month aluminium on the London Metal Exchange jumped to an all-time high of $3,443 a tonne, and later traded 4.2% higher at $3,428.5. Nickel climbed 3.4% to $25,220 a tonne, after hitting its highest level since May 2011 t $25,240. Soni Kumari, an analyst at Melbourne-based ANZ bank, told Reuters: Aluminium and nickel are energy intensive metals and higher energy prices would further push the cost curve. This raises risk of more European smelters suspending their production or postponing their restart plans. Germany pulled the plug on a major gas project, the $11bn Nord Stream 2 pipeline owned by the Russian state-owned gas giant Gazprom on Tuesday, further boosting natural gas prices. European shares have tumbled at the opening bell. Germany’s Dax fell 4.4%, while the French market dropped nearly 4%, Spain’s Ibex slid 4.3% and the Italian exchange lost 2%. The FTSE 100 in London has fallen nearly 200 points, or 2.6%. The Russian central bank said it would intervene in currency markets to prop up the rouble, after it crashed to an all-time low of 89.60 against the dollar. Against the euro, it is trading at $98, down nearly 7%. Russian forces have fired missiles at several cities in Ukraine and landed troops on its coast today, after denying for weeks that they had plans for an invasion. Russia’s currency and bonds have tanked, prompting the Bank of Russia to announce its first foreign exchange intervention to shore up financial stability since 2014, the year when Russia annexed Crimea from Ukraine. The bank said: To stabilise the situation on the financial market, the Bank of Russia decided to start interventions on the currency market. The bank has also decided to expand the list of securities it accepts as collateral in exchange for liquidity it provides, and will hold operations to offer extra liquidity to the Russian banking sector. Markets are also bracing for tougher western sanctions against Russia, following measures criticised as soft on Tuesday and Wednesday. As investors pile into safe-haven assets, the yields on eurozone government bonds have fallen sharply (the return to an investor from the bond’s coupon, interest, payments). Investors are buying German 10-year bonds, the benchmark in Europe, pushing the yield down to 1.139%, the lowest in three weeks. Most other 10-year bond yields in Europe are also down. Michael Hewson, chief market analyst at CMC Markets UK, said: It’s probably not hyperbole to say that Europe is now at its most dangerous juncture since World War 2. Gold, a traditional safe haven investment seen as a good hedge against rising inflation, jumped as much as 2% to their highest levels in a year, touching $1,948.77 an ounce. They later traded at 1.8% to $1,941 an ounce, while silver prices rose 2.3% to $25.08 an ounce. Palladium prices also surged. Russia is the world’s third-largest producer of gold and Moscow-based Norilsk Nickel is a major producer of palladium and platinum. Spot palladium rose 2.7% to $4,549.01 an ounce, and platinum gained 1.2% to $1,104.50. The UK also also threatened “unprecedented” sanctions against Russia. UK junior minister James Cleverly told Sky News: We will be bringing forward .... in close concert with our international friends and allies, an unprecedented sanctions response, coordinated sanctions response, to punish this appalling decision. Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. Oil prices have broken through $100 a barrel and global stocks are plunging, after Russian forces invaded Ukraine. Vladimir Putin ordered a “special military operation” at dawn, amid warnings from world leaders that it could spark the biggest war in Europe since 1945. Within minutes of Putin’s short televised address, at about 5am Ukrainian time, explosions were heard near major Ukrainian cities, including the capital Kyiv. The United States and its allies will impose “severe sanctions” on Russia, US president Joe Biden said. Oil prices jumped more than 6% and Brent crude went through $100 a barrel for the first time since mid-2004. It touched $103.32 a barrel, the highest since August 2014, while US light crude soared to $97.51 a barrel, up $5.4. The rouble hit a record low of 89.60 against the dollar, and the Moscow stock exchange remains temporarily suspended, but is due to reopen at 10am GMT. Russian sovereign dollar bonds are selling off, with the bond maturing in 2029 down more than 15 cents to a record low of 72.5 cents. Asian stocks tumbled, with Japan’s Nikkei losing 1.8% and Hong Kong’s Hang Seng and the Singaporean exchange falling more than 3%. European stock futures point to sharp losses when bourses over here open at 8am GMT. Euro Stoxx 50 futures are down 4.7%, German Dax futures are more than 5% lower and FTSE futures have fallen 3%. The Agenda 7.45am GMT: France consumer confidence 11am GMT: CBI retail sales survey 1.15pm GMT: Bank of England governor Andrew Bailey speaks 1.30pm GMT: US GDP for fourth quarter, second estimate (forecast: 7%) 1.30pm GMT: US Initial jobless claims for week of 19 FebruaryI think the German word falschfahrer (wrong driver), for someone driving the wrong way down a motorway, to be beautifully succinct and maybe, like schadenfreude, could be incorporated into the English language (Letters, 20 February). With an ageing population, this error of judgment could become more commonplace. Frank Lloyd Essen, Germany • Let the record show that the Russian Federation unleashed war against a neighbour at a time when the Russian Federation held the presidency of the United Nations security council, responsible, inter alia, for the preservation of international peace and security. Rod MacKenna Kefalas, Crete, Greece • Thanks to Gary Brooker and Procol Harum (Obituary, 23 February), I have a perennial earworm. Sara Hayward Worcester • As a young aspiring organist at my Methodist church in the 1960s, I played A Whiter Shade of Pale as an introductory piece prior to the service. Imagine my indignation afterwards when the senior organist told me, “you can’t play stuff like that in here”. Perhaps the devil really does have all the best tunes. John Dilleigh Uppingham, Rutland • Another competitor for the most ingenious substitution by a supermarket’s online delivery system (Letters, 21 February): my wife ordered a box of matches from Sainsbury’s and we received a packet of firelighters. Peter Wemyss-Gorman Lindfield, West Sussex • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.With Kim Kardashian in the front row and her half sister Kendall Jenner on the catwalk – a resurgent Prada is flexing its muscles, as the big hitters of Italian fashion jostle for position in the post-pandemic era. With Gucci returning to the city’s fashion week for the first time since February 2020 and Giorgio Armani, who cancelled two January events during the Omicron surge, throwing his hat back into the ring with two shows, the competitive edge has returned to Milan’s catwalks. Miuccia Prada, ever the maverick of this group, has declared herself tired of fashion history. She cares about “the history of women, the history of people, not the history of fashion”, she said before Thursday’s show. Simple Marlon Brando-style white cotton vests turned up in no less than 15 of the catwalk looks, while a pair of cotton pyjamas with the show address printed on the breast pocket served as the invitation for the event. The concept: a celebration of intimate, everyday clothes that don’t scream status or glamour. But Prada has always delighted in contradictions and the showstopper tailored coats embellished with pastel feathers on the upper sleeve – a captain’s armband, but make it cocktail – pointed to plenty of fashion ambition. Now a design partnership in which Miuccia Prada shares design duties with Raf Simons, the label’s retail sales were up 18% in the third quarter of 2021 compared with the same period in 2019. Prada’s husband and business partner, Patrizio Bertelli, recently indicated that a succession plan was in place to hand over the reins of the company to their son, Lorenzo, within the next five years.  The job of fashion, Simons believes, is “to define our idea of beauty today”. In its mashup of the lo-fi (cotton vests and nylon parkas) and the ultra-glamorous (Kardashians and feather trims), this collection was Prada doing what it does best: using fashion to hold a mirror to the contradictions of how we live now. The show was dotted with Prada in-jokes. The famous triangle logo twinkled from the toes of shoes and at the collar of an evening dress, while the skirt-and-sweater as a look – a staple of Prada greatest hits and of Miuccia’s own wardrobe – made several catwalk turns. I’ll be your mirror: MaxMara glad old orthodoxy nearing end Ian Griffiths, the British designer of MaxMara, cast models of a range of body sizes and ages to wear autumn’s teddy bear fake fur coats and ultra wide-leg trousers at his show. “I want to create a rapport with the woman watching, who should see herself reflected in the catwalk. I want to hold up a mirror and say – yes, this is aspirational, but it is also about you.” Backstage after the show, he said: “The days when designers would say, ‘I want to do a show with only blondes.’ I can’t imagine going back to that world now.” Griffiths added that the rise of Kate Moss, who challenged the orthodoxy that only very tall women could be successful catwalk models, “was the beginning of the end of a system, which I’m glad to say is now breaking down”.In asking for a special review of the Equality and Human Rights Commission’s “A” rating as a regulator (LGBT+ groups call for EHRC to lose international status over trans stance, 11 February), Stonewall is trying to undermine the only regulator we have that is invested in securing human rights and equality for all in the UK. The EHRC’s chair is right to point out that its task is to balance the rights of all and not any one group. Stonewall’s insistence on misrepresenting the EHRC’s views and on “speaking for all” in the quest for gaining rights for trans people is misguided. Rights and freedoms are not entitlements; they are negotiated with others before the law through honest and often impassioned debate. The EHRC knows better than most that all equalities are connected. If hate crimes take place against an individual from one group, it will also take place against others in other groups. We also know that most of us have identities that mean we want equality for several, not just one identity. Stonewall’s task is to bring people together to address these difficult issues, to support the EHRC, even if it wants to take it to task, and to build alliances with other key equality groups, not to bully them into submission. Fighting for equality has become toxic at a time when we need our equality leaders to protect existing rights and not demolish them in the name of one particular equality. Elaine Willis Former chair, Stonewall • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.French politicians have long embraced domestic animals – from Emmanuel Macron’s rescue dog, Nemo, who once peed on a fireplace during an Elysée meeting, to the far-right leader Marine Le Pen’s hobby of breeding Bengal cats. But a dog called Douglas from the south of France is causing ridicule for the rightwing presidential candidate Valérie Pécresse. The dog, which lives in Nice on the Côte d’Azur, was allegedly signed up to vote in the primary race that chose Pécresse as the candidate for Les Républicains, according to an investigation by the daily newspaper Libération. The paper said it had seen confidential party membership lists for the December primary, and among the 148,000 party members signed up for the vote journalists had found names of at least four deceased people and one dog. “Douglas was a discreet party activist,” wrote Libération. “After paying €30 online in November, he received a membership card and the right to vote in the primary. No one saw him at meetings and he never commented on the campaign on social media – for the very good reason that Douglas is a dog.” Libération said it had contacted Douglas’s owner, who confirmed that he had signed up the animal with his own contact details “to see if it was possible”. Pécresse said she knew nothing of the dog’s alleged presence and denied any irregularities in the primary campaign, which she said had been “exemplary” and had never been challenged. She said the paper’s investigation was a “grotesque act of manipulation and destabilisation” and that any primary might have had the odd prank. In a statement, the party denied all the allegations and said it would make a legal complaint against Libération. But it was too late to stem the tide of dog jokes flooding social media aimed at Pécresse, particularly among the digital campaigners of her rival, the far-right TV pundit Éric Zemmour. Zemmour, who has convictions for incitement to racial hatred, is known for both his thunderous speeches about the decline of France and his mocking of his opponents. His supporters seized on Douglas and soon the hashtag #Douglasgate was trending in France. One Parisian Zemmour supporter posted a video of a recent Pécresse speech in which she told party members, “At last we’re all united”, and superimposed footage of a pack of hunting hounds. Zemmour himself tweeted that his new Reconquête party was the first to officially allow pets to join as supporters, “but they aren’t allowed to vote”. Douglas soon had his own Twitter account. Journalists at the paper Nice-Matin claimed to have hunted down the real Douglas the dog, which had been given a false name by Libération to protect his owner. The paper said that the canine was in fact a Shiba Inu living in Nice named Clovis. Polls this week have shown Macron ahead in the first-round vote, followed by Le Pen and Zemmour, with Pécresse slipping slightly behind them and the hard-left candidate Jean-Luc Mélenchon trailing her. The two-round vote takes place on 10 and 24 April.I was intrigued by Dr Clare Gerada’s long read (‘In my 30 years as a GP, the profession has been horribly eroded’, 22 February). I left general practice in late 1990, a few months before Dr Gerada began her own distinguished career. The changes she so graphically describes were incipient even then. The personal, responsive and resilient service provided by a dedicated and stable workforce was already under threat. The shift to an impersonal gig economy has been driven by inexorable consumer demand, untempered by any significant response from the profession. It is my opinion that the General Medical Council and Royal College of General Practitioners could have done far more to retain the ethical, personal and accessible services threatened by the intrusive and bureaucratic contracts of 1990 and 2004. My profession’s weakness and possible complicity has led us to the situation we find ourselves in today. Peter Baddeley Painswick, Gloucestershire • I write to applaud Dr Clare Gerada’s account of general practice. I too was a GP in south London, but from 1962 until 1996. In the early days, I had a highly visible yellow Renault 4 and would often come out from Safeways to a small queue of people by the car asking for a repeat prescription “to save an appointment, doctor”. These I would cheerfully give as I knew everyone and they had a point. There was no appointment system at the surgery, but numbered cards on hooks in the hall meant you could nip out to do a bit of shopping while waiting. The absence of technology meant the art of diagnosis – as it was called – was vital. We were taught in the Royal Free medical school to “listen to the patient – they are telling you the diagnosis”, and I hope I always used that wisely. Dr Margaret Taylor Clare, Suffolk • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Caoimhín Kelleher is a John Achterberg project, according to Jürgen Klopp, in the sense that Liverpool’s goalkeeping coach was convinced the “skinny boy from Ireland standing in this big goal” had first-team potential when others harboured doubts. Another Achterberg project is the goalkeeper mural at Liverpool’s Axa training centre, a work he commissioned from the local artist John Culshaw to commemorate those with a hand in shaping the club’s history – from Elisha Scott to Tommy Lawrence, Ray Clemence to Bruce Grobbelaar, Jerzy Dudek to Alisson – and which decorates a wall behind the keepers’ training area. It is an ambition of Kelleher’s to marry the Achterberg projects together. “There are absolute legends up on that wall so to be up there would be an honour for me,” the 23-year-old says. “It would be quite cool and special if I was there. It is nice when you go training every day to be having a look at that. It is cool that we have a chance to win a trophy and maybe I can get myself on there as well. It is a good inspiration for us when we are training every day in front of it.” Kelleher will have his chance to win a trophy and press claims for a place on the mural – there remains space for an addition or two – in Sunday’s Carabao Cup final against Chelsea. The Republic of Ireland international will make his eighth appearance of the season, and 17th of his Anfield career, when Liverpool attempt to win their first domestic cup in a decade. The Carabao Cup is Kelleher’s dedicated competition this season and has demonstrated why the young talent has overtaken Adrián as Klopp’s second-choice keeper. After two penalty saves in the quarter-final shootout win over Leicester he was unflappable in the semi-final second leg win at Arsenal – in keeping with a laid-back personality – but discovered he would be playing at Wembley only when Klopp was asked his intentions at a press conference the following day. “My idea is to play him,” the Liverpool manager said. “Caoimhín deserves that. He brought the team there.” Kelleher recalls: “That was nice to hear. I didn’t know if I would be playing the final, not even when I was playing most of the games. I would never want to take anything for granted. I was obviously very happy. It is an honour to represent Liverpool in a final. I always had belief that I could get up to the first team but this is still a really nice moment for me.” A Liverpool fan from childhood in Cork, Kelleher was a prolific striker for the county and for Ringmahon Rangers until he was 13. Three of his four brothers play hurling (the other, Fiacre, is a defender for Bradford City) but there was no temptation to follow suit. “I tried a bit of GAA but for me it was just football,” Kelleher says. “It was the only one I was good at.” He switched from Ringmahon’s leading goalscorer to goalkeeper when their regular stopper left. “Obviously it has worked out well,” he says, with considerable understatement. “I did OK in the first game but it was more that I really enjoyed playing in the position. I took a love to it and kicked on. Maybe six to eight months after becoming a goalkeeper clubs would come looking and wanting to take me on trial.” Blackburn, Aston Villa and Manchester United were interested. When Liverpool called, however, there was only one place he was going. “I have had belief in myself since I came over that I can do it but it has taken a lot of hard work and a lot of coaching sessions to bring me on,” Kelleher says. “I have a lot to thank John for in that respect. Ever since I came here he has been brilliant with me. He saw something in me since I came into first-team training and he brought me on in leaps and bounds. I know for sure I would not be here if it was not for him. “I am nowhere near the highest level yet – I think I have a long way to go if I want to reach that – but I’ve always had belief in myself that I can play here and obviously playing games for the first team and performing relatively well gives you the extra boost of confidence that you are good enough. Now I need to push on and keep going.” Kelleher has been to Wembley once, for the Republic of Ireland’s friendly defeat by England in November 2020, and claims he will feel more excitement than nerves in the buildup to a final attended by his family and girlfriend. He prefers to listen to music than re-analyse opposition strikers before kick-off and, though his relaxed character appears well-equipped to handle pressure, Kelleher’s manager has removed it from him anyway. Klopp says: “If it works out, then it’s all about Caoimhín. If it doesn’t work out, then it’s all about me. It’s as easy as that, and I take it. It’s just a thing we have to do because of the quality Caoimhín has. We want to keep him as long as somehow possible knowing that, from our point of view, the best goalkeeper in the world is our No 1. Caoimhín is an exceptional goalkeeper and we want to keep him here. And for that, he needs games. These games are his competition, and there’s no chance of him not playing.”I read with interest your editorial (21 February) regarding buy-to-let landlords and the injustice faced by renters who are excluded from the prosperity generated by rising property prices and who are funding the comfortable retirements of their landlords. While the suggestion of extending the right-to-buy scheme to the private sector is, at first glance, interesting, sadly this will not assist those who will never be able to afford to purchase a property. How will an individual receiving the minimum wage be able to afford the deposit required by a mortgage lender? Given that the average mortgage is repaid over 25 years, anyone over the age of 40 is likely to be excluded. All political parties have avoided the fact that there is a chronic shortage of social housing. The Thatcher administration’s prohibition of local authorities using funds gained from former council tenants who purchased their properties to build new council-owned homes was shortsighted and caused incalculable social harm. The right to a permanent home is a basic human right and a cross-party issue. Will Boris Johnson and Keir Starmer be willing to accept, and promote, the fact that the only solution to the shortage is the largest programme of social housing construction since the end of the second world war? Keeley-Jasmine Cavendish London • You put the shocking rise in house prices down to a lack of stock coming on to the market. How refreshing that you recognise that this is not due to a shortage of physical homes, but to the rich hoarding homes and to frenetic housebuilding drawing the eye of investors. Here in south Oxfordshire, the government forces us to build three times more homes than the number of households expected to form, that is, two newly empty dwellings for every one that becomes a home. This has turbocharged the market and prices. Concreting over our land loses us Oxford’s green belt and fragments the landscape. Land lost cannot be restored for nature and regenerative farming. The Labour party’s intention to ban foreign ownership of new homes should be extended to all homes and further localised: you cannot buy a home in Oxfordshire (old or new) unless you are, or intend to become, a resident. All homes should be sold for residential purposes only, slowly ending the problem of housing for investment. Some holiday businesses could be enabled by licensing premises for that purpose. This may sound draconian, but it is the only way we can bring down prices and house our people well. Limit the market, do not increase supply. Dr Sue Roberts District councillor, South Oxfordshire • The housing shortage goes back to the Thatcher years and the privatisation of rentals. When she tried to make every tenant Conservative by pushing people to buy their council houses, she left a hole for councils, which she made sure could not be filled with the reductions on the amount that they could charge and the government subsidies that they could draw on. A lot of rough sleepers and plenty of tenants could surely be housed by local authorities – the biggest obstacle is the ideology of the present government. David Critchlow Poole, Dorset • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.UK consumers have been warned to brace themselves for a substantial increase in the cost of living, including the prospect of £3,000-a-year energy bills after the Russian invasion of Ukraine. The prices of wholesale gas and oil soared on the back of the news, leading to predictions of further rises in domestic bills. The AA and RAC warned that petrol and diesel prices would start rising within days after crude oil prices reached record levels. Analysts are warning that household gas and electricity bills could rise by a further £600-£1,000 a year – to as much as £3,000 – after the Russian invasion pushed up wholesale gas prices 28% on Thursday morning. Although UK households are not heavily reliant on Russian gas, concerns that supplies from the country will be disrupted have pushed up prices on the wholesale market. After Germany halted the approval of the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline this week, the Russian politician Dmitry Medvedev warned that natural gas prices could double in Europe. Oil prices have risen to a seven-year high over concerns about supplies from Russia. Energy bills The market turmoil is expected to cause further hardship for those already struggling to heat and light their homes. On 1 April, the average dual fuel bill is already set to rise to a record £1,971, and more pain could be on the way when the regulator Ofgem reviews the maximum rate that suppliers can charge in the autumn. Roger Bird, the head of energy trading and risk at the consultancy Advantage Utilities, warned that volatility in the energy market in the coming months could easily result in the cap increasing by £600 or more. Should Russia cut Europe off from its gas supplies, the continent would be at the mercy of a “cut-throat” industry that often sees gas supplies circle oceans and be redirected to the highest bidder, he said. “The worst-case scenario could see wholesale prices far exceed the astonishing spike previously seen around December 2021.” Martin Young, a senior energy analyst at Investec, was even more pessimistic. In a note sent to City clients, he warned that British households could face “devastating” rises in their energy bills if wholesale prices remain at their current levels. “The jump in electricity and gas prices of recent days has sent our October tariff cap estimate soaring above £3,000,” he said. “This could be devastating for UK households with elevated fuel poverty, and an ‘eat or heat’ dilemma.” Sarah Coles, a senior personal finance analyst at the financial services firm Hargreaves Lansdown, said: “Millions of people have fallen into the fuel poverty gap, and war between Ukraine and Russia could push even more of us over the edge.” Petrol prices Petrol and diesel reached record levels in the UK on Wednesday, with unleaded at nearly 149.5p a litre and diesel at almost 153p, and the RAC said petrol could rise as high as £1.60 a litre. “Russia’s actions will now push petrol pump prices up to £1.50 very soon,” said Simon Williams, the RAC’s fuel spokesperson. “The question then becomes where will this stop and how much can drivers take, just as many are using their cars more and returning to workplaces.” Williams said if oil prices rose to $110 (£82) a barrel, “there’s a very real danger the average price of petrol would hit £1.55 a litre”. He said: “This would cause untold financial difficulties for many people who depend on their cars for getting to work and running their lives as it would skyrocket the cost of a full tank to £85.” If prices were to hit $120 a barrel that could translate to a price of £1.60 a litre at the pumps and £88 for a full tank, he added. However, the AA said there were other factors that would work to stabilise the price for consumers. The first is that market increases often fall back after surges earlier in the day or week, and that the cost of petrol does not go up at the same rate as oil during global events. Finally, the fuel consumption of vehicles is lower coming out of winter. Edmund King, the AA president, said: “Prices at the pumps still vary considerably and tend to be cheaper when there is supermarket competition. To conserve fuel, drivers should consider cutting out short journeys, car sharing and eco driving. Cutting speed and driving more smoothly can lead to 15% reductions in fuel consumption.”Two former European leaders have quit the boards of Russian companies in response to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. Finland’s former prime minister Esko Aho said he had resigned as a director of Russia’s largest bank, Sberbank, while the former Italian prime minister Matteo Renzi announced he had quit the board of Russia’s largest car-sharing service, Delimobil. Their departures highlighted the pressure on western business leaders and politicians to reassess their ties with Russian companies after Moscow’s full-scale attack on its neighbour. Aho, who was an independent director of Sberbank, had been a member of the lender’s supervisory board since 2016. He told the Finnish newspaper Turun Sanomat on Thursday morning that he had “initiated measures to withdraw from the board”. A page on Sberbank’s website showing Aho’s board positions was updated on Thursday. It stated he was “considered to have retired from the supervisory board … upon a personal request”. Italian media reported that Renzi, who remains the leader of the Italia Viva party, had stepped down from the board of directors of Delimobil. The former prime minister had taken up the position last August at the car-sharing firm, which was founded in 2015 by the Italian businessman Vincenzo Trani, the president of the Italian-Russian chamber of commerce. The resignations will increase the criticism of prominent former European politicians who have not cut their ties with Russian corporations, including the former German chancellor Gerhard Schröder. At the beginning of February, Schröder was nominated to join the board of the Russian state-owned energy company Gazprom. Schröder, who led Germany from 1998 to 2005, remains the chairman of the Russian state energy firm Rosneft, and also sits on the shareholders’ committee at Nord Stream, the company behind the controversial gas pipeline linking Russia and Germany. The former Social Democrat chancellor has come in for frequent criticism since leaving office for his close ties with Russia, and his personal friendship with Vladimir Putin. Schröder issued a statement on Thursday calling for caution in the use of sanctions against Russia, saying they could endanger a return to peace and dialogue. “Much has been said in recent years about mistakes and failures in the relationship between the west and Russia. And there were many mistakes – on both sides,” Schröder wrote on his page on the networking website LinkedIn. “But Russia’s security interests also do not justify the use of military means.” Schröder sits on the board of Rosneft alongside the former Austrian foreign affairs minister Karin Kneissl, as well as western business leaders including the current and former chief executives of BP, Bernard Looney and Bob Dudley. The London-headquartered oil company BP owns almost a fifth of Rosneft.Though best known for his Horrortorio pastiche and the “pop cantata” Captain Noah and His Floating Zoo, Joseph Horovitz, who has died aged 95, was a master craftsman in a range of music genres, extending from chamber and orchestral through brass band and wind to opera and ballet. He also wrote at least 70 television and film scores over the course of his career, including that for Rumpole of the Bailey. Many of his more serious works displayed a popular touch, too, but he consistently succeeded in writing music that was gratifyingly accessible without superficiality or sentimentality. He began to achieve critical acclaim in the 1950s for two comic operas, The Dumb Wife, with a libretto by Peter Shaffer after Rabelais, and Gentleman’s Island, and for a series of ballets (he wrote 16 in all) beginning with Les Femmes d’Alger (1952) and continuing with Alice in Wonderland (1953) and Concerto for Dancers (1958). The former were performed by the Intimate Opera Company, for which he acted as a pianist-composer. In 1961 he was appointed professor of composition at the Royal College of Music, becoming a fellow in 1981 and continuing to teach there until shortly before his death. Horovitz once cited the British composers Peter Warlock, EJ Moeran and Frederick Delius, as well as the Anglo-Dutch Bernard van Dieren, as influences, but notwithstanding occasional echoes of Warlock, there are few significant traces of English pastoralism in his works. Rather he developed an individual neoclassical idiom, drawing on neo-tonal harmonies, enlivened by jazz, Latin American and other popular elements. The Trumpet Concerto (1963), written, according to Horovitz, to “demonstrate the agility and brilliance of the modern trumpet”, contrasts spiky, virtuoso material with indulgently mellifluous writing. The closing rondo – a favoured form of the composer – is spiced with Latin American rhythms that keep both soloist and orchestra on their toes. With its colourful orchestration including tambourine, side drum and xylophone, it affords an attractively good-humoured as well as challenging staple in the trumpet repertory. Originally associated with Philip Jones, who gave the first performance under the composer, it was subsequently recorded by a leading trumpeter of the succeeding generation, James Watson. Horovitz made similar contributions to the concerto repertory of many other instruments, too, including violin, clarinet, bassoon, percussion, tuba and euphonium. Probably his best-known work, Captain Noah and His Floating Zoo, written in 1968, was composed to a text by Michael Flanders. Performed by the King’s Singers, it won the Novello prize for the best children’s work and was set as a GCSE text. It was also adapted as a television cartoon and reorchestrated by the composer for a large-scale BBC performance in 2018, conducted by John Wilson, one of Horowitz’s many distinguished pupils. Almost as successful was the Horrortorio, first performed at the Hoffnung astronautical music festival of 1961 at the Royal Festival Hall, and subsequently all over the world. Setting a witty libretto by Alistair Sampson, from a scenario by Maurice Richardson that lampoons Hammer horror films of the period with its storyline populated by Count Dracula, Frankenstein, Moriarty and Fu Manchu, the Horrortorio is a riotous but skilfully crafted pastiche of Handelian oratorio, Gilbert and Sullivan and Walton’s Belshazzar’s Feast. Horovitz was born in Vienna to Béla Horovitz, a publisher and co-founder of Phaidon Press, and his wife, Lotte (nee Beller). Escaping from the city just days after the Nazi annexation of Austria in 1938, he travelled alone to London with his siblings, joined later by their parents. They spent the war years in Bath and Oxford. His elder sister, Elly Miller, became a distinguished art publisher, his younger sister, Hannah Horovitz, a classical music promoter. After reading music and modern languages at Oxford he studied with Gordon Jacob at the Royal College of Music and for a year with Nadia Boulanger in Paris. His first post as music director for the Bristol Old Vic provided both valuable experience – he continued to conduct throughout his life – and a grounding in the popular styles that were to become an intrinsic element in his own idiom. His Jazz Harpsichord Concerto (1965), using a concertino of amplified harpsichord, drums and bass, was a curiously idiosyncratic work for a professor at the RCM to write in the mid-60s, but its skilful blend of classical and jazz procedures, and its infectious, foot-tapping enthusiasm, give it immense audience appeal. The last of his five string quartets, dating from 1969, one of his finest works, uses gritty dissonance seemingly to recall the harsh experiences of his earlier life, with anguish forcefully invoked by insistent repetitions of Viennese waltz motifs. The disquiet alternates with wistful passages, however, and the quartet achieves a peaceful resolution on to a final consonance. He composed the score for The Search for the Nile (1971), a miniseries, for a BBC production of The Picture of Dorian Gray (1976), for Lillie, a TV series about Lillie Langtry starring Francesca Annis (1978), and for Rumpole of the Bailey (1978). The Jubilee Toy Symphony (1977), deploying toy instruments, bird sounds and percussion, was another popular success. Commissioned for the Queen’s silver jubilee, it was given its premiere by a stellar lineup of soloists under Colin Davis at a musical party in aid of the Musicians Benevolent Fund (now Help Musicians) at St James’s Palace, in the presence of the Queen Mother. In the 1980s he composed music for the TV series Agatha Christie’s Partners in Crime and A Dorothy L Sayers Mystery. A third opera, Ninotchka, based on the 1939 MGM film starring Greta Garbo, dates from 2006. He is survived by his wife, Anna (nee Landau), whom he married in 1956, and their two daughters, Isabel and Sally, six grandchildren and three great-grandchildren. • Joseph Horovitz, composer, born 26 May 1926; died 9 February 2022Global markets were thrown into turmoil on Thursday as the outbreak of war on European soil sent prices of commodities from oil and gas to wheat surging, while stock market plunged. The ramifications of a potentially prolonged conflict involving Europe’s primary supplier of gas sent a chill through markets, affecting prices across a broad spectrum of asset classes and investments. Oil Brent crude hit $105 a barrel for the first time since August 2014, following a rise of more than 8% on international energy markets. The increase signalled a further rise on garage forecourts to record-breaking retail price for unleaded petrol of more than 155p a litre. Russia is the world’s second-largest oil producer and sells most of its crude to European refineries. It is also the largest supplier of natural gas to Europe, providing about two-fifths of its supply. Oil prices have surged more than $20 a barrel since the start of 2022 as the Ukraine crisis went unresolved, with fears that the US and Europe would impose sanctions on Russia’s energy sector, disrupting supplies, should the situation escalate. Gas The price of British gas for next-day delivery jumped 53% to 326p per therm as the invasion stoked fears of a disruption to global energy supplies. Dutch futures, a closely watched measure for European prices, were up 57% on contracts for delivery in March. Analysts at Investec think the renewed surge in gas price could force the energy regulator Ofgem to increase the household bills price cap to £3,000 in October. The 54% increase to nearly £2,000 announced earlier this month has already caused significant political fallout and sparked warnings of families having to choose between food and heating. Gold Typically seen as a safe haven in times of crisis, gold moved through $1,950 (£1,460) per ounce at one point before settling back, reaching levels not far away from its 2020 all-time high of $2,067. Russia and Ukraine are also large producers of important industrial metals such as palladium, nickel and aluminium, which analysts said could be in short supply over the coming months unless the war ends quickly. Russia produces 6% of the world’s aluminium and 7% of its mined nickel. Aluminium rose more than 5% to hit a record high of $3,466 a tonne in London. Nickel hit its highest level since May 2011 at $25,240 at one stage. Palladium, used in catalytic converters for cars, was trading more than 5% higher on Thursday afternoon, after touching $2,695.57 an ounce in the morning, up 7% to the highest level since August. Wheat Between them, Russia and Ukraine export a quarter of the world’s wheat, with Ukraine in particular known as the “breadbasket of Europe”. Short-term European wheat prices neared record highs on Thursday afternoon. Ukraine is also a major exporter of corn and barley, as well as a key source of cooking oils. Stock markets There was a broad sell-off of shares across Europe, and banks with big operations in Russia were especially hard hit, such as Austria’s Raiffeisenbank, Italy’s Unicredit and France’s Société Générale, following moves by governments across the continent and in the UK to impose sanctions on Russian banks and wealthy Russian individuals. The FTSE 100 index in London tumbled 291 points, or 3.8%, to 7,207, while the Dax in Frankfurt lost nearly 4%, the Cac in Paris dropped 3.8% and the Italian borsa in Milan closed 4.1% lower. On Wall Street, the Nasdaq pared earlier losses and was flat in the afternoon while the S&amp;P 500 was down 0.9% and the Dow Jones slid 2%. Russian stocks plummeted as much as 50% when trading resumed on the Moscow stock exchange on Thursday morning following a temporary suspension. The dollar-denominated RTS index tanked 49.93% in early trading, and later traded 39% lower. The rouble-denominated Moex index fell 45% to 1,690.13, and was later down 33%. Thirty-one Russian companies are traded on the London Stock Exchange. State-owned banks Sberbank and VTB, along with state-backed oil and gas producers Gazprom and Rosneft have secondary listings in the UK while their primary listings remain in Moscow. A freeze on Russian bank assets in the UK nnounced by Boris Johnson sent shares in Sberbank plunging 74% while VTB held its value following a 30% drop since January. Gazprom, the mainly state-owned Russian energy company that trades some of its shares in London, was down 30%. Rosneft, the oil major which is 20%-owned by BP, dropped 50% and Lukoil fell 43%. The Anglo-Russian miner Polymetal was the top faller on the FTSE 100, down 38%, with the Russian mining group Evraz in second place, down 30%. Economic Impact A prolonged war could pile pressure on economies including the UK, with the cost-of-living crisis a particular concern. Inflation is already at a 30-year high of 5.5% but with oil, gas and food ingredients all rising on the back of the Ukraine conflict, economic analysts are warning it could go still higher, while growth could be affected too. Tatiana Orlova, an economist at Oxford Economics, said: “We will incorporate higher European gas, oil and food prices over the medium term in our baseline, as well as more financial market disruption and tougher EU and US sanctions on Russia. The impact of these changes on our forecast for the global economy is significant, cutting 0.2 percentage points from GDP growth in 2022 and 0.1ppts in 2023.”Fan service has come a long way since 2006, when studio New Line allowed its audience to basically crowd-think the entirety of Samuel L Jackson action epic Snakes on a Plane. Back then, somebody high up thought it would be a really good idea to start borrowing lines for Jackson to say (while fighting off those airborne reptiles) from a hyped-up geek community who had been spending most of their spare time discussing the unreleased movie on fan forums and blogs. The best/worst of them ended up being the legendary (for all the wrong reasons) line: “Enough is enough! I have had it with these motherfucking snakes on this motherfucking plane!” Up there with Jackson’s famous Ezekiel 25:17 speech about the path of the righteous man it really wasn’t. This week Marvel and Sony have shown how to do fan service properly. And all it took was a staged meme featuring all three webslingers from global megasmash Spider-Man: No Way Home pointing at each other. The image recalls a famous still from episode 19 of the 1967-1970 animated Spider-Man show, in which a Spidey-impostor – clue, he’s really a criminal – tries to impersonate the masked wallcrawler. It’s since been used millions of times in social media posts, often to illustrate moments when celebrities meet each other (according to the Know Your Meme website). The staged meme was shot to publicise the digital release date of No Way Home on 22 March, and tapping into fans’ nostalgia for old Spider-Man shows couldn’t be more fitting. Ultimately, Jon Watts’s film, which recently overtook Avatar to become the third-highest-grossing film of all time at the all-important US box office, is 148 minutes of incredibly well-conceived and detailed Spidey fan-service. There are returning villains we thought we’d never see on the big screen again, such as Willem Dafoe’s cackling Green Goblin and Alfred Molina’s tragic Doc Ock. There are three Spider-Men from different eras, two of whom make such a welcome return that it’s like meeting a dear old friend again for a beer after decades apart. Marvel and Sony got this so right that there is now talk of future movies starring Tobey Maguire and Andrew Garfield as Spidey. We will surely see Dafoe as the Green Goblin again, if the creatives out there have their heads screwed on properly. And there will be more old superheroes returning from the dead in forthcoming DC effort The Flash, in which we are promised the return of the Michael Keaton and Ben Affleck takes on Batman. It would almost be a shock if Warner Bros hasn’t been desperately reaching out to George Clooney to make an appearance, though it is obviously a little bit harder to play off nostalgia when nobody much liked your version of the caped crusader in the first place. But if fan service can be such a vital element of a good comic book movie, how do we explain Zack Snyder’s Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice, a DC episode concocted almost entirely so that people would head into the cinema in their droves to see the dark knight battle the last son of Krypton? This is, after all, a film that almost singlehandedly killed off Warner Bros’s plans for a Marvel-style cinematic universe. Perhaps the secret here, if Hollywood really wants to keep comic book fans happy, is to build stories that allow them to fall in love with their favourite superheroes all over again, rather than one that requires transforming one of the most loved superheroes of all time, Batman, into a gun-toting, meat-headed bully just because certain filmgoers want to see him get knocked out with heat vision while they munch on their caramel-drenched popcorn. It’s a lesson well worth learning for the men in suits. Otherwise, come press time, they might just find there’s a whole lot of studio bods suddenly pointing accusing fingers at each other, for entirely the wrong reasons.The four-times world champion Sebastian Vettel has issued a strident call for Formula One to abandon this season’s scheduled race in Russia after its invasion of Ukraine. Vettel insisted he would boycott the meeting set for September if it was held while F1’s leaders prepared to hold a swiftly-convened summit on Thursday evening to discuss whether the race should go ahead. The German, a director of the Grand Prix Drivers’ Association, has long been outspoken on issues of social and human rights and was unequivocal in his condemnation of Russia’s invasion and in his conviction that he would not race there. “My own opinion is I should not go, I will not go,” he said. “I think it’s wrong to race in that country. I’m sorry for the people, innocent people who are losing their lives, getting killed for stupid reasons under a very strange and mad leadership. “I woke up again after this morning’s news, shocked. I think it’s horrible to see what is happening.” The Red Bull team principal, Christian Horner, was also emphatic that he believed F1 could not hold a race in Russia. “I can’t see how we can go possibly to Russia in the current climate,” he said. “It’s an issue for the governing body and the commercial rights holder that are responsible but how much can things change between now and September?” His position was echoed by his driver and current world champion, Max Verstappen. “When a country is at war, it is not right to race there,” he said. McLaren’s Lando Norris confirmed that the GPDA would discuss the issue at their next meeting The Russian GP at the Sochi Autodrom remains on the calendar, however, with neither F1 nor the sport’s governing body, the FIA, acting to cancel the meeting which is backed by the Russian government. A statement from F1 on Thursday morning noted only that the sport was monitoring the situation. “Formula 1 is closely watching the very fluid developments like many others and at this time has no further comment on the race scheduled for September. We will continue to monitor the situation very closely,” it read. The FIA has yet to issue any comment on the race in Russia but, with testing in Barcelona taking place this week, the team principals, F1 and the FIA have convened a meeting to discuss how the sport should react. Uefa is set to drop St Petersburg as the venue for this season’s Champions League final. Seven of the 10 teams are based in the UK and the British government’s position on holding sporting events in Russia is already clear. There are issues also for the Haas team, whose title sponsor is the Russian chemical company Uralkali. It is owned by Dmitry Mazepin, the father of their driver, Nikita Mazepin, and their car’s livery is marked by the white, blue and red design of the Russian flag. The team announced on Thursday it was to drop the Russian-flag based livery for the final day of testing and run in plain white colours. Michael Schumacher’s son Mick is entering his second season in F1 with Haas but how further sanctions imposed on Russia impact on the team are being considered. Haas later issued a statement saying: “No further comment will be made at this time regarding team partner agreements.” They withdrew their team principal, Guenther Steiner, from a scheduled press conference on Thursday in Barcelona. Haas also cancelled their post-testing media call with Mazepin at short notice. In 2014, the year the first Russian GP was set to be held, there were calls for it to be cancelled after the Russian annexation of the Crimean peninsula. The former world rally champion and a candidate for the FIA presidency Ari Vatanen was outspoken in his condemnation of the event. “Do we support the regime who is masterminding this bloodshed? Or do we say this is not correct?” he said. “It would send a message of acceptance if we went to Russia. It would say we condone, effectively, maybe not explicitly, but by our actions we condone what is going on because it is used in propaganda.” Vatanen said he was supported in his opinion by the then FIA president Jean Todt but F1’s chief executive at the time, Bernie Ecclestone, was adamant that sport and politics should not mix and that the race, which was backed financially by the Russian government and supported by Vladimir Putin, should go ahead. The race was not called off and it was duly run with Putin in attendance and presenting the winner’s trophy to Lewis Hamilton. Red Bull’s Verstappen also condemned the FIA for its treatment of former race director Michael Masi. Verstappen described Masi being sacked after events at the decisive and controversial season finale in Abu Dhabi as unacceptable. “It’s very unfair what happened to Michael, he was really being thrown under the bus,” he said. “That they did sack him like that in the first place for me is unacceptable. That they sacked him is really incredible. I feel really sorry for Michael. Because I think he was a very capable and good race director. “I have nothing against the new race directors – because I think they are also very capable and very good race directors but, personally, and for Michael, I felt really sad and I sent him a text as well.”Vladimir Putin’s invasion of Ukraine is an unprovoked outrage and a heinous violation of international law. It is proof of his utter disregard for the health and wealth of the people of Russia and Ukraine. He is a tyrant prepared to take lives, destroy infrastructure and rob his own citizens in the name of a demented imperialist dream. The economic sanctions that the UK, its allies and partners enforce must be as severe as possible. The aim should be to cut Russia out of the western economic system, targeting the finance, energy, technology and defence sectors as well as individuals linked to Putin and the Russian government. The effects should be deep and long-lasting. This confrontation will last for years into the future. And here at home, after years of stubborn inaction, the government must now finally expunge corrupt Russian money from the UK. We must close the cracks and loopholes through which the tentacles of corrupt finance reach into our economy and democracy. While sanctions are essential, we know that Putin’s concerns go far beyond the depth of his pockets, as shown by his willingness to act despite western threats of economic pain. Russia has been preparing for sanctions for at least two years. So, to defeat Russian aggression, we need to do more than attack Putin’s bank balance. While sanctions must be as comprehensive as possible, we need a broader response to face down his aggression. To defeat Putin, we need to unite against the ideology of Putinism. This is an ideology of authoritarianism, imperialism and ethno-nationalism. It is not unique to Russia. This ideology is emulated by despots and dictators around the world: leaders in China, the Middle East and beyond will be watching the strength of the west’s response to this invasion as they plot their next moves. Russia’s attack will have long-term implications for the security of Europe. If Putin is successful in the short term, the new frontline to Russian aggression will widen to include Poland, Romania, Slovakia and Hungary, as well as Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania. We must work with our Nato and European allies and partners to bolster our continent’s defence and security and show strength, unity and resolve. But the opposition to Putinism needs to be broader than the G7, the EU or Nato. We need to rally the world against this threat and widen the international coalition that will oppose this grievous act of war, and counter Putin’s ideology of nationalistic expansion. We need to ensure that other global players such as India oppose the terrible precedent set by Putin’s invasion of a sovereign UN member state and his attempt to change national borders through military force. We must be clear that our opposition is to Putin and his gangster regime, not ordinary Russian people. Many of them will be feeling deeply uneasy as Russian troops wade across their nearest neighbour’s border, the home of many of their family and friends. Internal opposition to Putin’s deranged expansionism is the best hope of ending it. It’s imperative that we speak directly to them, making the argument for democracy, freedom and the right to self-determination, and never allowing our opposition to Putin to obscure our desire for friendship and peace with Russian people. It’s essential that we convince aspiring despots around the world that the Russian regime’s slide into imperialism is a historic mistake. Any victory will be pyrrhic in the long term, just as the invasion of Hungary in 1956, Czechoslovakia in 1968 and Afghanistan in 1979 all turned out to be failures in the end. The result of invasion is always brutal destruction, with civilians caught in the middle paying a terrible price. It is a moral imperative that we continue to help Ukraine to defend itself by providing defensive equipment alongside political, diplomatic and financial support. The Russian regime’s invasion of Ukraine signals the end of the post-cold war era. Nobody knows what comes next. The effects of this moment will depend as much on our response to this aggression as it will on the aggression itself. The response of the UK, its allies and its partners has to be strong not weak, united not divided, and strategic rather than short term. Our values of democracy and freedom must defeat Putinism in the end. David Lammy is the Labour MP for Tottenham and shadow foreign secretary Guardian Newsroom: the Russian invasion of Ukraine Join a panel of journalists, hosted by Michael Safi, for a livestreamed event on the Russia-Ukraine crisis. On Thursday 3 March, 8pm GMT | 9pm CET | 12pm PST | 3pm EST. Book tickets here.Warren East, the chief executive with a penchant for playing a church organ, is leaving Rolls-Royce, eight years after he was parachuted in as chief executive to navigate Britain’s aerospace champion through what turned out to be the most turbulent period in its 116-year history. On his second day at Rolls-Royce the Welshman was forced to issue a profit warning – the fourth of what would become five in a 20-month period – and presided over a record £4.6bn loss in his second year. “I didn’t know quite how bad it was,” he recalled as he began to uncover just how parlous the Rolls-Royce business was when he started in 2015. “I don’t think anybody did. It was more a case of survival.” East, now 60, was called off the board of directors at Rolls to take the helm of the jet engine maker after the surprise announcement by his predecessor, John Rishton, that he was to retire after only four years in the post. Shares rose when East was named as Rishton’s successor, as investors welcomed the appointment of the engineer, and they fell 13% on Thursday when it was announced he would step down at the end of this year. Two years before he was appointed chief executive of Rolls, East had retired from Cambridge-based microchip design company Arm, where over a decade he had helped make it a critical global partner for companies from Apple to Samsung, but the task at Rolls-Royce would prove to be the defining challenge of his career. The company had previously enjoyed two decades of unprecedented success under the leadership of Sir Ralph Robins and Sir John Rose, cementing the company’s place as the world’s second-largest maker of aircraft engines after General Electric. However, it was left to East, the part-time church organist, who confesses he enjoys a “great wrestle” with a difficult piece of music, to handle the devastating fall out of investigations into claims that the multinational had paid bribes to secure contracts in countries around the world. Five years ago the company paid £671m to avoid prosecution by authorities in the UK, US and Brazil – and East has in the past recounted how stunned he was to learn that the practices continued until as recently as 2013. “The genuine surprise was how recent some of the instances were,” he said in an interview a year after the fines, which were finally paid in full last year, were announced. “Most people thought it was prehistoric.” East, who has three children, attended Monmouth School for Boys in Wales and has a degree in engineering science from Wadham College, Oxford. He has said that his management style is not best suited for the thick-skinned job of big cuts and restructuring, certainly his time at Arm was a growth story, and yet at Rolls-Royce he will be remembered for managing one crisis after another. “[It] isn’t why I joined Rolls-Royce,” he has said. “I am probably not the best turnaround person there is.” The discovery of a series of failings with its Trent 1000 engines, which power the Boeing 787 Dreamliner, cost the company billions. In 2018, he said almost 5,000 job losses would be necessary “if we want to be around for the next 100 years”. East will bow out having for the most part weathered the worst of the crippling coronavirus pandemic, albeit after an emergency £7bn refinancing and asset fire sale, and at the cost of almost 9,000 jobs and billions in losses as the aviation industry came to a virtual standstill during lockdowns. When East took over, Rolls-Royce was valued at £15.7bn. As he enters his final months it is worth just over £8bn, and he leaves the company facing the steep challenge of moving away from fossil fuel-powered products and achieving a net zero carbon business. “This is the biggest technological shift for the group since the arrival of the jet engine,” he said, announcing his departure on Thursday. “[It] is the right moment to look to the future.”A critically acclaimed and award-winning television drama series about politics, corruption and class in the north-east of England has been given a new modern-day ending in a BBC Radio 4 adaptation. Our Friends in the North, which turbocharged the early careers of its stars Gina McKee, Daniel Craig, Christopher Eccleston and Mark Strong, has been adapted for audio by its original writer, Peter Flannery. The drama is set in the mid-1960s to the mid-90s, but a new 10th episode takes the main characters’ stories up to the year 2020. The final episode – by a new writer, Adam Usden – picks up on and develops the themes of the original drama. Our Friends in the North, broadcast on BBC2 in 1996, was hailed as a landmark show that combined gritty politics with personal relationships. “I’ve always said it’s just a posh soap opera – but it’s a posh soap opera with something to say,” Flannery, who was born in Jarrow, south Tyneside, once said. The storyline follows four friends over three decades against a backdrop of political, corporate and police corruption, shoddy housing scandals, the 1970s porn empires, the 1980s miners’ strike and the rise of New Labour in the 1990s. In 2010, the Guardian named it the third best television drama of all time. “Every school history department should own the DVD box set, for among titillating scenes of go-go dancers, gangland squabbles and unplanned pregnancies, a strong lesson about Britain’s past mistakes resonates clearly … The closing scenes in 90s Tyneside accompanied by an Oasis soundtrack are unforgettably moving,” wrote Grace Dent. Our Friends in the North was originally written as a three-hour stage play by Flannery, when he was writer-in-residence at the Royal Shakespeare Company. The TV adaptation – which cost £8m to make, half of BBC2’s drama serials budget for a year – was beset with legal problems because of similarities to real-life politicians and business people. Bringing the storyline up to date was daunting, said Usden. “It was a complete story. [Flannery] had landed the plane, and now I was being asked to take off again, and not crash it. “And the show has so many big ideas, it covers so many huge topics, it felt a bit reductive to pick up on just one or two. I tried to navigate that by focusing on what underpinned those themes – the sense of ordinary people being buffeted by forces above and beyond them. And legacy is such a core element of the show, which is helpful when you’re picking up a story 25 years on.” Usden said he had not discussed his final episode with Flannery. “I really love the show, and I’d like to think that this is a story that picks up on many threads from the original. I hope that he’s excited to see the continuation of the narrative.” Alison Hindell, Radio 4 commissioning editor for drama and fiction, said the themes of Our Friends in the North “illuminated the continuing north-south divide today”. She hoped the adaptation would find a new audience as well as being welcomed by fans of the original show. The parts of Nicky, Mary, Tosker and Geordie are taken by four young actors in the R4 adaptation – James Baxter, Norah Lopez Holden, Philip Correia and Luke MacGregor. Our Friends in the North begins at 2.15pm on Thursday 17 March on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds.What are the key changes? The repayment term for student loans will be extended from 30 years after graduation to 40 years – meaning that many students will still be making repayments into their 60s – and the income threshold at which repayments begin will be lowered from more than £27,000 to £25,000. The tuition fee for full-time undergraduates will be frozen at £9,250 a year until the end of the current parliament. When will these affect students? Only students enrolling in 2023-24 will have to sign up for the terms including the 40-year repayment period. They will also be charged a lower interest rate on their outstanding loans. Graduates since 2012 have paid interest based on the retail price index, rising by up to 3% depending on income. But the extra 3% will be scrapped, and RPI used solely. Will any of the changes affect current undergraduates? Yes. The freeze on tuition fees will be extended to those students from England studying full-time, so their institutions will see real-terms cuts in incomes. The undergraduate tuition fee was set at £9,000 in 2012 and was supposed to rise with inflation. However, the government has frozen it at £9,250 since 2016. Current students and graduates with student loans since 2012 will also see their repayment thresholds frozen at £27,000 – that too was meant to rise with inflation, but instead graduates will have to repay more than they otherwise would. Will access to student loans be restricted? Potentially, yes: the government has begun a consultation over minimum eligibility requirements to receive loans immediately after leaving school. The Department for Education’s consultation suggests achieving two grade Es at A-level or equivalents as one possibility. Another is achieving grade 4 passes in GCSE maths and English. But strong opposition and a wide range of exemptions may effectively make the policy too difficult to implement. Will the changes affect how many people go to university? The eligibility rules are unlikely to apply to mature or part-time students, although the prolonged and faster repayments may put off some students. The DfE says the changes to student finance will have a “neutral impact” and thinks the changes are unlikely to “significantly” change the minds of those aiming to study at university. The universities minister, Michelle Donelan, said the effect on students with special needs would need to be carefully considered. Who are the winners and losers? The biggest winner is the Treasury, which is estimated to gain an additional £600m in loan repayments, substantially reducing the amount of unpaid loans that would expire after 30 years. Other winners are the very well-paid, who will see their maximum loan repayments fall by more than 25%. The losers are young women, disadvantaged students, and those students coming from the north of England, Yorkshire and the Humber and the Midlands, who will see their repayments rise in some cases by 150%.Vladimir Putin has ordered Russian forces to attack Ukraine and invaded the country amid warnings from leaders across the world that it could “spark the biggest war in Europe since 1945”. We would like to hear from people living and working in countries near Ukraine about their thoughts on the situation. On Saturday, the Lithuanian foreign minister Gabrielius Landsbergi called for stronger military defence of the Baltic states and Poland, amid fears about Russian aggression in the region. If you’re living and working in Lithuania, Poland, Latvia or Estonia, we’d like to hear from you. What are your thoughts on the developments? What is the mood like at the moment? How do you feel about about the future? Share your views and experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below, anonymously if you wish, or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. IP addresses will be recorded on a third party webserver, so for true anonymity use our SecureDrop service, however anything submitted on the form below will be encrypted and confidential if you wish to continue. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.The Russian central bank has purchased millions of roubles to prevent the collapse of the Moscow stock exchange and prop up the currency after it plunged to an all-time low of 89.60 against the dollar. In a scramble to prevent the invasion of Ukraine pushing Russia’s financial system into meltdown, officials in Moscow closed the stock exchange while the Bank of Russia mounted a rescue operation to put a floor under the skidding rouble. By midday, the stock market had reopened and the rouble recovered to trade at 84 to the dollar, though late in the day it climbed back to 87 and analysts said an escalation of the war could force the central bank to intervene further to prevent the currency sinking even lower. “To stabilise the situation on the financial market, the Bank of Russia decided to start interventions on the currency market,” the central bank said. Russia’s main stock exchange fell 30% after reopening, falling from 3,000 to 2,000 points, while the MSCI index of shares in Russian companies traded in London and New York dropped by 45%. Kremlin spokesperson Dmitry Peskov said Russia had created a financial safety net to withstand market volatility and said the “emotional” reaction of the financial markets to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine would even out. He added that all necessary measures were being taken to ensure the market reaction was as brief as possible. After weeks of denying plans to attack Ukraine, Russian forces fired missiles at several Ukrainian cities and landed troops on its coast, prompting analysts to predict that severe pressure on global financial markets was likely to persist over the coming weeks. Russia’s currency, bonds and stocks all sank before its central bank announced its first foreign exchange intervention to shore up financial stability since 2014, when the country annexed Crimea from Ukraine. Russia holds a formidable war chest of more than $600bn (£450bn) in foreign-exchange reserves and gold that it can use in currency markets to prop up the rouble. A rapidly depreciating currency makes it harder to pay off foreign debts and leads to higher prices on imported goods and lower returns on exports. Officials at the Bank of Russia are understood to have sold foreign reserves to buy roubles to put a floor under the price, though the extent of the buying operation is not yet clear. One of the biggest falls in the value of the rouble was against the euro. Before the recent round of geopolitical tensions between Moscow and the west began to escalate in October, the rouble was trading at around 80 to the euro. It is now heading towards 90. Susannah Streeter, senior investment and markets analyst at stockbroker Hargreaves Lansdown, said: “Market volatility has increased since the beginning of the year, stoked by rising interest rates, and today’s news has added fuel to the market turbulence.” As the US said it may cut off Russia’s top banks from dollar transactions if Moscow moves its troops into Ukraine, data showed in December that Russian banks brought $5bn in foreign exchange back to Moscow and moved some of their long-term foreign exchange holdings into more liquid assets if needed in an emergency. To support Russian commercial banks under pressure from falling share prices and western sanctions, the central bank increased the daily amount of roubles it would swap for dollars from $3bn to $5bn. This will allow commercial banks to replenish the dollar stocks needed to repay foreign debts. The Bank of Russia also expanded the list of securities it accepts as collateral in exchange for the liquidity it provides. Markets are now bracing for the impact of fresh harsh western sanctions to punish Moscow for the invasion of Ukraine. “The sanctions hit is going to be significant, unlike the soft sanctions imposed on Tuesday and Wednesday,” said the investment firm Renaissance Capital. The effective interest rate on Russian government debt soared to almost 10% as bond investors sold heavily to seek safer havens, although the effect is expected to be limited as most of the debt is held by domestic financial institutions. Ukraine’s government debt collapsed in value, pushing the country towards a further bailout by the International Monetary Fund. The Washington-based lender of last resort said this week it was poised to start a virtual mission to Ukraine with a view to releasing $700m in aid. Since 2014, the IMF has committed more than $20bn in loans to Ukraine in a series of bailouts, though in 2019 it demanded that Volodymyr Zelenskiy’s government show it would aggressively try to recoup an estimated $15bn that was stolen from more than 100 banks, including the country’s largest, PrivatBank, over the previous decade before a further $4bn was released. The Russian central bank is expected to ease pressure on the rouble further by increasing its main interest rate, which it hopes will lure back foreign investors searching for high returns. The bank is also expected to continue monetary tightening by raising interest rates as it struggles to rein in inflation, which is set to worsen from the falling rouble.Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has said his compatriots are fighting to stop “a new iron curtain” falling across the country after Russian forces launched a huge and long-dreaded invasion that has sparked fears of the biggest war Europe has seen since 1945. Minutes after the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, ended weeks of agonised speculation by announcing a “special military operation” at dawn on Thursday, explosions were heard near major Ukrainian cities, including the capital, Kyiv. Ukraine’s interior ministry reported that the country was under attack from cruise and ballistic missiles, with Russia appearing to target infrastructure near major cities including Kyiv, Kharkiv, Mariupol and Dnipro. Zelenskiy responded to the invasion by declaring martial law and saying Kyiv would issue weapons to every Ukrainian who wanted to defend their country. As Ukrainian diplomats pleaded with the world to stop the Russian aggression, Zelenskiy warned of a bleak return to the past. “What we have heard today are not just missile blasts, fighting and the rumble of aircraft,” he said. “This is the sound of a new iron curtain, which has come down and is closing Russia off from the civilised world. Our national task is to make sure this curtain does not fall across our land.” By mid-afternoon on Thursday, Russia’s defence ministry claimed to have “neutralised” Ukraine’s airbases and air defences, destroying 74 military ground facilities, including 11 airfields, three command posts and 18 radar stations for anti-aircraft missile systems. Ukrainian authorities said Russia had carried out 203 attacks and that fighting was raging across almost the entire territory. Military sources in Ukraine said 20 Russian helicopters and Mi-8 aircraft had landed paratroopers at Hostomel airport in the Kyiv region, where forces from both sides were fighting for control. They said Ukrainian forces had killed 50 Russian troops, destroyed four Russian tanks, and downed six Russian planes and four helicopters. Zelenskiy also said Ukrainian forces were fighting to prevent Russian troops capturing Chernobyl. It was later reported that the Russians now held the former nuclear plant. The early hours of the invasion appeared to have claimed dozens of civilian lives in Ukraine. According to the authorities, 18 people were killed in a missile attack in the southern Odesa region, six people were killed in the town of Brovary, near Kyiv, and four people were killed and 10 injured after an “occupier’s shell” hit a hospital in the city of Vuhledar in Donetsk. With air raid sirens sounding over the capital and residents of Kharkiv sheltered in the city’s metro – scenes not seen in those cities since 1941 – Ukraine’s foreign minister also urged the world to wake up. “Putin has just launched a full-scale invasion of Ukraine,” said Dmytro Kuleba. “Peaceful Ukrainian cities are under strikes. This is a war of aggression. Ukraine will defend itself and will win. The world can and must stop Putin. The time to act is now.” Andriy Zagorodnyuk, Ukraine’s former defence minister, told the Guardian that multiple ground invasions were taking place on several fronts. “There are thrusts taking place,” said Zagorodnyuk. “They are quite close to the city of Kherson now. The situation is really critical there. They are also trying to surround Kharkiv. It seems like Kharkiv at the moment is the main target. They also try to get to Kyiv using one battlefield group.” In a bid to justify the attack, Putin claimed in his TV address: “A hostile anti-Russia is being created on our historic lands.” “We have taken the decision to conduct a special military operation,” he said, in what amounted to a declaration of war. He claimed it was for the “demilitarisation and denazification” of Ukraine, echoing a theme of Kremlin propaganda, the false claim that the Kyiv government is controlled by the far right. “We do not intend to occupy Ukraine,” he said, and he had a chilling warning for other nations. “To anyone who would consider interfering from the outside: if you do, you will face consequences greater than any you have faced in history. All relevant decisions have been taken. I hope you hear me,” he said. As Putin’s words were being broadcast and the first detonations were being reported, the UN security council was holding an emergency session, chaired by Russia itself, which holds the rotating presidency. It was begun by the UN secretary general, António Guterres, who made a direct appeal: “President Putin, stop your troops from attacking Ukraine. Give peace a chance. Too many people have already died.” The US president, Joe Biden, issued a written statement saying: “The prayers of the entire world are with the people of Ukraine tonight as they suffer an unprovoked and unjustified attack by Russian military forces. “President Putin has chosen a premeditated war that will bring a catastrophic loss of life and human suffering,” Biden said. “Russia alone is responsible for the death and destruction this attack will bring, and the United States and its allies and partners will respond in a united and decisive way. The world will hold Russia accountable.” Other world leaders also condemned the invasion. The UK prime minister, Boris Johnson said: “I am appalled by the horrific events in Ukraine and I have spoken to President Zelenskiy to discuss next steps. President Putin has chosen a path of bloodshed and destruction by launching this unprovoked attack on Ukraine. The UK and our allies will respond decisively. “We will hold the Kremlin accountable,” wrote Ursula von der Leyen, the head of the EU Commission, which had announced fresh sanctions against Moscow only hours before the attack. The stage for the offensive was set on Wednesday night, after the leaders of the two Russian-controlled territories in eastern Ukraine sent an official request to Moscow for military aid to “help repel the aggression of the Ukrainian armed forces in order to avoid civilian casualties and a humanitarian catastrophe in the Donbas”. Zelenskiy used a video address to appeal to the Russian public for help after an attempt to speak to Putin was unsuccessful. “Do Russians want wars? I would very much like to answer this question. But the answer is up to you,” he said. He also vowed to defend the country, saying: “If someone attempts to take away our land, our freedom, our lives, the lives of our children, we will defend ourselves. By attacking, you will see our faces, not our backs, but our faces.” Military analysts said they expected Putin to send his forces to capture or surround Kyiv. There were reports in Russian state media that airborne troops had captured the airport in Boryspil, near the capital. The Russian military claimed that all of Ukraine’s aviation bases were disabled in the barrage of missiles that began the invasion. Smoke rose from near major airfields outside Kharkiv and other cities in the east. But Russia also appeared to have hit airfields in Kherson and as far west as Ivano-Frankivsk, which is nearer to the border with Poland. It indicated its forces had entered Ukraine, claiming Ukraine’s border forces were “not putting up any resistance to Russian units”. Some of the first explosions after Putin announced the operation were heard near Kramatorsk, the headquarters of the Ukrainian army’s operations near the Russian-controlled territories in south-east Ukraine. Russia appeared to be targeting military infrastructure in its early strikes on Thursday morning. Explosions were also reported at military headquarters, and at military warehouses. The dramatic escalation of the crisis is the second time Moscow has launched a significant military incursion into Ukraine since the country gained independence from the Soviet Union in 1991. In 2014, Putin ordered undercover Russian soldiers to seize the Crimean peninsula, which Moscow then annexed. Thursday’s attack was preceded by a massive, continuous cyber-attack that targeted Ukraine’s ministries and banks, a form of hybrid warfare to sow confusion. In previous weeks, Putin built up an estimated 190,000 troops close to Ukraine’s borders while European leaders shuttled between Kyiv and Moscow, seeking a diplomatic solution. The Russian military claimed it was not targeting population centres. “High-precision weapons are disabling the military infrastructure, air defence facilities, military airfields and aviation of the Ukrainian army,” the Russian defence ministry said in a statement carried by RIA Novosti, a state-run news agency. Military analysts questioned whether Russia could sustain the bombardment and believed a ground invasion was likely. “Russia has a very effective aerial, naval and ground fires capability but it lacks large stockpiles of precision-guided munitions, which is why a ground offensive appears to have begun soon after the first strikes. Russia has every incentive to move as fast as possible,” wrote Rob Lee, a senior fellow in the Foreign Policy Research Institute’s Eurasia Program. The Russian rouble fell to a record-low level since 2016 as Putin announced the military operation. Trading was halted on the Russian stock market. The US is likely to announce new sanctions against Russia, using tools to punish Russian banks and its larger financial system that Washington had so far held in reserve. Biden said: “I will meet with my G7 counterparts in the morning and then speak to the American people to announce the further consequences the United States and our allies and partners will impose on Russia for this needless act of aggression against Ukraine and global peace and security.”The UK government has been criticised for its “toothless” use of the sanctions regime, as campaigners raised concerns that the enforcement body set up in 2016 to patrol breaches has only ever issued only six fines worth a combined £21m. As the government announces a fresh wave of sanctions against Russia after the invasion of Ukraine on Thursday, opposition politicians and campaigners warned that the UK’s failure to take action against existing suspected breaches of sanctions “undermines any real deterrent value that UK sanctions could have”. The Office of Financial Sanctions Implementation (OFSI), set up in 2016 by then chancellor George Osborne to act as a “centre of excellence for financial sanctions”, handed down just one fine in the year to the end of March 2021 despite investigating 132 suspected breaches. By comparison, the US authorities issued 87 fines worth more than $1.5bn (£1.1bn) in a single year. Susan Hawley, executive director of campaign group Spotlight on Corruption, said: “The OFSI’s very low enforcement rate and the very low average fine level make OFSI look pretty toothless, and undermine any real deterrent value that UK sanctions could have. “The OFSI lacks the kind of aggressive and proactive attitude to enforcement that would make the UK’s financial, accounting and legal sectors really sit up and take sanctions breaches seriously.” She warned that the lack of any criminal enforcement action over sanction breaches raises “real questions as to whether UK sanctions are actually be enforced properly at all”. Hawley highlighted the UK’s failure to act when a private jet targeted by sanctions against Alexander Lukashenko, Belarus’s autocratic leader and ally of Putin, landed at Luton airport earlier this year. The 13-seater Embraer Legacy jet was one of six aircraft listed by then foreign secretary Dominic Raab last year in sanctions aimed at Lukashenko. The lack of enforcement action by the OFSI comes despite its latest annual report showing that the total value of sanction breaches reported to the department in the year to March 2020 was £982m. That was a near fourfold increase on the value of reported breaches a year earlier. Hawley said the OFSI’s track record appeared shockingly weak compared with the US’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC), which has issued 87 fines worth a combined $1.53bn since 2021. David Lammy, the shadow foreign secretary, said the government must urgently explain why the OFSI had issued so few fines. He said the figures “show how government incompetence is contributing to the steady stream of dirty money from Russia and other authoritarian regimes flooding into the City of London”. A No 10 spokesperson said: “We certainly expect the sanctions to be met and we have done a lot of work with the Treasury in ensuring there is an impact. We want these sanctions to have an impact and will listen to views about how we do this.” An HM Treasury spokesperson said: “We are committed to ensuring business and individuals comply with financial sanctions, and to taking firm action when they don’t. Through our Office of Financial Sanctions Implementation we work to promote compliance in the first instance, and take compliance action against all reported suspected breaches.The EU faced furious remonstrations from Kyiv as Europe’s leaders held back from imposing the potentially most damaging sanction on Russia, even as the Kremlin lay siege to Ukraine via land, air and sea. Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, voiced his anger shortly before EU heads of state and government decided against blocking Russia from an international payments system through which it receives foreign currency. With casualties mounting, Kuleba warned that European and US politicians would have “blood on their hands” if they failed to impose the heaviest toll on Moscow by cutting Russia from the Swift payments system. “I will not be diplomatic on this,” he tweeted. “Everyone who now doubts whether Russia should be banned from Swift has to understand that the blood of innocent Ukrainian men, women and children will be on their hands too. BAN RUSSIA FROM SWIFT.” With Russian military forces seemingly ready to storm Kyiv, Ukraine’s president Volodymyr Zelenskiy had a “frank” message for EU leaders as he joined their summit via video on Thursday evening. Appealing for the harshest measures against the Kremlin, he told them that he may not be able to speak to them again given the military situation. Later Zelenskiy claimed that Russian assassins were in the Ukrainian capital and that both he and his family were on a kill list. The Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication (Swift) is used by over 11,000 financial institutions to send secure payment orders and is key to the movement of funds to Russia’s oil and gas sector. Removing Russia from the system, it is argued, would make it close to impossible for financial institutions to send money in or out of the country, with consequences for both the country’s oil and gas sector and its European customers. A number of member states believe there is nothing to be gained from waiting, a position shared by the UK government. Mark Rutte, the Dutch prime minister, admitted that “many colleagues pleaded for it” but he told reporters that “more work needs to be done to assess what happens if Russia is cut off”. During a call with the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, the British prime minister, Boris Johnson, had urged allies to react with the harshest measures, warning that “western inaction or underreaction would have unthinkable consequences”. UK sources said Johnson had also made a major play for leaders to withdraw Russia’s access to Swift during his G7 speech to other world leaders. Canada’s Justin Trudeau was the only other leader to express support for finding a way to enforce the ban. “On Swift, I think we all recognise that it is something that has to be done in conjunction with our major allies and will only be successful if that can be achieved as such, we are continuing those discussions,” Johnson’s spokesman said. “There are a range of views on it and we recognise it is a challenge. But it is certainly the prime minister’s intention so we will continue to have those discussions.” The Irish taoiseach Micheál Martin said his government also supported “the strongest possible sanctions”. Lithuania’s president Gitanas Nausėda, said the EU needed to learn the lessons that the bloc’s previous sanctions had been “too weak”. “We cannot have the luxury of being a discussion club,” he said. “Discussions are useful but we cannot forever be in discussions ... They need our support today, tomorrow might be too late.” Poland’s prime minister Mateusz Morawiecki said that the EU had to be united around severe sanctions “on Putin, on Russia” if Europe was to be relevant around the world. “This is now a critical moment for the history of the European union, the history of Europe,” he said. “The whole free world is looking at us, at what kind of sanctions, what kind of reactions” Diplomatic sources suggested that Germany, Cyprus and Italy were among the member states who were the most concerned about taking the measure at this stage, arguing that some leverage needs to be maintained. “Someone started a war and we want this war to stop here and now,” one EU diplomat explained of the caution over Swift. “You always need to have some doors open to be able to have a dialogue to stop a war.” The diplomat added that the measures that did have unanimous support within the EU would “be much more effective with high cost and consequences than doing one single issue on Swift, which might be needed for things which are very relevant for some EU member states.” Later, Scholz confirmed that he was opposed to cutting Russia off from the international payments system. He said: “It is very important that we agree those measures that have been prepared, and keep everything else for a situation where it may be necessary to go beyond that.” The fissure in the united front with Ukraine came at what was seen by many as one of the most testing summits for a generation, with the bloc’s capacity to strike convincingly at Russian interests in question. In the early hours of Friday morning, at the end of the summit, European Commission president, Ursula von der Leyen, said the EU had agreed on measures that would degrade Russian industry, push its economy into recession and block exports of irreplaceable components. She said: “This package includes financial sanctions that cut Russia’s access to the most important capital markets. We are now targeting 70% of the Russian banking market, but also key state-owned companies, including the field of defence. “These sanctions will increase Russia’s borrowing costs, raise inflation and gradually erode Russia’s industrial base. We are also targeting the Russian elite by curbing their deposits so that they cannot hide their money anymore in safe havens in Europe.” Von der Leyen said an export ban on components for Russia’s oil sector would make it “impossible for Russia to upgrade its oil refineries, which gave actually Russia export revenues of €24bn in 2019”. “The third topic”, she said, “is that we ban the sale of all aircrafts, spare parts and equipment to Russian airlines. This will degrade the key sector of Russia’s economy and the country’s connectivity. Three quarters of Russia’s current commercial air fleet were built in the European Union, the US and Canada. And therefore, they are massively depending on that.” Finally, Von der Leyen said the EU would be “limiting Russia’s access to crucial technology … such as semiconductors or cutting-edge technologies.” Belarus will also be subject to a sanctions package that has yet to be prepared for its role aiding Russia’s invasion from its territory. But a consensus on the need for a major package of sanctions across the financial and energy sectors was marred by a lack of support for what many regard as the most damaging of actions, both for Moscow and European countries with the closest trading ties to Russia. Those opposed - dubbed the “incrementals” – were said to be pushing to hold back from imposing the most onerous measures. Officials suggested that Swift may be held back as part of a “third tranche” of sanctions. It is argued by some diplomats in Brussels that Russia could find ways around being blocked from Swift and that the other measures would be just as significant in squeezing the Kremlin.Greg Norman, who is fronting a Saudi Arabia-backed breakaway golf league, has warned the head of the PGA Tour “it certainly is not the end” despite a string of high-profile players shunning the scheme. In an open letter, Norman took specific issue with Jay Monahan’s insistence that players will be banned from competing on the PGA Tour if they sign a deal with the Saudis. Norman has now claimed the PGA Tour is “threatening” its members. Tiger Woods, Rory McIlroy, Bryson DeChambeau, Justin Thomas, Jon Rahm, Brooks Koepka, Collin Morikawa, Jordan Spieth and Dustin Johnson are among those who have pledged allegiance to the PGA despite Norman’s advances. Phil Mickelson finds himself in the eye of a public relations storm after admitting he used the Saudi Super Golf League plan to earn leverage with the PGA Tour. At a meeting of players in Florida on Tuesday, Monahan, the commissioner, reasserted that golfers cannot combine the SGL with the PGA Tour. Norman has now fired back. In the correspondence, the former world No1 states: “Surely you jest. And surely, your lawyers at the PGA Tour must be holding their breath. “As has been widely reported, you have threatened the players on the PGA Tour, all of whom are independent contractors, with lifetime bans if they decide to play golf in a league sponsored by anyone other than the Tour. For decades, I have fought for the rights of players to enjoy a career in which they are rewarded fully and properly for their efforts. They are one-in-a-million athletes. Yet for decades, the Tour has put its own financial ambitions ahead of the players, and every player on the tour knows it. The Tour is the players’ tour not your administration’s Tour. Norman added: “When you try to bluff and intimidate players by bullying and threatening them, you are guilty of going too far, being unfair, and you likely are in violation of the law. Simply put, you can’t ban players from playing golf. Players have the right and the freedom to play where we like. “What is wrong with allowing players to make their own decisions about where to play and how often to play? What is so wrong with player choice? Why do you feel so threatened that you would resort to such a desperate, unwise, and unenforceable threat?” The PGA Tour is likely to be undeterred by Norman’s remarks, not least because of the backing as offered by Woods and co. Previously, Monahan told players that action would be taken against anyone trying to cause commercial or reputational harm to his organisation. Norman, in turn, emphasises the value of competition. “Commissioner – this is just the beginning,” said his letter in closing. “It certainly is not the end.” The PGA Tour is yet to respond.To the list of movies that will for ever carry with them the stink of disreputable on-set behaviour (such as Last Tango in Paris and Kill Bill) comes a surprising new addition. Mad Max: Fury Road is already a contender for the best and most berserk action film of the century so far. Unfortunately, it now transpires that the craziness was not restricted to porcupine-spined jalopies, double-necked flamethrower guitars and other markers of its delirious visual excess. With the publication of Kyle Buchanan’s Blood, Sweat and Chrome: The Wild and True Story of Mad Max Fury Road, it is now a matter of public record that Charlize Theron felt so threatened and intimidated by her co-star, Tom Hardy, that she asked to be protected from him – and that no one called time on his behaviour. To cut a long standoff short, it seems – after weeks of tension and bubbling aggression – that Theron berated Hardy for his persistent lateness, which had resulted in many hours of delays on set in the Namibian desert. One morning, after he kept her and the crew waiting for more than three hours, she suggested the producers should “fine the fucking cunt $100,000 for every minute that he’s held up this crew”. His response included “charging up to her” and saying, “What did you say to me?” Theron, whose baby daughter was with her in Namibia, requested that a female producer, Denise Di Novi, should be present to protect her – “I was really scared shitless,” Theron said – but this was overruled by another producer, Doug Mitchell, who blocked Di Novi’s attendance. The director, George Miller, says that if he were faced again with the same situation, “I would probably be more mindful”. How reassuring for an actor to know that a director will “probably” have her back. What is depressing is not so much that a star has behaved like a brute – power corrupts, after all – but that the system does nothing to discourage such behaviour. The industry has responded to the #MeToo movement by bringing in measures such as intimacy coordinators for sex scenes, as well as a heightened presence on sets from the human resources departments to whom cast and crew members can bring complaints in confidentiality. There is an increased awareness of the need for gender pay parity, even if that ideal hasn’t yet been reached. And stars such as Frances McDormand and Michael B Jordan have pledged to feature “inclusion riders” in their contracts to guarantee diversity on the sets of their movies. If nothing comparable is being done about the enduring macho spirit that persists in cases such as 2015’s Mad Max: Fury Road, that may be because it is indivisible from the mystery surrounding the craft of acting, and a general unwillingness to tamper with it. Sexual harassment, pay inequality, lack of diversity: none of these problems are remotely sexy. But news of an actor throwing a hissy fit, even to the point of sending co-stars and crew members ducking for cover, retains a bizarre but stubborn whiff of Hollywood lawlessness. Toxic masculinity is polling badly these days except when it is harnessed for the good of a movie. Would Max still be Max if he wasn’t Mad? This is part of the fabled wild west spirit of moviemaking: what happens in Namibia stays in Namibia, as the saying almost goes. Sometimes, this can result in tragedy, such as the death last year of the cinematographer Halyna Hutchins, who was shot accidentally by the actor Alec Baldwin with a gun that was meant to be loaded with blanks; the set of that film, Rust, has been described as “chaotic”. Mostly, it doesn’t get further than poor or reprehensible behaviour. And it can always be justified. A film set is a bit like Downing Street; normal rules don’t apply because people are working so damn hard in ways that the rest of us couldn’t begin to understand. When ordinary people watch the footage of David O Russell haranguing Lily Tomlin during the making of I Heart Huckabees, we might wonder why “creatives” are exempt from being civil to one another. (George Clooney claimed he was head-butted by Russell during the making of Three Kings. “If he comes anywhere near me, I’ll sock him in the fucking mouth,” the actor later said.) Likewise, when we listen to the 2008 recording of Christian Bale viciously berating the cinematographer Shane Hurlbut on the set of Terminator: Salvation, we hear only a callous, bullying narcissist. We are too far outside the creative process to appreciate that Bale is operating at a higher plane; he can’t be expected to deal with stress in the workplace by having a moan to HR like the rest of us. Perhaps we might even entertain such footling questions as: “All this for a Terminator movie? Really?” Until there are executives or film-makers willing to prioritise wellbeing over craft and celebrity, or at least to put it on an equal footing, then the industry is unlikely to produce figures brave enough to advise Hardy to calm down, let alone to shut up. The suspicion also prevails that his behaviour was orchestrated merely to mirror the on-screen tensions of the characters played by him and Theron – that he was going full method. The picture’s camera operator Mark Goellnicht suggested as much when he pointed to the tentative rapprochement between the pair as shooting went on. Hardy, he said, is “such a method actor that I think he took the arc in the literal sense”. Faced with that dubious defence, it is hard not to recall Robert Pattinson’s remarks on the subject. “You only ever see people doing method when they’re playing an asshole,” he said. “You never see someone just being lovely to everyone going: ‘I’m really deep in character.’” It is even more disappointing that these horror stories should have emerged from a film that exhibits such strong feminist credentials. It is the women, after all, who drive Mad Max: Fury Road – literally so, in the case of Theron’s character, Imperator Furiosa, who spends much of the movie at the wheel of a tanker, leaving Max for the most part a mere hanger-on in the film that bears his name. Miller even seemed to be goading any sexists in the audience, first by teasing them with a shot of women hosing each other down in the desert – a parodic Pirelli calendar-style spectacle if ever there was one – and then by placing most of the movie’s power in female hands. The misogynistic website Return of Kings, now no longer active, referred to the film as Mad Max: Feminist Road and urged its readers to shield their fragile eyes from its fearsome women. As a highly respected Oscar-winner with a badass brand, Theron had seniority over Hardy. She also happens to be exceptional in Mad Max: Fury Road, and now it turns out her performance wasn’t confined to the movie: at its Cannes premiere, she was pictured with one arm draped on Hardy’s shoulder, which surely merits a prize for best performance by an actor pretending not to loathe her co-star. In celebrity terms, she was his superior. Perhaps that was what he found so intolerable. Hardy certainly wouldn’t be the first man to feel chastened or emasculated by the prospect of a woman in a position of power, any more than he would be alone in using aggression to redress the balance. But until the industry begins penalising this behaviour, and kills off the myth that anything goes so long as it results in a good performance, then movie sets will remain stuck between a rock and a Hardy place.The number of people being deported from the UK is at a record low while asylum applications have soared over the last year, according to Home Office data. Government statistics, which have measured irregular migration for the first time, also confirmed that 28,526 people arrived on small boats in 2021 – slightly higher than previous reports and a huge jump from the 8,466 who came in 2020. Critics have claimed that the statistics undermine Priti Patel’s claims that the government is getting a grip on the UK’s immigration and asylum system. Figures released on Thursday show that just 2,380 people were forcibly returned to another country in the year to September 2021, a 35% yearly drop and the lowest number on record. In 2004 the Home Office deported 21,425 people. They also showed that just 11 people had been deported since the asylum application rules were strengthened last year after Brexit to allow asylum claimants to be removed if they arrived from another “safe country”. Only 64 individuals were served with inadmissibility decisions, meaning the UK would not admit the asylum claim for consideration in the UK system, because another country was considered to be responsible for the claim. Meanwhile, there were 48,540 asylum applications in the UK in 2021, 63% more than the previous year. This is also higher than at the peak of the European migration crisis in 2015-16, when there were 36,546 applications, and the highest number of applications since 2003. Seven in 10 of the 14,734 initial decisions on applications led to asylum being granted last year – the highest rate since 1990. That figure appears to challenge Patel’s claim before parliament that most people who travel to the UK in small boats are not genuine asylum seekers. Enver Solomon, chief executive of the Refugee Council, said: “It comes as no surprise that today’s Home Office statistics show that the UK, along with our European neighbours, has seen an increase in asylum applications in 2021. Where there is war, conflict and violence – there will be people desperately seeking safety.” “It is important to recognise that that seven out of 10 men, women and children arriving in the UK are found to be fleeing bloodshed and persecution, the likes of which is unfolding in Ukraine, and so are granted protection.” Steve Valdez-Symonds, Amnesty International UK’s refugee and migrant rights director, said the figures challenged Patel’s policies. “It’s been chilling to see ministers coldly blaming desperate people simply for trying to reach safety … Instead of plans to criminalise people for seeking safety, the government should be opening up safer routes for those seeking asylum – not raising the drawbridge and driving vulnerable people further into the hands of people smugglers.” Stuart C McDonald, the SNP’s home affairs spokesperson, said the statistics exposed the cruelty and the failings of the government’s current policies. “The Home Office under Priti Patel is making policy that bears no resemblance to human decency, human rights or the reality of the situation it faces. “The admissibility rules which are about to be enshrined in the borders bill are an example of such cruel policies and ride roughshod over the refugee convention just at a point in time when we need it more than ever. “Any Ukrainian who seeks protection beyond Poland will be deemed a queue skipper and subject to criminalisation and marginalisation,” he said. The Home Office-published statistics showed that 36,792 people were found to have entered the UK by irregular routes last year. This means that about 8,000 people are expected to have entered the UK by means other than by small boats, such as in the back of lorries or shipping containers. According to the report, last year’s figure of people crossing in small boats compares with 8,466 people crossing in 2020, 1,843 in 2019 and 299 in 2018. November 2021 saw the highest number of small boat arrivals in the last four years – 6,971 – and the number coming to the UK in each month of last year was higher than comparable periods in 2020. The statistics also show that two-thirds of the UK’s seasonal worker visa holders issued in 2021 went to Ukrainian workers, raising questions about the potential impact of conflict in Ukraine on recruitment to British farms. After Indian nationals, Ukrainians were the second most common nationality among people granted UK work visas in 2021, mostly as a result of the seasonal worker visa. Almost 20,000 seasonal worker visas were granted to Ukrainian nationals, 67% of the total. Madeleine Sumption, the director of the Migration Observatory at the University of Oxford, said: “Today’s data show how heavily UK farms have relied on Ukrainian workers in particular, raising the question whether this source of workers will be disrupted by unpredictable events in that region.” Responding to the figures, the immigration minister, Kevin Foster, said: “This government is fixing our country’s approach to illegal entry to the UK and asylum by making the tough decisions to end the overt exploitation of our laws and UK taxpayers. “We know there is no simple solution to this problem, but our New Plan for Immigration will deliver the fair but firm system the British people have repeatedly voted for.”Russia’s invasion and bombing campaign has sparked outrage, with many in the UK asking how they can help the people of Ukraine. Support local charities There are several Ukrainian charities working on the ground. Sunflower of Peace is a charity that helps paramedics and doctors, and has been fundraising for supplies, which includes first aid medical tactical backpacks. United Help Ukraine focuses on providing medical supplies and humanitarian aid, and raising awareness of the conflict. Voices of Children aims to help children affected by the war in eastern Ukraine, providing support through art therapy, psychologists, video storytelling and a number of other methods. The British Red Cross has launched an emergency appeal to help Ukraine. The charity will be updating its webpage with news on the work its team is doing, and how support will be used to help people. Support local journalism English-language news outlets based in the country, such as Kyiv Independent and the New Voice of Ukraine, are covering developments on the ground as the conflict unfolds, using local journalists. The Kyiv Independent says it was created by journalists in order to defend editorial independence. This site on Twitter covers many local journalists in Ukraine. Write to your local MP This can be a way to lobby the British government to place further sanctions on the Russian government and its associates. You can get in touch with your local MP via email or post to their constituency address. Instructions on how to get in touch can be found on parliament.uk.Warren East picked a bad day to announce he’ll be off from Rolls-Royce at the end of the year but, then, his entire spell as chief executive has been an exercise in managing the unexpected. He inherited troublesome Trent 1000 engines, issued two profits warnings in his first six months in 2015 and had to cope with a thumping fine from the Serious Fraud Office for events before his time. Just when the clouds cleared, and £1bn of annual cashflow could be glimpsed, the pandemic struck, obliterating income that depended on aircraft with Rolls engines recording hours in the air. By the autumn of 2020, the company’s survival was in doubt. The painful remedy was a £7bn package comprising a hefty rights issue, extra borrowing, asset disposals and a heavy round of job losses. Against that backdrop, the direct fresh uncertainty for Rolls created by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine could almost be viewed as modest. Annual revenues from Russian airlines may dwindle towards zero with sanctions, but the current figure (£170m) is tiny in a group context. A more serious problem may be sourcing titanium for engines since Rolls buys 20% of its supply from Russia but, in the end, that headache ought to be manageable. The effect of indirect uncertainties, though, is hard to assess. Further delay to the recovery in the long-haul civil aviation market is now the way to bet, especially if oil prices stay above $100 a barrel, but the degree is anyone’s guess. In the circumstances, an underwhelming forecast of “positive free cashflow” and “broadly unchanged” operating profit margins of 3.8% in 2022 wasn’t much comfort for investors who crave medium-term predictability. The shares fell 13%. The shame is that East has done an excellent job. The boast that Rolls is now “a more balanced and more sustainable business” is basically correct, especially the second part thanks to net zero efforts in electric power systems, clean jet fuel, small modular reactors and the like. East has 10 months left, which probably won’t be long enough for him to prove his point in terms of the share price. Keep going, though. Chris O’Shea plays it savvy Chris O’Shea, chief executive of Centrica, owner of British Gas, is displaying more savvy than his predecessor. Outrage over boardroom bonuses was almost an annual occurrence during Iain Conn’s ill-starred reign of credit downgrades, dividend cuts and a crumbling share price. By contrast, O’Shea is forfeiting a £1.1m bonus in sympathy with customers facing rocketing energy bills. Sensible. It remains to be seen whether the move, plus a return of £27m of furlough money, will count for anything amid continuing talk of windfall taxes, where Centrica is theoretically exposed thanks to its remaining North Sea oil and gas fields that were the biggest driver of the group’s doubled operating profits of £948m for 2021. But one has to concede that O’Shea has a point about regular taxes looking windfall-ish from the point of view of the Treasury: Centrica’s bill was £480m, versus virtually nothing a year ago. Whatever happens on that front, O’Shea is definitely correct in his call for banking-style “prudential regulation” for retail energy suppliers given that failed companies invariably impose costs on everybody’s customers. He means “fit and proper” tests and, crucially, ring-fencing of customers’ deposits. Centrica has recently adopted the latter policy voluntarily but all firms should be made to fall into line sharpish. Critics may spy a plot to favour large suppliers. Actually, it’s a matter of treating punters fairly. Lloyds have been this way before The entire UK financial industry seems obsessed with the idea of catering for the needs of the “mass affluent”, by which they mean people with investable savings of more than £75,000, and here comes Charlie Nunn, new chief executive of Lloyds Banking Group with his version. One sees the appeal. We’re told that, on average, Lloyds customers hold 2.4 financial products with the bank but have seven overall. So use all those data insights to grab a bit more business from a semi-captive audience. That’s the theory, but banks (including Lloyds) have been round this cross-selling track in the past and have found that specialist providers tend to defend their territory fiercely. To be fair, Lloyds, by virtue of its sheer size, probably stands a fair chance of success. And Nunn set a few hard targets for extra revenues from a £4bn investment plan that, it should be said, is wider than just wealth management. After almost a decade of no growth at Lloyds during its recovery phase, he had to try something new. But one can’t call it a bold new direction. That may be a good thing, of course.Boris Johnson has been formally reprimanded by the official statistics watchdog for the second time in a month after he misleadingly claimed that there are now more people in work in the UK than before the start of coronavirus. The reproach from Sir David Norgrove, the head of the UK Statistics Authority, follows concerns he raised with Johnson at the start of February about an incorrect claim that crime levels were falling. In his new letter to Johnson, Norgrove noted that at prime minister’s questions on Wednesday the PM had said there were now more people in employment than before the pandemic began. However, Norgrove said, this was only the case if you considered only workers on payrolls, which was misleading, as it was more than offset by a drop in numbers of self-employed people – if you include them, the total is now 600,000 lower. “If, as seems to be the case, your statement referred only to the increase in the number of people on payrolls, it would be a selective use of data that is likely to give a misleading impression of trends in the labour market, unless that distinction is carefully explained,” Norgrove told Johnson. He added: “I hope you will agree that public trust requires a complete statement of this important measure of the economy.” Johnson has made the same misleading claim at earlier editions of prime minister’s questions. On 3 February, Norgrove announced that he would be writing to the offices of Johnson and Priti Patel, the home secretary, to highlight what he called a “misleading” use of crime statistics. Speaking in the Commons, Johnson had said the government was “cutting crime by 14%”, a reference to statistics between September 2019 and September 2021, a claim echoed in a Home Office press release. However, this was only the case if the statistics excluded fraud and computer misuse, which have risen quickly over the Covid period.Vladimir Putin’s decision to launch a catastrophic new European war, combined with the sheer weirdness of his recent public appearances, has raised questions in western capitals about the mental stability of the leader of a country with 6,000 nuclear warheads. They worry about a 69-year-old man whose tendency towards insularity has been amplified by his precautions against Covid, leaving him surrounded by an ever-shrinking coterie of fearful obedient courtiers. He appears increasingly uncoupled from the contemporary world, preferring to burrow deep into history and a personal quest for greatness. The French president, Emmanuel Macron, is well-placed to analyse changes to Putin’s demeanour. Macron once drove a cooperative, if self-conscious, Putin round the gardens of the palace of Versailles in a tiny electric golf cart in the summer of 2017 and welcomed him to his holiday residence at a fortress on the Mediterranean coast the following summer, where Putin descended from a helicopter carrying a bunch of flowers and complemented the Macrons on their tans. After Macron held five hours of talks with the Russian leader in Moscow at opposite ends of a 15-metre table, he told reporters on the return flight that “the tension was palpable”. This was not the same Putin he had last met at the Elysée palace in December 2019, Macron said. He was “more rigid, more isolated” and was off on an “ideological and security drift”. Following Putin’s speech on Monday, an Elysée official made an unusually bold assessment that the speech was “paranoid”. Bernard Guetta, a member of the European parliament for Macron’s grouping, told France Inter radio on Thursday morning, after military invasion began: “I think this man is losing his sense of reality, to say it politely.” Asked by the interviewer if that meant he thought Putin had gone mad, he said “yes”. Guetta is not alone. Milos Zeman, the Czech president and long one of Vlaldimir Putin’s staunchest supporters, denounced Putin a “madman” after the invasion. “All our Russia-watchers, watching his press conferences, think that he’s descending even more into a despotic mindset,” another European diplomat said. Vladimir Ashurkov, a close aide of Alexei Navalny, Putin’s most prominent opponent who is now in a penal colony, described Monday’s rambling speech by the Russian president about Ukraine as “really bizarre”. “It’s unprecedented in the rhetoric of world leaders, but also for Russia. It’s quite strange,” said Ashurkov, who is executive director of Navalny Anti-Corruption Foundation, and lives in exile. “Why would you spend so much time, you know, looking back into the past, when we now live in the 21st century? We should be looking into the future. It puzzles me as to what audience is intended for such a speech, because it’s not going to resonate with Russians and it’s rubbish for an international audience.” “I think he’s in some sort of self-induced concept of reality that is very revanchist, based in the past, and in the trauma of the dissolution of Soviet Union,” he said. “Frankly speaking, we are in a situation where the leader of a major nuclear country is living in his own world.” According to an estimate by the Federation of American Scientists (FAS), Russia has 5,977 nuclear warheads, even more than the US, its own rival in that field. Putin frequently refers to that huge arsenal, and made a thinly veiled reference to them when he launched the war on Ukraine. He said: “Whoever would try to stop us and further create threats to our country, to our people, should know that Russia’s response will be immediate and lead you to such consequences that you have never faced in your history. We are ready for any outcome.” Nato’s North Atlantic Council responded with similar open-ended language, saying: “We have increased the readiness of our forces to respond to all contingencies.” The US and Nato have made it very clear that they will not intervene directly in Ukraine, but their forces are in ever closer proximity and they have vowed to keep sending arms to Ukrainian forces if they become a guerilla resistance to Russian occupation. An errant Russian missile hit a Turkish-owned cargo ship in the Black Sea off the coast from the port city of Odessa on the first day of fighting. There have already been close encounters between Russian and Nato planes, while their naval forces will brush alongside each other. Ukraine has asked Turkey to close the Dardanelles Strait to Russian warships, to stop them moving from the Mediterranean to the Black Sea. Putin could also see the Nato provision of weapons, or certain types of sanctions as strategic threat, and respond in an unpredictable way. Emma Claire Foley, a researcher at Global Zero, a disarmament advocacy group said she worries about “the risks of having all these troops, all this materiel, in close proximity plus the sort of the ambiguity that an actual war introduces for people who are trying to understand the meaning of the other side’s actions, especially when communication is limited.” Hans Kristensen, director of FAS’s nuclear information project said that any unintended clash would have to go through several phases of escalation before nuclear weapons would be contemplated, but he cautioned: “If a direct clash happened, that escalation to that point could happen quickly. “It doesn’t necessarily have to go according to plan.” In a crisis, it would be very much up to Putin how to react and whether to escalate. Like a US president, he has access to a nuclear briefcase, the Chegets, with nuclear launch code. According to an analysis by the Middlebury Institute for International Studies at Monterey, the defence minister and chief of staff of the armed forces are also supposed to be involved, but in Putin’s Kremlin it is unclear whether they would act as any kind of brake on his actions. “Nuclear weapons are an interesting exception to the general rule that the psychology of world leaders is less important than the systems they work in,” Foley said. “Don’t assume that this could proceed in an orderly fashion. It could spin out of control very easily.”Boris Johnson was quickly out of the blocks when the news arrived from Ukraine before dawn. By 5am, a tweet was out in his name condemning Russia’s military invasion and promising a decisive response. He spent the morning getting briefed and on the phone to other leaders, including President Volodymyr Zelenskiy in Kyiv. At midday he broadcast to the nation, and in the early afternoon he took part in a virtual G7 meeting to coordinate sanctions against Russia with the US, the EU, Japan and Canada. By 5pm, he was spelling out the UK’s new plans in the House of Commons. Mr Johnson is a prime minister on probation with his own party. His initial announcement of sanctions against a handful of Russian banks and oligarchs had been scorned, including by Tories, as underwhelming. So Thursday night’s new package went further, as it should have done even without Russia’s assault. Although the G7 failed to agree to exclude Russia from the Swift international banking system, the package they agreed is substantial. Mr Johnson announced new curbs covering banks, exports, the freezing of assets and a ban on the Russian airline Aeroflot. Whether this will “hobble the Russian economy”, as Mr Johnson promised in his broadcast, remains to be seen. But the exercise shows the incomparable value of working together with allies. These were the easier bits. Warm words are Mr Johnson’s comfort zone. But the invasion of Ukraine is not a verbal joust. It is a violent and dangerous fact. It will not be reversed by sonorous phrases. To do that requires serious planning, deliverable agreements, effective deeds, the building of trust with allies, and sustaining the effort over a long period, if necessary at some financial and human cost. This is the bit where Mr Johnson always falls down. Nevertheless, these leadership qualities are essential in the dangerous new world that Russia created this week. This is, as Keir Starmer said, a turning point. Mr Johnson talked some of the talk in his broadcast, with references to “our European continent”, about Ukrainian “neighbours and co-workers”, and about responding “in concert with our allies”. He was quite right. But is he capable of turning words into consistent realities? To do so will demand a major change in approach from the government and the prime minister. In particular, it will mean working hard, consistently and reliably with the EU and allied European governments on big issues like defence, intelligence, energy, sanctions and the treatment of refugees. It will require an end to smug claims to be world-leading, to threats to break treaty commitments, and to public digs at neighbours and allies. It is a tall order. Dangerous times demand it all the same. There were hints of a new approach on Thursday. But Mr Johnson remains very much on probation.There is no shock today, only profound horror at what Russia has already unleashed upon Ukraine, and at what is to come. The invasion launched in the early hours is illegal, immoral and outrageous. It is, above all, a catastrophe for Ukraine: a massive assault by an aggressor with a well-documented ruthlessness and disdain for civilian lives. But as the country’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, warned: “The fate of not only our state is being decided, but also what Europe will be like.” A country that endured so many 20th-century traumas is now experiencing the continent’s biggest attack by one state on another since the second world war. The unprovoked assault does not merely destroy the hopes of 1991. It is also a terrible blow to the broader international system. Vladimir Putin launched this attack even as the UN security council made its last desperate attempts to stave it off, and as the secretary general, António Guterres, pleaded with him publicly to call off his troops. It is true that the rules which prevailed after 1945 have been honoured perhaps as often in the breach as the observance. But the Russian president has spelt out his utter contempt for the teetering rules-based international order at its very heart. Russia claimed for months that it would not invade; its assurances that it will not occupy Ukraine are worth nothing. Even on its own supposed logic, the request for military help from the breakaway “republics” in the east cannot explain why troops are advancing from the north and south, and bombarding targets across the country. Mr Putin says that he wants to “demilitarise” and “de-nazify” a democratic country that freely chose its Jewish president. Kyiv believes his aim is to topple the government and install a puppet regime. How far the Russian president goes may be determined in large part by the Ukrainian response, and the costs its military can inflict. Mr Putin warned against other countries “meddling”, with the chilling warning that otherwise there would be “consequences you have never encountered in your history” – a barely coded nuclear threat – though Ukraine has long known it will fight alone, albeit strengthened by the recent influx of arms and advice. A brave minority in Russia have publicly decried this war. Even allowing for his work to insulate his country – amassing foreign currency, reducing western imports and increasing links with China and others – it is likely to pay for this assault with a weakened economy, increasing isolation, a reinvigorated Nato and a bitterly anti-Russian Ukraine. Though state media is pumping out propaganda, and internet censors threatened others with fines if they used non-official sources in their reporting, Mr Putin has done strikingly little to prepare the public for the invasion, or its costs. Yet a president who has twinned aggression abroad with repression at home seems indifferent not only to those costs, but also to the public response to them. Ukrainians now need and deserve the staunchest support. Those who flee must be given a true welcome by western Europe as well as neighbouring countries. But the big question is what price Ukraine’s backers are willing to pay. The UK and EU promised “massive” sanctions, but hours after the invasion, states were still bickering over how far to go. A further hike in energy prices could tip countries into rampant inflation and potentially recession, with the danger of political destabilisation and further division as citizens struggle to get by. Mr Putin has reason to believe that he can weather the reaction. Nord Stream 2 is now on hold; yet its construction began just one year after Russia annexed Crimea. Ukraine’s friends must make clear that this time is different, with a sustained as well as large-scale response. Serious attempts to counter Moscow’s aggression must start now, but will be the work of years. It will take years, too, to understand the new era on which we are all now embarking.Thousands of Ukrainians have left the country and as many as 100,000 are internally displaced after fleeing their homes following the attack ordered by Vladimir Putin, the UN refugee agency has said. Videos and photos on social media show lines of cars moving out of cities and heading west, as well as an increase of people on foot near the southern and western borders. The United Nations refugee agency said on Thursday that the situation was quickly deteriorating after Russia’s invasion, estimating that several thousand had already fled with more expected to follow. It appealed to neighbouring countries to keep their borders open to people seeking a safe haven. “We have already seen reports of casualties and people starting to flee their homes to seek safety,” said Filippo Grandi, the UN high commissioner for refugees. At the Luzhanka border crossing with Hungary in western Ukraine, hundreds of cars waited in a queue snaking more than 2 kilometres back from the border on Thursday afternoon. People said they had been waiting over six hours in line to cross. A steady stream of people crossed on foot, carrying suitcases and holdalls stuffed with belongings. Many were Ukrainians from the Hungarian minority that live in the west of the country, and said they were traveling to stay with relatives for a few days in the hope the danger would pass. Others had come from other parts of Ukraine and planned to drive on to Western Europe. “The people who have money are leaving,” said one of the customs officials at the post. He said over 1,500 people had left through the crossing by 4pm on Thursday, as opposed to just a few hundred on a normal day. One 19-year-old man from the town of Svyalava said he had left both because he was scared of Russian assault and of potentially being called up to the Ukrainian army. “My brother lives in Hungary and I’ll stay with him as long as it takes,” he said, waiting at the border post. He asked not to use his name. Others also said they were fleeing before receiving army call-ups. People carrying luggage and accompanied by children crossed into the Polish city of Medyka, and lines of cars stretching for miles were reported on the approach to Ukraine’s border with Moldova. For weeks, central European countries on Ukraine’s western border have been making preparations for a potential influx of millions of refugees. Authorities in the countries next to Ukraine have already identified border crossings through which people can leave the country by land, such as Vyšné Nemecké in Slovakia, Záhony in Hungary, Siret in Romania, and Palanca in Moldova. Maia Sandu, the president of Moldova, said on Thursday there was an increase in traffic flow on the border. Poland is preparing a train, with medical equipment, to transport wounded civilians from the Ukrainian border to Polish hospitals, said the country’s health minister. “We are preparing a sanitary train with full rescue service and medical equipment to transport the injured,” said Adam Niedzielski. “This solution was created completely from scratch and, so far, has not been used in Poland. At the same time, we already have a list of 120 hospitals throughout the country to which victims may go. In total, we estimate at the moment that it would be possible to admit several thousand patients.” Poland, in particular, has been preparing for various scenarios, including a wave of up to a million people fleeing Ukraine, said Maciej Wąsik, the deputy interior minister. Poland is already home to about 2 million Ukrainians, many of whom moved after the 2014 conflict, and they have taken advantage of a relatively easy scheme to gain work permits. The government has said it is planning to house Ukrainian refugees in hostels, dormitories and sports facilities. A few days ago, local authorities in the countries bordering Ukraine were asked to indicate the list of accommodation facilities for refugees, the number of people it would be possible to accommodate, the costs involved and the timeframe for the adaptation of buildings. The ground floor of the exhibition centre in the south-eastern Polish city of Rzeszów has been equipped to receive people who may flee Ukraine, about 30 miles to the east. Germany has said it will offer support to countries in eastern and central Europe, especially Poland, facing an influx of refugees. German media have cited estimates that between 200,000 and a million people may flee to the EU from Ukraine in the event of a war. “We will offer massive support to the affected states – especially our neighbour Poland – in the event of large refugee movements,” the interior minister, Nancy Faeser, said in a statement, adding she had been in touch with the Polish government and the European Commission. Franziska Giffey, the mayor of Berlin, told news outlet RBB 24 that the German capital was preparing for the arrival of refugees. “For next week, we have set ourselves the goal of discussing concrete implications, what preparations we can make, especially in the event of people fleeing this situation,” Giffey said. Other countries in Europe have offered support to countries in eastern Europe in case of a wave of refugees leaving Ukraine. António Costa, the prime minister of Portugal, said potential refugees from Ukraine were welcome in the Iberian country, home to a large Ukrainian community. “Ukrainian citizens who have family, friends and acquaintances here are welcome in Portugal,” Costa said, promising to facilitate the issuance of entry visas.Wealthy undergraduates in England will be better off while women, disadvantaged students and those from the north and Midlands are most likely to be worse off under proposed changes to student finance, according to the government’s own analysis. After the official announcement of an overhaul of how graduates in England will repay tuition fee and maintenance loans in the future, ministers also urged universities to make “efficiencies” to cope with the reduced income they faced from a prolonged freeze on tuition fees. The changes would result in students who enrol in 2023-24 having to make repayments for 40 years rather than 30 under the student loan system that has been in place since 2012. Save the Student labelled the changes as “among the most regressive yet”, while the Institute for Fiscal Studies said that high-earning borrowers “stand to benefit substantially”. According to the IFS, graduates on lower-middle earnings would suffer the biggest proportionate loss, the equivalent of more than a penny in every pound they will ever earn during their lifetime. Middle and lower income graduates would also be hit by the government’s move to lower the repayment threshold from its current rate of £27,000 to £25,000 as the point at which graduates must use 9% of their income to repay loans. An equality analysis on the proposals by the Department for Education, states that “those likely to see some negative impact with increased lifetime repayments under the reforms” include younger and female graduates as well as graduates “from disadvantaged backgrounds, or reside in the north, Midlands, south-west or Yorkshire and the Humber”. The analysis shows that the lifetime repayments of a graduate in 2023-24, earning £22,000 in current prices with projected lifetime earnings of £850,000, would rise by 150% – from just below £9,700 now to £24,000. In contrast, the loan repayments of a graduate in the top 10% of earnings with an annual pay of £88,000, who would enjoy lifetime earnings of £3.5m, would drop from £53,000 to £39,000. Wealthy graduates particularly benefit from the government’s decision to stop charging higher earners an extra 3% interest rate. The changes will set interest at the rate of inflation, which the universities minister Michelle Donelan hailed as “injecting fairness into the system”. The IFS’s analysis said the changes would substantially increase the proportion who pay off their student loans, which now average close to £50,000. Students from a wealthier background tend to have lower borrowings as the amount of maintenance loan is linked to parental income. Whereas only a quarter of graduates are expected to have repaid their loans in full within 30 years of graduation, under the new system 60% can be expected to. “The long-run benefit for the taxpayer will be modest at around £1bn per cohort of university entrants, as higher repayments by borrowers with low or middling earnings will be mostly offset by lower repayments of high-earning borrowers,” the IFS said. On top of higher repayments, the institutions at which students study will receive less in real terms. Donelan confirmed that tuition fees will remain frozen for a further two years, at no more than £9,250 for English universities, meaning an effective cut after inflation. “We’re asking everybody to share this balance, and we want to continue to drive the sector to find efficiencies. There are more efficiencies that can be found and it is important that students get value for money for their degree,” Donelan said. The government is to commit an extra £900m over three years, including £750m for teaching targeted at science, technology, medicine and other high priority subjects. But the Russell Group of research universities said inflation meant the extra grant would not be enough to compensate for the cost of such courses. The Department for Education also published a controversial consultation to restrict numbers on certain courses, and set minimum criteria for school leavers to qualify for student loans, such as requiring at least a grade 4 in GCSE maths and English. Martin McLean, of the National Deaf Children’s Society, said: “This misguided proposal would make it even harder for deaf young people to reach higher education and it must not go ahead.” The government also announced that a consultation on shifting the university admissions process until after A-level results had been dropped because it was too complex.Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has amplified pressure for tougher economic sanctions on Moscow. The Labour leader, Keir Starmer, was among many to call for Moscow to be shut out of Swift – the world’s main international payments network – with the aim of hitting Russian trade and making it harder for its companies to do business. What is Swift? Swift (the Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication) is the main secure messaging system that banks use to make rapid and secure cross-border payments, allowing international trade to flow smoothly. It has become the principal mechanism for financing international trade. In 2020, about 38 million transactions were sent each day over the Swift platform, facilitating trillions of dollars’ worth of deals. Who owns Swift? Swift, founded in the 1970s, is a cooperative of thousands of member institutions that use the service. Based in Belgium, it remains neutral in trade disputes, being run principally as a service to its members. Why would a Swift ban be so serious? Boris Johnson told MPs it would harm the Russian economy if it were locked out of Swift. Run-of-the-mill transactions would need to be conducted directly between banks, or routed through fledgling rival systems, adding to costs and creating delays. Why is the US reluctant to implement a ban? One reason is that the impact on Russian businesses might not be so serious. The head of a large Russian bank, VTB, said recently he could use other channels for payments, such as phones, messaging apps or email. Russian banks could also route payments via countries that have not imposed sanctions, such as China, which has set up its own payments system to rival Swift. A ban on Russia using Swift could accelerate a the use of China’s rival Cips system. There is also a fear that it could damage to the US dollar’s status as the global reserve currency, and accelerate the use of alternatives such as cryptocurrencies. Would a Swift ban affect other countries? The Biden administration is also concerned that a ban could harm its allies as much as it does Russian firms. Russia is a big buyer of foreign manufactured goods, especially from the Netherlands and Germany. Russia is the main EU supplier of crude oil, natural gas and solid fossil fuels, and European countries could find it harder to find replacement suppliers. Is Swift bound by economic sanctions? In the past, Swift has resisted calls to impose bans on certain countries, describing itself as neutral. But in 2012, the European Union barred Swift from serving Iranian firms and individuals sanctioned in relation to Tehran’s nuclear programme, setting a precedent for action against Russia. A Swift spokesperson declined to say how the organisation would respond to any US sanctions, Reuters said.A group of 11 Labour MPs from the left of the party have removed their names from a statement about the invasion of Ukraine, which heavily criticises Nato after being warned they risked losing the party whip. In a rapid victory for Keir Starmer over MPs still linked to Jeremy Corbyn, the Labour chief whip wrote to the 11 backbenchers asking them to remove their signatures from a statement drawn up by the Stop the War group. It is understood that Alan Campbell told the group, including Diane Abbott, John McDonnell and Richard Burgon, that they risked losing the Labour whip if they did not remove their names. A party spokesperson later said all the MPs had agreed to do so. The Stop the War statement, which accuses the UK government of “sabre-rattling” over Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, also criticises it for saying Ukraine has a right to join Nato if it wishes. It says the alliance “should call a halt to its eastward expansion and commit to a new security deal for Europe which meets the needs of all states and peoples,” adding: “We refute the idea that Nato is a defensive alliance, and believe its record in Afghanistan, Yugoslavia and Libya over the last generation, not to mention the US-British attack on Iraq, clearly proves otherwise.” While Corbyn is a long-term Nato sceptic, Starmer has stressed his support for the organisation. Writing in the Guardian earlier this month, the Labour leader said the party’s commitment to Nato “is unshakable”. He was also heavily critical of Stop the War, which first emerged before the 2003 invasion of Iraq by US and UK forces, and which Corbyn chaired before becoming Labour leader. The group did not represent “benign voices for peace”, Starmer said, adding: “At best they are naive, at worst they actively give succour to authoritarian leaders who directly threaten democracies. There is nothing progressive in showing solidarity with the aggressor when our allies need our solidarity and – crucially – our practical assistance now more than ever.” A Labour spokesperson said: “The small number of Labour MPs that signed the Stop The War statement have all now withdrawn their names. This shows Labour is under new management. With Keir Starmer’s leadership there will never be any confusion about whose side Labour is on – Britain, Nato, freedom and democracy – and every Labour MP now understands that.” The other MPs who signed the Stop the War statement were Tahir Ali, Apsana Begum, Ian Lavery, Ian Mearns, Bell Ribeiro-Addy, Zarah Sultana, Mick Whitley and Beth Winter. Other signatories included Corbyn, who is sitting as an independent after losing the Labour whip for refusing to rescind comments he made in the aftermath of the publication of the Equality and Human Rights Commission report on Labour’s handling of antisemitism complaints. It was also signed by Claudia Webbe, the Leicester East MP who was elected for Labour but sits as an independent after being found guilty of a campaign of harassment, including threatening an acid attack, against a woman. Andrew Scattergood, co-chairman of left-wing campaign group Momentum, said: “These MPs’ steadfast commitment to the Ukrainian people and against Russia’s invasion is beyond question. Indeed, many of them have led the criticism of Putin’s act of aggression today, forcefully and without reservation. “It beggars belief that the Labour leadership instead focuses on a week-old statement in an attempt to wage factional warfare against them, while a real war wages on against the Ukrainian people.”Nearly every UK bank has struggled over the past decade managing the fallout of multibillion pound taxpayer bailouts, business scams or devastating IT meltdowns. But few have faced quite as many scandals, near-failures and turnaround efforts as the Co-operative Bank. During that period the mid-size lender has teetered on collapse, its former chief executive was charged for drug possession, it has been bailed out by a group of hedge funds and it has changed its boss six times in nine years. But the bank, which has its roots in the ethical co-operative movements and was formed in 1872, has survived the fallout of the so-called Crystal Methodist scandal and is now enjoying relative stability under its hedge fund owners, who have seen it to its first profit in a decade. Its newest chief executive, Nick Slape, is insistent that the bank’s 150th anniversary this year will be a turning point. He says it is an opportunity to look beyond recent scandals and spark new excitement over the UK’s “original ethical bank”, which reported on Thursday a £31m profit for 2021 – its first since 2011. The Co-op Bank also more than tripled its bonus pot for bankers to £13.3m after what it described as a “milestone year”. Slape’s team have been rifling through archives to prepare for November’s anniversary. The bank traces its origins to the 1872 establishment of the Co-operative Wholesale Society, the body that would become the Co-operative Group. It was meant to provide financial services to the wider co-operative movement in Britain, in which member-owned businesses worked for the common good. While the bank has since separated from the group, having been taken over by its hedge fund investors as part of a £700m rescue deal in 2017, and no longer counts itself as a member-owned organisation, it has tried to maintain its ethical roots. Although hedge funds and private equity investors are often slated for their focus on maximising profits and short-term gains, Slape is quick to emphasise that the bank’s ethical policies are enshrined in its articles of association, which its shareholders have in effect signed up to. “We take it seriously: with real policies that are approved by the board, and a values and ethics committee that monitors it all, and we report it to the Co-operatives UK,” Slape said, referring to the national industry body that monitors and coordinates on behalf of co-operatives across the country. In 2019, the bank agreed to formally recognise a customer “union” aimed at protecting its ethical policies, which was formed out of the Save Our Bank campaign after the Co-operative Bank’s near collapse in 2013, the year the lender’s financial troubles first came to light. That year, a £1.5bn hole was discovered in its accounts after the disastrous 2009 takeover of the Britannia building society. “That led to its own kind of crisis over the next few years,” Slape said, resulting in the first rescue deal that started the bank’s disentanglement from the larger Co-operative Group. Its troubles were compounded when the bank’s former chair, the ex-Labour councillor and Methodist church minister Paul Flowers, nicknamed the Crystal Methodist, pleaded guilty to possession of cocaine, crystal meth and ketamine in 2014. Slape said Flowers’ charges drove away more customers than the bank’s balance sheet woes ever did. “The only time that they ever really moved away was with the news of the previous chairman that was in the tabloids,” he said. “That clearly played very much on the ethics and the values of the bank. So that’s when my predecessors saw [customer] attrition. Other than that, we’ve got really loyal customers that have stuck with us.” That loyalty was maintained even after the hedge funds took full control nearly five years ago. The group, which includes Silver Point Capital, GoldenTree, Anchorage Capital and Cyrus Capital and the fund manager Invesco, now collectively owns 85% of the bank, with the remainder held by a range of undisclosed institutional investors. Every Co-operative Bank chief executive since has been dogged by questions about when its hedge fund owners will plot an exit. They came close in November 2020, when the New York-based private equity firm Cerberus Capital Management offered about £270m to buy the lender. However, those talks broke down a month later. No further offers have been made and Slape, a former Lloyds, Deutsche Bank and Merrill Lynch banker, is setting his sights on future growth. Having already built up more capital – the financial cushion banks must hold to protect them from risky loans and products on their balance sheets – the Co-operative Bank has an opportunity finally to return some cash to its shareholders, or, as Slape puts it, “invest in something”. That could mean buying a loan portfolio or buying another bank to merge with the lender, which on its own has 3.2 million personal customers, 95,000 business clients and 50 branches across the UK. Slape’s team in October tabled a tentative offer, which has since been rejected, for the takeover of the banking rival TSB. But with the Co-operative Bank’s credit rating on the rise – Moody’s upgraded the bank’s unsecured debt rating by two notches last month – Slape says it has further opportunities on the horizon. “We’ve got some big enablers that have been put in place that are allowing us to sort of think about things that we couldn’t think about before, when we weren’t profitable. So all of these things are positive,” he said. Moody’s credited the bank’s upgrade on its “continued progress towards a more sustainable business model” and its improving profitability, but added that the latter could remain “very weak” during the next 12-18 months and that a further downgrade could be possible if profitability proved unsustainable beyond 2021. However, those risks seem unlikely to phase Slape, who is toying with the idea of a stock market flotation that would allow the Co-operative Bank’s longstanding hedge fund investors to exit by 2023. “We’ve got a strong board, we do all our reporting completely consistent of what you do as a public company. So it’s not a big step-change for us,” Slape said. “This is clearly an option.”It began an hour before dawn, airstrikes and missiles raining down on military bases, airfields, border posts and cities across Ukraine, explosions lighting up the still-darkened sky from Odessa to Mariupol, Kharkiv to Dnipro, Lutsk to the capital, Kyiv. In the grey early light that followed, Russian tanks and troops began rolling across the border, columns of soldiers pouring into the eastern regions of Chernihiv, Kharkiv and Luhansk. Others landed in the ports of Odessa and Mariupol. In Moscow, shortly before 5am, Vladimir Putin had announced the launch of the biggest attack by one state against another in Europe since the second world war. “I have decided,” he said, “to conduct a special military operation.” The assault, the Russian president said, was aimed at “the demilitarisation and denazification of Ukraine”, and any foreign country that tried to interfere risked “consequences you have never seen”. Barely an hour later, at 5.58am in Kyiv, as explosions rattled the city and sirens blared, Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, tweeted: “Putin has just launched a full-scale invasion of Ukraine. Peaceful Ukrainian cities are under strikes.” This was “a war of aggression”, Kuleba said. “Ukraine will defend itself and will win. The world can and must stop Putin. The time to act is now.” Minutes afterwards the country’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, addressed his nation in a tense video, saying explosions were now being heard “in many cities across the country”. He declared martial law. On the overnight train from the south-eastern port city of Mariupol to the capital – the last, perhaps, to make the journey for some time – passengers woke up to news from the now besieged city they had left behind. There was an air of grim calm; no shouting or weeping, no explosions of emotion. People flicked through their phones, watched snatches of video showing shelling; held long, subdued conversations with those now stuck behind the frontline and wondering what they should do next. The south and east were not the only regions of Ukraine under attack; reports soon began coming in of an armoured incursion, backed by Belarusian troops, through the Senkivka border crossing in the north, as well as of Russian armour moving into Ukraine from Crimea. By 7am, two hours into the assault, Russian-backed separatist rebels were launching multiple attacks on Ukrainian military positions around the self-proclaimed republics in Luhansk and Donetsk in the south-east. Video footage showed Russian rockets hitting populated areas in major cities, despite Moscow’s claims that it was only targeting military infrastructure; pictures from Kharkiv showed the tail section of an unexploded rocket sticking out of the pavement close to an Orthodox church. Russia has amassed more than 150,000 combat troops on the borders of Ukraine, with another 34,000 lightly armed separatist forces in the self-proclaimed republics: an estimated two-thirds of the country’s total ground forces. Half its air force is also deployed in the region. As Europe awoke, leaders denounced the assault, warning of heavy casualties and a huge economic impact. Financial markets opened – and instantly plunged. Oil prices soared. Governments convened emergency meetings and readied new sanctions. In Kyiv, a city of three million people, the city’s mayor, Vitaly Klitschko, urged residents to stay at home unless they were involved in critical work and to prepare go-bags with necessities and documents in case they needed to evacuate. Some headed underground, seeking refuge in the metro. With reports suggesting Russian tanks were advancing on Kyiv from Belarus, barely 93 miles (150km) and two and a half hours’ drive and away, others hurriedly packed suitcases and took to trains, cars and buses; main roads leading out of the city started to back up from mid-morning. “We are facing a war, and horror. What could be worse?” said one resident, Liudmila Gireyeva, 64. She said she was planning to travel later in the day to the western city of Lviv, and then to try to move on to Poland to join her daughter. Putin “will be damned by history”, Gireyeva said. “Ukrainians are damning him.” As the train from Mariupol pulled into Kyiv, only an hour late, at 11am, those on board tumbled out into a city reeling from the start of hostilities few believed would reach such a terrifying scale. The station was crammed with people desperate to get on a train out – in almost any direction but eastwards. “My parents called me around 5am to say war is coming and I didn’t believe them,” said Anna Bolosheva, 27, taking a train to stay with relatives in a rural area to the north of Kyiv. “I opened the news and there wasn’t much about it – but then I heard the explosions. I couldn’t imagine it, and I can’t understand it. Yesterday I didn’t think this could happen.” Eight hours’ drive and 340 miles (550km) to the west, in the city of Lviv, near the Polish border, the queues for banks and pharmacies and supermarkets were already snaking round the block. Lviv had long seemed one of Ukraine’s safer cities, prompting several western embassies concerned about a possible Russian invasion to relocate there from Kyiv, but morning air raid sirens and news of Russian strikes in Lutsk to the north and Ivano-Frankivsk to the south had punctured that illusion. Glued to his phone was Ivan Taibov, 27, from Odessa. His screen showed video of a plume of smoke rising from his home city. “They’re calling for people to come to its defence,” he said. “I’m trying to see if it is possible to get back. There will be a fight.” Tanya Hrunyk, a 43-year-old economist waiting in one of the bank queues, was wondering whether to stay in Lviv and for how long. “I have family in the country where I could go. I’ll go if there’s an evacuation. Until then, I’m not sure,” she said. Asked what she thought of Putin’s reasons for attacking her country, Hrunyk said sharply: “He’s a crazy man. He’s mentally ill. Our task is to stay calm and united.” Ivan Borislavsky, a bartender who is expecting a baby with his partner in a month, said he was staying. “I need to fight for my wife and children and my land,” he said. Ukrainian officials confirmed video footage from several sources of a Russian helicopter assault at Hostomel, barely four miles from Kyiv. At least 20 Mi-8 and Ka-52 helicopters flew in from Belarus to attack an airfield that is home to the Antonov aircraft maker and has a runway long enough to handle big cargo planes. By lunchtime, casualties were starting to mount: 18 dead in a missile attack near Odessa, according to authorities; six more in Brovary, half an hour’s drive north-east of Kyiv. In Vuhledar, near Donetsk, an occupier’s shell hit the hospital, killing four people and injuring 10, including six doctors. Russia’s military claimed to have wiped out Ukraine’s air defences; Ukraine’s to have shot down five Russian aircraft and killed 50 soldiers on the eastern front. In Mariupol, in the far south-east, close to Russian-occupied territory, Yulia, a local journalist, said she had heard multiple heavy explosions on the opposite side of the city from the western Primorsky district where she was with her young son. “We’ve collected our stuff and are ready to run to a bomb shelter if necessary,” she said. But she added she was worried because she could not reach her mother, who lives in the eastern part of the city, by phone. “I hope it’s just because her phone battery has run out,” she said. In Kherson, east of Odessa, Svitlana described a column of Russian tanks, APCs, military trucks and rocket launchers moving inexorably north in the direction of Nova Kakhovka. “We are just sitting in our houses,” she said. “The shops are closed, nothing is working.” There was shelling earlier, but now it was quiet. Nearly 560 miles away in Moscow, banks and exchange bureaux opened for business but rapidly ran out of dollars as the Russian rouble plunged to an all-time low. Despite a barrage of state media propaganda, many residents expressed profound shock that Russia should have launched a full-scale attack on its neighbour. “I didn’t think Putin would be willing to go all the way. How can we bomb Ukraine? We have our disagreements, but this is not to a way to solve them,” said one appalled Muscovite, Ksenia Fadeeva. Another, Nikita Golubev, said: “I am embarrassed for my country. To be honest with you, I am speechless. War is always scary. We don’t want this.” Tatyana, who asked for her surname not to be published, said she “couldn’t believe the news I read this morning. A war with Ukraine? What are we doing? I feel powerless.” Ordinary citizens were not alone. Valery Meladze, arguably Russia’s most popular singer, posted an emotional video in which begged Russia to stop the war. “Today something happened that should have never happened. History will be the judge of these events. But today, I beg you, please stop the war,” he said. By 2pm, Andriy Zagorodnyuk, a former Ukrainian defence minister, was describing a situation that was still “extremely tense. There are thrusts happening. They are quite close to Kherson; the situation is critical there. They are trying to surround Kharkiv. Ukrainian armed forces are fighting quite seriously. There is no panic.” Shortly after, Ukraine called on the EU to urgently provide air defence and anti-missile systems, as well as use “all means” to jam Russian satellite signals, requesting an “end to business as usual” with Russia and “fierce measures against Belarus, which directly supported Russia’s full-scale invasion”. Russia’s defence ministry, meanwhile, claimed about 12 hours into the attack to have destroyed 74 Ukrainian military ground facilities, including 11 airfields, three command posts and 18 radar stations for anti-aircraft missile systems. Back in Kyiv, the capital’s central railway station, Kyiv-Pasazhyrskyi, was crowded with hundreds of passengers seeking to leave. There were long queues for tickets and information. Several trains had been cancelled, marked red on the departure board, but others were functioning as normal. By 6pm, there were still huge queues of cars trying to escape the capital and head westward, with the main road out jammed with vehicles. Drivers stood next to their vehicles, patiently waiting for the route to clear. Mayor Klitschko ordered a 10pm-7am curfew but said metro stations would stay open all night for shelter. As darkness began to draw in at the end of the first day of what analysts have said may prove Europe’s fiercest conflict for more than 75 years, Zelenskiy turned to an earlier dark era, and a celebrated phrase from the end of that war. “What we have heard today are not just missile blasts, fighting and the rumble of aircraft,” the Ukrainian president warned. “This is the sound of a new iron curtain, which has come down and is closing Russia off from the civilised world. Our national task is to make sure this curtain does not fall across our land.”We’re now closing this live blog. Thanks for reading along with us. France has reported 66,732 new coronavirus cases, Reuters reports. The European Union’s drug watchdog has approved Moderna’s Covid jab for children aged six to 11, the second vaccine to be approved for younger children in the 27-member bloc, AFP reports. “The EMA’s human medicines committee (CHMP) has recommended granting an extension of indication for the Covid-19 vaccine Spikevax to include use in children aged 6 to 11,” the Amsterdam-based European Medicines Agency (EMA) said in a statement. The jab, developed by US-based pharmaceutical company Moderna, has already been approved for adults and children aged 12 and above “As in the older age group, the vaccine is given as two injections in the muscles of the upper arm, four weeks apart,” the EMA said. France reported 109,649 coronavirus deaths in hospital, up by 197. France also reported that 2,656 people are in intensive care units with Covid-19, down by 97, Reuters reports. A further 125 people have died in the UK within 28 days of testing positive for Covid-19, bringing the total to 161,104, the government said. Separate figures published by the Office for National Statistics show there have been 184,000 deaths registered in the UK where Covid-19 was mentioned on the death certificate. Here is a round-up of today’s main Covid news stories: The legal requirement to self-isolate with Covid ends today in England. Guidance will remain in place until April for those who test positive to stay at home and avoid contact with others for at least five full days, but there will be no penalty for not doing so. Iceland will lift all remaining coronavirus restrictions on Friday, including a 200-person indoor gathering limit, restricted opening hours for bars and quarantine requirements for those infected with the virus. Taiwan is reopening to business travellers and shortening quarantine for all arrivals. From early March, foreigners will be allowed to enter for business purposes, including inspection, investment, employment or fulfilling contractual obligations. A group of shouting protesters have chased the New Zealand prime minister’s van down a driveway as she visited a Christchurch primary school amid tensions over increasingly volatile anti-vaccine mandate protests. Hong Kong’s government has invoked emergency powers to allow doctors and nurses from the Chinese mainland to practise in the financial hub as it struggles to tackle a spiralling coronavirus outbreak. The most disadvantaged areas of Melbourne in Australia have been hit hardest by Covid-19 deaths during Victoria’s Omicron wave, further underscoring the pandemic’s disproportionate effect on communities with lower employment and income levels, and poorer access to services. Data obtained exclusively by Guardian Australia shows that in Melbourne’s most disadvantaged local government areas (LGAs), Covid deaths occurred at a rate of 26 deaths per 100,000 residents. This substantially outweighs deaths in areas of greater socioeconomic advantage. That’s all from me, Léonie Chao-Fong, on the global coronavirus blog as I head over to our Ukraine coverage. Do join me there if you’d like. In the meantime, here’s a rundown of everything you might have missed: Iceland will lift all remaining coronavirus restrictions on Friday, including a 200-person indoor gathering limit, restricted opening hours for bars and quarantine requirements for those infected with the virus. Iceland’s minister of health, Willum Thór Thórsson, confirmed the country would remove all restrictions from 25 February, including lifting all border measures, with no additional restrictions for unvaccinated travellers. From today, people in England who test positive for the coronavirus will no longer be legally required to isolate themselves. Guidance will remain in place until April for those who test positive to stay at home and avoid contact with others for at least five full days, but there will be no penalty for not doing so. Taiwan is reopening to business travellers and shortening quarantine for all arrivals, in a move to slightly ease restrictions in one of the few places still pursuing a zero-Covid strategy. Authorities announced restrictions would ease from early March for foreigners coming in for business purposes. The UK government health secretary, Sajid Javid, has defended the Covid response against accusations that MPs were unable to scrutinise controversial provisions in emergency legislation during the early stages of the pandemic. Ministers had to “act quickly”, Javid said, as he addressed the public administration and constitutional affairs committee on the Coronavirus Act ahead of its two-year anniversary. Several high-end countries have vaccinated 90% of their populations while some African nations have completed only 10% of inoculation, the World Health Organization’s (WHO) chief scientist Soumya Swaminathan said. Speaking in a panel discussion as part of BioAsia 2022, she suggested that there was a need for a distributed manufacturing network across the globe. The Queen has postponed two scheduled virtual audiences on Thursday after her Covid-19 diagnosis, Buckingham Palace said. The 95-year-old monarch tested positive for the virus on Sunday when she was said to be suffering from mild cold-like symptoms. A group of shouting protesters chased the New Zealand prime minister Jacinda Ardern’s van down a driveway as she visited a Christchurch primary school amid tensions over increasingly volatile anti-vaccine mandate protests. Anti-vaccine and anti-vaccine mandate protesters have been occupying New Zealand’s parliament grounds for more than two weeks and blocking a number of streets in Wellington’s central business district with their cars. Hong Kong’s government has invoked emergency powers to allow doctors and nurses from the Chinese mainland to practise in the financial hub as it struggles to tackle a spiralling coronavirus outbreak. The densely populated metropolis is in the throes of its worst-ever Covid wave, registering thousands of cases every day and overwhelming hospitals. The Canadian prime minister, Justin Trudeau, has announced he is removing emergency powers police can use after authorities ended the blockades at the borders and the occupation in Ottawa by truckers and others opposed to Covid restrictions. Most pregnant women in the UK are still shunning Covid vaccines despite an increased chance of stillbirth, premature birth and risks to their own health, analysis shows. Data reveals 73% of Asian women, 86% of black women and 65% of white women were unvaccinated at the time of giving birth in October 2021. Several high-end countries have vaccinated 90% of their populations while some African nations have completed only 10% of inoculation, the World Health Organization’s (WHO) chief scientist said. Although the scientific achievement with regards to tackling the pandemic has been commendable, there was no global coordination and several countries did not abide by the framework put out by the WHO, Soumya Swaminathan said. Speaking in a panel discussion as part of BioAsia 2022, she said: I think that while the scientific achievements have been absolutely outstanding, the fact that we have a vaccine in less than a year … Where we fell short was on really global coordination and harmonised ways of approaching pandemic. Though the world no longer faced an acute vaccine supply shortage that was seen throughout 2021, the challenge remains that many countries are not able to carry out massive vaccination programmes. Swaminathan said the WHO was working on scenarios where variant-proof vaccines were developed and suggested that there was a need for a distributed manufacturing network across the globe. The UK government health secretary, Sajid Javid, has defended the Covid response against accusations that MPs were unable to scrutinise controversial provisions in emergency legislation during the early stages of the pandemic. Ministers had to “act quickly”, Javid said, as he addressed the public administration and constitutional affairs committee on the Coronavirus Act ahead of its two-year anniversary. The health secretary accepted that ensuring parliament could properly debate emergency legislation may be one of the “lessons learned” from the crisis, adding that he did not “envisage” ever having to bring back provisions in the act which are set to expire at midnight on 24 March. The former shadow chancellor John McDonnell said there was a view among some MPs that decisions which had a “major impact” on the public had at times seemed like a “fait accompli”. At times, when it’s come to announcements in parliament, there is a view among some parliamentarians that actually it’s almost been like peeping through the keyhole or shouting through the letterbox of Number 10 rather than participating in the decision-making process of such fundamental issues. Scottish National party MP for Inverclyde, Ronnie Cowan, asked Javid: You don’t think it would have been preferable at some point to have had a wider debate in parliament on some of those provisions? Javid replied: I see what you’re getting at and I think that should be part of the lessons learned. I guess your point is that whilst the overall act is needed, could individual provisions, could parliament have more say on them... even if it’s not all the provisions, some of the more, let’s say, controversial ones, and I think it’s a very fair point to think about that now. The government had to “act quickly” and strike a balance between enabling parliamentary debate on the laws and rolling out measures to protect the British public at pace, he said. Hong Kong’s Covid-19 vaccine pass came into effect today, requiring people entering restaurants, shopping centres and supermarkets to have received at least one Covid-19 jab. Masks are also required for all outdoor exercise and people are not permitted to remove face coverings to eat or drink on public transport. From Thursday, people must also use their phone’s LeaveHomeSafe contact tracing app to scan a QR code to enter specified premises. Restaurants will proactively scan people’s vaccination records, while higher traffic venues such as malls and supermarkets will only see spot checks. To qualify for a vaccine pass, the person must have received at least one Covid-19 jab, or have a doctor’s certificate certifying they are medically unfit to be inoculated. Anyone caught using somebody else’s vaccination records as their own could face legal consequences, authorities said. From today, people in England who test positive for the coronavirus will no longer be legally required to isolate themselves. Guidance will remain in place until April for those who test positive to stay at home and avoid contact with others for at least five full days, but there will be no penalty for not doing so. Unveiling his government’s strategy for “living with Covid” on Monday, Boris Johnson told the public: Until April 1 we will still advise people who test positive to stay at home but after that we will encourage people with Covid-19 symptoms to exercise personal responsibility, just as we encourage people who may have flu to be considerate to others England’s chief medical officer, Prof Sir Chris Whitty, said people should still isolate if they had the virus, despite the legal requirement ending on Thursday. He said it was “standard public health advice” and warned that while rates were coming down it was “still a very common infection”. Self-isolation support payments of £500 for people on low incomes have also ended today, as has the legal obligation for workers to tell their employer that they need to isolate. Routine contact tracing has also ended, meaning people will no longer be advised to test or isolate after coming into contact with someone who has the virus. Isolation rules are not changing in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, meaning people will still be required to isolate for at least five full days after testing positive. Iceland will lift all remaining coronavirus restrictions on Friday, including a 200-person indoor gathering limit, restricted opening hours for bars and quarantine requirements for those infected with the virus. Iceland’s minister of health, Willum Thór Thórsson, confirmed the country would remove all restrictions from 25 February, including lifting all border measures, with no additional restrictions for unvaccinated travellers. Speaking at a government meeting today, Thórsson said: We can truly rejoice at this turning-point, but nonetheless I encourage people to be careful, practice personal infection prevention measures and not to interact with others if they notice symptoms Iceland, with a population of 368,000 people, has reported between 2,100 and 2,800 daily infections recently. More than 115,000 infections have been recorded in the country since the start of the pandemic and 60 have died due to the virus. Taiwan is reopening to business travellers and shortening quarantine for all arrivals, in a move to slightly ease restrictions in one of the few places still pursuing a zero-Covid strategy. Taiwan’s Central Epidemic Command Centre (CECC) announced restrictions would ease from early March for foreigners coming in for business purposes, including inspection, investment, employment or fulfilling contractual obligations. Chen Tsung-yen, deputy head of the CECC, said: We will open to foreign business people starting March 7 in line with some relaxations in the overall pandemic prevention measures. Chinese, Hong Kong and Macau residents can only apply for entry to fulfil business contracts or due to transferrals within multinational companies. Also from 7 March, the 14-day mandatory quarantine for all arrivals will be cut to 10 days, in addition to a week of monitoring at home. A mask mandate and some other restrictions will be eased from 1 March, authorities said. Chou Jih-haw, head of the CECC’s disease surveillance division, said: We had some domestic cluster infections before Lunar New Year but the number of local cases continued to fall in recent weeks. The domestic situation is stable and under control. Hello everyone. It’s Léonie Chao-Fong here again, taking over the live blog from Tom Ambrose to bring you all the latest global developments on the coronavirus pandemic. Feel free to get in touch on Twitter or via email. We start with the news that the Queen has postponed two scheduled virtual audiences on Thursday after her Covid-19 diagnosis, Buckingham Palace said. The palace said the 95-year-old monarch was “continuing with light duties”. The update comes amid heightened concerns for her health, given her age, frailer appearance of late and recent health scare. The Queen tested positive for the virus on Sunday when she was said to be suffering from mild cold-like symptoms. A palace spokesperson said today: The two virtual audiences that had previously been scheduled to take place today will now be rescheduled for a later date. Her Majesty is continuing with light duties. No other engagements are scheduled for this week. Here is a round-up of today’s main Covid news stories: A group of shouting protesters have chased the New Zealand prime minister’s van down a driveway as she visited a Christchurch primary school amid tensions over increasingly volatile anti-vaccine mandate protests. Hong Kong’s government has invoked emergency powers to allow doctors and nurses from the Chinese mainland to practise in the financial hub as it struggles to tackle a spiralling coronavirus outbreak. The Canadian prime minister, Justin Trudeau, has announced he is removing emergency powers police can use after authorities ended the blockades at the borders and the occupation in Ottawa by truckers and others opposed to Covid restrictions. Japan has said international travellers showing proof of a Covid vaccination with the Johnson &amp; Johnson shot would be allowed in and be eligible for a shorter time in quarantine when border controls are eased next month. The Omicron BA.2 sub-variant of Covid appears to be more infectious than the original BA.1 sub-variant, according to data from South Africa. The rollout of the coronavirus vaccination programme has been praised by the UK’s public spending watchdog for meeting “stretching and unprecedented targets” and saving lives. Most pregnant women in the UK are still shunning Covid vaccines despite an increased chance of stillbirth, premature birth and risks to their own health, analysis shows. Hong Kong reported a new record of 8,798 Covid infections on Thursday, health authorities said. That’s it from me, Tom Ambrose, until tomorrow. My colleague Léonie Chao-Fong will be along shortly to take over the global Covid live blog. Bye for now. The Omicron BA.2 sub-variant of Covid appears to be more infectious than the original BA.1 sub-variant, according to data from South Africa. However, it does not cause more severe disease, the head of Africa’s top public health body said on Thursday. Japan has said international travellers showing proof of a Covid vaccination with the Johnson &amp; Johnson shot would be allowed in and be eligible for a shorter time in quarantine when border controls are eased next month. The J&amp;J shot, which has not been approved in Japan, will join a list of three other shots that have been approved by regulators as sufficient for non-residents to enter, after a nearly two-year ban on such travellers. The other approved vaccines on a list that the foreign ministry released on Thursday are the ones developed by Pfizer, Moderna and AstraZeneca, Reuters reported. Vaccines developed by Chinese and Russian makers are not included. From 1 March, authorities will raise the number of people allowed in to Japan to 5,000 a day, from 3,500, Prime Minister Fumio Kishida told reporters last week. The easing applies to students, workers, and other visa holders, but not to tourists for the time being. The quarantine period will be reduced to three days in some conditions, from seven, and it will be waived entirely depending on the traveller’s point of origin, and if they have had a booster shot. Hong Kong reported a new record of 8,798 Covid infections on Thursday, health authorities said. It comes as the global financial hub struggles to control a worsening outbreak that has overwhelmed its health system ahead of a citywide compulsory testing scheme in March. The rollout of the coronavirus vaccination programme has been praised by the UK’s public spending watchdog for meeting “stretching and unprecedented targets” and saving lives. The National Audit Office (NAO) said securing a supply of vaccines early was “crucial to the successful rollout” which helped “to save lives and reduce serious illness and hospitalisation”. The independent watchdog said there were risks ahead for the programme, including staff burnout and reaching groups with a lower rate of uptake, PA Media reported. But in a report released on Friday, which covers a period up to the end of October 2021, the NAO said wastage of around 4.7m vaccine doses - around 4% of the total supply - had been “much lower than the programme initially assumed” and that the whole operation had been “an effective use of public money”. The report said the vaccine programme spent £5.6bn up to the end of October last year, out of a total available pot of £8.3bn available over two years up to March this year. The NAO said its calculations had found the average procurement cost per Covid vaccine dose had been £15.02 including VAT, but this varied between suppliers and over time, while the average deployment cost was £25.70 per dose. The report said the programme now “needs to maintain the high levels of vaccine uptake it has achieved among the general population”. The Canadian prime minister, Justin Trudeau, has announced he is removing emergency powers police can use after authorities ended the blockades at the borders and the occupation in Ottawa by truckers and others opposed to Covid restrictions. Trudeau said the “threat continues” but the acute emergency that included entrenched occupations has ended. His government invoked the powers last week and lawmakers affirmed the powers on Monday, the Associated Press reported. “The situation is no longer an emergency, therefore the federal government will be ending the use of the emergencies act,” Trudeau said. “We are confident that existing laws and bylaws are sufficient.” The emergencies act allows authorities to declare certain areas as no-go zones. It also allows police to freeze truckers’ personal and corporate bank accounts and compel tow truck companies to haul away vehicles. The trucker protest grew until it closed a handful of Canada-US border posts and shut down key parts of the capital for more than three weeks. But all border blockades have now ended and the streets around the Canadian Parliament are quiet. “We were very clear that the use of the emergencies act would be limited in time,” Trudeau said. Most pregnant women in the UK are still shunning Covid vaccines despite an increased chance of stillbirth, premature birth and risks to their own health, analysis shows. Data from the Nuffield Department of Population Health at the University of Oxford shows 73% of Asian women, 86% of black women and 65% of white women were unvaccinated at the time of giving birth in October 2021. The charity Wellbeing of Women, which funded the study with the National Institute for Health Research, called for “urgent action” to address “stark racial and social inequalities” among pregnant women, PA Media reported. The study found that severe Covid infection in pregnant women, particularly in the third trimester, significantly increased the risk of giving birth early, having an induction or a Caesarean, having a stillborn baby or a baby that needed intensive care. In the UK, an estimated 1.1 million women gave birth between 1 March 2020 and 31 October last year. Overall, 4,436 pregnant women were admitted to hospital with Covid during this period in the UK, of whom 65% had mild disease, 21% had moderate illness and 14% had severe infection. Some 77% of all the women were in their third trimester of pregnancy. Of the 1,761 women whose vaccination status was recorded in this group (from when vaccines became available), 97% were unvaccinated, 2% had received their first dose, and 1% had received two doses. During the study period, 22 women died with severe Covid-19 during pregnancy, 59 babies were stillborn and 10 babies died around the time of birth. A group of shouting protesters have chased the New Zealand prime minister’s van down a driveway as she visited a Christchurch primary school, amid tensions over increasingly volatile anti-vaccine mandate protests. Jacinda Ardern, who was visiting a primary school in Christchurch, was met by a crowd of people shouting “shame on you” and “traitor”. Some held signs saying that the prime minister would be “put on trial” and “held responsible”, and one man brandished a fabricated arrest warrant – references to conspiracy theories that a cohort of world leaders and powerful people are secretly using vaccines to commit a genocide, and would soon be put on trial and hanged for treason. Police officers formed a barrier to allow the prime minister to pass through. TVNZ deputy political editor, Maiki Sherman, who was attending the event, reported that parents and teachers at the school were “visibly upset”. The incident came as the country reported 6,137 new cases of Covid-19, almost a doubling from the previous record, set one day earlier. Anti-vaccine and anti-vaccine mandate protesters have been occupying New Zealand’s parliament grounds for more than two weeks and blocking a number of streets in Wellington’s central business district with their cars. Hello. Tom Ambrose here and I’ll be bringing you all the latest Covid news from around the world over the next few hours. We start with the news that Hong Kong’s government has invoked emergency powers to allow doctors and nurses from the Chinese mainland to practise in the financial hub as it struggles to tackle a spiralling coronavirus outbreak. “The regulation will provide a legal framework for the CPG (central people’s government) to render the necessary emergent support to Hong Kong in a more effective and expeditious manner,” the government said in a statement. The densely populated metropolis is in the throes of its worst-ever Covid wave, registering thousands of cases every day, overwhelming hospitals and the city’s requirement that all patients are isolated in dedicated units. Local authorities adopted a zero-Covid strategy similar to China to keep infections mostly at bay for two years. But they were caught flat-footed when the highly infectious Omicron variant broke through those defences and have increasingly called on the Chinese mainland for help. “Hong Kong is now facing a very dire epidemic situation which continues to deteriorate rapidly,” the government said in its statement announcing the use of emergency powers. Chinese mainland medics are not currently allowed to operate in Hong Kong without passing local exams and licensing regulations.Vladimir Putin has said there is broad public support for the invasion of Ukraine that he announced just before dawn on Thursday morning. But by evening, thousands of people in cities across Russia had defied police threats to take to central squares and protest against the military campaign. Police had made at least 1,702 arrest in 53 Russian cities as of Thursday evening, according to the OVD-Info monitor, as they cracked down on the unsanctioned protests. Most of the arrests were made in Moscow and St Petersburg, where the crowds were largest. The protesters chanted: “No to war!” as they exchanged shocked reactions to the attack on Ukraine. In Moscow, Alexander Belov said he thought that Putin had “lost his mind”. “I thought that we would never see a war like this in the 21st century,” said Belov, who arrived early at Moscow’s Pushkinskaya Square to find it surrounded by police vans. “It turns out we live in the Middle Ages.” The mood in Moscow was dark and sombre hours after Putin had announced that he was launching a broad military offensive targeting Ukraine. “I am embarrassed for my country. To be honest with you, I am speechless. War is always scary. We don’t want this,” said Nikita Golubev, a 30-year-old teacher. “Why are we doing this?” His anger and hopelessness were shared by many commuting to work down central Arbat Street. At the Ukrainian culture centre just down the road, the mood was even grimmer. The Ukrainian administrator said the centre, which aims to promote the language, traditions and identity of a country Vladimir Putin denied the legitimacy of as a modern state in his speech on Monday, would be shut for the “coming period”. “We are being bombed as we speak. Of course we are closed! Jesus, what is happening?” the administrator, who did not want to give his name, shouted. There were already signs that Russians were uncomfortable with Putin’s initial decision to recognise the two self-proclaimed republics in Donbas. On Tuesday, Yuri Dudt, one of Russia’s most popular media personalities, said he “did not vote for this regime” and its need for an empire, and felt ashamed, in a post that received almost a million likes in 24 hours. A fresh poll by the independent Levada Center released on Thursday showed that only 45% of Russians stood in favour of the recognition move that preceded Thursday morning’s dramatic events. “I didn’t think Putin would be willing to go all the way. How can we bomb Ukraine? Our countries have their disagreements, but this is not a way to solve them,” said Muscovite Ksenia. But outcries of anger were not only felt on the streets of Moscow, where the Guardian did not encounter support for the military assault. Russia’s cultural and sporting elite, usually firmly behind Putin and often called upon by the president during election campaigns to gather popular support, also expressed their deep worries about Russia’s invasion. Valery Meladze, arguable the country’s most beloved singer, posted an emotional video in which he “begged” Russia to stop the war. “Today something happened that should have never happened. History will be the judge of these events. But today, I beg you, please stop the war.” Likewise, Russian football international Fyodor Smolov posted on his Instagram channel: “No to War!!!” US intelligence has for months warned that Russia would seek to fabricate a major pretext before launching an invasion of Ukraine. In the end, no major false flag came, and experts now believe that Putin decided to act without gathering the backing of his own electorate. “Putin seems totally indifferent to approval on the street. He’s acting not like a politician in need of public support, but like a figure from national history books who cares only about the approval of future historians and readers,” tweeted Alexander Baunov, a political analyst at the Carnegie Moscow Center. The Russian leader looked to have also surprised some of Russia’s most prominent oligarchs, who saw their wealth tumble as the country’s financial markets collapsed. Just on Monday, after Putin recognised the independence of the two Donbas territories, Oleg Deripaska, a Kremlin-friendly oligarch who once said that “he does not separate himself from the Russian state”, exclaimed on his Telegram channel that “war had been averted”. He has since deleted the post. On Russian state television, the invasion was framed as a defensive mission aimed at preserving Russian lives. “What’s the point of a major first strike? However strange or cynical it sounds, it’s actually humane because it allows everyone around to prevent a large massacre. By immobilising Ukraine, life is being preserved,” said pundit Vladislav Shurygin on the Channel One programme Vremya Pokazhet. Some risked arrest on Thursday evening in order to voice their opposition to the invasion. Zhargal Rinchinov from Buryatia arrived on the square in a jacket with the inscription: “No to war.” If he held up a sign, he said, he would be arrested. “Everyone is scared,” he said. “They know if they say something bad then they’ll be put in jail. So people pretend they don’t notice we have started a war, so they don’t have to speak up about it.” For Ukrainians, public messages of opposition to the war will come too late. The country has said that at least 40 soldiers have already been killed and many more civilians injured, as it is threatened with being overrun by a much larger military force. Yet, sensing that a genuine large-scale pushback against war might be Ukraine’s best bet, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, Ukraine’s president, on Thursday morning urged Russians to speak up. “If the Russian authorities don’t want to sit down with us to discuss peace, maybe they will sit down with you.”From Thursday, people who test positive for coronavirus are no longer required to self-isolate by law in England. Free mass testing for the general public in England will end on 1 April. The change is part of the government’s new “living with Covid” plan, announced earlier this week, which will see the end of all pandemic regulations. Five people share their reactions below. ‘If I knew I had Covid, I would not go out with it’ “I wouldn’t go out if I tested positive for Covid. I’d worry about spreading it to people who could suffer dire consequences. There’s still a high death rate and a lot of people who are compromised, who haven’t got much freedom to be on public transport or in the workplace. So if I knew I had Covid, I would certainly not go out and about with it. “I have the luxury of taking that view, because my employer would accommodate it and I also have sick pay. It just worries me that other people won’t have that choice. “I think, by and large, people are trying to be decent and mutually protect each other. In a way, we’re being exhorted to drop that, but I think people will continue to do their best.” Kathy, 59, administrator, London ‘I am worried about people at work testing positive’ “I’ve been shielding for two years, but think I will be returning to the office part-time in the middle of next month. I am worried about people at work testing positive. The current plan is that I will be working a good distance from everyone else at a desk right beside a large window I can open. I will probably remain masked, too. But the problem will be after April, when people won’t know if they are infected. “My greatest anxiety is about commuting on public transport and being in close contact with unmasked people. I also have to deal with members of the public in my role, but I have been assured that I will not be required to meet them face to face. My employer has been quite understanding so far and if the work from home guidance hadn’t been withdrawn then I think they would have kept me at home. Harry*, 34, working in local government, Durham, who is considered clinically extremely vulnerable ‘I’ve never been testing’ “I’ve not been testing and never have. The only time was when I came back from Spain because I had to in order to travel. I want to stress that I’m not anti-vaxx, as I’ve had all my jabs. “It’s all madness. This ridiculous desire to test for Covid is insanity and has really affected people’s mental health and should’ve stopped a long time ago. If I’m unwell, whether it’s with Covid or the flu, I will just stay at home until I feel better. It’s the way I’ve done it in the past and I seem to have survived. “I know asymptomatic transmission of Covid is possible, but it seems to be very, very unlikely. The only time I would really have an issue with it is if someone came out with a streaming cold when they should be at home.” Norma, Cotswolds ‘I wouldn’t want to pass any illness on to anyone else’ “I guess I would fall into the more cautious spectrum, in terms of Covid. And so, I’ve been pretty careful all the way through. I don’t think I’ve had it, and I don’t think I would want to go out if I was ill, let alone the risks to the rest of the population. “If I contracted Covid, I wouldn’t be wanting to pass it to anyone else. I wouldn’t want to pass any illness on to anyone else now we’ve gone through this. “I received an email from my work today saying that, even though the rules have changed, the company will continue to follow the guidance. That sort of sensible, head-screwed-on approach is, as I see it, the way forward for the time being until something changes. Ben, 42, Bristol, record label employee ‘People aren’t going to be aware that they’re positive’ “There’s no way I would go out infecting other people, and I think everyone should be supported to make that choice. I just feel that it’s very unfair. We’re in a situation where we had children perhaps later than we would have liked, which meant we’ve been able to pay off our mortgage. We can make decisions that better protect my mother, ourselves and society. “Others aren’t in that position. Statutory sick pay is just [under] £14 a day. Testing is going to be something that people have to pay for. People aren’t going to be aware that they’re positive, and they’re not going to be able to afford to stay at home even if they want to. The message is ‘Just get on with life. It’s just like the flu.’ It’s clearly not. It’s clearly still causing a lot of damage. It just seems barbaric really.” Sarah, Nottingham, 44, teacher and stay-at-home parent *Name has been changedBoris Johnson has said it is time to “squeeze Russia from the global economy, piece by piece,” as he announced a wide-ranging sanctions package against Moscow, including freezing the assets of all major Russian banks and banning hi-tech exports. “Putin will stand condemned in the eyes of the world and of history: he will never be able to cleanse the blood of Ukraine from his hands,” the prime minister told MPs as he announced the swingeing package of measures. Pointing to sharp declines in Russian stock markets and the value of the rouble since the invasion of Ukraine, Johnson said, “we will continue on a remorseless mission to squeeze Russia from the global economy piece by piece, day by day and week by week.” He had earlier tried and failed to convince fellow G7 leaders to shut Russia out of the Swift global payments system, though his spokesperson said he would continue to press the issue in the coming days. Johnson announced 10 measures the UK was taking immediately. The assets of all major Russian banks in the UK will be frozen, including VTB, the country’s second largest bank with assets totalling £154bn. Individual sanctions will be imposed on over 120 individuals, entities and subsidiaries, including Rostec, the country’s biggest defence company, which exports £10bn in arms a year, as well as four other defence companies. Legislation is expected be tabled next week to ban major Russian companies from raising finance on UK markets and to prevent Moscow from raising sovereign debt in London. Oligarchs who will be sanctioned include Putin’s former son-in-law Kirill Shamalov, Russia’s youngest billionaire; Denis Bortnikov, the deputy chair of VTB Bank’s management board; and Yury Slyusar, the director of the United Aircraft Corporation. The Russian airline Aeroflot will be banned from landing in the UK. A diplomatic source said: “These are people who have international lifestyles. They come to Harrods to shop, they stay in our best hotels when they like, they send their children to our best public schools, and that is what’s being stopped. “So that these people are essentially persona non grata in every major western European capital in the world. That really bites.” The UK will suspend and prohibit all dual-use export licences to Russia, which covers items that could have civilian or military use. There will also be legislation to prohibit a wide range of hi-tech exports to Russia, including semiconductors, aircraft parts such as Rolls Royce jet engines, and oil refinery equipment. Number 10 said it would set out more detail in the coming days about new legislation to limit the deposits that all Russian nationals can hold in UK bank accounts to £50,000, intended to choke off the ability of Russians to raise finance and keep their money in London. The measures will also apply to Belarus, which Russian forces have used to invade Ukraine. The government will also bring forward the economic crime bill, before Easter recess, aimed at making assets more transparent. Labour leader Keir Starmer said his party would support the measures, saying the public would face “economic pain,” as a result, but “the British public have always been willing to make sacrifice to defend democracy on our continent and we will again”. Johnson had faced criticism from across the political spectrum earlier this week for introducing sanctions that many MPs, including in his own party, felt were too weak. Responding to Johnson’s statement on Thursday, former prime minister Theresa May said “every possible economic sanction” should be levied on Russia so it “absolutely feels the cold wind of isolation” and understood it had become a “pariah state”. Jeremy Hunt, the former Tory foreign secretary, said economic sanctions would not go far enough and that a “fundamental review of our military capability” was needed, as well as a revisiting of the “out of date” Integrated review of the UK’s defence policy. Some Conservative MPs called for the UK to increase military aid to Ukraine, including the former cabinet minister David Davis, who said the UK should consider providing air support to the Ukrainian armed forces. Davis said that even the most “ferocious sanctions … are no longer a deterrent, they are a punishment” and that the invasion of Ukraine meant Vladimir Putin had “effectively declared war on the west”. Full list of planned sanctions 1. An asset freeze on all major Russian banks, including VTB, the country’s second largest bank, which has assets of £154bn. 2. Legislation will be introduced to parliament on Tuesday that will prohibit the ability of all major Russian companies to raise finance on UK markets, and for the Russian state raise sovereign debt on UK markets. The aim is to pass the legislation in one day. 3. A set of individual sanctions on over 100 individuals, entities and subsidiaries, when also counting the measures unveiled on Tuesday. The new targets include the Russian state-owned defence giant Rostec, its subsidiaries, and a group of oligarchs seen as particularly close to the Kremlin. These are: Kirill Shamalov: Russia’s youngest billionaire and Vladimir Putin’s former son-in-law. Petr Fradkov: head of Promsvyazbank, one of the banks sanctioned, and the son of the former head of Russia’s FSB intelligence service. Denis Bortnikov: deputy president and chair of VTB bank. Yury Slyusar: head of Russia’s United Aircraft Corporation. Elena Georgieva: board chair of Novikombank. More people will be named in the weeks to come. The individuals will be banned from all UK transactions – meaning those with children in UK private schools will be unable to pay future fees. Relatives will not, however, be sanctioned personally. 4. Immediately ban the ability of Russian airline Aeroflot to land in the UK. 5. An immediate suspension of all dual-use export licences to Russia. This covers items that could have a civilian or military use, such as electrical components and truck parts. 6. In the coming days, legislation to prohibit a wide range of hi-tech exports, and the export of equipment connected to extracting oil and gas. This is being done in concert with the US. 7. Looking into a way to limit the amount of deposits Russian nationals can hold in UK bank accounts. The details have to be decided, and also whether this will cover dual nationals. 8. A plan to work with allies to shut off Russia’s access to the Swift international banking system. This would have a major impact, but can only be done effectively if other countries agree. 9. Extending the full range of sanctions to Belarus, given the integration of the nations’ military forces. 10. The UK’s economic crime bill, which will strengthen areas such as unexplained wealth orders, will be brought forward. On Wednesday Boris Johnson had told MPs the bill would not be brought to the Commons this parliamentary session.UK The UK has imposed sanctions freezing the assets and imposing a travel ban on eight named individuals and 11 businesses, including six banks. Hundreds more individuals sitting on Russia’s Duma will also face sanctions. Individuals will be banned from all UK transactions – meaning those with children in UK private schools will be unable to pay future fees. Relatives will not, however, be sanctioned personally. Individuals Kirill Shamalov Russia’s youngest billionaire and Vladimir Putin’s former son-in-law. He is a shareholder and director of petrochemical giant Sibur. Petr Fradkov Chair and chief executive of Promsvyazbank, he is also the son of Mikhail Fradkov, a former prime minister of Russia and former director of the Foreign Intelligence Service (SVR). Denis Bortnikov A deputy president of VTB Bank and chair of its management board. Son of Aleksandr Bortnikov, a the director of the Federal Security Service (FSB), who has been on the sanctions list since March 2021. Yuri Slyusar Head of United Aircraft Corporation, major supplier to Russia’s military and a key figure in its defence sector. Elena Georgieva Chair of Novikombank, a subsidiary of the major Russian state-backed defence business Rostec. Gennady Timchenko The 69-year-old billionaire friend of Russia’s president owns the private investment firm Volga Group, which has holdings in energy, transport, infrastructure and financial services. Boris Rotenberg A co-owner of SMP Bank, which is linked to energy firm Gazprom, Rotenberg is described as having “close personal ties” to Putin, a friend since childhood, when they trained in judo together. Igor Rotenberg A nephew of Boris’s who also has close ties to Putin. He controls transport businesses and has also been linked to Gazprom. Politicians The UK government has also said it will sanction those members of the Russian parliament, the Duma, and Federation Council who voted to recognise the independence of Donetsk and Luhansk. Banks VTB Bank Russia’s second largest bank, VTB is majority-owned by the state, with interests in banking assets across Eastern Europe. Rossiya Bank A St Petersburg-based bank owned by a group of billionaires with close links to Putin. It has a stake in National Media Group, which owns TV stations that the UK government says promote the Russian government’s policies and has benefited from expansion in Crimea since the region was annexed by Russia in 2014. IS Bank The Moscow-based bank’s development has been “directly tied” to the annexation of Crimea, according to the UK, where it has operated after Ukrainian banks were stopped from doing business. GenBank A Moscow-headquartered financial institution that operates extensively in Crimea. Promsvyazbank A Russian state-owned bank with the main role of financing defence projects, including nearly 70% of state contracts signed by the Russian ministry of defence. The Black Sea Bank A Crimea-based bank that was set up immediately after Russia’s annexation of the region in 2014. The UK government says its operations had consolidated Crimea into the Russian Federation through the financial system. Companies JSC Research A Russian state-owned group that produces military equipment, particularly tanks, for the country’s armed forces. United Aircraft Corporation A state-owned group that controls all Russia’s major aircraft manufacturing companies and is a major supplier of aircraft to its military. United Shipbuilding Corporation The largest shipbuilder in Russia, it repairs, maintains and builds craft including several frigates and other warship classes that have been deployed in Crimea and carried out drills in the Black Sea last year. Rostec A state-owned conglomerate that invests in defence and technology including weaponry and aviation components. Tactical Missiles Corporation One of the most prominent manufacturers of missiles in Russia, specialising in aircraft and naval armaments. It recently announced it was developing seaborne weapons, and was involved in developing coastal defence missile systems in Crimea. Other measures Russia’s national airline, Aeroflot, is now banned from UK airspace. All dual-use export licences to Russia have been suspended with immediate effect. This covers items that could have a civilian or military use, such as electrical components and truck parts. Under legislation to be tabled next week, key Russian state-owned and private companies will be prevented from borrowing or raising capital on the UK markets or processing any payments through the UK, and Russia will be barred from raising sovereign debt in London. Further legislation is planned to prohibit a wide range of hi-tech exports, and the export of equipment connected to extracting oil and gas. This is being done in concert with the US. US The president, Joe Biden, announced a “first tranche” of sanctions against Russia on Tuesday and updated the list on Thursday. Targets include large Russian state-owned banks, trading in five Russian oil tankers and container ships, and oligarch “elites close to Putin”. It also banned US banks and individuals from trading Russian sovereign debt. Individuals Sergei Ivanov Chief executive of Russian state-owned diamond mining company Alrosa and a board member of Gazprombank, Ivanov is the son of Sergei Borisovich Ivanov, reportedly one of Putin’s closest allies and former chief of staff of the presidential executive office. Alexander Vedyakhin First deputy chairman of the executive board of Sberbank. Andrey Puchkov and Yuriy Alekseyevich Soloviev Two high-ranking VTB Bank executives. Denis Bortnikov See UK sanctions above. Petr Fradkov See UK sanctions above. Vladimir Kiriyenko Chief executive of VK Group, the parent company of Russia’s top social media platform, VKontakte. He is the son of Sergei Kiriyenko, already sanctioned, who serves as first deputy chief of staff of the presidential office is said to be “Putin’s domestic policy curator”. Banks Sberbank The largest financial institution in Russia, it holds about a third of all bank assets in the country. Within 30 days all US financial institutions have been instructed to close any Sberbank accounts they maintain and reject any future transactions involving Sberbank or its subsidiaries. VTB Bank See UK sanctions above. Otkritie, Novikom, and Sovcom These three financial institutions hold combined assets worth $80bn (£60bn) and “play significant roles in the Russian economy”, according to the US Treasury. All will now be subject to blocking sanctions. Vnesheconombank With $53bn (£40bn) of assets, VEB is one of Russia’s top five banks, and has a “unique role in Russia’s financial system as the servicer of Russia’s sovereign debt” as well as financing exports and a loan portfolio of over $20bn. Promsvyazbank See UK sanctions above. EU Individuals Sanctions are being imposed on 27 individuals and entities who played a role in “undermining Ukrainian sovereignty”, 351 members of the Duma who voted in favour of Russia’s recognition of the self-proclaimed republics in Luhansk and Donetsk, and the 11 who proposed it, along with the commanders of the Russian military “peacekeeping” mission. They include: Sergei Shoigu Russia’s minister of defence has overseen the military buildup on Ukraine’s borders and is believed to be playing a key role in managing the war effort. Anton Vaino Putin’s chief of staff in his executive office who plays an active role in the Security Council of the Russian Federation and advises Putin in the field of defence and national security. Marat Khusnullin As deputy prime minister for construction and regional development, he is responsible for policies on occupied Crimea, including providing water to Crimea and Sevastopol. Dmitry Grigorenko Deputy prime minister and chief of the government staff and chair of the supervisory council of the VTB Bank. As a former director of the Russian tax service, he set up a new tax system in Crimea after its annexation. Maxim Reshetnikov Minister of economic development and member of the supervisory council of the VTB Bank. Nikolay Yevmenov Commander-in-chief of the Russian navy. Vladimir Lvovich Kasatonov Deputy commander-in-chief of the Russian navy. Igor Osipov Commander-in-chief of the Black Sea fleet. Oleg Salyukov Commander-in-chief of the Russian ground forces. Sergei Surovikin Commander-in-chief of the Russian aerospace forces. Sergey Dronov Commander of the air force and deputy commander-in-chief of the air and space forces. Yevgeny Prigozhin Dubbed Putin’s chef because of the restaurant business in which he made his fortune, Prigozhin’s interests now include a notorious internet “troll factory” in St Petersburg, known as the Internet Research Agency (IRA). Violetta Prigozhina Prigozhin’s mother and owner of Concord Management and Consulting LLC, which belongs to the Concord group, founded and owned until 2019 by her son. Lyubov Valentinovna Prigozhina Prigozhin’s wife and owner of Agat LLC, a subsidiary of Concord Management and Consulting LLC. Denis Bortnikov See UK sanctions above. Andrey Kostin President-chair of VTB– one of the leading state-owned banks in Russia – and a member of the Supreme Council of the “United Russia” political party. Igor Shuvalov Head of Vnesheconombank, which has been a key source of funding for Kremlin priorities. Margarita Simonyan Described the EU as a “central figure in government propaganda”. She is editor-in-chief of the English language television news network RT (Russia Today). Maria Zakharova As Russia’s foreign ministry spokesperson, the 46-year-old is described by the EU as central to government propaganda efforts. Vladimir Solovyov Presenter of the Russia-1 channel and Rossia 24, described by the EU as a propagandist. Konstantin Knyrik Runs MediaGroup News Front Ltd, a news website registered in the illegally annexed Crimean peninsula, Knyrik is also chief of the Crimean division of the pro-Kremlin Rodina party. Aleksey Pushkov A senator from Perm Krai, he is a member of the ruling United Russia party and chairman of the commission on information policy. Pyotr Tolstoy Member of the Duma and head of the Russian delegation at the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE). He also hosts the TV show Vremya Pokazhet. Companies Internet Research Agency A Russian company engaged in online influence operations on behalf of Russia. Its ultimate objective is to manipulate public opinion through disinformation, the EU has said. Banks Rossiya Bank See UK sanctions above. Promsvyazbank See UK sanctions above. Vnesheconombank See US sanctions above. Further measures Restrictions on access to Europe’s capital market have been imposed, in particular by prohibiting the financing of Russia, its government and its central bank. It is prohibited to directly or indirectly purchase, sell, provide investment services for or assistance in the issuance of transferable securities and money-market instruments by the Russian government or its central bank.Russia’s attack on Ukraine began at about 5am local time, with multiple missile and air raids and a three-pronged invasion from the north, east and south that appeared to be targeting the capital, Kyiv, and the cities of Kharkiv and Kherson respectively. Hostomel airbase As of Thursday evening, a fierce battle for the strategic airbase close to Kyiv appeared to be continuing after Russian helicopters and airborne troops attempted to establish a bridgehead outside the city. Videos on social media – among the most dramatic to have emerged since the invasion began – depicted a swarm of Russian Ka-52 and Mi8 helicopters descending on the Antonov military airfield. Ukraine said it had downed three helicopters in the initial assault, but a lunchtime report from CNN showed Russian forces in control of at least some of the base. Shortly after, however, Ukraine’s armed forces chief said Kyiv’s forces were fighting back in a critical early battle. Justin Bronk, of the Rusi thinktank, said if airborne assault troops could take and hold the airbase, the Russians could use it to rapidly build up forces ahead of heavy ground troops to put pressure on the capital. “However, it’s high risk because until ground forces link up, the airborne assault forces are deep in Ukrainian territory and dependent on aerial resupply, casualty evacuation and fire support,” he said. Chernobyl and the north A Ukrainian presidential adviser said Ukraine had lost control of the Chernobyl nuclear site in the north, where fighting raged after Russian troops crossed the border from Belarus. The adviser said authorities did not know the current condition of the facilities at the site of the world’s worst nuclear disaster. Ukraine’s interior ministry warned that if artillery fire was to hit waste stored after the 1986 disaster, it could lead to “radioactive nuclear dust” being spread “over the territory of Ukraine, Belarus and the countries of the EU”. The Chernobyl exclusion zone lies directly in the path of what western experts believe is the principal invasion route from Belarus to the west of Kyiv, where Ukraine’s presidential palace and key buildings are located. Russian troops also advanced from the north on the city of Chernihiv. One axis of advance appears to have centred around the Senkivka border crossing to the north-east of Chernihiv. Crucial, perhaps, in this calculation is the fact that south of Chernihiv – which lies to the east of the Dnieper river – lies the E95 highway to Kyiv. Kharkiv and the east A substantial attack appeared aimed towards the eastern city of Kharkiv, which has a population of more than 1 million. Multiple reports from Kharkiv described explosions nearby – while Ukraine’s defence ministry said mid-morning that “fierce fights” were taking place in that area. Andriy Zagorodnyuk, Ukraine’s former defence minister, said Russian forces were trying to surround Kharkiv. “It seems like Kharkiv at the moment is the main target,” he said. Kherson and the south Russian forces heading north into Ukraine from Crimea were not meeting any obvious resistance, at least initially. Border guards released security camera footage on Thursday showing a line of Russian military vehicles crossing into Ukraine’s government-held territory from Russian-annexed Crimea. Social media footage appeared to show Russian forces reaching the city of Kherson on the Dnieper, 80 miles (130km) inside Ukraine. Shortly after, around lunchtime, the presidential adviser said fierce fighting was taking place there. Film posted online was said to show Russian helicopters over the nearby Kakhovka hydroelectric power plant. Russian forces had also moved north-eastwards from Crimea to Melitopol, where the presidential adviser said they would meet resistance. Zagorodnyuk said: “They are quite close to the city of Kherson now. The situation is really critical there.” Missile strikes Air and missile strikes appear so far to be mostly focused on military targets, including an air defence site in the frontier down of Mariupol, the Ukrainian naval base in Ochakiv and an arms depot in Kalynivka, 124 miles (200km) south-west of Kyiv, according to the defence intelligence specialists Rochan Consulting. Russia’s defence ministry said its forces had destroyed 74 “objects of above-ground military infrastructure”, though this could not be confirmed. The US said it believed Russia launched 100 missiles and used 75 aircraft in the first wave of bombing. Casualties Information on casualties has been hard to verify, though on Thursday evening Ukraine’s health minister said 57 people had been killed and 169 injured. Ukraine’s armed forces earlier reported that at least 40 soldiers had died. The Ukrainian presidential adviser said up to 10 civilians had been killed. The mayor of Mariupol said three civilians had been killed there and emergency services in Kharkiv said a boy had been killed after shelling struck an apartment building. The local administration in Odesa said 22 people had died in a strike on a military base. How the militaries compare Russia has amassed more than 150,000 combat troops on the borders of Ukraine, with a further 34,000 lightly armed separatist forces in the pro-Russian self-proclaimed republics in Donetsk and Luhansk. That amounts to an estimated two-thirds of Russia’s total ground forces. Half of Moscow’s air force is also deployed in the region. Ukraine’s forces are considerably smaller. It has a regular army that numbers 125,600, according to the International Institute for Strategic Studies, but has mobilised reserves of at least 36,000. Some of the Russian ambition has been aimed explicitly at demoralising Ukrainian civilians with the reach of the offensive. While much of the initial barrage was aimed at the east of Ukraine, so far, more sporadic strikes on cities in the west, from Uman to Lutsk and Ivano-Frankivsk, seem designed to demonstrate the reach of Russian weapons.Good morning. Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has continued with Russian forces seizing control of the Chernobyl nuclear power plant and Russia’s defence ministry claiming to have “neutralised” Ukraine’s airbases and air defences, destroying 74 military ground facilities, including 11 airfields. Russian forces have attacked Ukraine on the orders of Vladimir Putin as world leaders warned that it could spark the biggest conflict in Europe since the second world war. Within minutes of Putin’s short televised address, at about 5am Ukrainian time, explosions were heard near major Ukrainian cities, including the capital, Kyiv. Ukraine’s interior ministry reported that the country was under attack from cruise and ballistic missiles, with Russia appearing to target infrastructure near major cities such as Kyiv, Kharkiv, Mariupol and Dnipro. Tens of thousands of Ukrainians were fleeing or preparing to flee the country with videos and photos on social media showing lines of cars moving out of cities and heading west. Ukraine’s president has said Kyiv would issue weapons to anyone who wanted to use them to defend the country’s sovereignty. Western leaders have pledged far-reaching sanctions but the EU is wavering on banning Russia from Swift payment system, which is key to the movement of funds to Russia’s oil and gas sector. Meanwhile, European stock markets continued to tumble as the crisis fuelled a near-40% rise in gas price and pushed oil to $105 per barrel. The Russian central bank has bought millions of roubles to prevent the collapse of the Moscow stock exchange and prop up the currency after it plunged to an all-time low of 89.60 against the dollar. In Australia, Scott Morrison has promised “further waves of sanctions” against Russians, including hundreds of members of parliament, as he condemned Putin for the brutal and unprovoked invasion of Ukraine. The conflict is also likely to reignite concerns about Australia’s energy security with petrol prices at the bowser already north of $1.80 and headed to $2 as the expected invasion has added to global oil price pressures. The prospect of sanctions is hurting one of Australia’s largest alumina refineries, Queensland Alumina Limited, part-owned by a Russian firm. If you are struggling to get your head across the scale of the invasion, see this visual guide to the conflict. Australia The collapse of construction giant Probuild could be just the start of financial trouble across the Covid-ravaged industry, the construction sector’s peak body warns. Probuild, which directly employed about 750 people and had annual revenues of more than $1.4bn, was placed into voluntary liquidation by its South African owners, Wilson Bayly Holmes-Ovcon (WBHO), late on Wednesday. Contractors and other workers turned up at sites on Thursday in several Australian cities to collect equipment, including at CSL’s $750m proposed new headquarters in Melbourne. The Northern Territory government has been condemned for a “breach of trust” after NT police confirmed that spithoods and restraint chairs remain in use, despite promises to phase out the “inhumane” devices. NT police data reported by the NT News showed spithoods have been used 27 times since 2018 and 21 of those applications having occurred since 2020. The most disadvantaged areas of Melbourne have been hit hardest by Covid-19 deaths during Victoria’s Omicron wave, further underscoring the pandemic’s disproportionate effect on communities with lower employment and income levels, and poorer access to services. An elderly man who sparked a police manhunt when, acting out of love, he kidnapped his “sweetheart” from a West Australian aged care home has died in a car crash just two days after his partner died. The world One of the most aggressive criminal investigations against Donald Trump appears to be running into the sand after the two leading prosecutors in the Manhattan district attorney’s office investigating the former president’s finances resigned. Prince Harry has launched a libel action days after the Mail on Sunday published claims about problems with his security arrangements. A court in Islamabad has sentenced to death the tycoon’s son who raped and murdered Noor Mukadam, a case that sparked outrage in Pakistan. Mukadam, 27, the daughter of a former Pakistani diplomat, was held captive, tortured and beheaded in July last year by Zahir Jaffer, a member of a well-known industrialist family. A juror in Ghislaine Maxwell’s criminal trial who might not have disclosed childhood sexual abuse during jury selection for the high-profile case will now be questioned publicly as Maxwell’s team seeks a retrial, court papers released on Thursday said. The QAnon conspiracy myth movement continues to thrive in the US and has even strengthened more than a year after Trump left the White House, according to the largest ever study of its followers. Recommended reads In Jamal Smith’s mind sits a tableau of family he’s never really known. From memories stretched by time, he grasps at fragments of an absent father, an abusive mother, cousins he knew as siblings, and a found family of friends he fears to lose. Jamal is the protagonist of Son of Sin, the debut novel from the prime minister’s literary prize-winning poet Omar Sakr. It begins in western Sydney, where Jamal is being raised by Lebanese aunties, uncles and grandparents – the extended family of his estranged mother, Hala. Guarded by religion and propriety, they keep the past hushed, and brand Jamal as different. But from whispers, the threads of their secrets unfurl, revealing the sprawling traumas that broke them apart. The big, bold songs in Angel in Realtime, the third studio album from Gang of Youths, will get the airplay and crowds singing, but it is the stripped-back ones where the Aussie rockers truly shine. More and more young people are enticed by the glittering promises of a career as an influencer – but it’s usually someone else getting rich. Listen A political wedge is a tactic usually used to stir up controversy and debate with an opposing party. Over the last few weeks, the Coalition has attempted to “wedge” Labor on various policies. So why have we seen so much of it lately, and what are the risks involved in playing into this kind of cynical politics? Gabrielle Jackson speaks to editor-in-chief Lenore Taylor and deputy news editor Jo Tovey about how the media covers wedge politics. Full Story is Guardian Australia’s daily news podcast. Subscribe for free on Apple Podcasts, Spotify or any other podcasting app. Sport It could be argued that the NRL really understands how to build anticipation for its women’s game. That would, of course, be a very generous interpretation of the situation that has led to a 491-day break since the last time an NRLW game was played. The 2021 season, which was originally slated to take place in August and then pushed back to October, was moved to 2022 due to the ongoing impact of the Covid-19 pandemic. NRL CEO Andrew Abdo said at the time that the delay offered an opportunity to commit to the women’s game completely in 2022. The former Australia wicketkeeper Rod Marsh is in a critical condition after suffering a heart attack. Media roundup A novel drug therapy which could potentially be used to treat ovarian cancer – among other types of cancer – is being developed by Queensland researchers, the ABC reports. Tennis pro Nick Kyrgios has spoken openly about his struggles with mental health and his past abuse of drugs and alcohol, the SMH reports. Coming up An inquest into the disappearance of Belgian backpacker Theo Hayez in Byron Bay continues. The disability royal commission continues. And if you’ve read this far … Tougher and chewier aren’t usually selling points for ice cream, but an Adelaide shop is treating Australians to a whole new world of the white stuff. Sign up If you would like to receive the Guardian Australia morning mail to your email inbox every weekday, sign up here. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com. Discover Australian Weekend Every Saturday at 6am, enjoy early access to the best journalism planned for the weekend in one elegant app, plus a curated selection of the week’s news and analysis from Australia and the world.Rishi Sunak has been sent a questionnaire by the Metropolitan police over his attendance at a birthday party held for Boris Johnson while tough Covid restrictions were in force. The chancellor has not yet responded but has seven days to do so, and will be able to set out why he was at the gathering in a bid to avoid being fined £100. It comes nearly two weeks after the prime minister received a questionnaire from Scotland Yard as part of its Operation Hillman investigation into a dozen alleged parties that may have fallen foul of rules on social mixing. Sunak is understood to have attended a gathering on 19 June 2020 in the cabinet room, along with the prime minister’s wife, Carrie, the interior designer Lulu Lytle and other Downing Street staff. A cake was presented to Johnson, but ministers have sought to dismiss the significance of the event. One, the Northern Ireland minister Conor Burns, said the prime minister was “ambushed by cake”, while another, the transport secretary, Grant Shapps, said the gathering lasted only 10 minutes. Sources close to Sunak have said he simply happened upon the celebrations, and believed it was inevitable he would receive a questionnaire given that he both works and lives in Downing Street. However, the Mirror reported earlier this month that police had obtained a photograph of Johnson holding a can of beer while standing next to Sunak. Scotland Yard has said that being handed a questionnaire is the equivalent to being interviewed under caution. All recipients of the form are asked what the purpose was of their participation in the event under scrutiny, how long they were there, who else was there and, crucially: “What, if any, lawful exemption applied to the gathering and what reasonable excuse did you have for participating in said gathering?” More than 88 questionnaires have reportedly been sent out so far, with the outgoing Met commissioner, Cressida Dick, suggesting earlier this month that “some – but probably not all – may very well end up with a fixed penalty notice”. The fine it carries is £100, though those who wish to appeal against it will see the issue referred to court. Sunak was asked several weeks ago if he was worried that the string of Downing Street parties had damaged public confidence in the government. He told the BBC: “Yes, I think it has. I can appreciate people’s frustration. And I think it’s now the job of all of us in government, all politicians, to restore people’s trust.”The clues had all been there. The buildup of troops on the Ukrainian border. The increasingly bizarre, stage-managed television appearances of Vladimir Putin. The movement of troops into the self-proclaimed republics in Luhansk and Donetsk. Yet still there was a belief that diplomacy and reason could somehow win through and that Russia would pull back from all-out war. That hope died early on Thursday morning when Putin launched a ground, sea and air offensive on several Ukrainian cities, including the capital, Kyiv. Just after midday, Boris Johnson delivered his own televised statement from behind a small table hastily positioned in front of a doorway in Downing Street. Presumably his office was too much of a tip for him to be filmed there. There was an early reference to Neville Chamberlain, who in a 1938 radio address had described the dispute over the Sudetenland as “a quarrel in a faraway country between people of whom we know nothing”. Johnson stressed that Ukraine was neither far away nor a country of which we know nothing. But otherwise there was little of the Churchill tribute act that has characterised his recent Commons appearances. Instead we got something more restrained. More hesitant, even. As if even he couldn’t quite believe it had come to this and was uncertain of what steps to take beyond a vague aspiration to defeat Putin. He talked the talk. Bodies – not ours – would mount up and Russia would be hit with massive sanctions. Yet there was a dissonance. A disconnection. It was almost as if he was aware that these were desperately serious times and he needed a different persona to his naturally glib self. Yet he couldn’t conjure one that was entirely convincing. Johnson did rather better when he faced the Commons to make a statement on Ukraine in the afternoon. Possibly because he had had a quick lesson in statesmanship from a crisis management expert, though more likely because he had accepted a few home truths. This was one of the few occasions when it didn’t matter that most of the country didn’t rate him at all and believed his first instinct was always to protect himself. In a straight fight with a delusional, narcissistic dictator who had just invaded another country and had blood on his hands, the UK’s very own narcissist was going to win hands down. Put simply, Putin was in a totally different league of sociopath. So Johnson only had to stand up to look good. It also helped that this time, Boris actually had something substantial to say. On Tuesday, he had talked a good line about Ukraine’s independence and democratic freedoms, only to come up with a list of sanctions that were about as effective as pissing in the wind: five small banks and three individuals who had already been sanctioned by the US back in 2018. At the time, the Suspect had tried to make out that this was part of a carefully gradated response, but he had clearly been taken aback when almost the entire house – the Lib Dems had been the most hawkish of the lot – thought the government was useless and it was only a matter of time before Putin invaded the rest of Ukraine. After he had recovered from nearly dying of laughter. Johnson wasn’t going to make the same mistake twice. So he followed up his tough words on Putin with equally tough sanctions. Dozens of companies and individuals would have their assets frozen – possibly even some that had donated to the Tory party, though that wasn’t made entirely clear. He also made it clear that the UK had been pushing the EU and other Nato countries to block Russia from the Swift international money transfer system – something the EU and the US were so far reluctant to do. Maybe if things got worse … The Suspect was for once ahead of the curve. He promised to bring forward the economic crime bill to next Monday, having promised it some time in the next session earlier in the week. He also hinted that the sanctions would hit UK citizens’ cost of living. For someone pathologically averse to telling people things they don’t want to hear, this was a huge step forward. Though not one necessarily to be repeated. Keir Starmer was also in his comfort zone, relishing the chance to show that Labour could be trusted in matters of defence and security. So much so that he had threatened to withdraw the whip from the 11 of his MPs unless they took their names off the Stop the War statement they had signed. He too condemned Putin and promised to back all the sanctions. And any others Johnson happened to want to bring in at a later date. You couldn’t put a cigarette paper between Starmer and Johnson, and much of the rest of the session developed into a love-in, with everyone falling over themselves to agree with one another in their determination to defeat Russia. Occasionally someone would seek clarification that people or businesses hadn’t been left off the sanction list, and the Suspect duly wrote down their names and added them to it. Even the most hawkish seemed to have decided that Nato being militarily involved was a bad idea. The defence secretary, Ben Wallace, just looked glum as he sat next to Johnson. Then maybe he was still kicking himself for making a twat of himself by telling the army that he would kick Russian backsides just like in the Crimean war. Anyone for the Charge of the Light Brigade? There were only two small moments of tension. Alba MP Neale Hanvey looked disappointed he didn’t get more applause for having persuaded his leader, Alex Salmond, not to broadcast on Russia Today. And Labour’s Clive Lewis had to be reminded that the time for negotiation was generally before an invasion, not after it. But otherwise it was all sweetness and light. Shame it takes a war to make politics this cooperative.Minutes after Vladimir Putin ended weeks of agonised speculation by announcing a “special military operation” at dawn on Thursday, explosions were heard near major Ukrainian cities, including the capital, Kyiv. According to Ukrainian officials, the initial wave of strikes appeared to involve cruise missiles, artillery and airstrikes, which struck military infrastructure and border positions, including airbases. Russian troops have entered the country from the north, east and south, seemingly targeting the capital, Kyiv and the cities of Kharkiv and Kherson respectively. Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, responded to the invasion by declaring martial law and saying Kyiv would issue weapons to every Ukrainian who wanted to defend their country. As Ukrainian diplomats pleaded with the world to stop the Russian aggression, Zelenskiy warned of a bleak return to the past. By mid-afternoon on Thursday, Russia’s defence ministry claimed to have “neutralised” Ukraine’s airbases and air defences, destroying 74 military ground facilities, including 11 airfields, three command posts and 18 radar stations for anti-aircraft missile systems. Ukrainian authorities said Russia had carried out 203 attacks and that fighting was raging across almost the entire territory. Thousands of Ukrainians are already on the move and leaving the country, with tens of thousands more preparing to flee, after the Russian attack ordered by Vladimir Putin. Videos and photos on social media show lines of cars moving out of cities and heading west, as well as an increase of people on foot near the southern and western borders. Joe Biden ordered broad new sanctions targeting four Russian banks, oligarchs and high-tech sectors. The US president also said 7,000 additional troops would be deployed to Germany. “Putin is the aggressor,” Biden said. “Putin chose this war, and now he and his country will bear the consequences.” The UK’s prime minister, Boris Johnson, announced the “largest ever” set of economic sanctions on Russia, including pushing to end Russia’s use of the Swift international payment systems, freezing assets of all major Russian banks, limiting cash held by Russian nationals in UK banks, and sanctioning more than 100 individuals and entities. Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, voiced his anger as EU heads of state and government appeared to hold back from imposing the potentially most damaging sanction on Russia. With casualties mounting, Kuleba warned that European and US politicians would have “blood on their hands” if they decided against blocking Russia from the Swift system, through which it receives foreign currency.News of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has shaken members of Canada’s Ukrainian community, the largest diaspora population outside of Ukraine and Russia. “I have a knot in my stomach. I can only imagine what it’s like for people in Ukraine who are living with the shelling,” said Taras Kulish, a Toronto-based charity lawyer and member of the Ukrainian Canadian Congress. “We’re all concerned and there’s a definitely a shock factor in processing it.” Announcing new sanctions on key Russian figures, Justin Trudeau on Thursday condemned the “horrific, unprovoked attack” on Ukraine. “We stand united and steadfast in our support of Ukraine’s sovereignty,” the prime minister said. “And we stand in solidarity with the Ukrainian people’s right to decide their own future in a free and democratic state.” Canada’s sanctions will target wealthy Russians, large banks and members of the Russian security council, including the defence minister, the finance minister and the justice minister. Canada will also halt export permits to the country. The deputy prime minister, Chrystia Freeland, who is of Ukrainian descent, said Russian president Vladimir Putin’s decision to invade Ukraine placed him in the ranks of the “reviled European dictators” who caused mass death and carnage in the 20th century. At times speaking in Ukrainian, Freedland also called on fellow members of the Ukranian Canadian community to show strength and to support loved ones affected by the war. “The Ukrainian people, like all people, must be free to determine their own future,” she said. “We know that the people of Ukraine … are fighting for us too. They are fighting for democracy and we stand with them.” Canada’s new sanctions comes after it previously pledged C$500m (US$780,770) in financial support Ukraine C$7.8m worth of lethal equipment and ammunition. For Ukrainian Canadians, news of the invasion has been devastating. A number of organizations across Canada are quickly raising funds for relief projects, organizing rallies and assisting those with families affected by the war. The prairie province of Alberta announced it would donate C$1m to the Ukrainian Canadian Congress, a recognition of the large diaspora population in the region– and the long history Ukrainian residents have farming the area. Kulish, who works closely with humanitarian organizations in Ukraine, says colleagues on the ground have described the surreal experience of shelling near their homes and the constant worry of loved ones. “I’ve been checking in with colleagues telling them we’re here. We’re praying for you. We’re looking to see what we can do in response. We’re trying to give them that knowledge that people are concerned about them and who love them,” said Kulish. “But you can’t imagine what it’s like. It’s almost unfathomable.” For the last eight years, Kulish has been involved in work providing trauma therapy clinic’s in the country’s eastern region. “We’ve been living this for the last seven years, so in one way, we’re terribly prepared for it.”Actor Sean Penn is on the ground in Ukraine making a documentary about the Russian invasion, Vice Studios confirmed to Variety on Thursday, as Russia began a full-scale attack on its neighbor. The Oscar-winning star and longtime humanitarian activist appeared at a press briefing by the Ukrainian government in Kyiv on Thursday, listening to government officials speak about the crisis many world leaders are calling the worst conflict in Europe since 1945. Penn previously visited Ukraine in November 2021 to research for the film. His visits with the Ukrainian military were documented by the Ukrainian joint forces operation press service, which posted photos of the meetups on social media at the time. According to Newsweek, Penn arrived in Kyiv earlier this week and met with deputy prime minister Iryna Vereshchuk, as well as local journalists and members of the military. The office of Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy issued a statement through the Ukrainian embassy in praise of the actor and director, who “specially came to Kyiv to record all the events that are currently happening in Ukraine and to tell the world the truth about Russia’s invasion of our country”. “Sean Penn is among those who support Ukraine in Ukraine today. Our country is grateful to him for such a show of courage and honesty,” the translated statement read. The statement also said Penn “is demonstrating bravery that many others have been lacking, in particular some Western politicians. The more people like that – true friends of Ukraine, who support the fight for freedom – the quicker we can stop this heinous invasion by Russia”. This is not the first time Penn has put himself in the center of a crisis. The 61-year-old actor directed the 2020 Discovery Plus documentary Citizen Penn, about the process of establishing his non-profit Community Organized Relief Effort, or Core, in the wake the devastating earthquakes in Haiti in 2010. Core also helped deploy teams for Covid-19 testing and vaccination during the pandemic. In January 2016, Penn published an exclusive – and highly controversial – interview with Mexican drug kingpin Joaquín “El Chapo” Guzmán in Rolling Stone; Penn’s covert journey to visit with the Sinaloan cartel leader, who escaped from prison in 2015, contributed to his arrest by Mexican authorities. Penn later said he had “terrible regret” that his interview and 10,000-word article did not achieve its true purpose of changing the conversation about the war on drugs.• A reference to buy now, pay later platforms could have been read as suggesting that they charge high interest. Typically these lenders do not charge interest – but borrowers unable to meet repayments can face late payment fees and referral to debt collectors (The ‘soul-destroying’ effects of Covid debt, 21 February, G2, p4). • Petrópolis in Brazil is in Rio de Janeiro state, not São Paulo state (World weatherwatch, 22 February, p32). • Other recently amended articles include: Nicholas Thirkell obituary Kamila Valieva horror show proves the price of Olympic gold is too high Almost 15,000 ‘ghost flights’ have left UK since pandemic began The Jewish ice hockey star picked by Germany for 1936 Winter Olympics Coalition pledges $804m to ensure Antarctica is ‘free from conflict’. Antarctic sea ice falls to lowest level since measurements began in 1979 ‘All those agencies failed us’: inside the terrifying downfall of Boeing ‘Go-to place for film lovers’: Birmingham’s Electric cinema reopens ‘A certain pleasant darkness’: what makes a good fictional sex scene? Editorial complaints and correction requests can be sent to: guardian.readers@theguardian.com. You can also write to: Readers’ editor, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU, or leave a voicemail on +44 (0) 20 3353 4736.England have been dealt a colossal blow before Saturday’s crunch Six Nations match against Wales with Manu Tuilagi ruled out by a hamstring injury – just hours after he was recalled to the side by Eddie Jones. Tuilagi was in line for his first England appearance since November, as well as a first Six Nations start for two years, but Jones’s plans have now been ruined after the centre’s injury curse continued. Joe Marchant has been summoned to join the squad but Jones will not finalise his team until hours before kick-off on Saturday with Elliot Daly another option to come into the centres. Either way, Tuilagi’s absence creates a monumental headache for Jones and little time to resolve it as England seek to keep their Six Nations title hopes alive against Wales. During training on Thursday afternoon Tuilagi suffered a low grade tear to the same hamstring he injured in the first 10 minutes against South Africa, in the process of scoring the opening try, and a subsequent scan confirmed the extent of the injury. Though England hope the 30-year-old will return before the end of the Six Nations, his absence on Saturday is a devastating setback. Jones had enthused about the unique threat of Tuilagi, and over the prospect of seeing a 10-12-13 axis with Marcus Smith and Henry Slade on either side of the Sale centre. Now the head coach must decide whether to put Marchant straight back into the side after he was released back to Harlequins earlier in the week, or opt for the versatile Daly instead. England’s attacking plan requires major surgery regardless. “Manu is a gain-line accumulator isn’t he,” Jones had said. “He wins the gain line consistently, draws defenders in which creates space for other options. He does that better than anyone else in the world when he’s at full tilt.” Jones did, however, acknowledge that while Tuilagi is, in effect, irreplaceable, England have often had to cope with his absence. Since Jones took over in 2016, Tuilagi has been available for just 50 of 71 matches prior to Saturday’s clash but such is his value, England have not lost at Twickenham for 10 years when he has been in the side. “The only thing I know is that he gives us a lot of confidence because he has that physical power and when he plays the players feed off that,” added Jones. “But also we’ve learned to play without him. We’ve played most of the last two years without Manu. But when he’s there we intend to use his power and if he’s not there we find another way to manufacture power.” His latest blow will also be keenly felt among the rest of the squad given his popularity among his peers. Ellis Genge, formerly a teammate at Leicester Tigers, said earlier this week: “Besides being a world-class player he is a world-class teammate. He is probably one of them you would think because of his genetics he doesn’t do the graft off the pitch. But he is relentless with his recovery.” Jones has handed the returning Courtney Lawes the captaincy but left Ben Youngs – is in line for his record-breaking 115th cap – on the bench with Harry Randall continuing at scrum-half. Lawes comes straight back into the side at blindside flanker, having been sidelined with a head injury since mid-January, and takes back the captaincy from Tom Curry. Randall impressed against Italy last time out, making only his third start, and his fledgling partnership with Smith has evidently impressed Jones. His selection is a signal of intent given the tempo that Randall brings with Youngs now poised to surpass Jason Leonard’s caps record from the bench. Max Malins and Jack Nowell are on the wings and Freddie Steward continues at full back. In the pack, Alex Dombrandt keeps his place at No 8 ahead of Sam Simmonds while Maro Itoje returns to the second row where he joins Charlie Ewels. Genge and Luke Cowan-Dickie – both been named among the four vice-captains – are alongside Kyle Sinckler, who makes his 50th appearance, in the front row. Slade and Curry are the other two deputies while Joe Marler, Jamie George, Will Stuart, Nick Isiekwe, George Ford and Elliot Daly join Simmonds and Youngs on the bench.It was in early November that US president Joe Biden took the rare step to dispatch CIA director Bill Burns to Moscow. The spy chief’s message – in part – was to warn his Kremlin counterparts that the West was concerned about unusual troop movements it was seeing near Ukraine’s border. British officials were anxious, too. “We keep on coming back to crises over Ukraine,” one said later that month. “President Biden does not send Bill Burns to Moscow unless he is very worried about something. And so, you know, without being able to go into the full details, there is enough substance to this to make us concerned.” A few days later, in early December, the Washington Post reported that US intelligence had found that the Kremlin was “planning a multi-front offensive as soon as early next year involving up to 175,000 troops”, from the north, east and south. The intelligence warnings continued into January, increasingly to the irritation of Kyiv, whose president Volodymyr Zelenskiy complained that acute tensions with Russia were nothing new. “We have been in the situation for eight years,” he said at the time, referring to the start of the 2014 war with Russian-backed separatists. At the time, some were considered outlandish. Britain warned that Russia was contemplating a coup plot, involving four exiled politicians, while the US said plans were afoot to create a pretext for an invasion using a “very graphic” fake video of a Ukrainian attack. It turned out that Russia did try to create false pretexts, but with none of the production values – or credibility – the US warning implied. The debacle of the buildup to the war in Iraq, where claims of weapons of mass destruction turned out to be baseless, has hung over US and UK agencies for two decades. This time, unfortunately, their warnings about Vladimir Putin’s intentions have proved uncannily accurate.Ukraine was fighting for its survival after Vladimir Putin unleashed a punishing offensive on the country that left hundreds dead or injured, and world leaders warned that Moscow had embarked on a dangerous new era of imperial expansion. The continent awoke to the shock of scenes it once believed it had left in the 20th century: helicopters strafing homes outside the capital, long lines of tanks ploughing ever deeper towards Ukraine’s heartland, roads choked with refugees, and civilians huddled in underground stations to escape bombardment. The west scrambled to respond with a range of new sanctions against Moscow, with the US also announcing it would send 7,000 more troops to Germany to shore up Nato’s eastern borders. But even after the invasion there were divisions on the strength of the response, as Russian forces advanced undeterred by the threats. With ferocious fighting on multiple fronts, Putin’s ultimate war aims were not entirely clear, but they appeared to be ambitious. Russian airborne forces descended on a military base at Hostomel, just outside Kyiv, with the possible objective of forcing open a pathway to the capital. US secretary of state, Antony Blinken said that “all evidence suggests that Russia intends to encircle and threaten Kyiv”. “We believe Moscow has developed plans to inflict widespread human rights abuses – and potentially worse – on the Ukrainian people,” Blinken told a meeting of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). Russian troops were also clearly attempting to cut off Kharkiv, Ukraine’s second city, with a population of nearly 1.5 million, in the east. Ukrainian authorities said one Russian column had seized control of the Chernobyl nuclear plant, the site of Europe’s worst environmental disaster in 1986, and an emblem for many Ukrainians of the incompetent despotism of rule from Moscow. Mykhailo Podoliak, an adviser to the head of the president’s office in Kyiv, admitted it was “impossible to say” whether the site, where the remains of its radioactive reactor core lie buried, was safe. White House press secretary Jen Psaki said the US was “outraged” by credible reports that staff at the plant were being “held hostage” by Russian forces. “This unlawful and dangerous hostage-taking, which could upend the routine civil service efforts required to maintain and protect the nuclear waste facilities, is obviously incredibly alarming and gravely concerning. We condemn it and we request their release,” she said. The port city of Mariupol, which lies between the two regions of Ukraine already occupied by Russia, Crimea and the Donbas in the east, was also reported to be under heavy fire. Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, declared martial law and pledged that his government would arm every Ukrainian willing to defend their country. In a late-night address, he said that 137 people had died in fighting, and claimed that Russia had named him “target number one.” As Ukrainian diplomats pleaded with the world to stop the Russian aggression, Zelenskiy warned of a bleak return to the past. “What we have heard today are not just missile blasts, fighting and the rumble of aircraft,” he said. “This is the sound of a new iron curtain, which has come down and is closing Russia off from the civilised world. Our national task is to make sure this curtain does not fall across our land.” Many of Putin’s keenest observers had thought the Russian leader would hesitate before ordering an all-out land war to subjugate Ukraine because of the potentially catastrophic consequences for Russia as well as Ukraine, but he proved them wrong. While Russia was chairing an emergency session of the UN security council that was tasked with finding a way out of the crisis the Kremlin had engineered, Putin broadcast a declaration of war he had recorded three days earlier, underlining the futility of the global diplomatic efforts to dissuade him. The US and Europe sought to inflict punitive measures on his regime with the aim of ensuring that Putin’s war of choice became his worst strategic blunder, by crippling the Russian economy. “Putin’s aggression against Ukraine will end up costing Russia dearly economically and strategically,” Joe Biden warned. “We will make sure of that. Putin will be a pariah on the international stage.” Biden said he was sending 7,000 more troops to strengthen Nato’s eastern borders, expelling Russian diplomats, imposing sanctions on Russia’s two largest banks and almost 90 financial institution subsidiaries around the world. Asked if the invasion marked the start of a new cold war, Biden replied: “That depends. It’s going to be a cold day for Russia.” At the same time, the UK announced its “largest ever” set of economic sanctions on Russia, freezing assets of all major Russian banks and limiting cash held by Russian nationals in UK banks and sanctioning more than 100 individuals and entities. However, clear divisions remained among western countries, with the US and European allies concerned about the global economic ramifications of some of the stronger sanctions. Biden admitted for example that exclusion from the Swift global electronic transactions system was not in the present package of sanctions. It was not, Biden said, the “position that the rest of Europe wishes to take”. Nor did the sanctions announced on Thursday include restrictions on Putin himself. The omission of Swift sanctions enraged the Kyiv government. The foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, said that those opposing the move had to “understand that the blood of innocent Ukrainian men, women and children will be on their hands too”. In announcing the sanctions on Thursday, Biden suggested that a wider conflict was possible, given Putin’s aspirations. “He has much larger ambitions than Ukraine. He wants to reestablish the former Soviet Union – that’s what this is about,” he said. Late on Thursday, French president Emmanuel Macron called Putin “to demand an immediate halt” to Moscow’s offensive, the Elysee Palace said. The Kremlin, meanwhile, said only that the two leaders had a “serious and frank exchange of views” about Ukraine. In his speeches, Putin has portrayed the Ukrainian government as a mortal threat to Russia, and hinted heavily at his desire for regime change. He claimed that the Kyiv government had ambitions and means to acquire nuclear weapons, and was run by Nazis – claims so outlandish that they triggered questions about the Russian leader’s mental stability. By mid-afternoon on Thursday, Russia’s defence ministry claimed to have “neutralised” Ukraine’s airbases and air defences, destroying 74 military ground facilities, including 11 airfields, three command posts and 18 radar stations for anti-aircraft missile systems. Ukrainian authorities said Russia had carried out 203 attacks and that fighting was raging across almost the entire territory. Military sources in Ukraine said 20 Russian helicopters and Mi-8 aircraft had landed paratroopers at Hostomel airport in the Kyiv region, where forces from both sides were fighting for control. They said Ukrainian forces had killed 50 Russian troops, destroyed four Russian tanks, and downed six Russian planes and four helicopters. Zelenskiy also said Ukrainian forces were fighting to prevent Russian troops capturing the former nuclear power plant at Chernobyl. The early hours of the invasion appeared to have claimed dozens of civilian lives in Ukraine. According to the authorities, 18 people were killed in a missile attack in the southern Odessa region, six people were killed in the town of Brovary, near Kyiv, and four people were killed and 10 injured after an “occupier’s shell” hit a hospital in the city of Vuhledar in Donetsk. Air raid sirens sounded in Ukraine’s major cities, and civilians in Kyiv and Kharkiv sheltered in the cities’s metro stations – scenes that have not been seen in those cities since 1941. Kuleba urged the world to wake up. “Putin has just launched a full-scale invasion of Ukraine,” he said “Peaceful Ukrainian cities are under strikes. This is a war of aggression. Ukraine will defend itself and will win. The world can and must stop Putin. The time to act is now.”Ron DeSantis, the right-wing Republican governor of Florida, has fueled speculation about a future US presidential run with a high profile speech lambasting Joe Biden, the media and what he termed “wokeism”. DeSantis, who is both an ally and possible rival to Donald Trump, delivered the attack at the Conservative Political Action Conference (CPAC), the biggest annual gathering of grassroots conservatives in the US. The governor was speaking in Orlando in his home state, but the broad and national sweep of his address, which did not mention Trump by name, was consistent with eyeing a potential White House run in 2024 or 2028. “I can tell you there’s one fellow that just hates Florida: his name is Joe Biden,” said DeSantis, setting himself up as the voice of opposition to the incumbent US president, whose name elicited boos in the cavernous ballroom. “Always trying to take pot shots at Florida and he does things like take our medication. He stiffs storm victims of relief just because he doesn’t like the governor. He doesn’t like Florida. He doesn’t like me because we stand up to him.” The crowd cheered and applauded DeSantis, 43, who went on to rail against Biden over border security, crime and the economy. “The inflation is because of his policies and we’re not going to let anyone forget that. So all told, he’s had the worst first year of any president since the 1800s. “And as Biden flounders, Florida is leading on issue after issue ... We are in the process of getting money from the legislature so that if Biden is dumping illegal aliens into Florida from the southern border, I’m rerouting them to Delaware. We’ll do some in DC and Hollywood as well.” The reference to Biden’s home state was a populist crowd pleaser – it produced a resounding roar of approval – that Trump himself would have envied. Indeed, DeSantis’s speech was a model of Fox News talking points that mocked “lockdown” politicians for holidaying in Florida, which he declared the least restrictive state in the nation during the coronavirus pandemic. In an attack on Biden’s chief medical adviser, infectious disease expert Anthony Fauci, DeSantis declared: “From the very beginning, we refused to let this state descend into some type of Faucian dystopia where people’s freedoms are curtailed and their livelihoods are destroyed ... Florida has defeated Faucism. Freedom has prevailed in the sunshine state.” He added: “I really believe had Florida not led the way, this country could look like Canada or Australia.” Florida is such a bastion of freedom, he claimed, that people are settling there as they flee from “leftist governments” in America and around the world. The slogan at this year’s CPAC, where Trump is due to speak on Saturday, is “Awake not woke”. DeSantis tapped into the resentments of the audience – some of whom wore “DeSantisLand” caps and flags – by launching a broadside at so-called “woke culture”. He boasted about banning critical race theory (CRT), an academic discipline that studies how racism is embedded in US law and institutions that, despite not taught in America’s public schools, has been caricatured and demonized by the right. “They want us to be powerless, they want us to be voiceless, they want us to be second-class citizens,” said DeSantis, who is running for reelection as governor this year, “And what are these ideological aims? The woke is the new religion of the left, and this is what they have in mind.” Many major institutions – including big tech companies – have become “infected with this woke virus”, the former Republican congressman added. “You look at the corrupt and dishonest legacy media in this country and what they’re doing to divide us and what they’re doing to prop up the regime”.Joe Biden on Thursday unveiled a fresh round of what he said would be crippling sanctions on Russia after its invasion of Ukraine, declaring that Vladimir Putin “chose this war” and that he and his country would bear the consequences. The harsh new sanctions target Russia’s largest banks and companies, effectively cutting them off from western financial markets, while imposing restrictions on the exports of advanced technology used to power the country’s military and tech sector. “Putin is the aggressor. Putin chose this war,” the US president said. “And now he and his country will bear the consequences.” Part of a coordinated response, Biden said the measures taken by the US and allied nations around the world were meant to “maximize a long-term impact” on Russia, extracting severe costs on Moscow immediately and over time for what Biden called its “brutal assault” on a sovereign nation. Biden warned that Putin’s “desire for empire” extended beyond Ukraine, saying the Russian leader sought to re-create the former Soviet Union. But the president was emphatic in his vow that US troops would not engage Russia in Ukraine, but he again affirmed the US would defend “every inch of Nato territory”. The commitment was underscored by an announcement that Biden had authorized the deployment of additional US troops to Germany as part of Nato’s response. As Biden addressed the nation from the East Room of the White House, the Ukrainian government reported mounting casualties as Russian troops unleashed a punishing offensive on the nation, advancing on the nation’s capital, Kyiv. Biden’s remarks came hours after he held a virtual meeting with the leaders of Britain, Canada, France, Italy and Japan. European Commission president Ursula von der Leyen, European Council president Charles Michel, and Nato secretary general Jens Stoltenberg were also in attendance. Earlier on Thursday, he convened a meeting of the US national security council. In the afternoon, Biden spent an hour on the phone with the Democratic and Republican leaders in Congress, briefing them on the situation in Ukraine and the administration’s response to date. The White House has been threatening severe sanctions for weeks, in hopes of deterring Putin from waging war on Ukraine. Earlier this week, when Putin made clear he intended to invade, the White House levied an initial “tranche” of sanctions in response. The penalties imposed on Thursday were designed to further destabilize Russia’s financial system while starving the country of technology critical to its economy and military, such as semiconductors. The US Treasury said the latest round of sanctions against Russia would impact nearly 80% of all banking assets in Russia, fundamentally threatening its economy and weakening the Kremlin’s geopolitical posture. “Treasury is taking serious and unprecedented action to deliver swift and severe consequences to the Kremlin and significantly impair their ability to use the Russian economy and financial system to further their malign activity,” said Janet Yellen, the Treasury secretary. Touting the unity among allies and partners, Biden said the sanctions would limit “Russia’s ability to do business in dollars, euros, pounds and yen to be part of the global economy”. But they are not as forceful as some elected officials in the US and Ukraine have called for, steps that would include removing Russia from the Swift international banking system and targeting Russia’s energy sector or leveling sanctions against Putin personally. “We demand the disconnection of Russia from Swift, the introduction of a no-fly zone over Ukraine and other effective steps to stop the aggressor,” the Ukraine president Volodymyr Zelenskiy said in a tweet. On Thursday, congressman Adam Schiff, the chairman of the House intelligence committee, called on the US to “dramatically escalate” its response to Moscow and endorsed calls to remove Russia from the international banking system and its ability to access western capital. Biden argued that time was needed to the current round of sanctions to take their desired effect, and said the US was “prepared” to impose more severe penalties on Russia. The president defended his administration’s response. For several weeks, the US has declassified and made public Putin’s secret plans, while moving quickly to blame Russia for a series of cyber-attacks against Ukrainian banks and agencies. The purpose of the approach was to expose the Kremlin’s justification for war as baseless, he said. “Now, it’s unfolding largely as we predicted,” the president said. Asked by reporters whether he was consulting China to isolate Russia, Biden would not comment. He also said he was working to persuade India to join the western-led push against Russia. Biden said he had no plans to talk to Putin. During the White House briefing on Thursday, White House press secretary Jen Psaki downplayed the threat of a nuclear attack, after Putin warned that countries that interfered with Russia’s invasion would face “consequences you have never encountered in your history”. Some analysts interpreted Putin’s comments as a warning that he was prepared to use the country’s nuclear arsenal. “We don’t see any increased threat in that regard at the present time,” Psaki said. As thousands of Ukrainians flee the country, Psaki said the US was prepared to welcome Ukrainian refugees to the US, but expected that the vast majority of them would prefer to remain in Europe. She said the US was working to support humanitarian efforts in neighboring countries, where the European Union is preparing for a large number of displaced people. Psaki also said the US was “outraged” by “credible” reports that Russian soldiers were holding staff hostage at the Chernobyl nuclear site, near Kyiv. “This unlawful and dangerous hostage-taking, which could upend the routine civil service efforts required to maintain and protect the nuclear waste facilities, is obviously incredibly alarming and deeply concerning,” she said. “We condemn it and request their release.” The US president also urged resolve among the American people, who he said would likely face economic consequences as a result of what Biden called Putin’s “naked aggression”. The US has also warned government agencies and operators of critical infrastructure to take pre-emptive actions to safeguard against a potential Russian cyber-attack. In a stark contrast to Donald Trump, who has repeatedly assailed Biden during the escalating crisis while badly mangling the facts surrounding Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, Barack Obama called on “every American, regardless of party” to support the president’s efforts to punish the Kremlin. Echoing Biden, Obama acknowledged that there would likely be economic consequences for Americans, but that it was a “price we should be willing to pay to take a stand on the side of freedom”. As Biden has warned throughout his presidency, he said democracies around the world were being tested and threatened by Putin’s “sinister vision for the future of our world”. He said there was never a question that the US would respond to Russia’s assault on Ukraine. “This aggression cannot go unanswered,” Biden said. “America stands up to bullies. We stand up for freedom. This is who we are.”There would seem no immediate link, at first glance, between the quicksilver Harry Randall, England’s starting scrum-half against Wales, and Jack Leach, the bespectacled Somerset and England left-arm spinner. In the constantly whirring mind of Eddie Jones, though, a significant connection exists which is set to shape the outcome of Saturday’s pivotal Six Nations fixture at Twickenham. As an avid cricket fan Jones took his usual keen interest in the recent Ashes series, not least the calculated way in which Australia sought to hit Leach out of the attack early in the series at The Gabba. This week Jones has dug out those clips again to illustrate to his squad the importance of meticulous, smart preparation and the effect it can have on major sporting outcomes. The point was less about Australia’s plethora of left-handers deliberately trying to dent Leach’s confidence – which they successfully achieved – and more the broader importance of having a plan in place at international level. “That didn’t happen by chance,” said Jones, having announced perhaps the best balanced England starting XV available to him. “That was a plan by the Australian team’s leadership to get Leach out of the attack. They didn’t want him in there and they wanted to make sure England’s four medium pacers had to keep bowling.” Which is a not dissimilar rationale to the one Jones has applied to his selection this week, prior to the hammer blow of Manu Tuilagi’s hamstring strain which has now ruled him out of contention. His analysis of Wales has reinforced his view of a team who are tough to put away in tight games, as shown by a series of close contests in recent times and again against Scotland in Cardiff last week. The Jones plan, therefore, is to rush out and grasp the early initiative via a combination of pace, power and purpose. Hence the choice of Randall ahead of Ben Youngs, who must now wait to overhaul Jason Leonard’s record as England’s most-capped player from the bench. Randall is nothing if not rapid and England’s second-half go-slow against Italy in Rome with Youngs on the pitch has also trumped any sentimental feelings. The layers of tactical nuance, though, do not end there. England are already well aware of Wales’s preference for keeping the ball infield against them rather than supplying them with plenty of lineout possession from which they so often build. The aerial skills of Dan Biggar and Liam Williams are further incentives to hoist the ball skywards and seek to compete, with a hard-working defence in support. Factor in Jones’s belief that the first 20 minutes are an increasingly prime time to attack in the modern game and the head coach believes supporters would be wise to take their seats early. “You generally find that, if you can get some good quality ball early, the defences are not as quickly set,” confirmed Jones. “The first 20 minutes of a Test match is always the quickest. I think the stat is that 78% of teams who score the first try win the Test, so it is really important for us to have a fast start. We have to get out of the blocks pretty quickly.” And if that fails, Jones also has Plan B waiting. Modern stats indicate a tendency for more lineouts to occur late in games, for which Jamie George’s throwing accuracy is perfectly suited. It leaves Luke Cowan-Dickie to roar from the start alongside the equally rumbustious Ellis Genge, with Joe Marler on hand to inject extra second-half scrummaging oomph if needed. Youngs, while disappointed not to be starting, is also no stranger to last-quarter pressure while Elliot Daly has been a late thorn in Welsh sides in the past. Much time and effort, furthermore, continues to be spent on enhancing England’s leadership depth, with Simon Scott, a former Royal Marines officer and corporate leadership consultant, and the former national captain Will Carling helping to improve both communication and the squad’s operational structure. The upshot, slightly counter-intuitively, is that England now boast no fewer than four official vice captains supporting Courtney Lawes – Tom Curry, Henry Slade, Genge and Cowan-Dickie – with the Owen Farrell-George Ford decision-making axis no longer holding the balance of power. Where precisely that will leave Farrell when he is back from injury remains an interesting question but the more collegiate approach encouraged by Scott appears to suit all concerned. “Simon brings a very modern perspective of leadership to help create an environment where the players can grow,” explained Jones. “He’s a corporate guy who loves his rugby. Communication is one thing [but] it’s about being intentional in your planning. Nothing ever happens unless you plan it.” On the aforementioned Scott’s website his personal mantra sounds simple enough: to help “ordinary people to achieve extraordinary performance over and over again through deliberate, rigorous, quality practice – and to stay cheerful, even in adversity”. England have endured a touch of the latter in this championship so far but, if they win well this weekend, their title destiny will still be very much in their own hands. Could it be that the English mists – both tactical and mental – are finally beginning to clear?