The under-30s are driving a surge in people getting their first jab of the Covid-19 vaccine, with the overall number of people rising by almost half in the week up to 21 December, figures show. The sudden uptick is fuelled by fears of the Omicron variant, as well as the government’s “Get boosted now” publicity drive, which has seen millions of people come forward for their third Covid shot in the past fortnight. A total of 221,564 first doses were administered in England in the week of 15-21 December, a 46% increase from the previous week, and 279,112 second doses were administered, a 39% jump, the Department of Health and Social Care said. The largest increase was seen among young people, with an 85% increase in first doses for those aged 18 to 24 and a 71% increase in first doses for those aged 25 to 30. More than seven in 10 people aged 18 and over have now received their booster, with 27,127,951 people who are three months on from their second dose already boosted in England, as of 24 December. The effect is also being seen in older age groups. In the week up to 21 December, more over-60s had had a first dose than during any seven-day period since early June. Data from the UK Health Security Agency has revealed that two doses of the Covid-19 vaccine, while providing strong protecting from the Delta variant, show substantially reduced effectiveness against symptomatic infection from the Omicron variant over time. But a third dose provides between 60% and 70% protection against symptomatic infection from Omicron two to four weeks after the booster dose. The government and NHS England have expanded the booster programme and launched an advertising campaign urging the public to “Get boosted now”. More than 30 million people have had their third dose and all of those eligible will be offered a booster by the end of the year. The health and social care secretary, Sajid Javid, said that it had “never been more vital to get your jabs” and described the recent surge in first and second doses as “excellent”. “Those initial jabs lay the foundation for the booster jab to protect against Omicron, two doses is not enough and you need to build protection jab by jab and once eligible get boosted now,” he said. The news comes as a senior NHS doctor warned “stragglers” who were eligible for a booster but had yet not had one that there was “no time to lose”. “The evidence is clear. One or two jabs can help but they do not provide the protection we all need against Omicron,” said the NHS national medical director, Prof Stephen Powis. He said that staff and volunteers on the NHS Covid vaccination programme would be working throughout the festive period to “make sure people can get the protection they need as conveniently as possible” and that people could go online to choose from thousands of vaccination sites to book an appointment, “with no need for long queues”. Over the festive period, 750 armed forces personnel have been drafted in to support the rollout of the booster programme, while extra vaccine centres and pop-up sites have opened to make it as easy as possible for people to be vaccinated. More than a million slots for vaccinations are still available in the run-up to the New Year. Although millions of people have received a booster dose in the last few weeks, about 10% of appointments have been missed nationwide while hundreds of thousands of appointments remain unfilled since the prime minister, Boris Johnson, urged those eligible to book a third jab.Click here to access the print version. Normal Sudoku rules apply, except the numbers in the cells contained within grey lines add up to the figures in the corner. No number can be repeated within each shape formed by grey lines. Buy next week’s Observer Digital Edition to see the completed puzzle.Click here to access the print version. Fill the grid using the numbers 1 to 9. Each number must appear just once in every row, column and 3x3 box. Buy next week’s Observer Digital Edition to see the completed puzzle.Click here to access the print version The Chambers Dictionary (2014) is recommended. Special announcement We regret to announce that, until further notice, we are unable to offer prizes for solvers of the Azed weekly crosswords. The special monthly Azed clue writing competitions are not affected and will continue as normal. Entry rules for these will appear as usual.Every Christmas, Observer Business Agenda casts its eye over the year that was, seeking to spotlight the business luminaries whose deeds might otherwise have gone unrecognised. At first glance 2021 looked awfully similar to 2020 – a pandemic, various lockdowns and a new wave of infections to round it all off – but it soon became clear that there were still candidates worthy of special recognition. Sir Richard Branson award for self-promotion And the winner is … Sir Richard Branson. The eponymous award winner has taken his ego to the last place it had yet to colonise: space. We are of course used to billionaire oneupmanship, but where yachts were the plaything of choice, now it is rockets. After Branson’s years of unfulfilled promises that a launch was just around the corner, it was vital that his company, Virgin Galactic, made it into space (or near it, according to some contested definitions of where the atmosphere ends) before rivals. So he cannily waited for Bezos to set a launch date for his oddly “anthropomorphic” spaceship in July – then jumped in with his own nine days earlier. Sports Direct award for outstanding economic contribution to the boss Yet Bezos can surely not feel too hard done by in this year’s awards. After all, he has already presented our next gong: to Amazon’s workers for funding his own jaunt beyond the atmosphere. “I want to thank every Amazon employee and every Amazon customer, because you guys paid for all of this,” the Stetsoned billionaire gushed in July after landing back on Earth. Workers campaigning for union recognition in the company’s famously intense warehouses will of course accept his gratitude and never bring it up at salary negotiations. Alok Sharma award for climate action While it was his failure to phase out coal that brought the UK’s chair of the Cop26 climate talks to tears, this year’s honour once again goes to the oil industry. The UK supermajors, led by Ben van Beurden at Shell and the unimprovable Bernard Looney of BP, plus ExxonMobil and Chevron in the US, all managed to bury their heads even further in the sand. This was despite a series of shareholder rebellions, led by tiny campaign group Follow This, which suggested that they may just have to think about reducing their carbon footprints. The oil companies decided instead to kick the can down the road by signing up to cut emissions while also drilling for more oil. Bravo. Samuel Johnson award for patriotism Coming a close second in the race for “last refuge of the scoundrel” was the Trump family, after both Donald and Ivanka Trump described the rioters storming the US Capitol as “patriots”. But neither managed to spectacularly misunderstand love for country while also riding an electric surfboard and waving the star-spangled banner. Step forward, Mark Zuckerberg! The Facebook boss posted a minute-long video on Instagram of himself on US Independence Day riding above the water on an efoil board (about $10,000 a pop) to the backing of John Denver’s Country Roads. This wasn’t the only time Zuckerberg played up to his public image as billionaire nerd to questionable effect during 2021: a joke about his robotic demeanour fell particularly flat during a video announcing Facebook’s rebrand as Meta. Meta wants to host the next generation of the internet (and it also gives it a handy excuse to distance itself from the controversies of its money-spinning social network). George Osborne award for being absolutely everywhere The UK’s former chancellor was relatively young when he was booted out of the job, so quickly turned his hand to filling his time with as many other gigs as he could. (His latest this year: a job at an investment bank – in recognition, we suppose, of his record for canny financial management.) This year the gong in his honour goes to the entire private equity industry, which has managed to go from niche concern of the financial pages to owner of what seems like most of British industry. Supermarkets (Morrisons), pubs (Punch), aerospace (Cobham), nuclear submarines (Ultra Electronics) … there seems to be no door a big wodge of cash can’t open – except, for LV=, a mutual where normal people actually had a say. Wisconsin Tourism Federation award for worst acronym A dishonourable mention for this award must first go to the man who became the world’s richest at the beginning of the year, Elon Musk. In retaliation for being punished for stock manipulation, Musk hijacked the Securities Exchange Commission’s abbreviation, tweeting: “SEC, three letter acronym, middle word is Elon’s.” But the winners of the year’s least-loved initialism award are NFTs, or non-fungible tokens, which became mainstream in 2021. Basically take the utopian Wikipedia-esque ideal of endlessly shareable digital information (say an artwork or a video clip), and find a way to make it scarce and exclusive like in the physical world so it can be sold at a big profit. There may well be some use for the technology, but 2021 did not deliver it.This blog is closing now. Than ks for reading - but you can follow all the pandemic developments at our new blog here: https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2021/dec/26/covid-live-news-france-and-italy-see-record-daily-cases-australias-omicron-outbreak-spreads Cases are continuing to rise in Australia. New South Wales recorded a record 6,394 cases, while Victoria recorded 1,608 new Covid cases. The NSW health minister has urged residents to reconsider whether they need to call an ambulance or go to hospital due to staff furloughs, warning everyone in the state was likely to be infected with Omicron. Testing centre delays were still hitting Australian states and territories, with some reaching capacity before opening on Boxing Day. France recorded a record high of 104,611 Covid-19 infections on Saturday, breaking the 100,000 threshold for the first time since the pandemic began. Italy reported a third successive record tally of Covid-19 cases on Christmas Day, Reuters reports. New cases reached 54,762 compared to 50,599 a day earlier, the health ministry said. Record cases are being reported in Ireland and in China, where authorities are imposing strict lockdowns to contain the outbreaks. Local transmission is rising in China and its Xi’an province is now allowing only one member of a household to leave their home for necessities every two days. More than 5,400 flight cancellations have thrown the Christmas travel schedule into chaos. Omicron has meant airlines could not staff flights. A quarter of cancelled flights were in the United States. New Covid measures in England could be in place until late March under measures examined by the UK government’s scientific advisers, including a ban on socialising with another household indoors and a return to the rule of six outdoors, in line with the Step 2 restrictions in place in England earlier this year India’s prime minister Narendra Modi has announced vaccinations for children under 15 and booster jabs for healthcare and frontline workers. The Omicron variant has become the dominant strain in Portugal, making up almost two-thirds of cases since Wednesday. Schools, bars and clubs are closed until 10 January. There were queues at vaccination centres in England, kept open in some areas to allow walk-in appointments as the government encourages booster shots to counter the surge caused by the Omicron variant. The Nigerian president’s top media aide Garba Shehu said on Saturday that he has tested positive for coronavirus and was in isolation. In east Congo, a suicide bomber has struck a restaurant in the city of Beni killing at least five people as well as himself, Reuters reports. Fourteen people were injured in the attack including two local officials. It is the latest violent attack in a region where Congolese and Ugandan forces last month launched a campaign against suspected Islamists. In a statement, the regional governer’s spokesperson Général Ekenge Sylvain said: The suicide bomber, prevented by security guards from entering a crowded bar, activated the bomb at the entrance of the bar. The ADF did not immediately claim responsibility for the attack. In the US, a male surfer has been killed in an apparent shark attack in California on Christmas Eve. Local police say they responded to the report of a man “unresponsive” on the beach after being pulled from the water early on Friday. The man was pronounced dead at the scene. Morro Bay beach goers have been told to avoid the water for the next 24 hours. The Los Angeles Times has reported the victim is believed to be a 31-year-old body boarder. “PCR tests”, Hazzard says with a sigh: We’re now getting something in the order of 130,000 to 160,000 test as day and that on the face of it sounds good, but then we need to consider why are people being tested and why are we putting the stressors on our pathology system? Well, of course, in many cases, it is forced upon us by direction from health, or because other states, South Australia, Queensland, and so on, are insisting on PCR tests for travel...I certainly send again the message to those states that getting PCR tests is putting an enormous pressure on our pathology system and minimising the capacity for proper clinical PCR tests...as health minister I strongly implore them to review that situation as soon as is possible. It comes with 2,000 staff currently furloughed in NSW, putting “enormous pressure” on the hospital system. Hazzard says “think carefully” before you ask to call an ambulance or need to go to hospital, a disturbing indictment on the state of the health system as a result of rapidly rising Covid cases. NSW health minister Brad Hazzard is up. He says “we’re all going to get Omicron”, so the best present you can give someone is getting vaccinated: Bottom line here is that we would expect that pretty well everybody in New South Wales at some point will get Omicron, we’re all going to get Omicron, and if we’re all going to get Omicron, the best way to face it is when we have full vaccinations including our booster. The challenge for us in the state is to make sure that our health system can cope with that oncoming virus that is so transmissible...and generally what we’re finding, though, in the early stages...is that Omicron is not as severe in terms of its impact on individuals. That is a huge plus for all of us, but quite clearly it does impact on those who are unvaccinated, the majority of people who are in intensive care in New South Wales and requiring health staff to be looking after them, putting them at risk also, are people who have not been vaccinated. So the unvaccinated are taking more places than perhaps should be or actually - no, they’re taking more places than they should be in our ICUs simply because they have chosen not to be vaccinated. Perrottet acknowledges the long queues for Covid tests across the state. Testing numbers remain incredibly strong...but I just want to make the point again in respect of testing - if you do not feel unwell, if you are not required to be tested and have not been directed so by New South Wales Health, or you are not travelling interstate and that is a requirement, there is no need to be tested. What we can’t have are people sitting in testing queues which takes away from people who are unwell and who need that test because we want to get those tests back as quickly as possible...we have been working very closely with the other state premiers to move away from PCR testing to rapid antigen tests for those people who are travelling interstate, and I appreciate the Queensland premier’s movement there to bring that...but in the meantime there’s still going to be pressure on the system...I know there are long queues right across our state, so if we can help with that, if you do not feel unwell, if you are not advised by New South Wales Health, there is no need to receive a PCR test. You are taking spot in the queue from somebody who needs a test. The NSW premier Dominic Perrottet has been providing a Covid update this morning. He thanks “everybody across the state” for “amazing sacrifices” people are making over the Christmas period, including the thousands in isolation on 25 December. Those inconveniences will continue, but the efforts that we make will ensure that we keep our state safe and I have the strong view that New South Wales is in a very good position and we will stand tall during this difficult time and as case numbers continue to increase, more sacrifices will need to be made...but those rules are in place to keep our community safe and we’ll continue to do that as we move through this next phase of the pandemic. He says “there will be challenges” as NSW moves to the next stage of the pandemic, “but we will get through it”. On Christmas Eve, we hit 95% first dose. What an amazing achievement from the efforts that everybody has made across our state. We...never believed we would reach that rate. When you go back months ago to be in a position now where we have one of the highest vaccination rates not just in the country, but globally, ensures that as we open up we’re able to do so as safely as possible. Back in Australia, Tasmania has detected 44 new Covid cases overnight. It is a slight jump on yesterday’s 33 cases, which brought active cases on the island to 113. An employee at the Royal Hobart Hospital tested positive to the virus on Christmas Eve. There is one person being treated in hospital and none in intensive care. Scientists have declared the eruption on Spain’s La Palma officially over, Reuters reports. After nearly 100 days since the Cumbre Vieja volcano began to spew out lava, rock and ash, the eruption was declared over on Saturday. The volcano went quiet on 13 December but authorities held off until Christmas Day to give the all clear. Canary Islands regional security chief Julio Perez told a news conference: “what I want to say today can be said with just four words: The eruption is over”. In Myanmar, women and children are among dozens who have been reported killed in a Christmas Eve massacre. Myanmar government troops rounded up and shot dead at least 38 villagers, a charity and other outlets report, with fighting remaining intense near the village. Purported photos of the aftermath of the massacre in eastern Mo So village have spread on social media, sparking outrage against the military that took control of the state in February. A witness said victims of the attack had fled fighting between the army and armed resistance groups. Two Save the Children workers remain missing, with confirmation their private vehicle was attacked and burnt out. In a statement, the charity said “the military reportedly forced people from their cars, arrested some, killed others and burned their bodies”. Covid-19 testing lines across Australia are reaching capacity on Boxing Day as soon as they open. As of 9am Sunday morning, all of the ACT’s testing clinics were closed or at capacity an hour after opening. In New South Wales, a Covid testing line at Port Macquarie was closed at 7.30 am after reaching capacity, with a more than six hour wait before the centre opened. Huge queues were also forming in Sydney, with drive through testing clinics shutting as record Covid cases were detected. Randwick mayor Dylan Parker told channel 9 people were waiting “all day” to receive a test. I know someone who showed up in line at 8.30am and they didn’t get out until 4pm on Christmas Day...it’s just not good enough. In Australia’s capital territory, rising numbers of Covid cases including the Omicron strain have seen authorities tighten visitor restrictions to health facilities. No visitors will be able to enter a health facility unless in “exceptional circumstances”. In Australia, New South Wales has recorded another record number of infections today, with 6,394 cases reported. More than 5% of today’s tests came back positive. There have been an additional 70 hospitalisations overnight, but ICU rates remain steady. Victoria has recorded 1,608 new cases, a slight dip on yesterday’s numbers. There are 374 people being treated in hospital, and there have been two deaths. It comes as cricket fans begin to stream in to Melbourne’s MCG for the first day of the Ashes Boxing Day test. The Nigerian president’s top media aide Garba Shehu said on Saturday that he has tested positive for coronavirus and was in isolation. Shehu, who is in his late 50s, is in the immediate circle of 79-year-old President Muhammadu Buhari. “I can only confirm that [I am] infected by Covid-19 and on treatment in isolation,” Shehu said. Several local newspapers reported that some of Buhari’s aides and top officials have contracted the virus, including information minister Lai Mohammed, Reuters reported. A presidency spokesman declined to comment on whether any other official or minister was infected and whether Buhari, who received a booster dose on Tuesday, has been tested. UK cabinet ministers vying to succeed Boris Johnson have been warned by Tory colleagues that they will damage their chances unless they stridently oppose further Covid measures, as MPs called for New Year’s Eve restrictions to be ruled out. With ministers expected to meet as soon as Monday to discuss whether additional measures are needed to protect hospital capacity, several Conservatives said that they would be watching those emerging as leading contenders to replace Johnson should he step aside before the next election. The news comes after it emerged government scientific advisers had modelled the impact of implementing so-called “step 2” restrictions from Tuesday. Such measures would see an end to indoor gatherings, limited outdoor gatherings, and bars and restaurants only able to serve outdoors. The modelling suggested that restrictions could reduce deaths by 18% if kept in place until mid-January or 39% if retained until the end of March. Australians face a day of festive leftovers, Boxing Day sales and surging Covid-19 infections with the national daily case total expected to pass 10,000. Christmas Day coronavirus numbers across the country hit 9,993, a figure expected to be eclipsed on Sunday, the Australian Associated Press reported. In New South Wales, a record record 6,288 cases were reported with thousands of people in isolation or separated from family. It was a similar story in Queensland where 765 new infections were counted, 151 of them of the Omicron variant. The mark was 176 higher than the state’s previous record set on Friday. Victoria avoided setting a new record on Saturday but another 2,108 people tested positive for the virus, ruining festive plans as they and their close contacts were forced to isolate. South Australia recorded 634 new cases with 12 patients in hospital, two of them in intensive care units. Some 33 cases were diagnosed in Tasmania, while the Northern Territory reported 19 cases, 10 of which were interstate arrivals. Western Australia recorded two new local Covid-19 infections on Christmas Day, both linked to a French backpacker who arrived in the state from Queensland. The cases bring the total number of community infections in WA to seven, after five cases were reported on Friday. Pope Francis has called for dialogue to counter the isolation wrought by the Covid-19 pandemic, as billions around the world marked a second Christmas under the shadow of the coronavirus. In his traditional Urbi and Orbi Christmas Day blessing, the pope told the faithful gathered in St Peter’s Square at the Vatican that “our capacity for social relationships is sorely tried; there is a growing tendency to withdraw, to do it all by ourselves, to stop making an effort to encounter others and do things together. “On the international level, too, there is the risk of avoiding dialogue,” said the 85-year-old Argentine pontiff. “Yet only those paths can lead to the resolution of conflicts and to lasting benefits for all.” In a time of pandemic, Pope Francis also asked God to “open hearts to ensure that necessary medical care - and vaccines in particular - are provided to those peoples who need them most,” AFP reports. France recorded a record high of 104,611 Covid-19 infections on Saturday, breaking the 100,000 threshold for the first time since the pandemic began. Italy reported a third successive record tally of Covid-19 cases on Christmas Day, Reuters reports. New cases reached 54,762 compared to 50,599 a day earlier, the health ministry said. Record cases are being reported in Ireland, Australia’s New South Wales and in China, where authorities are imposing strict lockdowns to contain the outbreaks. Local transmission is rising in China and its Xi’an province is now allowing only one member of a household to leave their home for necessities every two days. More than 5,400 flight cancellations have thrown the Christmas travel schedule into chaos. Omicron has meant airlines could not staff flights. A quarter of cancelled flights were in the United States. New Covid measures in England could be in place until late March under measures examined by the UK government’s scientific advisers, including a ban on socialising with another household indoors and a return to the rule of six outdoors, in line with the Step 2 restrictions in place in England earlier this year India’s prime minister Narendra Modi has announced vaccinations for children under 15 and booster jabs for healthcare and frontline workers. The Omicron variant has become the dominant strain in Portugal, making up almost two-thirds of cases since Wednesday. Schools, bars and clubs are closed until 10 January. There were queues at vaccination centres in England, kept open in some areas to allow walk-in appointments as the government encourages booster shots to counter the surge caused by the Omicron variant. An update to an early story. US airlines cancelled more than 900 flights on Saturday, the second straight day of massive cancellations as surging Covid-19 infections have sidelined some pilots and other crew members. A total of 913 Christmas Day flights, including domestic flights and those into or out of the country, were cancelled, up from 690 on Christmas Eve, according to a running tally on flight-tracking website FlightAware.com. Around 1,110 flights were delayed, Reuters reports. Record sales are expected this Boxing Day in Australia with shoppers tipped to splurge more than $20bn during the summer sales period. The Australian Retailers Association has estimated people will spend $21bn in the post-Christmas sales through to mid-January. Some shoppers are preparing to shrug off Covid concerns and visit CBDs and major shopping centres. However, online purchases are expected to surge this year. The ARA said it expected total sales to exceed last year because people could or would not spend their money on overseas travel during the Covid pandemic. France recorded a record high of 104,611 Covid-19 infections on Saturday, breaking the 100,000 threshold for the first time since the pandemic began. Health authorities said the number of Covid patients in intensive care went up by 28 to 3,282, Reuters reports. The country has also reported a total of 123,531 Covid-19 related deaths in hospital, up by 84. This post was amended on 26 December 2021 to give France’s correct cumulative death toll, according to Johns Hopkins University. Israel has ordered 100,000 units of Pfizer Inc’s anti-viral Covid-19 pill Paxlovid for people aged 12 and older at risk of severe illness, an official said. Channel 12 TV said the country’s prime minister Naftali Bennett agreed the deal in a phone conversation with Pfizer CEO Albert Bourla. The first oral and at home treatment for Covid-19, Paxlovid was nearly 90% effective in preventing hospitalisations and deaths in patients at high risk of severe illness, according to data from Pfizer’s clinical trial, Reuters reports. Recent lab data suggests the drug retains effectiveness against the Omicron variant, it said. In his national address, India’s prime minister Narendra Modi said: “From the point of view of precaution, the government has decided that healthcare and frontline workers should start getting a precaution dose.” India has reported a swift rise in Omicron cases, with the number reaching 415 overall across 17 states. Modi’s government has been accelerating its vaccination campaign, administering at least one dose to 88% of the eligible 944 million population, while 61% have taken both doses. He also urged citizens to continue to wear facemasks and follow other Covid-19 protocols, Reuters reports. Some further data from Italy. Patients in hospital with Covid-19 - not including those in intensive care - stood at 8,892 on Saturday, up from 8,812 on Friday. There were 106 new admissions to intensive care units, against 102 on Friday, Reuters reports. The total number of intensive care patients increased to 1,071 from a previous 1,038. Some 969,752 tests for Covid-19 were carried out in the past day, compared with a previous 929,775, the health ministry said. Italy reported a third successive record tally of Covid-19 cases on Christmas Day, Reuters reports. New cases reached 54,762 compared to 50,599 a day earlier, the health ministry said. The number of coronavirus-related deaths rose to 144 from 141 on Friday. Italy has registered 136,530 deaths linked to Covid-19 and has reported 5.57 million cases to date. Indian prime minister Narendra Modi has announced new vaccination pushes in an address to the nation as he told citizens to stay cautious but not panic. Modi said vaccinations would be extended to children aged 15 and over from Jan 3, while from the week after booster jabs will be given to healthcare and frontline workers as well as those vulnerable because of health conditions. The Omicron coronavirus variant vigorously continued its viral march across the US on Christmas Day, throwing many winter holiday celebrations into turmoil. Airlines canceled over 2,000 flights on Friday, with more than 600 within, into or out of the US, stranding passengers after short-staffed carriers were hit by pilot and flight attendants reporting infections. Hundreds more cancellations were anticipated for Saturday. The global tally of cancelled flights exceeded 5,400 trips over the weekend. FlightAware, a flight-tracking website, noted 888 flights entering, leaving or inside the US were canceled on Saturday, up from 690 on Friday. Christian churches were disrupted, with many canceling in-person congregations, while others planned outdoor services or a hybrid of online and in-person worship, including requirements to wear masks and show proof of Covid-19 vaccinations. Comedian Sarah Millican has led a campaign to help keep people connected during Christmas, offering entertainment, distraction and someone to speak to for anyone feeling lonely or isolated. Social media users have enthusiastically responded with pictures of their breakfasts and pets under the hashtag #JoinIn. Just over a year ago, Anna-Jane Casey was forced to abandon the Covid-shuttered West End to deliver hundreds of parcels in a second-hand van. She was overjoyed to find herself back on stage this Christmas in one of theatreland’s most star-studded and critically acclaimed shows: Cabaret. But productions are at the mercy of Omicron, with the highly transmissible Covid variant ripping holes in casts and backstage staff daily, so Casey’s triumphant return to the West End has been put on hold. “Cabaret had to come off [last week] because there are about four to five cast members ill,” she said from her home in Kent. “It’s hit so many different departments: the dressers in the wardrobe department … our automation and sound and lighting. We’ve got a lot of cases across the board – and we’re a new production so the understudies aren’t ready to step in yet.” Cabaret – which stars Eddie Redmayne and Jessie Buckley in a revival of the 1960s musical about the Nazi-menaced nightlife of the Weimar republic – is not the only theatrical casualty of the wave of infections sweeping the capital. Last week more than 70 performances of 31 shows were axed, including Moulin Rouge, Mamma Mia! and Matilda. “Up until about four days ago, 2021 was rocking along just fine. But we seem to be back where we were last year,” said Casey, who has appeared in shows including Chicago and Billy Elliot. “Producers are losing money hand over fist. Our producers are being unbelievably generous and paying us while we are not working but I don’t know how long that will last.” How do you forecast the future of the British economy during something as unpredictable as a pandemic? The Guardian’s Economics editor Larry Elliot spoke to Richard Hughes about just how they have tried to do that over the past year and what they’re learning over at the Office for Budget Responsibility. We spend a lot of time talking to public health experts, to epidemiologists, to [England’s chief medical officer] Chris Whitty and to Sage advisers. We start by saying: what’s the outlook for the virus? How effective are the vaccines? What are the prospects of having to reimpose Covid restrictions? Because all of that dictates the near-term economic outlook. ... When you are hit with an enormous shock, you gather information from wherever you can get it. The Queen looked back on a year marked by personal, as well as national, grief in her Christmas Day message – the first since the loss of her husband – yet strived to strike a more hopeful tone for the year to come. As a second year marked by the Covid-19 pandemic drew towards its end, the 95-year-old monarch said she could understand the feelings of all those who have lost loved ones, having been bereaved herself in April. Nevertheless, she looked forward becoming the first British monarch to celebrate a platinum jubilee – 70 years on the throne – in 2022. “Although it’s a time of great happiness and good cheer for many, Christmas can be hard for those who have lost loved ones. This year, especially, I understand why,” the Queen said in her annual televised address. Two more members of the K-pop boy band BTS have tested positive after the group returned to South Korea from performances in the United States. Rapper RM and singer Jin joined their bandmate Suga, who tested positive on Friday. The concerts in Los Angeles were their first in-person performances in the country since the start of the pandemic, which forced them to call off their biggest ever world tour last year. All three members of the group, which has spearheaded a global craze for K-pop, had been double-vaccinated. Scientists who have become familiar faces during the course of the pandemic have taken to Twitter on Christmas Day. Tim Spector, professor of genetic epidemiology at King’s College London and lead researcher of the Covid Symptom Study app, shared an impressive model of a church made from lateral flow tests. From Stephen Reicher, professor of psychology at the University of St Andrews and a member of government advisory body the Scientific Pandemic Insights Group: From Dr Zubaida Haque, a member of Independent Sage and former interim director Runnymede Trust: Kit Yates, senior lecturer in mathematical biology at the University of Bath, writes: From University College London infectious diseases expert Dr Neil Stone, who is working on the ward on Christmas Day: And finally a Christmas Day message from the head of the World Health Organization (WHO), Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus: Ireland recorded 13,765 new cases on Saturday, more than 2,500 more than its previous record of 11,182 cases just yesterday. Approximately 83% of reported cases are believed to be the Omicron variant. As of 8am this morning, there are 378 people in hospital with the virus and 87 people in intensive care with Covid. The Department of Health said “large volumes” of case numbers are anticipated over the coming period. Hundreds of thousands of people in the UK will be forced to self-isolate on Christmas Day after a record 122,186 tested positive for Covid, the highest daily figure since the pandemic began. If you are self-isolating at Christmas and feeling alone, you’re far from the only one. You can join the comedian Sarah Millican’s #JoinIn Twitter hashtag on Twitter and speak to others in your position. Now in its 11th year, #JoinIn is a space for people who have not chosen to be alone but find themselves on their own on Christmas Day. The Omicron variant has become the dominant strain in Portugal, one of the countries with the highest Covid vaccination rates worldwide, officials said. “The Omicron variant is already dominant in Portugal,” the General Directorate of Health said, “accounting for 61.5% of cases on December 22.” On Friday, Portugal recorded 11 deaths and 12,943 cases – a record since 29 January. Schools, bars and clubs are closed until 10 January, with people told to work from home and face masks mandatory indoors. Germany recorded 22,214 new cases, compared with 35,431 the day before, officials said. A further 157 deaths were recorded. The latest figures came after health authorities admitted they are struggling to trace the contacts of people infected with Covid. In an interview published yesterday, Ute Teichert, chair of the Federal Association of Doctors in the Public Health Service, said “comprehensive followup [of Covid cases] is almost no longer taking place at the moment.” In some German states including Baden-Württemberg, Berlin and Hamburg, contact tracing has been completely suspended as officials focus on recording the “numerous coronavirus infections”, she added. Thousands of people across England will receive a Christmas Day booster jab as the vaccination effort continues in the face of record case rates. Queues have been spotted at pharmacies as people wait for their “jingle jabs” with appointments available in locations in London, Manchester, Swindon and Eastbourne. Vaccination clinics in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland are closed today. NHS England has thanked staff who are working or volunteering on Christmas Day. In a tweet, it said: “From vaccinators to volunteers, porters to paramedics, midwives to mental health practitioners, and all other essential workers – thank you to everyone who is working over the festive period!” Meanwhile, the government says it will be sending millions of text messages on Boxing Day urging people to “get boosted now”. The message will say: “Every adult needs a Covid-19 booster vaccine to protect against Omicron. Get your Covid-19 vaccine or booster.” Malaysia has detected its first local case of the Omicron variant, officials have said. In a briefing today, the country’s health minister, Khairy Jamaluddin, said the case was reported in the Borneo state of Sarawak on Christmas Eve. The individual, a 38-year-old Chinese national, is fully vaccinated and has not travelled abroad recently, he added. The cause of the infection is not known and investigations are ongoing. Malaysia has a total of 62 Omicron cases, about half of which are from Saudi Arabia, followed by five from the UK, four from Qatar and three from the US. New Covid measures in England could be in place until late March under measures examined by the UK government’s scientific advisers, Press Association reports. The modelling by experts from Warwick University considered a package of measures including a ban on socialising with another household indoors and a return to the rule of six outdoors, in line with the Step 2 restrictions in place in England earlier this year. The research, published on Christmas Eve by the Scientific Pandemic Influenza Group on Modelling, Operational sub-group (Spi-M-O), looked at imposing Step 2 restrictions on either 28 December or New Year’s Day and keeping them in place until 15 or 18 January or 28 March 28. A summary read: A reduction in mixing equivalent to half that of Step 2 results in only a very small reduction in severe outcomes compared to Plan B alone. Step 2 has a much larger effect, reducing the number of deaths up to 31st May by 39% (24-54%) if kept in place from 28 December until 28 March , and 18% (12-27%) if kept in place until 15 January. The work was completed before the latest data suggesting the Omicron variant may produce less severe illness than the Delta strain. New South Wales has recorded its highest ever Covid daily caseload, with 6,288 new infections announced today – by far the highest number of cases in any Australian state since the pandemic began. Record Covid cases were reported across Australia on Christmas Day as overwhelmed testing clinics were forced to close and tens of thousands of people spent the holiday in isolation. Covid transmission also continued to surge in Victoria, where authorities announced 2,108 new Covid-19 infections and six deaths from the virus. Queensland announced a daily record of 765 new cases, with the state’s health minister, Yvette D’Ath, declaring “this virus is everywhere now”. D’Ath confirmed 151 of those cases had the Omicron variant. The leading Catholic in England and Wales, the archbishop of Westminster, has urged the government not to reintroduce restrictions on churches amid record Covid-19 infection rates. Data published on Thursday, suggesting the Omicron strain might cause less severe illness than the previously dominant Delta variant, has fuelled speculation in Westminster that Boris Johnson will resist imposing further restrictions in England after Christmas. Cardinal Vincent Nichols said it was clear that large spaces such as churches were “not places where we spread the virus”. He told the BBC prior to midnight mass at Westminster Cathedral: I would sincerely appeal that they do not again consider closing churches and places of worship. He added: I think this country has shown that people can make good judgements themselves. We’re at that point of saying we understand the risk. We know what we should do. Most people are sensible and cautious. We don’t need stronger impositions to teach us what to do. It comes after a further 122,186 lab-confirmed Covid-19 cases were recorded in the UK as of 9am on Christmas Eve, another record daily figure, while 137 people died within 28 days of testing positive. Read the full article here: In Bethlehem, the city where Christians believe Jesus was born, thousands usually pack the streets during the Christmas period. On average, Bethlehem welcomed 3 million visitors a year before the pandemic, with Christmas alone drawing 10,000 people to the city’s hotels, around half from abroad. But Israel, which controls all entrances to Bethlehem in the occupied West Bank, has barred its borders to foreigners in an effort to rein in infections from Omicron. In Manger Square, numbers were noticeably lower as Covid fears overshadowed celebrations for a second straight year. “It’s very strange,” said Kristel Elayyan, a Dutchwoman married to a Palestinian, who came to Bethlehem from Jerusalem told Agence-France-Presse, adding: Before (the pandemic), you had a bunch of people coming in from different countries to celebrate Christmas, and now you know that everybody who is here is probably not a tourist. Last year, Bethlehem curtailed celebrations sharply with a virtual tree lighting and just a handful of visiting scouts. This year, the celebrations were more vibrant - but still a fraction of their usual size. One shop owner, Victor Epiphane Tabash, said it was his 57th Christmas behind the counter. For him, as for many shopkeepers around Manger Square, “there is nothing to say about Christmas”. He said he kept his business alive during the pandemic by exporting because no customers came to buy in person. He compared the pandemic to two previous Palestinian uprisings, or intifadas, adding: We have lived through the intifadas, wars. But the coronavirus is worse. Japan’s Fukuoka prefecture has confirmed its first infection with the Omicron variant, officials said. The case was a result of possible community transmission as the infection route was unclear, its governor Seitaro Hattori said. New Omicron infections were also detected in the Kyoto prefecture and came a day after community transmissions of the variant were found in another western city of Osaka on Friday. In Tokyo, 38 new cases were recorded today, marking the eighth consecutive day for the number of new cases to exceed that of the previous week. The number of people getting their first jab of a Covid vaccine in England rose by around 46% in the week up to 21 December, figures by the UK’s Department for Health and Social Care show. In total, 221,564 first doses were administered in England in the week of 15-21 December, a 46% increase from the previous week. The total number of people getting a second dose was 279,112, a 39% jump from the week before. The largest increase was seen among young people, with an 85% increase in first doses for those aged 18 and 24 and a 71% increase in first doses for those aged 25 to 30, PA reports. In the week up to 21 December, more over 60s had had a first dose than during any seven-day period since early June. Officials in China are rushing to contain outbreaks in several regions, including the north-western city of Xi’an where 13 million residents have been under lockdown since Thursday. Of the 140 new infections reported today, 87 were locally transmitted, according to officials, compared with 55 a day earlier. In Xi’an, households have only been permitted to send one member outside every two days to purchase necessities. The city has recorded 330 locally transmitted symptomatic cases since the first case was reported on 9 December. Cases from Xi’an have so far spread to five other cities including Beijing, according to state media. China is on high alert for new infections as it prepares to hold the Winter Olympics in February in Beijing. The first doctor to alert South African authorities about the Omicron variant says India will see a surge in cases driven by the strain but the infection may be mild in most people as in South Africa. The Times of India quotes Dr Angelique Coetzee as saying existing vaccines will definitely control the contagion but unvaccinated people “will potentially spread the virus 100%”, adding: I believe it will be difficult [for the ongoing Covid-19 pandemic to end soon]. I presume it will become endemic. India will see a surge in Omicron-driven Covid-19 cases and simultaneously there will be a high-positivity rate. But hopefully the majority of the cases will be as mild as what we are seeing here in South Africa. Passengers travelling over the Christmas holiday have been hit with disruption worldwide after airline companies cancelled more than 4,500 flights, according to a flight tracking website. A surge of cancellations on Christmas Eve and Christmas Day came as the rapidly spreading Omicron coronavirus variant meant carriers were unable to staff their flights. The website of the flight tracking firm FlightAware showed that 2,175 flights around the world had been scrapped on Christmas Eve, a typically heavy day for travel. Around a quarter of those were in the US. Another 1,779 flights were scrapped worldwide on Christmas Day, along with 402 more that had been scheduled for Sunday. The bulk of the cancellations came from five firms, with China Eastern cancelling 474 journeys, while Air China scrapped 188. United cancelled 177 flights, Air India 160 and Delta called off 150. Read the full article by my colleague Clea Skopeliti here: A United States Navy warship has delayed its deployment to South America because of a Covid outbreak among its crew, officials said. The USS Milwaukee, which deployed from Mayport, Florida, on 15 December will remain in port at Naval Station Guantanamo Bay, where it had stopped for a scheduled visit, Associated Press reports. In a statement, the Navy said the ship’s crew is “100% immunised” and that all of those who tested positive for Covid-19 have been isolated on the ship away from other crew members. Early last year a major military outbreak of the virus saw the USS Theodore Roosevelt sidelined in Guam for nearly two months, and more than 1,000 of the 4,800 crew members tested positive. One sailor died, and the entire crew went through weeks of quarantine in a rotation that kept enough sailors on the ship to keep it safe and running. Hello and welcome to the Guardian’s rolling coverage of the coronavirus pandemic with me, Léonie Chao-Fong. Here’s a rundown of everything you might have missed. Passengers travelling over the Christmas holiday have been hit with disruption worldwide after airline companies cancelled more than 4,500 flights, as the rapidly spreading Omicron variant meant carriers were unable to staff their flights. Around a quarter of those were in the United States. The Chinese city of Xi’an, home to 13 million people, reported an increase in daily Covid-19 infections as the country’s latest hotspot entered its third day of lockdown. China as a whole reported 140 new confirmed coronavirus cases for Friday, an increase of 62% from 87 cases the day before, its health authority said. One in 35 people in England had Covid last week, new figures show, with 1.7 million people testing positive across the UK – the highest number on record so far. In London, hospital admissions due to Covid have nearly doubled week-on-week, the latest figures show. Across England, 1,246 admissions were recorded on December 22, up 55% week-on-week and the highest number for a single day since February 16. Ministers could meet as soon as Monday to determine whether new restrictions are needed in England over the new year amid growing concerns that soaring Covid cases could hit public services. France reported a record 94,124 new daily Covid-19 infections on Friday while the number of people hospitalised for the disease reached a seven-month high at close to 16,200, according to official data. The seven-day moving average of new cases also reached a new record of 66,417, a total that has tripled in just one month. People in South Africa without Covid symptoms will no longer have to test or self-isolate if a contact tests positive, the government announced on Friday. Additionally, South Africans will be offered a booster dose of Johnson &amp; Johnson’s vaccine from Friday after the health regulator approved its use for the general public. The US will next week lift the travel ban imposed on several southern African nations when the Omicron variant of Covid was first detected, AFP reports. The ban applied to South Africa, Botswana, Zimbabwe, Namibia, Lesotho, Eswatini, Mozambique and Malawi. Please do get in touch with me on Twitter or by email if you have anything to flag you think we should be covering.Cabinet ministers vying to succeed Boris Johnson have been warned by Tory colleagues that they will damage their chances unless they stridently oppose further Covid measures in England, as MPs called for New Year’s Eve restrictions to be ruled out. With ministers expected to meet as soon as Monday to discuss whether additional measures are needed to protect hospital capacity, several Conservatives said that they would be watching those emerging as leading contenders to replace Johnson should he step aside before the next election. The news comes after it emerged government scientific advisers had modelled the impact of implementing so-called “step 2” restrictions from Tuesday. Such measures would see an end to indoor gatherings, limited outdoor gatherings, and bars and restaurants only able to serve outdoors. The modelling suggested that restrictions could reduce deaths by 18% if kept in place until mid-January or 39% if retained until the end of March. Delaying the measures until New Year’s Day would reduce their impact, though the scientists said their models did not have “sufficient precision” to detect differences in a small delay. “When an epidemic is rapidly growing, the earlier interventions take place, the larger their effect,” they said. New coronavirus restrictions are being introduced by the devolved governments of Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland, including new physical distancing rules, the closure of nightc lubs and limits on indoor gatherings. The UK recorded 122,186 new Covid cases on Friday, the highest yet, while the Office for National Statistics estimated that 1.7 million Britons had the virus in the week ending 19 December, also a record. However, Tory MPs are hardening their attitudes against further restrictions and now want cabinet ministers to be vocal in their opposition. “If No 10 proposes tighter restrictions straight after Christmas, those cabinet ministers with freedom-loving instincts – who gave us all so much hope last week – must speak out,” said one member of the Covid Recovery Group of Tory MPs. “In any future leadership contest, we will all remember how they acted this week. We need real, gutsy, freedom-loving Conservatives to rescue us from this madness.” Other Tory MPs also said they would consider a candidate’s position on restrictions in any leadership race. It shows the extent to which speculation over Johnson’s position risks affecting the government’s Covid policies. It also reveals a weakening of the prime minister’s authority after a series of scandals and setbacks that have seen Labour take a poll lead. Liz Truss, the foreign secretary, and Rishi Sunak, the chancellor, are seen as the frontrunners if the Tory leadership becomes available. Both are said to have expressed opposition to the tightening of restrictions recently. Allies of the prime minister have already accused them of jostling for position. Several MPs said that data suggesting Omicron was less severe than the Delta variant that it has displaced meant that new restrictions should not be needed. “Evidence is showing there is no need for further restrictions,” said Tory MP Richard Drax. “Time to trust people to get on with their own lives and for the state to back right off.” Former minister Desmond Swayne said: “We have earned the right to be treated like adults: to make our own assessment of the risks we are prepared to take and the sensible precautions that we apply. People are fed up with being ordered what not to do.” Graham Brady, chair of the powerful 1922 Committee of Tory MPs, said: “As we look forward to the new year, it is time to move on from the lazy assumption that government has the right to control our lives; we should take responsibility for our own lives once again.” Charles Walker, a former vice-chair of the committee, said: “I think the PM has done extremely well to weigh up the information, hold his nerve and get us to this point. Like everyone, I hope that the emerging data supports the current course of action being maintained.” However, scientists have continued to stress the need for extreme caution over the next few weeks and to consider further restrictions. “The wiser course is clearly to do everything we can to minimise transmission while the size and nature of the impact of Omicron clarifies itself and while everyone who is willing gets a booster and gets time to mount an immune response to it,” said Professor Adam Finn of Bristol University. “Better to take the flak for overreacting than for failing to act when there was still time.” This point was backed by Stephen Griffin of Leeds University. “We have to follow the precautionary principle and act ahead of the curve. And that’s the problem at the moment, we’re not doing that. So we will experience harm. We will experience further Long Covid and we will allow the virus to continue to evolve, I’m afraid.”We referred to Amelia Luck, 21, as “the youngest ever female lifeboat helm”. She is currently the youngest woman in that role, but the RNLI website notes that Elizabeth Hostvedt, an 18-year-old Norwegian student, became the first woman qualified to command an RNLI inshore lifeboat in 1969 (‘If there’s peril I’ll be there...’ 12 December, p31). We misnamed Alan Shepard, the first American in space, as “John Shepard” (The science stories of 2021, 19 December, the New Review, p28). In a report about the BBC Sports Personality of the Year awards (“Biles receives lifetime achievement award”, 19 December, Sport, p17, later editions), we incorrectly said the US gymnast Simone Biles had been “unable to add to her tally [of medals] at the Tokyo Olympics” after withdrawing for mental health reasons. We meant to say she did not add to her haul of gold medals; she won a team silver and an individual bronze at the 2020 Games. Also, Biles has four Olympic golds, not five as the article said. All ye faithful: A Notebook item (19 December, p50) said the “latest census figures, released last week” show the percentage of the “UK population” who identify their religion as Christian is just over 51%. In fact the figure is from a 2019 ONS survey, which is the most recent data available, and is for England and Wales. Other recently amended articles include: ‘We are family’: the Israelis sharing life and hope with Palestinians Bands and DJs count the costs as UK fans fail to show up for gigs Peter Macnab: Superdrug boss leading the high street fightback Newcastle v Manchester City underlines the problem inherent in football Write to the Readers’ Editor, the Observer, York Way, London N1 9GU, email observer.readers@observer.co.uk, tel 020 3353 4736London’s Oxford Street is undergoing a painful reinvention as some of its biggest names close their doors. House of Fraser is expected to leave in January, while Debenhams, Topshop, French Connection and Gap are already shuttered. While there are no guarantees for the future, there is hope in the fact that the nation’s retail mecca has undergone multiple reinventions. Here, we take a walk through 300 years of Oxford Street history, through the evolution of five key buildings. 150-154: from dioramas to Sports drama Woolworths, July 1957. Left: Royal Bazaar, coloured lithograph, circa 1829. Right: Sports Direct in 2021. Billionaire Mike Ashley’s Sports Direct has just lavished £10m creating a London emporium designed to throw off its bargain tracksuit image and dazzle the crowds when it opened this summer. His chosen site has been involved in drama from the start. When the Royal Bazaar opened its doors in 1827, it offered a mix of entertainment and retail with artworks and other goods on sale alongside a diorama, where audiences stood on a rotating platform to view semi-transparent paintings lit to give the impression of changing seasons or shifts from day to night. The diorama caught fire, and by 1840 the Princess Theatre had opened in its place, hosting high class Shakespeare plays and popular melodramas, according to the Survey of London (Vol 53: Oxford Street) edited by Andrew Saint and published for the Bartlett School of Architecture at University College London, and informs our history of the street. It was not until 1931 that new owners created Princess House, a modern building housing offices and workrooms and an outlet for relatively new arrival, Woolworths, which occupied the basement and ground floors complete with a cafeteria and lunch bar for 500 people. Woolworths departed in 1977, 32 years before the UK business went bust and disappeared from Britain’s high streets, and the site became a shopping mall called Oxford Walk. Then in 1986 HMV moved in, claiming the three-floor 600,000 sq ft (55,740 sq metres) store was “the biggest music shop in the world”. Such space became increasingly redundant as new technology diminished demand for vinyl records then CDs and DVDs and HMV went into administration in late 2013, making way for cut price fashion chain Sports Direct to move in. 214 Oxford Street: from the Bazaar to Ikea Ikea will be taking over the building previously occupied by Topshop at 214 Oxford Street. Left: Crystal Palace Bazaar, circa 1858. Right: Peter Robinson department store, on the corner of Oxford Street and Great Portland Street, circa 1905. Once the sparkling gem of British high street fashion, Topshop’s former flagship on Oxford Street lies empty. Now being refitted to lead furniture chain Ikea’s march on to high street, this north-east corner of Oxford Circus encapsulates the history and the future of British shopping in one site. In 1858 the spot debuted as the Crystal Palace Bazaar, an iron and glass-roofed shopping arcade selling toys, jewellery and other goods, in a building designed by the architect Owen Jones who had been involved with the Crystal Palace. The glittering emporium only had a small entrance on Oxford Street which, at that time, was not a major shopping destination. As trading dwindled, the building was bought by Yorkshire draper Peter Robinson in 1876 as part of the expansion of his clothing business. In 1912, a building covering the entire block was erected with Peter Robinson occupying the lower floors and an upper floor restaurant crowned by domed ceilings decorated with murals, which are still there today. In 1965, the department store’s basement became home to Topshop which in 1994 took over the building, hosting a hairdressers and a nail bar alongside its giant changing rooms. Sports brand Nike took over the prime corner plot in 1999. Topshop finally exited the high street last year after it fell into administration and was bought by online specialist Asos. 252-258 Oxford Street: pig pen to BHS and crazy golf The building that was BHS. John Lewis East House, decorated in 1953 for the coronation the Queen. The 2016 closure of Oxford Street’s BHS, and its dozens of other outlets around the country, was at the heart of a retail scandal. The collapse of the ailing department store, just a year after it was sold for £1 to a serial bankrupt by the retail tycoon Sir Philip Green, led to thousands of redundancies and a hefty pension deficit only covered by Green’s family after public outcry. The department store’s grubby end came after even grubbier beginnings, with part of site on the Cavendish-Harley estate once home to Nibbs’s Pound for lost pigs, according to Saint. There was also a stable yard nearby, alongside the Phoenix pub. Redevelopment began in the reign of George I and by the 1780s there were a range of shops including a saddler and a print seller. The occupants were eventually bought out by Spedan Lewis, the head of John Lewis, in 1928. After John Lewis came the fast expanding BHS, which opened its flagship there in 1961. The site has now been divided into a pick and mix array of uses including Polish fashion chain Reserved!, Swingers crazy golf and a tourist souvenir and sweet shop. One name has remained a constant for the last 300 years, however: the block still houses a pub called the Phoenix. 456-464 Oxford Street: from bootmakers to controversy Marks &amp; Spencer, December 1964. Artist’s impression of the new Marks &amp; Spencer store at Marble Arch. Marks &amp; Spencer’s Marble Arch flagship store is right at the sharp end of the reinvention of the Oxford Street. The retailer wants to raze its current plot, which includes Orchard House, completed in 1930, to make way for a building that will halve its selling space, from five floors to just two-and-a-half, topped by several floors of offices. The development will include a shopping arcade, a small park and potentially leisure facilities, such as a gym. While Westminster council has given approval for the plan, pending the go-ahead from the mayor of London, campaigners have urged a rethink, criticising the scheme over its potential carbon footprint and destruction of a historic building. The loss of retail space, however, is very much back to the 19th century for Oxford Street. Like most of the street this stretch began as terraced houses. By the 1830s all had shops on the ground floor, with homes or small workrooms for businesses, such as milliners or dressmakers, above. Orchard House was commissioned by tearoom operator Lyons &amp; Co which used the upper floors as training rooms until the late 1960s. M&amp;S, which opened its first London store in 1899 having grown from a penny bazaar in Leeds, initially took the ground floor and basement of the new building. Marks &amp; Spencer gradually expanded to take more of the building, before the rise of online shopping made such acreage redundant. Left: Marks &amp; Spencer store showing the coronation decorations on Oxford Street, London, 21 May 1953. Right: The shop floor of Marks &amp; Spencer’s Oxford Street branch, September 1955. 499 Oxford Street: Edwin Lutyens to Primark Shoppers swarm through the entrance to the C&amp;A clothing store at Marble Arch, for the start of the January sale 1956. Left: Primark, near Marble Arch. Right: Allders department store. Primark’s 100,000 sq ft store near Marble Arch caused mayhem when it opened its doors in 2007, with shoppers queuing down the street for two hours and battling to snap up cut price fashion at the chain’s first central London outlet. Primark has endured a difficult few years during the pandemic when it has been forced to close its doors for months on end, with no online sales to fall back on. But that is nothing compared with the grim fortunes of previous retailers in this spot. Once the site of several grand houses on the Grosvenor Estate’s Hereford Gardens, it was taken on by the Gamages department store group in 1928 which wanted to expand from its Holborn base to a new store with flats above. The building cost more than £1m, with construction overseen by the arts and crafts era star architect, Sir Edwin Lutyens. While the luxury flats were a success, the store, which opened in 1930 at the height of the Great Depression, closed after only eight months. In 1938 it was bought out, becoming the UK headquarters of C&amp;A, which used the upper floors as its offices. The Dutch fashion chain had opened its first UK outlet just eight years earlier, further along Oxford Street, and continued to trade until 2001 when its rainbow logo and cheap fashions had fallen out of favour. The site was next taken on by Allders department store, but by 2005 that group collapsed into administration with hefty debts, paving the way for Primark’s grand entrance. • This article was amended on 11 January 2022 to give fuller details of, and the correct link to, the Survey of London relating to Oxford Street.I read with interest “Host of golden daffodils will rot in the fields for want of foreign pickers” (News). While farmers are struggling to recruit UK workers, the National Farmers’ Union lists the UK’s new points-based immigration system, which coincides with the free movement of EU citizens ending because of Brexit, as one of the reasons for this problem. Giving asylum seekers the right to work would allow them to use their skills and live in dignity. How can the government justify to farmers who need labour the policy of not allowing people who are already in the UK the right to fill these vacancies? How can you explain to a farmer who has no labour to harvest his fruit, vegetables or flowers that, yes, we have people who are eager to work but we will not allow it and if you employ them you will be breaking the law? Refugee Action has been running a campaign to “lift the ban”. The Lift the Ban coalition report shows that a change in policy would result in an economic gain of £97.8m a year for the government as a result of additional tax revenues and savings. This is based on the amount that would be saved by not having to provide cash support plus the extra money received by the exchequer through payroll contributions from income tax and national insurance. Other sectors would also benefit from a change in this Kafkaesque scenario. Virginia Brown Talgarth, Powys What about the victims? Who would argue with Catherine Bennett about the need for tougher penalties for dangerous, careless, uninsured, irresponsible or even intoxicated drivers (“Pity the poor, oppressed driver forced to share their roads with the rest of us”, Comment)? But what she misses is the impact on the victims. Society pays little attention to those seriously but not fatally injured, whose livelihoods are lost as a result of someone else’s wrong decisions. They are left to the machinations of insurance companies whose motivation seems to be minimising and delaying compensation pay-outs. The companies’ prolonged negotiations leave victims with no financial cover when they need it most and mental and physical suffering. By all means pile up the righteous indignation if it will prevent future carnage but spare a few thoughts for the many permanently injured people whose lives are never the same after a chance encounter on the road. Yvonne Williams Ryde, Isle of Wight My fears for future of the NHS I, too, am very worried about the future of the NHS (“A dangerous lie is stalking the NHS: that it is no longer fit for purpose”, Comment). Since 1948, many on the right have been keen to kill it off. However, until recently, the popularity of the NHS has prevented this. The way the Tories traditionally move a public service into the private sector is to underfund it to the point that the public will agree to any change in the hope of seeing it improve. This was classically demonstrated by the way the railways were run down in the 1980s in order to privatise them in the 1990s. NHS funding stagnated between 2010 and 2016, with the corresponding rise in waiting lists to 4.5 million pre pandemic. The political strategy could not be any more transparent. John Kinder Romsey, Hampshire No ‘papers, please’ Re “Strange beasts, these ‘libertarians’ who love to curb the freedom of others” (Comment): for another example of libertarian inconsistency, Kenan Malik needed to look no further than Nick Cohen’s description of the damagingly partisan elections bill (“The Tories call it electoral reform. Looks more like a bid to rig the system”, Comment). Last week, Unlock Democracy, Open Britain and Fair Vote UK wrote to all the Conservative Covid rebels about the elections bill. We pointed out that, if it is passed, to be allowed to vote people will need to present photographic identity documents. This unnecessary requirement will cost up to £180m over 10 years and actively discriminates against young, older and disabled voters. For Conservative rebels committed to fighting a “papers, please” society, there will be a chance at the report stage of this bill to stand up and be counted and defeat photo voter ID. I fear many will be missing in action. Tom Brake, director, Unlock Democracy London N1 Scrum down, Michael Your rugby union correspondent, Michael Aylwin, writes that primary-school teacher is a euphemism for “part-timer” in his report on Cardiff’s heroic performance against Harlequins in the Champions Cup (“Dombrandt’s double helps break resistance of Cardiff’s kids”, Sport). Is he up for changing jobs in January with Cardiff’s stand-in hooker, Evan Yardley? Rob Walker Linthwaite, Huddersfield Papal firefighter One factor Simon Tisdall might have mentioned in his thoughtful article (“The world is ablaze. Xi, Putin and Biden must join the firefighters”, Foreign affairs commentary): while each world leader’s interest is in protecting his/her back, the one voice that reaches every corner of the world and consistently advocates the common good is Pope Francis. He urges world leaders not simply to look after their own interests but to work together to abolish nuclear weapons and capital punishment, to oppose interests that selfishly squander natural resources and damage the world’s ecosystems, to make refugees welcome in more prosperous countries, to put an end to the enslavement and trafficking of vulnerable women and to make the sharing of technology to defeat Covid a priority. Guido Waldman London N1 Follow this school’s rules Angela Neustatter’s article was a beautiful account of her grandmother’s role as AS Neill’s partner in founding the extraordinary Summerhill school as it celebrates a century of existence against all the odds (“My grandmother’s forgotten role in the school with no rules”, Focus). She rightly also referred to the debt the school owes to the “charismatic” Zoe Redhead, Neill’s daughter and successor. At a time when the pressures on childhood and adolescence have made being a “good enough parent” so much more difficult, Redhead has just written Barefoot in November: Parenting the Summerhill Way. It is published by the Summerhill Trust and is, a guide to hard-pressed parents – and grandparents and other guardians, for that matter – on how to cope with the everyday, and increasingly vexed, issues of family life. Summerhill is not, as your headline suggests, “the school with no rules”; it has plenty, but the children are involved in agreeing and enforcing them. A failure to involve pupils in the running of our schools has been a drag on school improvement, especially in England, and has led to a decade-long fad for “zero tolerance” and “assertive discipline”, which has resulted in 1,500 pupils being permanently excluded from English schools for every one excluded in Scotland. More of us should find out what Scotland is doing so well and of course buy Zoe Redhead’s book. Tim Brighouse Oxford Maggie in Madrid A footnote to your article about Spain’s rightwingers and their gatherings in Madrid’s Plaza de Colón (“‘A Francoist daydream’: how Spain’s right clings to its imperial past”, World, last week). Just off Colón you will find Plaza Margaret Thatcher. Janet Ruane Leamington Spa • The headline of this letters package was amended on 29 December 2021 because an earlier version incorrectly referred to “refugees” when the plea in the first letter was to remove the legal bar and allow asylum seekers to work.The Pointless presenter Richard Osman has revealed he suffers from a lifelong food addiction, but is endeavouring to destigmatise the shame surrounding the affliction. Speaking on BBC Radio 4’s Desert Island Discs, Osman told about the “difficult journey” his addictive behaviour had led him on. He said: “There hasn’t been a day of my life since the age of nine where I haven’t thought about problems with food and how it affects me. “And it will be with me for the rest of my life, I know that. I’m either controlling it or not controlling it at any given time, and these days I control it more often than I don’t. “But again, because you have to eat, it’s actually quite hard and sometimes you do slip but I try my best and I certainly have no shame about it now and anyone at home who overeats or, and thinks it’s ridiculous, you’ve just got to divorce that. “We all have something that gets us through life and if that’s yours, then you have to face it head on. It’s just not being so afraid of life and afraid of what will happen if you put yourself out there. “That’s a difficult journey and it doesn’t come naturally to me but the more I try it, the happier I get.” The TV presenter and bestselling novelist, 51, added that he was left feeling “directionless”, despite his success, writing for quizshows Have I Got News for You and Whose Line Is It Anyway at the time. “I think it is that thing of, my career was going well and I was successful, and I had kids, so I had all the things that I thought were the thing that I needed or the thing that was going to make everything OK, and none of them did,” he said. “And getting older and older and just working out that I was slightly directionless, and I had various addictive behaviours as well.” “As soon as you have an addictive behaviour you know that something’s up because you know you’re hiding something or controlling something. “My addictive behaviour has always been food, it has been since I was incredibly young.” He reflected on how an addiction to food does not have the same “doomed glamour of drugs or alcohol” but he sees them as “identical”. “It’s just booze but food … The secrecy of consuming these things, the shame behind it,” he added. However, the TV presenter noted that, while quitting alcohol and drugs was “unbelievably difficult”, you often can cut them out of your lifestyle. Food, however, is essential, which makes tackling the addition “tricky”. Aside from his success behind and in front of the TV screen, Osman is also a bestselling writer of two crime novels set in a retirement community, including the popular book The Thursday Murder Club, which is being made into a film. Osman revealed that the novel series is based on his mother’s retirement home in Sussex as he thought it would be the perfect place to stage a murder. He added: “It’s like the A-team but everyone’s over 70 and they’ve done these extraordinary things and yet they’re invisible because of the way we treat older people.” However, he revealed that his mother first read it through to check none of the portrayals were too close to her fellow residents so they could not take legal action against him. Desert Island Discs airs on BBC Sounds and BBC Radio 4 on Sunday at 11amThis year the public saw an alarming side of Facebook, after a huge leak of internal documents revealed the extent of vaccine misinformation and extremism on the platform, a two-tier system of who gets to break the rules and the toxic effects of Instagram for teens. Digital rights activists around the world have warned about these issues for years, but with the company facing mounting pressure, next year could provide an unprecedented opportunity for action. We spoke to researchers, activists and tech experts about how Facebook can be reined in 2022 and beyond, and the innovative solutions that could bring about change. Regulation In the US, the path towards regulation is likely to be a long one. But this year has seen rare bipartisan calls to tighten the rules on big tech. Section 230 of the Communications Decency Act, which protects Facebook from lawsuits if users post anything illegal, has once again come under scrutiny. Rashad Robinson, president of the civil rights group Color of Change, who led a corporate boycott of Facebook in July 2020, says amending it is a critical first step. “I believe that there needs to be a removal of the Section 230 immunity when it comes to paid advertising and when it comes to things that are connected to product design,” Robinson said. Meanwhile, lawmakers have introduced bills – including the Children and Media Research Advancement Act and the Algorithmic Justice and Online Platform Transparency Act of 2021 – that would, respectively, fund research into the platform’s effects on young people and tackle Facebook’s often inscrutable algorithms. Robinson says such laws would address “the ways in which Facebook makes money and refuses to be held accountable”. In Europe, 2022 will see a final decision by the European court of justice (ECJ) in a German online gaming case that could pave the way for Facebook to face legal ramifications for privacy violations. Javier Pallero, the policy director at the digital civil rights organisation Access Now, says any regulation must consider human rights, particularly when it comes to content moderation in the global south. Facebook’s current moderation model is flawed, he says. “They either allow too much or they take down too much and they end up basically censoring entities, activists, and so on around the world. So you need human moderators, ergo, you need more investment, you need more people.” Breaking it up Facebook’s sheer size and market dominance remain a significant barrier to change, and a growing chorus of lawmakers and others are calling for a simple solution: break it up. Matt Stoller, research director at the American Economic Liberties Project, says Facebook’s vast power is the greatest threat to democracy. “He’s operating like a sovereign,” Stoller says of Zuckerberg. “And that’s what a monopolist is. Somebody who has control, governing power over a market.” First, Stoller urges breaking up Facebook’s grip on the social media market. Once Facebook took over all its competitors, he says, “they just started surveilling and doing anything that they wanted, and there was really no way around it”. Second, Stoller proposes bringing criminal charges against Zuckerberg and his leadership team over allegations of fraud and insider trading. (Facebook has rejected those claims.) Third, Stoller recommends imposing rules on the social media marketplace so companies such as Facebook can’t be financed by or engage in advertising that is driven by hyper-personalized surveillance. Fixing Facebook from within Some of the strongest efforts for change are coming from Facebook’s own workforce or former workers, including Frances Haugen, the former product manager at Facebook’s civic integrity department who disclosed tens of thousands of the company’s internal documents to the Wall Street Journal and the US Securities and Exchange Commission. Jeff Allen and Sahar Massachi are a former data scientist and data engineer at Facebook who helped build the company’s election and civic integrity team and now run a non-profit organization called the Integrity Institute. They believe the solution is empowering integrity professionals who deal with issues such as trust, security and detecting fake activity. Massachi says Facebook’s culture incentivises the opposite: one team will flag harmful content and recommend driving down engagement, while another team will find a trick to increase engagement with the harmful content. To fix this, he proposes introducing a monthly metric that ranks companies based on integrity. Regulators could monitor companies based on this metric. He envisions regulators being able to take concrete action if companies don’t keep up their score. Katie Harbath, founder and CEO of the tech policy consultancy Anchor Change, said the lack of empowerment for integrity teams was a structural problem at Facebook. “The fact that the integrity team reports into the growth team is problematic,” she said, leading to prioritising growth. “One way to think about this would be to actually put integrity and growth on the same level within the company.” Open the company up to researchers When Facebook promised to collaborate on a research initiative with academics after the Cambridge Analytica scandal, there were hopes it would shed light on how Facebook affects society. Instead, researchers were met with flawed and incomplete data, with only a handful of scholars granted access. Nate Persily, professor at Stanford Law School and the director of the Stanford Cyber Policy Center, has worked with Facebook in an academic capacity but became increasingly frustrated with the amount of data the company shared with researchers. Since then he has drafted text for a law – the Platform Transparency and Accountability Act – which would grant scholars access to information the social media company holds, while protecting user privacy. “These companies have thrived in secrecy and we are now seeing that from the Frances Haugen revelations,” Persily said. The impact of opening the data up would be twofold: first, it would educate academics and the public about what’s happening on the platform, including the role of algorithms, apps targeting kids, and rates of disinformation, Persily said. Second, Facebook would behave differently if it knew it was being watched.The Christmas lights are on along the nation’s busiest high street, but beneath their festive glow about a quarter of the outlets are either empty, or housing temporary shops. Alongside the shuttered stores and building sites on London’s Oxford Street are now at least a dozen shops selling confectionery, cheap souvenirs or perfume, giving it the air of a rundown seaside resort rather than a global retail destination. Big names including Topshop, Debenhams, Gap, French Connection and Carphone Warehouse have disappeared, while others, such as Next and Monsoon have reduced their space. And little wonder: in the second year of the pandemic, sales in the Oxford Street area, including Regent Street and Bond Street, dropped by £8bn to £2bn last year and are expected to reach just £5bn this year, according to trade body the New West End Company (NWEC). The vast former House of Fraser department store will close next month before it is redeveloped into offices and a rooftop restaurant above a smaller shop and a basement gym with a pool. Both Marks &amp; Spencer and John Lewis are considering converting some of their retail space into offices and leisure facilities. Drapers, bonnet makers and saddlers began to take over from pubs and theatres on Oxford Street at the end of the 18th century, and these changes mark a historic retreat from retail’s national stronghold. “I do think we have hit the bottom,” says Jace Tyrrell, the chief executive of NWEC. The 1.2-mile long shopping street is in the throes of major change, with Covid accelerating the switch to buying online and in more local shops. This has driven away commuters, day trippers and international tourists. But Oxford Street is still devoted almost exclusively to retail. It has just one pub, and very few dining outlets facing the thoroughfare. (There are, however, restaurants and cafes in department stores such as Selfridges and John Lewis.) Redevelopments promise more entertainment and dining alongside office space and leisure facilities such as gyms and crazy golf. There may also be more flats, which is not new: in Victorian times it was common for shop staff to be housed above the store. Mark Robinson, chair of the government’s High Streets Task Force, says Oxford Street’s future must be about reacting to consumer and stakeholder demands: “Its location and heritage give it an enormous start.” The street has reinvented itself before: in the early 18th century the Roman road out of London had become a muddy track by the time it reached the gallows at Tyburn, now known as Marble Arch. A building boom in the 1700s saw terraced houses replace the street’s animal pounds and seedy pubs. The houses were soon converted into retail spaces, with workrooms above, for drapers, bootmakers and milliners. In the early 1800s there was a trend for “bazaars” – indoor markets that often included entertainment as well as stalls. In the 1870s, as outlined in the Survey of London, department stores emerged (Vol 53: Oxford Street, edited by Andrew Saint and published for the Bartlett School of Architecture at University College London). Marshall &amp; Snelgrove, on the site of the now-empty Debenhams, was among the first, but of the Victorian retail giants only John Lewis remains. Well-known names including Peter Robinson, Bourne &amp; Hollingsworth and furniture maker Waring &amp; Gillow are long gone. Before retail took over, Oxford Street was an entertainment hotspot, home to several theatres, starting with the Pantheon in 1772. That gave its name and site to the Marks &amp; Spencer store east of Oxford Circus. There have been churches on the street, as well as hospitals and several pubs – only one of which, the Flying Horse near Tottenham Court Road, survives. Lyons, the tearooms operator, once had three “corner houses” on Oxford Street, and training rooms in the building that is now Marks &amp; Spencer Marble Arch. Tyrrell says Oxford Street must look to its history to build a more “European approach”, with food and drink services, entertainment, seating and greenery serving offices above. “We still think that by 2024 we will be back to £10bn of sales – even given what has happened in the world – but this will be from a very different mix and different customer. There will be more people working, a longer dwell time and more domestic shoppers coming to London.” Rents in the street have fallen by up to 50%, according to Tyrrell, and that could foster new ideas. Paul Swinney at the Centre for Cities thinktank agrees: “In the past the risk of trading [for a new business] in the centre of London was too expensive. If that comes down, it opens a new business opportunity for experiment and innovation.” For that to succeed, though, work must be done on making Oxford Street a more attractive place to dally. Westminster council has pledged to £150m of public realm improvements, including more greenery and seating, but it ditched plans for temporary piazzas on either side of Oxford Circus this year after an early attempt to lure back the crowds backfired. The widely mocked £6m Marble Arch Mound, an artificial hill intended as an attraction linking Oxford Street to Hyde Park, had to switch to free entry after only two days, and is set to close next month. Westminster council now plans wide consultation before confirming its plans to improve the look and feel of the street. But finding a happy solution could be tough. Traffic has been reduced and the pavements widened in recent years, but it’s hard to engender a leisured atmosphere amid a constant stream of buses and taxis, with no space for slower transport such as bicycles. The traffic problems seem endemic: witnesses to a royal commission more than a century ago, in 1903, complained that there were too many buses on Oxford Street. Proposals for improvement have varied from a 1960s plan for a deck above the street to carry shoppers via a travelator and a 1970s scheme for a track carrying cars on air cushions, to numerous calls for full pedestrianisation. Today the street is banking on Crossrail, or the Elizabeth Line, which will ferry in shoppers from further afield if it opens this spring, at least four years later than once hoped. Plans for improvement have “got to get moving fast”, according to Tyrrell. “The next couple of years we have got a window,” he says. “Not just retail but all brands will be looking at the street. When we get into the spring and summer, and customers and office workers are back, that’s when trends and perceptions are going to be set. We have to make sure we are ready to take that opportunity.” • This article was amended on 11 January 2022 to give fuller details of and the correct link to the Survey of London relating to Oxford Street. Andrew Saint’s The Survey of London, Vol 53: Oxford Street, is published by Yale University Press.Ministers are being urged to ban trail hunting on public land ahead of this year’s traditional Boxing Day hunt, amid concern from critics that the practice is being used as a smokescreen for illegal foxhunting. In a landslide vote at the National Trust’s annual meeting in November, members voted overwhelming to ban this form of hunting, which was devised after the Hunting Act banned the hunting of foxes with dogs. The National Trust ban came after one of the biggest landowners in Wales, Natural Resources Wales, similarly banned the practice. But activists expect more than 240 hunting days will have taken place on land owned by the Ministry of Defence this year. In trail hunting, a “trail layer” goes out ahead of the hunt, dragging a rag coated in an animal scent. Hunters cast the hounds to this scent and follow it to the end of the trail. Critics argue that it is routinely used as a cover for old-fashioned illegal hunting but hunters say trail hunting causes no harm to animals. Labour criticised the government for granting licences to “the prime minister’s mates” on Boxing Day meetings. The shadow environment secretary, Jim McMahon, said: “Allowing hunts to go ahead on public and government-owned land is completely irresponsible, regardless of whether those taking part are the prime minister’s mates. “The government must do more to close the loopholes that allow people to break the law, and consign hunting to the history books, where the vast majority of us believe it belongs.” Chris Luffingham, the director of external affairs at the animal rights charity League Against Cruel Sports, added: “It’s time all major landowners permanently banned trail hunting on their land and that the government strengthens the Hunting Act to ensure its loopholes can no longer be exploited.” Last year, the National Trust was among several landowners to suspend trail hunting on their land while police investigated claims that hunt organisers planned to kill foxes. In October, the reputation of Britain’s hunting community was dealt a serious blow after a prominent huntsman was convicted of encouraging others to hide the illegal hunting of live foxes behind a cover of trail hunting. Mark Hankinson, the former director of the Masters of Foxhounds Association, was found guilty of encouraging or assisting others to break the Hunting Act 2004, under the Serious Crimes Act 2007. He had been talking to more than 100 other hunters on a series of training webinars about how to use trail hunting as a smokescreen.José Méndez walked up the mountain behind his rural Ch’orti’ Mayan community of Corozal in eastern Guatemala. He pointed towards an abandoned home of the plantation owner who used to run this hillside. “Right outside that house they killed our three compañeros, the exact same day the county government recognised us as an Indigenous community with rights to the land.” Further up the mountain, in the mist of corn and coffee fields, Méndez shows off a large water reservoir that irrigates the community’s crops as well as small household gardens of nutritious and medicinal herbs. “This is what we sacrificed for. To recover our land and our water to have a chance to survive here.” He said all of it – the crops, the gardens, the land, the water – is thanks to local organisation Comundich (the Coordinator of Associations and Communities for Holistic Ch’orti’ Mayan Development). This tiny organisation of nine full-time advocates is making historic gains. It has recovered enormous tracts of ancestral land for Indigenous communities through a ground-breaking legal strategy that is being replicated across Guatemala and Central America. It also runs governance, nutrition, and climate resilience workshops that help communities avoid displacement and migration in the face of intensifying droughts and storms. Comundich is an example of the kind of grassroots climate mitigation project funded by Global Greengrants Fund UK, one of four charities supported by the 2021 Guardian and Observer Climate Justice appeal. Global Greengrants works with international partners through the Clima Fund to invest in small climate projects across the global south. Comundich works in stark conditions. Guatemala is among the 10 countries already most affected by climate change, according to the UN Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). In eastern Guatemala, Comundich is “in the eye of the hurricane,” according to Silvel Elías, an agricultural development professor at Guatemala’s University of San Carlos. He said the region – part of Central America’s “dry corridor” – has some of the highest rates of poverty, migration, and climate vulnerability in the country, in large part because Indigenous communities have for centuries been progressively stripped of their territory. Elías said that by focusing on land ownership, Comundich is addressing the roots of the problem. “In that region, you can’t talk about development and leave land out of the equation.” But, he said, “talking about land is dangerous there”. Landowning elites dominate the political class and attempts to recover ancestral land threatens powerful interests. Since its founding in 2004, 10 Comundich leaders and community partners have been murdered and 30 have spent time in jail. In 2020 alone, the Unit for the Protection of Guatemalan Human Rights Defenders documented 15 targeted murders of rights defenders, more than 1,000 assaults and acts of aggression and more than 300 cases of criminalisation – the pressing of spurious charges for political reasons. But Comundich never backed down. “They’re fearless,” said Elías, who consults with international grant-makers and works with community groups across Guatemala. He said that the organisation is one of the most effective in the country due to its low overheads, its commitment to long-term planning and women’s leadership, and the enormous trust it built with communities by involving them in decision-making. It developed these strengths as it helped Ch’orti’ Mayan towns in Chiquimula department face down a triple threat of displacement as a major mining project, local plantation owners and county authorities all sought to seize Ch’orti’ land and water sources. Comundich took it all on, designing a long-term legal strategy with affected towns to unite local Ch’orti’ communities, object to the mine, and convince county governors to formally recognise them as Indigenous communities, which would grant them special rights to land and water. It wasn’t easy; Comundich had to transform deep-rooted fear of Indigenous identity into pride, unity and strength. For decades, the plantation owners who encroached on Ch’orti’ territory and then employed land-poor labourers for a pittance have seen Indigenous language and dress as signs of resistance that merit abuse or arrest. This identity-based repression intensified during Guatemala’s brutal 36-year internal armed conflict, which lasted until 1996, left 200,000 dead and 45,000 disappeared, and led to a genocide of Indigenous peoples in the 1980s. Most of the dead were noncombatants killed by the military and government-aligned death squads. “That was when we lost much of our language and traditional dress and other signs of our identity, so now the plantation owners say we’re not Indigenous and have no right to our ancestral territory,” said Esteban Ramírez, a Ch’orti’ Indigenous mayor in the town of Guayabo. These programmes helped the communities rally around the concept of Ch’orti’ identity and, on 6 June 2013, a new governor granted formal recognition. Families no longer had to pay to live on their small plots and won sovereignty over vital forest springs. “It was like our independence day,” said Méndez. That same June night, three community leaders were killed. “Our opportunity now was paid for in blood,” said Yesenia Martínez of Corozal. “We became more united. We had no choice but to keep fighting for that land. The plantation owners would no longer hire us even for that awful work, and our children were going hungry.” After years of dialogue with national authorities, Comundich found a 19th-century land grant that showed what the communities had always known: claims to land taken from Ch’orti’ families were illegitimate. Finally, in 2018, Corozal won legal title to the land. That’s when they started building the reservoirs and planning for the future. Méndez said, “We have a long way to go. But now we are truly free.”“As ever for me, the best ideas are the intuitive ones:” Giorgio Armani is musing on his era-defining casting of Posh and Becks in his advertising campaign for Emporio Armani underwear back in 2008. “In those years, David and Victoria were at the center of attention,” he recalls. “In the mirroring of their respective personalities, they embodied the moment: the metrosexual man, and the seductive woman with a fierce entrepreneurial outlook on things. And they both paid utmost attention to their physical appearance [so] having them in underwear looked like the right idea … and it took very little effort to persuade both.” Armani – or Mr Armani as the fashion industry unofficially-officially refers to him – is a man who is no stranger to having the right idea. Aside from his multi-billion-pound Giorgio Armani empire, his Emporio Armani brand for which he managed to get the world’s most-talked-about couple down to their pants for is case in point. Established back in 1981 as a more liberal multi-platform to complement his eponymous mainline after seeing “a gap in the market and hunger from younger people for something new and fresh”, he proudly marked its 40th anniversary this year with an exhibition in his native Milan chronicling its trajectory. “I wanted to show how innovative the brand has been since its very beginning,” says 87-year-old Armani who famously, like many designers of his generation – most notably the late Karl Lagerfeld – is “fiercely anti-nostalgic”. Initially, he says he “resisted the idea” of the exhibition but ever young at heart he says he “changed my mind when we switched from the retrospective format to adopt the concept of the exhibition as an experience and a lively manifesto”. A visual blitz through the past, The Way We Are is very much Armani’s homage to living in the present, documenting key moments such as its first menswear and womenswear catwalk shows in 1985 and its iconic campaigns shot by the likes of Mert Alas and Marcus Piggott, Peter Lindbergh and Armani’s longtime collaborator Aldo Fallai. “Honestly, it feels like an achievement,” reveals Armani in a rare self-congratulatory moment. “The collection that stemmed from my desire to talk to the younger generations evolved into an essential part of the Armani lifestyle as a whole: one that speaks a metropolitan language that still retains my pared-down, essential idea of elegance.” The first years of the brand, he continues, “are the ones I am most fond of, quite simply because we kept experimenting in order to find the right communication language, the perfect tone of voice for a collection that was so new.” If that sounds like familiar rhetoric in the current age of brands rushing to “speak” to Gen Z, back in 1981 Armani’s methods were pioneering. One of the most mined assets belonging to Emporio Armani for the exhibition is the brand’s huge glossy bi-monthly magazine which was launched in 1988 and helped to lay the foundations for the fashion industry adopting the concept of combining content with commerce. “Today, it’s normal for fashion brands both large and small to produce content of all kinds, but in 1988, Emporio Armani Magazine was something new,” says Armani, crediting his sister, Rosanna in helping him “create a product that was much more than a catalogue: a real magazine, in which photographic reports on the collection … were accompanied by articles dedicated to the most diverse topics, written by prominent authors.” To mark the brand’s anniversary, Armani commissioned a special issue of the publication for which features current Italian icons, including the Ferrari F1 drivers – and Armani ambassadors – Charles Leclerc and Carlos Sainz in conversation; the actor Pierfrancesco Favino on what it means to be an actor; and GQ-famed editor Masafumi Suzuki on the power of the suit alongside shoots of current collections. “I think printed matter will never die, because in the age of transience, it stays,” he says. “That is the statement I wanted to send out with this special, one-off issue of the magazine. I wanted to offer a picture of this moment that in twenty or forty years’ time will still feel relevant and timely.” The anniversary couldn’t pass without an ode being made to Milan, the city to which Armani is considered royalty. The hangar in the city’s Linate airport which has greeted arrivals with Emporio Armani in shimmering sky-scraping signage since 1996 is celebrated in all its dominant glory (“[I] love people to feel welcomed in a city that has always expressed modernity, energy, an optimistic outlook towards the future; an international metropolis with an Italian soul, exactly like Emporio) and the famous “Broletto” billboard in central Milan that, as well as the Beckhams, saw Cristiano Ronaldo and Rafael Nadal supersized in their underwear (he has a soft spot for sport, he admits, by virtue of the “discipline, hard work and teamwork” he relates to) both take centre stage. “I am quite proud of the fact that the Broletto billboards have become part of the Milanese urban landscape and as such a landmark,” he says. “What started as a fresh idea – adopting the bold language of traditional advertising and bringing it into the fashion world – has turned into a series of endless surprises that engage and entertain whoever passes from that spot.” During the pandemic, Armani – who donated more than €2m to hospitals in Milan, Rome, Bergamo, Piacenza, and Versilia in the devastating first few months – eschewed advertising on the billboard to instead “send out messages of hope, support, and happiness. It is a blank canvas that allows me freedom to communicate in a very direct way, and I truly enjoy it.” It’s a sentiment that he applies to his vision for Emporio Armani in its 40th year and for the future. “It stands for a set of values that are not merely aesthetic even though they are based on my appreciation for simplicity and elegance,” he says. “The only way to push boundaries is to keep looking at the world, at the evolutions of society, and act inventively. Fashion, for me, is always a reflection, and at times also an anticipation, of the moment.” Emporio Armani – The Way We Are is on display at Armani/Silos in Milan until 6 February 2022A Very British Scandal Boxing Day, 9pm, BBC One Plummy diction. Roaming eyes. Pouting red lips. Claire Foy is gleefully on-brand as Margaret Campbell, Duchess of Argyll in this three-part drama from Sarah Phelps. Following the duchess’s real-life divorce from the duke (an icky Paul Bettany who will make you wince), it cleverly unpicks the institutional misogyny of the time, which targeted Campbell for being a woman who enjoyed sex. In fact, it could be argued that Thorpe stealing and using his wife’s explicit, private photos against her in court was an early example of revenge porn. A beautiful production with some ugly truths and plenty of raunch. Hollie Richardson Around the World in 80 Days 5.50pm, BBC One With a second series already confirmed, David Tennant was clearly the ideal choice for Phileas Fogg in this adaptation of Jules Verne’s classic novel. In the first five minutes, he spots the travel competition that will take him on the voyage of his life with French valet Passepartout (Ibrahim Koma) and journalist Abigail “Fix” Fortescue (Leonie Benesch). HR Death in Paradise 7.30pm, BBC One Good vibes, cold beers, elaborate slayings: this year saw tropical murder-fest Death in Paradise celebrate its 10th anniversary. The cherry on top is this feature-length festive special where current fish-out-of-water cop Neville (Ralf Little) teams up with returning veteran Dwayne (Danny John-Jules) to investigate the demise of a shipping magnate. Graeme Virtue All Star Musicals at Christmas 8pm, ITV Gyles Brandreth, Fern Britton and ex-Blue Peter host Radzi Chinyanganya will be backed by a West End choir as they attempt to inspire joy by not mangling songs from Cats and Moana. Alexi Duggins All I Want(ed) for Christmas 8pm, Channel 4 Jonathan Ross, Big Narstie and Martine McCutcheon reveal which toys have always been on their Christmas list and finally get the chance to unbox them. An exercise in delayed gratification. Henry Wong Big Fat Quiz of the Year 9pm, Channel 4 Jimmy Carr is back with the popular annual quiz that celebrates, or ridicules, the year that’s been. This year’s contestants are Jonathan Ross, Sarah Millican, James Acaster, Judi Love, Sara Pascoe and Guz Khan. (Small plea to bring back the Goth Detectives.) HR Film choices Paddington, 4.20pm, BBC One Michael Bond’s accident-prone Peruvian bear comes alive for a new generation, thanks to this masterful 2014 comedy. The CGI bear (voiced by Ben Whishaw) blends in seamlessly with his live-action, adopted family the Browns – led by Hugh Bonneville and Sally Hawkins – as he comes to London to find the British explorer who encountered his uncle and aunt in the rainforest. Mild peril comes in the shape of chilly taxidermist Millicent Clyde (Nicole Kidman), who covets Paddington’s rare hide. The sequel can also be seen on Monday 27, on BBC One. Simon Wardell The Suicide Squad, 11.45am, 8pm, Sky Cinema Premiere You could be forgiven for thinking you’ve been here before, but the “The” is the sign this isn’t the 2016 supervillain film but its 2021 sequel. James Gunn of Guardians of the Galaxy fame writes and directs the pulpy misadventures of a bunch of convicts, including Margot Robbie’s returning Harley Quinn, Idris Elba’s Bloodsport, John Cena’s Peacemaker (soon to get his own HBO series) and Sylvester Stallone as a shark-human hybrid, who are offered lighter sentences if they infiltrate an island nation and destroy its secret weapon. SW Mr Holmes, 1.10am, BBC Two Director Bill Condon reunites with the great Ian McKellen, star of his 1998 film Gods and Monsters, for this deft, affecting 2015 tale, taken from Mitch Cullin’s novel about an ageing Sherlock Holmes. The Baker Street detective has retired to rural Sussex and is facing a losing battle between his brilliant mind and dementia. As he struggles to remember his final case (recalled in flashback), which he fears must have been a failure, he befriends Roger (Milo Parker), the attentive young son of his unhappy housekeeper Mrs Munro (Laura Linney). SW Live sport Premier League Football: Liverpool v Leeds United 12.30pm, BT Sport 1. From Anfield. Rugby Union: Bristol Bears v Leicester Tigers 1.30pm, BT Sport 2. From Ashton Gate.There was a strip of cafes and bars that ran alongside Tompkins Square park in the Lower East Side in New York and none of them minded if all you bought was a single coffee and sat all night long. So I did just that. It was the late 90s, I was 19 years old and I had never lived in a city before. I sat night after night in these cafes, reading books, watching people, drinking too much coffee. I didn’t really have anything else to do, I didn’t know anyone, so I’d sit and watch the East Village whirl around me. I wasn’t the only lonely kid, though. After a while I noticed another sitting night after night in Café Pick Me Up, a studious young man feverishly filling up notebooks. Café Pick Me Up was a cosy little place with a low pressed-metal ceiling, crammed full of tiny tables, with French cafe chairs and mellow lighting. If you were to write a romcom featuring a meet cute, you’d set it there. I can’t remember who sent the first note; I can only imagine it must have been him because I certainly wasn’t that bold back then. He wanted to know what I was reading that night. I read voraciously back then, a book a day, in part to fill the long hours of boredom. I think I might have been a bit standoffish in my reply, but it didn’t deter him. He sent more notes. Eventually I asked him what he was writing. Poetry – it was his true love. He was Danish. It was nice to talk to someone, even nicer that he was European. I’d only been in New York for a couple of months but I missed home. I didn’t quite get these loud, mouthy New Yorkers. This quiet, thoughtful Danish poet was just what I was longing for. He was there the next night, and so was I, and the night after that and the following one. We struck up an intense friendship and spent all our free hours together. We’d hop from Café Pick Me Up to Alt Cafe next door, or end up sitting late into the night eating steaming bowls of cabbage soup in Leshko’s. It was winter, the coffee shops’ windows steamed up, the Christmas lights went up outside, it was bitterly cold, and when we were finally high on caffeine we’d walk it off. We were both penniless, but we were young and happy to stroll for hours, exploring Manhattan. One weekend we got up at the crack of dawn and walked the length of the island; it took all day. Through all this I learned about his life in Denmark, the childhood sweetheart waiting for him back home, how he was reluctantly training to become a social worker, but mostly about his infectious love of poetry. That bit worked very well on me. I was falling. His training placement in Manhattan was coming to an end, though. By Christmas he’d be home again. We had just weeks, we’d met too late and, anyway, he had a girlfriend. It was all very chaste, until it wasn’t. He’d walk me back each night through Tompkins Square park, with its Christmas lights glowing. One night he kissed me on a park bench. I knew we shouldn’t but he would be gone so soon. The next night a homeless guy on a bench nearby hollered at us to get a room, but we couldn’t as we both had fierce landladies. His flight left on 20 December, and we spent every available hour till then together, sitting up all night kissing on park benches, despite the bitter cold. On the morning of the 20th I left him to go to work at New York Botanical Garden, where I was employed in the labelling department. It was my job to make those plastic display labels you see on all the plants. I sat in an attic with a loud engraving machine and stacks of blank labels, meticulously spelling out Latin names, locations of origin and accession numbers. It was a pretty boring job but it had got me the ticket to New York and I only had to do it over the winter. Come spring I’d be gardening outside again. As no one ever came to the attic to see what I was doing – as long as the machine was running – I could go to sleep without anyone noticing. And I did that a lot, making up for all those late nights talking. That morning, broken-hearted, I curled up to sleep the day away. But I didn’t get to: my boss, Margaret, came to tell me there was a telephone call for me. No one ever called me at work, not even my mother. She looked at me curiously. I had to take the call at her desk. It was him calling from the airport. The cheapest way to fly back to Europe back then was via Iceland. He’d decided to make a trip of it, taking a three-day layover to explore the island before returning to his life in Denmark. He wanted to know if I would come. He’d buy the ticket; he had a hotel room already paid for, and we could see the northern lights. We’d be alone with all that ice and snow for three whole days. Then we’d go our separate ways. All I had to do was tell my boss I was suddenly very unwell, get back to Manhattan, pick up my passport, and a ticket would be waiting for me for the evening flight; he’d meet me at the other side. With Margaret looking on, and noting this was probably the case, he said: “Think about it, make your excuses, call me back in 30 minutes and I’ll book the flight.” I put the phone down. I cannot now remember much about this man – not what he looked like, nor his name, nor where in Denmark he came from – but I can remember exactly how my heart felt in my chest, the way the office span around as I ached with sadness and lack of sleep. I never called him back. I waited for the half-hour to pass and then I went back to making labels. I sobbed so loudly in my attic space, I don’t think the machine drowned it out. But if I had gone it would no longer have been so innocent. He had a girlfriend and a life to return to, whereas my time in New York was just beginning. Still, I spent the next three days inconsolable. New York was twinkling with Christmas cheer and I was heartbroken and alone again. For a long time, I regretted my choice, wondering what might have happened if I’d gone to Iceland, how life might have spun differently. But New York moves at pace, and spring was coming, with many more adventures for me.The question I am due to be the bridesmaid at my friend’s wedding. She’s been engaged for five years. The whole thing has had to be rearranged twice due to the pandemic and now it’s on for 2022. When she became engaged, I was one of her only mates. We had been teenage friends and used to go out drinking and partying. She started working and became sensible and ambitious, met her fiancé and settled down. I went to college, met a bunch of people I bonded with and we started to drift apart. She asked me to be her bridesmaid more than four years ago and I think it was because at that time there were not many other people she could ask. Since then, our friendship has continued to diminish. She refuses ever to meet on week nights because of work and doesn’t like to go out on the weekend any more. I go to her house for a cuppa about twice a year. She talks wedding plans, we do a rudimentary catching up, and then I leave. We don’t speak for months at a time. We don’t share any interests, we don’t have any other friends in common. I haven’t even met her fiancé because she has told me that we won’t get on. Neither of us has really put any time or effort into our friendship. Unfortunately, she cares strongly about the perfect wedding, another thing which we don’t agree on. My dilemma is this: I am working a low-pay job and cannot afford a four-day hen do abroad. I want to get out of this responsibility. I do not want to go to the hen do, be a bridesmaid, or even go to the wedding. My friends tell me to grin and bear it, that it’s only a few days, but I have never wanted to escape a situation more. Philippa’s answer You are reminding me of that Reba McEntire track, I’d Rather Ride Around With You, about a bridesmaid who jumps into a sports car with her boyfriend when she should have been at church holding the bouquet for her cousin, the bride. It’s a great story-song, have a listen. You are expected to make good your promise. She wants the perfect wedding and you fit the perfect bridesmaid role. The bride even has a cup of tea with you twice a year (to be fair we have had lockdown) to keep you primed for this role. It will be horrible to be the “bad person” in this and the extraction process will be unpleasant, but the relief of not having to go through this charade will make up for that. What your friends haven’t realised is that it’s not just a few days of the hen do and the wedding that you lose if you go through with this, but all the days leading up to it as well. Your life at the moment seems to be tarnished with background dread. If you get yourself out of this situation, you will get back more than saved money and a few days, you’ll also free yourself from months of this trepidation. How about sending her a letter: “Dear X, I am really sorry, I know I promised all those years ago to be your bridesmaid and a good person would keep good her promise. But as your wedding approaches I find myself not wanting to be a bridesmaid, not wanting to join the hen do and not even really wanting to go to the wedding. I realise by extracting myself I’m not being a great friend to you and I’m sorry. It’s not just that I can’t afford it and I can’t, it’s that I don’t want to be there. I can’t put on an act and I don’t want to spoil your day by not being enthusiastic. I hope you have a wonderful day and I’m sorry. Love from… PS Sometimes being authentic means I’m not as kind as I would wish to be, sorry.” If you need permission to break your promise, I am giving it to you. And if you need an excuse to justify your actions to yourself, it seems she has only wanted to spend time with you lately on her terms and you have to come to her. But the thing that sticks in my throat more, is her not introducing you to her fiancé and saying you won’t get on. She obviously loves him because she’s chosen to spend her life with him, but what does it say about her regard for you, if she doesn’t want the two of you to meet? But you don’t need excuses, your dread is reason enough to go back on this promise. Free yourself from dread. Release her from having a hostage at her wedding. There is a strong possibility she’ll not see it like that and be very hurt. But one of you will suffer – either you with the dread, or her with the hurt. Now I’m playing Please Release Me, Let Me Go, by Engelbert Humperdinck, and one of the lines in that song is “to live a lie would be a sin”. If you have a question, send a brief email to askphilippa@observer.co.ukIt was the year we craved the normality of a meal out, regardless of how abnormal an experience it might have to be for that to happen. No matter that the waiters might be masked up or the tables dotted across the room as if set for an interrogation, or that there could be screens between those tables. If the essentials were present – a list of dishes that you hadn’t cooked yourself, someone to fetch them, a pass on the washing up – many of us were there for it. At times it felt as if all of us customers and staff alike, were working very hard to share that delusion of normality. But 2021 was not normal. I began mine by combing my bookshelves for satisfying cookbooks with which to fill a restaurant column when all the restaurants were closed. I reacquainted myself with the brilliance of great recipe writers and cooks such as Claudia Roden, Simon Hopkinson and the late Gary Rhodes. The latter finally taught me to swallow my shame and learn how to make custard from scratch. Custard vanquished; life skill achieved. Thank you, Gary. You may no longer be here, but you held my hand from beyond the grave. When the time finally came, I grabbed the opportunity to get out of my own kitchen like an A-level student galloping from the exam hall after the final paper. I made a list of the past year’s top restaurant experiences recently and the first three that came to mind were all outside London. I loved the butch, gutsy cooking at the Double Red Duke in Oxfordshire, with its glossily sauced devilled kidneys and its fat scallops under drifts of garlicky crumbs. The sunlit early evening I spent at Sonny Stores in Bristol, sweeping the fattest of salted anchovies on to crusty bread, and demolishing a plate of perfect meringues with white peaches will stay with me for a very long time. And then there was the tiny menu at Erst in Manchester, which delivered so much more than it promised: bubbled and blistered flatbreads swamped with garlic butter; steak tartare under a shouty tonnato sauce; a bay panna cotta that melted away on the tongue. In an age when holding polarised opinions has become a spectator sport, someone somewhere will now extrapolate from this that all restaurants in London are therefore awful. Obviously not. The dish that I got the most correspondence about was the golden carb and dairy fat wonder of a double XL triple cheese toastie served to me at the Wigmore. People exchanged photographs of theirs on social media, like tourists proving they too had visited Angkor Wat on their holidays. Only it was an Angkor Wat crafted out of toasted sourdough, Ogleshield, raclette and Montgomery cheddar. Elsewhere in the capital I was thrilled by the intense nerdiness of Humble Chicken where many specific parts of the bird were carefully grilled on sticks over burning coals. Oh, that line of parsons’ noses. Honourable mentions must also go to the bravery of the Dirik brothers at Mangal 2 who have broken from the traditions of the many Turkish grill houses around them in Dalston, to serve something a little more subtle and, in its own curious way, Scandi. And then there’s the extraordinary bespoke sushi experience that Chris Restrepo narrated his way through at Kurisu Omakase, operating out of his parent’s café in Brixton. I do so love dinner and a show. But if you want stupidity in the restaurant sector, if you want a business proposition that will make your eyes roll so aggressively your neighbours will be able to hear the friction of ball against socket, the capital is still guaranteed to deliver. It speaks volumes about what truly dreadful people you all are, that when I finally broke my self-imposed ban on negative reviews by dismembering the pop-up Polo Lounge on the rooftop of the Dorchester Hotel on London’s Park Lane, it became my most read review of the year online. They deserved it for marking up bog standard wines by a factor of six or seven, and charging £38 for a McCarthy salad that looked like someone had been trying to colour code vegetables as part of a middle management away-day bonding exercise. The second most read review online? It had to be my stupid stunt outside Salt Bae’s Nusr-et Steakhouse in Knightsbridge, during which I declined a hyper expensive gold leaf-wrapped steak in favour of a takeaway from the marvellous Kebab Kid. I will admit I did feel a bit of an arse sitting at a picnic table on the pavement outside, but not as much of an arse, I venture, as all those people who are still going there for £1,000 gold leaf-wrapped steaks even though dear Salt Bae – that’s Mr Bae to you – flew out of London weeks ago, presumably sprinkling various seasonings from his private jet while howling with laughter. Of course, while I swanned around from one table to the next putting my back into the arduous business of eating my tea, life for the restaurants themselves has been rather less dreamy. Many reopened after the lockdown to find that staff they depended upon simply weren’t there any more. Some had re-evaluated what they wanted from life during the pandemic and concluded that a tough job in hospitality wasn’t it. Others were EU citizens who had simply gone home. When I pointed out in a recent review that this was forcing restaurants to shorten their opening hours and blamed this squarely on Brexit, a number of people argued this was a positive. It meant people were no longer willing to work for what were too often the lousy wages offered by hospitality. While I don’t think that negates any of the arguments against the utter bollocks of Brexit, they do have a point. Each week commenters on my reviews online compare the prices in British restaurants unfavourably to those in, say, rural Thailand or Ukraine, while failing to acknowledge the differences between the economies. Those comparisons are pointless. Running a British restaurant is expensive and this past year has shown us just how shaky the sector’s economic model can be. If we want to eat well and be served by people paid a proper wage, we are going to have to accept that it will continue to cost more. That doesn’t mean all pricing is fine. Some restaurants do take liberties. Good value matters. But the cost of eating out is rising. Don’t bother being cross with me about that. It’s just a fact. And it will still be the case in 2022. See you next year. Email Jay at jay.rayner@observer.co.uk or follow him on Twitter @jayrayner1Given the cover image of the Observer Magazine of 6 December 1964 (‘The Christmas Predicament’), I foresaw some hand-wringing about the ethics of buying animal fur, but, of course, this was the 60s and instead we had present suggestions of fur-lined ‘trapper’ slippers and a rabbit-fur bedspread. But before we got to the contributors’ choices of presents for ‘husbands, wives, children, parents and others’, we had a brilliantly baroque takedown of Christmas from Robert Robinson, of Call My Bluff fame. ‘Christmas a predicament?’ he asked rhetorically. ‘It’s more like a jail sentence – in a jail, moreover, where the prisoners are supposed to like it. For three days, sometimes four, life closes down. Whole families withdraw into frosty and unnatural proximity… the human race hides behind its separate front doors, celebrating the Feast of St Salesman by eating birds.’ Jane Bown suggested a magazine subscription for children – ‘the one thing they wouldn’t break by Boxing Day’ – and a ‘multi-purpose penknife. Will open bottles and take grit from a horse’s eye’. Can’t see any potential problems there. Caroline Glyn chose 12 umbrellas for her ‘absent-minded mother’ (one for each month) and a Beatles wig for her balding father, ‘to make him feel young and vital’. For the man at the top, Tony Ellis chose, ‘Jamaican cigars, not Cuban, to suggest a profitable sprinkling of transatlantic visitors, who are sensitive about Cuba’. And ‘for the woman colleague: plastic flowers. That tells her she’s brave enough to defy prejudice against artificial flowers.’ Good luck with that. Back to Robinson and ‘the disagreeable business of deciding which useless article may be most colourably donated to placate what ritual idol’. Christmas for him was ‘for watching the children start the day fresh – grow dull – end feverish, for feeling the domestic process soar ruthlessly into the ascendant so that in the end the meals seem to be eating you, and you die with the dying fire’. Merry Christmas!Tesco Finest Premier Cru Champagne, France NV (£21, Tesco) As I’ve written in these pages before, t This is a golden age for sparkling wine and the choices for giving 2022 a sparkling welcome are more appealing and diverse than they’ve ever been. Let’s start with some of the cheaper options. If you like your fizz with r a little sweetness and gentle foaminess, a prosecco-alike from near Bologna, such as Taste the Difference Pignoletto Vino Spumante Brut NV (£9, Sainsbury’s), or, even better, the apple-snow light fluffiness of the Languedoc’s Antech Blanquette de Limoux Méthode Ancestrale NV (£10, thewinesociety.com) are both good candidates for midnight on Friday. For something drier, but still in that circa-£10 spot, Marks &amp; Spencer’s Cava Prestige Brut NV (£10) is a wine of real depth and character, while Jansz Premium Cuvée NV is a bright, toasty example of the pristine Tasmanian fizz style at a very good 20%-off price (£14.39 until 2 January, Waitrose). Tesco’s stylish, creamy Premier Cru is my pick of this year’s crop of supermarket own-label champagnes. Bollinger Rosé Brut, Champagne, France NV (£28, 37.5cl, Waitrose) England’s sparkling wine producers haven’t had a particularly good year in the vineyard (it’s been a vintage to remind everyone that this country is still on the northern fringe of winemaking possibility). But the sparkling wines available to buy continue to win friends and awards. Among my favourites this year were the immaculate range from the exponentially improving Rathfinny vineyard in the South Downs in East Sussex (including the impeccable Classic Cuvée Brut 2017, from £28.95, robersonwine.com, leaandsandeman.co.uk) and the briskly stylish Bride Valley Blanc de Blancs 2017 (£38, Waitrose), a slightly bittersweet choice since it comes from the Dorset estate of the debonair wine writer Steven Spurrier, who died earlier this year. With large parties rather unlikely, a half-bottle, such as Bollinger’s typically rich and savoury rosé, is just right for two, and works very well with food. As indeed can the same producer’s La Grande Année Rosé 2012 (£110, Waitrose), a superbly complex wine from a great vintage for blowing any savings you’ve made from missing that expensive NYE night out. Kleine Zalze Project Z Sweet Fortified, Coastal Region, South Africa NV (from £24.40, handford.net; harrogatefinewinecompany.com) Contrary to every single marketing message and supermarket inducement to the contrary, there is in fact no law stipulating that all wines consumed on the strike of midnight – or at any other celebration – must be filled with bubbles. This, after all, is a late-night occasion, and sparkling wine is very rarely at its best after a meal or a night of other drinks. My own preference when the time comes is often for something richer and calmer – more suited to reflection – than the frenetic energy of fizz. Certainly, there’s something to be said for toasting the end of another weird and, for many of us, very difficult year with something a little cosier and sweeter, but no less special. The ideal – the dream! – would be the astonishing spice-cupboard and exotic fruit complexity and startling Atlantic Ocean freshness and intensity of the great fortified Barbeito Malvasia 20 Year Old Madeira (£175, oxfordwine.co.uk). More realistically, a glass of Kleine Zalze’s fine, filigreed, floral-perfumed and graceful Project Z would also help me to start 2022 in my desired state of blissful enchantment. Follow David Williams on Twitter @DaveydaibachYou don’t have to look far to find evidence of Wada’s centuries-old connection to whaling. Visitors to the town on Japan’s Pacific coast are greeted by a replica skeleton of a blue whale before entering a museum devoted to the behemoths of the ocean. At a local restaurant, diners eat deep-fried whale cutlet and buy cetacean-themed gifts at a neighbouring gift shop. At the edge of the water stands a wooden deck where harpooned whales are butchered before being sold to wholesalers and restaurants. In 2019, when Japan withdrew from the International Whaling Commission (IWC) – the body that had effectively banned whaling in the late 1980s – Wada rejoiced at the prospect of a return to commercial hunting and at a popular reconnection with a source of food that had sustained coastal communities for 400 years. But here and in other whaling towns in Japan, the resumption of killing whales for profit for the first time in more than three decades has offered little cause for celebration. While condemnation from conservation groups has eased in the three years since Japan’s fleet exited the Antarctic, the country’s whalers face other obstacles: ageing fishermen and vessels, mysterious changes in cetacean behaviour possibly linked to climate change, and a stubborn refusal among Japanese people to eat enough whale meat to make killing them a profitable venture. While Japan skirted the IWC ban by conducting limited “scientific” hunts in the Antarctic, it had long argued that only a return to commercial whaling would guarantee a stable supply of affordable meat and ignite a revival in consumption. “But all the evidence points in the opposite direction,” says Patrick Ramage, senior director for outreach and programme collaboration at the International Fund for Animal Welfare. “Whether pursued on the high seas under the pretext of science or in coastal waters in pursuit of profit, Japan’s commercial whaling is an economic loser, kept afloat only by government subsidies.” Ramage believes the future of Japan’s ageing whaling towns rests on embracing ecotourism. “Whale-watching is making growing contributions to local economies around the world, particularly in locations previously involved in whaling. It’s better to have tourists paying to see whales than taxpayers paying to keep whaling on life support.” Barely 300 people in Japan are directly connected to whaling, while whale made up only about 0.1% of the country’s total meat consumption in 2016, according to government data. About 4-5,000 tonnes of whale meat enter the domestic market every year – the equivalent in volume of about half an apple for every person. But Yoshinori Shoji, the president of the Gaibo Hogei, a whaling company in Wada, said abandoning coastal hunting was unthinkable. “I know it is controversial in other parts of the world, but for us, whales are simply a source of food,” said Shoji, whose company has been processing whale meat for more than 70 years. To keep the town’s whaling culture alive, whale meat is served twice a year at local primary schools and children are invited to watch workers flense Baird’s beaked whales after they have been harpooned and dragged ashore, where they are left intact for 18 hours to allow their meat to mature. “Why shouldn’t we eat whale meat?” says Shoji. “Humans have always eaten local wildlife. It depends on the surrounding environment. My job is to give people the chance to eat and appreciate locally caught whale meat. We’re not forcing anyone to eat it.” He displays hunks of frozen meat and blubber, some of which is sent to Japan’s north-east coast where it is made into soup. On the roof of his factory, slices of Baird’s beaked whale blacken beneath the winter sun before being sold as a local delicacy reminiscent of beef jerky. But Wada’s 30 whale-industry employees are struggling. During last year’s April-October season, they caught just nine whales and have harpooned the same number so far this year. Shoji believes warmer seas may have sent the whales farther north, while more frequent powerful typhoons have confined the town’s two whaling boats to port for days on end. Japan’s commercial whaling industry would grind to a halt without government subsidies of ¥5.1bn (£.033bn) a year, says Junko Sakuma, a freelance journalist and expert on Japan’s whaling economy. “The government has said that it can’t continue to subside what is supposed to be a commercial concern for ever,” she says. “When Japan left the IWC, fisheries officials thought they would be able to catch as many whales as they needed to sustain the industry, but in fact it has shrunk. Japanese whaling will continue, but in a much smaller form.” Paradoxically, the end of “scientific” whaling and the Japanese fleet’s annual clashes with the anti-whaling organisation Sea Shepherd may be hastening whaling’s decline. “In the past, Japanese people were defensive because they didn’t like white people telling them not to eat whale meat,” Sakuma says. “But whaling is barely mentioned these days by anti-whaling countries like Australia, Britain and the US. Now Japanese people have nothing to rebel against, so they could end up just forgetting about whale meat.”So how was it for you? 2021? It was an odd year at the plot. Old winter crops left to flower into summer. Brassicas towering. Gastropods feasting. Almost a glimpse into a post-apocalyptic gardening world. I grew to love the wild abandon. Grasses seeding, blowing in the wind (though we might come to regret some of this later). Flower beds left to live a fuller life. I couldn’t help but save some seed. Howard and Rose grew a memorial plot to Rose’s grandmother. A shaded spot. Making a virtue out of austerity. Highlight for me there, the overwintered chicory flowering sky-blue deep into autumn. We had height like never before. Self-seeding fennel largely left to its own devices, yellow heads dancing. Tall Verbena bonariensis, beloved by butterflies, from shoots on a neighbouring plot. Lasting into November, until torn to the ground by clambering nasturtiums, roped like mustangs. And what a year for nasturtiums. Feral in creams, oranges, rusts and reds. Purest tagetes Ildkongen, too, refreshed with new stock from Signe (copenhagenseeds.dk). Sprawling scarlet bushes, tall and confident. Self-seeding amaranth (Hopi Red Dye) and orache spread and added extra height. What about vegetables you might ask? Tear peas were disappointing. We may have to search for new stock, though as yet we will trial to see if it was the year, the strange season, or the seed. It was slightly the same story with climbing beans, though we will have to hunt for more Gold of Bacau. Howard has a plan. There was chard, chervil, some parsley, too. But it was a year for flowers. For colour, for beauty. All largely left to go to seed. Most we saved for next summer. There are trays and paper bags and envelopes on shelves throughout the house. Full of hope for a brighter and better year. As the year shudders to a stop, from Howard and Rose, Mary and me, wishing you all a happy, healthy 2022. Allan Jenkins’s Plot 29 (4th Estate, £9.99) is out now. Order it for £8.49 from guardianbookshop.comThe recent barrage of threats from Vladimir Putin is no longer solely to do with Ukraine. Russia’s president has steadily broadened the scope of his demands to encompass defence and security arrangements in Europe as a whole. Even if current tensions on Ukraine’s borders do not ultimately result in open conflict, this deliberate escalation bodes ill for 2022. What Putin wants, in effect, is to turn the clock back to the 1990s, before former Warsaw Pact countries such as Poland and ex-Soviet republics such as Estonia joined Nato. If he had his way, he would probably reconstitute the Soviet Union, whose demise he mourns. This bitter old KGB spy never accepted cold war defeat. The western alliance must make clear that such dangerous revisionism is unacceptable. Russia cannot have a veto on Ukraine’s (or Georgia’s) future Nato membership. Nor may Putin revive the old Soviet “near abroad”, resurrect spheres of influence or dictate where western forces are stationed. Talks on confidence-building measures to ease Russia’s concerns would be a more sensible way forward. Yet by deploying an estimated 100,000 troops to Ukraine’s frontiers and maintaining a verbal bombardment, Putin has made clear he will not quickly relax the pressure on Europe’s leaders. For Washington, this is a geopolitical puzzle. For Europeans, a hostile, angry Russia is an immediate, menacing danger lurking on their doorstep. Sensing US weakness, eastern European countries in particular are alarmed by President Joe Biden’s statement that the US is ready to address “Russia’s concerns relative to Nato” – and by Putin’s aggressive demand last week for “immediate” concessions. The broader worry for 2022 is that, following the chaotic Afghanistan withdrawal, US security guarantees cannot be trusted. Despite assurances at last summer’s G7 summit in Cornwall that “America is back”, Biden is focused primarily on his domestic agenda and on containing China. Neither policy is going well. Covid is surging again, while the president’s signature spending bills, aimed at sparking a post-pandemic recovery, have been watered down or blocked by wayward Democrats in Congress. Biden will be preoccupied by a difficult campaign for November’s midterm elections. Thus for Europe, and the EU in particular, the new year looks set to begin on a disconcertingly uncertain, lonely note. It’s squeezed between a malignant Moscow and an ambivalent America. And to make matters worse, postwar Europe’s foundational relationship – that between France and Germany – may be about to come under fresh strain. Olaf Scholz, Germany’s new chancellor, wasted no time in opening a dialogue with the French president, Emmanuel Macron, travelling to Paris two days after taking office. On paper, the centre-left, three-party coalition led by Scholz backs deeper EU integration and enhanced European sovereignty, ideas promoted by Macron and diluted by Angela Merkel, Scholz’s predecessor. But in practice, French-German convergence may be hard to achieve. There are sharp differences on EU energy policy, the “green transition” and French efforts to classify nuclear energy as a “sustainable” fuel at a time of fast-rising gas prices. Macron wants Germany to support more pan-European spending, funded by shared debt along the precedent-setting lines of the EU’s €800bn (£679bn) Covid recovery fund. This is unpopular in Berlin. Macron argues passionately that, in a world of fierce predators and unreliable friends, Europe must strive for greater autonomy in defence, security and foreign policy. Yet he has opposed calls for a tougher line towards Russia and China from, for example, Annalena Baerbock, co-leader of the German Greens, who is Scholz’s new foreign minister and a keen human rights advocate. It will be hard to square this circle. Europe’s ability to deal with a host of other pressing problems – the row between Brussels, Poland and Hungary over constitutional issues, separatist tensions in the Balkans, friction with Turkey, Islamist terrorism in the Sahel, Iran’s nuclear ambitions and unresolved Brexit arguments – will not be helped by France’s assumption of the six-month EU presidency in January. Although he denies it, Macron is certain to be distracted by his bid for a second term in April’s elections. This epic battle unites three central issues that will dominate Europe’s agenda in 2022: rightwing populism, migration and the pandemic. Some surveys indicate that since the German election, the populist tide has been receding. But in France, strong support for the xenophobic racists, Marine Le Pen and Éric Zemmour, suggests such conclusions are premature. Having followed Biden in abandoning Afghanistan, European Nato members can hardly complain if, as aid agencies predict, they face a big new wave of Afghan refugees this winter. This would again highlight the EU’s collective failure to agree a comprehensive, humane migration policy – and will be exploited by the French far right. Another failure, the extraordinary absence of a coordinated European response to the Omicron variant as countries impose different, contradictory and often deeply unpopular, draconian restrictions, could help tip how France votes. As with Boris Johnson, the Covid bug, not the machinations of Russia, China and the US, may yet be Macron’s and Europe’s undoing.If there is one image from the past year that is certain to make the history books, it is that indelible picture from April of the Queen, Covid-masked and isolated, in a wooden pew of St George’s chapel, Windsor, for the funeral of her husband, Prince Philip. As yesterday’s heartfelt Christmas message confirmed, the monarch, frail though resolute, still consumed by duty, has, as she enters the 70th year of her long reign, never felt so alone. You might argue that, at the end of a torrid year, her nation also finds itself as isolated as at any time during those seven decades. Twelve months on from the Brexit agreement that saw the not-very United Kingdom bid adieu to its nearest neighbours, many more of the fears of Remainers than the hopes of Leavers have begun to be realised. Though the economic evidence has been blurred by the pandemic, it’s already clear enough that departure from the single market has created dramatic and predictable labour shortages and severely disrupted supply chains. Far from the promised ease of “sovereignty”, Britain has in the past year become a country ever more hemmed in and obsessed by its borders, locked into intractable negotiation over the Irish Sea, mired in bureaucracy at the Channel ports, fixated on hostile responses to desperate refugees in rubber dinghies and currently shut out from any free movement to the continent because, as if we didn’t know before, borders have two sides. The roots of that isolation lie in the disease of British – or English – exceptionalism, which brought this government to power. It is that ideology, in which rules are for other people, which also set the stage for the reckless and chaotic initial response to the pandemic and which has defined the judgment of the prime minister right up to the present moment. To say the government he leads has “trust issues” is like suggesting that a kleptomaniac enjoys a shopping trip. That peerless chronicler of her times, Joan Didion, who died on Thursday at the age of 87, once observed (of the moribund and corrupt Reagan administration of 1988) that “most strikingly of all, it was clear that those inside the process had congealed into a permanent political class, the defining characteristic of which was its readiness to abandon those not inside the process”. Looking back over the events of the past year or longer, it is equally hard to understand the actions of Johnson’s government in any other way. One heartening consequence of that transparent venality and laziness, however, has been the determination of the majority of the population to act with greater fellow feeling than their rulers in Westminster. The spirit of localism that had its vivid expressions in Marcus Rashford’s campaign to feed hungry children at the start of the pandemic, and which saw communities pull together to make provision for the vulnerable, has persisted in different ways as the crisis has dragged on. You could see it in the widespread acceptance that, in the absence of clear guidance, this would have to be once again, a restrained festive period. Despite the vocal minority of anti-vaxxers on the streets, and the highly selective “libertarians” dictating government dithering from the back benches, most people have been at pains to do the right thing. We are approaching the new year with understaffed emergency wards filling up and a depressingly familiar sense of uncertainty about the exact scale and nature of the challenges ahead. As Didion also observed: “It is easy to see the beginnings of things and harder to see the ends.” If the past year has revealed anything, however, it is, once and for all, that complex crises cannot be solved by populist slogans; they require rigour and competence and sacrifice, qualities, as we move into 2022, still far more in evidence in Britain’s people than its leaders.Italians have been enjoying an unusual period of political harmony – Mario Draghi, the prime minister, brought decisive, competent leadership in the midst of the pandemic, and the economy is growing fast. But that could be thrown into jeopardy when parliament elects a new president in January. An opaque ritual described as being akin to the appointment of a new pope, the topic is dominating the political debate as the outcome could leave Italy with a predicament at a critical juncture: should Draghi, the former European Central Bank chief credited with restoring stability and confidence in the country, remain prime minister, or become president? There are no official candidates in Italy’s presidential elections. Instead, lawmakers cast secret ballots for the seven-year mandate – they can vote for anyone, so long as they are an Italian citizen and aged 50 or over. Names that have cropped up in previous elections have included footballer Francesco Totti, actor Sophia Loren, and even porn star Rocco Siffredi. Voting can drag on for several rounds before a winner emerges. Draghi has been regularly floated as the frontrunner to succeed Sergio Mattarella, who steps down as head of state on 3 February. The 74-year-old hinted last week that he might be readying for the role. At his end-of-year press conference, he responded to questions about his future, saying: “My personal destiny is of no importance. I have no particular ambitions. I am, if you like, a grandfather in the service of the institutions.” The only person who is explicitly pursuing the role, according to the Italian media, is the scandal-tainted former prime minister and leader of Forza Italia, Silvio Berlusconi. “It’s extremely unlikely that he’ll get elected but we shouldn’t rule it out,” said Wolfango Piccoli, co-president of the London-based research company, Teneo. “If there is one person who has unparalleled vote-buying skills, it’s Berlusconi.” Italy’s president is largely a ceremonial role, albeit with the power to resolve political crises, pick prime ministers and call early elections. Mattarella was forced to step in several times to resolve crises, including calling on Draghi to form a unity government in February after the administration led by Giuseppe Conte collapsed. The timing of the election is delicate. Draghi is considered a safe pair of hands but a move to the presidential palace would bring his government to an early end, undermining efforts to enact the reforms needed to secure instalments from the EU’s post-pandemic recovery fund, of which Italy is the biggest beneficiary. “It’s the first time that this election has been economically relevant,” said Piccoli. “The country lost 10% of GDP because of the pandemic, and now, with Draghi, there is this new confidence… the question is whether this can last beyond the presidential election.” In the worst-case scenario, Draghi’s promotion could bring the general election forward by a year. If early elections are held, polls consistently indicate that a coalition of the far-right parties, the League and Brothers of Italy, and Berlusconi’s Forza Italia, could win. Voting is expected to begin in the third week of January, but only on three occasions has a new president emerged in the first round. “There will be back-door deals, lots of posturing and random names mentioned every other day,” said Piccoli. “But, historically, all the names mentioned in the lead-up to the vote are there to get burnt. I would be surprised if anyone mentioned so far is the real deal, with the exception of Draghi.” Other names bandied about in the media include the current justice minister Marta Cartabia, the former prime minister Romano Prodi, another former prime minister and current European commissioner for the economy, Paolo Gentiloni, and Gianni Letta, a long-time adviser to Berlusconi. If Draghi does stand, he might bide his time until the second or third round. “Even for someone like Draghi it’s not a given that he can get elected in the first round, and so he wouldn’t want to undermine his standing by putting himself up for the job too early,” said Piccoli.Right through history – be it during war times or a downturn in economic stability – red lipstick has always been used as a way to lift one’s spirit and countenance. So for those who are yet to discover the magic of a red lipstick, now is as good a time as any. “Everyone has a red,” they say. Trite but actually, more than ever, it is true. Broadly speaking, the key finishes are creamy, shiny and (my personal favourite) matte. Mattes of old have (justifiably) gained a reputation for being brilliant for colour payoff but so drying they turn your lips to sandpaper. The new formulations, however, are much more sophisticated than their predecessors, so you can expect a deep, rich long-lasting pigment that doesn’t compromise on comfort. The breadth of tones available is also impressive. The red lipstick is, contrary to popular belief, not monolithic. You can get a bluey red, said to be pretty universal (Byredo is a good example of this); a brownish red (Lisa Eldridge’s Cinnabar, Mac’s Viva Glam 1); an orangey red (Confidence by Kjaer Weis); a pinky red (Valentino’s Spike Red)… essentially there is something for everyone. You just need to try them and see what clicks. That said, if the idea of an opaque red still feels like too big a step, try Violette FR’s Bisou Balm. This will give you just a hint of red and a less intense starting point. 1. Kjaer Weis Lipstick in Confidence £44, net-a-porter.com 2. Violette FR Bisou Balm in Betisse £24, violettefr.com 3. Too Faced Lady Bold Lipstick £22, selfridges.com 4. Hourglass Confession Ultra Slim Lipstick £39, cultbeauty.co.uk 5. Valentino Rosso Valentino in Spike Red £40, valentino-beauty.co.uk 6. Byredo Mad Red £35, byredo.com 7. Vieve Modern Matte Lipstick in Muse £19, cultbeauty.co.uk 8. Pat McGrath Matte Trance Lipstick in Elson £35, selfridges.com 9. Lisa Eldridge Velvet Lipstick in Cinnabar £26, lisaeldridge.com 10. Mac Viva Glam 1 Lipstick £17.50, maccosmetics.co.uk Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFettoCinderella may not be going to the ball any more but people are bringing the glamour to their own front rooms for this New Year’s Eve. Much like the rise of the makeshift “kitchen disco”, which brought the dancefloor to your home during last year’s lockdown, “Hogmanay at home” looks, such as “tinsel hair”, are having a moment despite mass celebrations being called off. “With the recent news putting the fear back into us all, daily mood boosters, like doing our hair, will be key to keeping morale up,” says hairdresser and colourist Lisa Shepherd. Tinsel hair, in which people coat strands of their hair with silver pieces of tinsel, also feeds into fashion trends from the late 90s and early 2000s such as low-rise jeans and Croc shoes, which are back in vogue. “The 00s are having a huge impact on hair trends; we’re seeing so many buns with spiky ends and butterfly clips are everywhere,” says Rachael Gibson, hairstyle historian. “The original Y2K trends were very much about the birth of digital culture, and now we live entirely online it makes sense that those trends are being revived.” Tinsel hair, recently sported by singer Katy Perry to mark her Las Vegas singing residency, is also about the revival of certain hair accessories. “Tinsel hair first appeared in the early 00s when the hair extensions market exploded,” says Gibson. “As well as seeing wider availability of extensions for typical services like length and volume, we started seeing options for more fun, fashion looks, like vibrant colour as well as things like feathers and tinsel.” Gibson draws a historical line from tinsel hair to glitter hair sprays in the 1980s, and all the way back to ancient Romans using gold dust in their hair. The style, thanks to its immediate visual impact, currently has 19 million views on TikTok. Hana Ben-Shabat, author of Gen Z 360: Preparing For The Inevitable Change In Culture, thinks that younger people are wearing styles rooted in the past out of a desire to escape their current circumstances. “I believe that they revert to the past, not out of single-minded nostalgia but as a means to escape and find comfort and inspiration at a time that the world around them is overwhelmingly confusing and challenging,” she says. More practically, Gibson thinks that tinsel hair works because of its immediacy and affordability. “The trend was born for social media – it’s colourful, it’s sparkly and it’s a bit different. All factors that work really well to launch a trend,” she says. “After the last couple of years, people are looking for statements of optimism and fun, and there’s not much more fun than glitter hair.”How are your Sunday mornings? Right now I’m in Edinburgh – my Sundays start in a hotel room, alone. Midweek, I’m up at 5.30am to make it on set. The first thing I do is text my wife Amanda in New Zealand with a message for my son. If I’m lucky with the time difference I can read him a bedtime story. Do you work? I love to write. On Sundays it’s a joy. It’s a gift that nobody else is working. It’s the day I have to really write – the best bit of the job – when most of my time is spent doing admin and emails. We’ve got three TV shows on the go, there’s a lot to do, but right now on Sundays I’m left to make things up, uninterrupted. What are Sundays like at home? In New Zealand it’s a family day, taking my son down to the beach, getting my head out of my phone and computer. It’s strange, I think of Woodstock, New York, as my actual home. Because of Covid I have not been there since 2019. I miss walking aimlessly up the nearby hills. Sundays growing up? Relatives would cook something the size of a Christmas meal. I’d be left in somnolent pain from overeating on the sofa. I loved that I could spend the day reading books Sunday night? Pre-Covid, Amanda and I would try to sneak out for a date. Going out to a restaurant? I remember it fondly. If you could be anywhere next Sunday? At my house on the Isle of Skye; it’s the place that makes me happiest. It’s strange to be working in Edinburgh, yet I’m unable to get there. Hiking boots on, I’ll walk to a 500-year old ruined castle. In summer the sun sets at 11pm. After dusk it’s almost immediately dawn. By 2am you hear the cuckoos. It’s magical. Michael Segalov The Ocean at the End of the Lane is at The Duke of York’s Theatre in London until 14 May 2022 (oceanwestend.com). A Netflix adaptation of The Sandman will be released in 2022And so that was Christmas. I hope you had fun. Near and dear ones, old and young, all the good stuff. Presents, tree, giant fowl… a dusting of carols, a soupcon of the Queen… a joyous surrender to couch-based inertia and sprout-based flatulence. If this isn’t the time to indulge a few cliches, I don’t know what is. My family has always indulged pretty much every one of its yuletide whims, turning the 72 hours from Christmas Eve to Boxing Day into a rare bacchanal of M&amp;S excess that I embrace, endorse and would defend to the death on the barricades. There is only ever one wrinkle in the wrapping paper, which is that I’m still single at 43 and nothing brings that home like the most family-oriented festival of the year. For one thing, the TV schedulers do seem to have a unified if blinkered view of what constitutes an appropriate Christmas message for never-married women like me. I’ve watched enough Hallmark movies now to have learned that the reason for my ongoing lack of a partner is the fact that I’m simply too uptight and wedded to my job and that if I would only move back home to the small town where my parents’ grocery store is under threat, I’d soon run into a passionate beet farmer who could teach me the true meaning of the season. So while I rarely regret my singleness, a rich diet of festive romcoms does tend to bring on an annual purging of forlorn hope, the same way the water companies like to discharge their sewage overflows into the sea when they think no one is looking. After all, these are not the most dignified of times for the unpartnered person. You try feeling great about yourself after you’ve spent a sleepless night sharing a room with your excitable five-year-old niece or gradually deflating on the airbed wedged in the alcove next to your brother-in-law’s treadmill. Thank the blessed baby Jesus, then, for Betwixtmas, which begins, according to my calendar at least, on 27 December. This special four-day period is nestled between the messy aftermath and clean-up duties of family Christmas and the exhausting-sounding New Year’s Eve party I will almost certainly flake out of at the last minute. It is truly the single person’s holiday. For while married friends and knackered parents are on field manoeuvres in a car crowded with over-entitled children and over-ripe cheese, zigzagging between grandparents, in-laws and friends they’re too busy to see the rest of the year, the single person is in their pyjamas eating leftover trifle for lunch and making a last-minute plan with their other single friends to see the new Matrix film. As with any epiphany, the magic of Betwixtmas did not immediately appear to me and my pals. In our 20s, it was a wilderness zone, when everyone had taken time off work and headed home to see their folks, with whom they would grow increasingly impatient and irritated, building up a head of frustration and emotion that had to be released in an epic all-night blow-out on New Year’s Eve. But we were young and the fear of being home alone without concrete plans was still upon us. It was only in our 30s that we began to discover the secret weapon of which we were possessed. If there is one superpower that the single person wields, one gift the gods have reserved uniquely for us, it is that of spontaneity. While our contemporaries require a good week’s notice to find enough childcare cover for a quick coffee, we who have so much time to ourselves usually have plenty left over to share with others. For that very reason, some of my most cherished festive memories have been laid down in the unhallowed, under-celebrated days of Betwixtmas, days with mundane names such as Monday or Tuesday or that-day-I’ve-got-off-in-the-middle-of-the-week. A holy time of quiet reflection, punctuated with long walks with whoever’s around or sneaky sales shopping in self-extended lunch hours. Of easygoing leisure interrupted with a sudden dash to a discount-ticket matinee or an outing to an ice rink where you spend five minutes in skates and two hours drinking rum-laced hot chocolate under an outdoor heater. Yes, many of these are days when some of us are technically supposed to be working. But first, we all know no one’s keeping tabs. Second, if Heather says she’s going to be in the pub that lies exactly halfway between our houses then surely it would be impolite not to join her? And third, the randomness of people’s availability is half the joy. There’s an element of open-house fluidity to Betwixtmas; it extends its joyful invitation to anyone with a few hours to spare during this unstructured interregnum. Which is how I’ve ended up spending some gloriously meandering days with a truly random assortment of friends and friends’ friends who would never otherwise have been in each other’s company. This, to me, is when the festive season offers its most exclusive gift. These are the moments when I feel like I’m living my true Christmas movie-self: making lightning costume changes, from a onesie to a party dress and back again. You need confidence in yourself to enjoy it. You have to be prepared to embrace uncertainty. Of course, in-person social activities will be curtailed this year; it is incumbent on those of us who love this sacred time to honour it responsibly. Some of the meet-ups will move to Zoom, some of the movie nights will be Netflix watch-alongs, but its spirit will live on among single people everywhere. So from my “family” to yours, we wish you all a very merry Betwixtmas. Emma John’s book, Self Contained: Scenes From a Single Life, is out nowOnce again, Britain is experiencing a festive season hit by waves of Covid-19 infections. Last year, Christmas and the new year were spoiled by the appearance of the Alpha variant. This time, it is Omicron that has sent case numbers soaring. Christmas cancellations have swept through Britain’s restaurants, pubs and clubs and left the country on the brink of another bleak New Year as the NHS warns once more that it is facing the threat of being overwhelmed by spiralling numbers of seriously ill patients. The scenario has raised fears that this now represents the shape of Christmases to come. Social restrictions and lockdown threats could become our normal festive fare. It is a dispiriting prospect. But is it realistic? Are we justified in drawing close parallels between this Christmas and last year’s? These are key questions because, in trying to answer them, we may also find clues to the likely path of the entire pandemic. How close does this year’s outbreak parallel that of last winter? At first glance, the two years look strikingly similar, with case numbers rocketing in only a few weeks in the UK. However, hospitalisations and deaths from Covid-19 remain very low so far this year, with latest research suggesting that the new variant appears to trigger fewer cases of severe illness than its viral predecessors. Scientists have generally treated these results studies as good news but have also counselled caution. Daily Covid-19 case numbers are still rising – they reached a record 122,000 on Friday – and it was estimated that 1.7 million people had Covid-19 in the UK last week. Are there noticeable differences in the ages of those affected by Omicron? Crucially, most of the new cases have occurred in young adults, which has led some researchers to warn that if Omicron starts to affect older – more vulnerable – people in greater numbers, hospitalisations could still jump. On the other hand, a huge number of people – especially the elderly – have now been give vaccines and boosters and will have gained considerable protection against Omicron. It remains to be seen how these different factors affect figures. At present, data is still being gathered and it is too early to be sure. At the same time, policy decisions to protect public health still have to be taken. The problem is highlighted by infectious disease epidemiologist Professor Mark Woolhouse of Edinburgh University. “There is inevitably a lag between infection and hospitalisation,” he told the journal Nature last week. “But in the meantime, policy decisions have to be made, and that is not straightforward.” Is the virus likely to lose its power to cause severe illness? Many scientists believe evidence is now suggesting that this idea may be correct. Recent studies in Scotland, England and South Africa all point in this direction. “My gut feeling is that this variant is the first step in a process by which the virus adapts to the human population to produce more benign symptoms,” says Dr Julian Tang, professor of Respiratory Sciences at Leicester University. “In a sense, it is to the virus’s advantage if it affects people in a way that they don’t get too sick – because then they can walk around and mingle in society and spread the virus even more.” So will Covid-19 end up behaving like flu? Some health officials have predicted that Covid-19 could end up behaving like influenza, which requires a new vaccine to deal with new strains that appear every year. However, Professor Martin Hibberd, of the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, argues that coronaviruses – like those that already cause common colds – do not behave this way: “They do not appear as new strains every year. The reason we get colds in winter is because our immunity to coronaviruses does not last very long. And this virus seems to be more similar to those that cause common colds. In other words, we may still need to think about giving vaccines to protect against Covid-19 every year because immunity will always slip.” That does not mean we face “doom and gloom” for the next five years, adds Tang. “I think the virus will evolve itself out of the pandemic strain very soon and become milder, more transmissible to the point where you may only need to think about vaccinating the more vulnerable members of the population.”There was a moment last year when Boris Johnson was reported to have gone awol (absent without leave) from governing the country in order to work on a book about Shakespeare. At the time, many commentators blamed his absence for a crucial delay in decision-making which contributed to thousands of avoidable, Covid-related deaths. Be that as it may, or was, he returned to the helm of state, brushed off many a criticism, and managed to persuade gullible members of the media and electorate that he possessed Teflon qualities and was invincible. However, the events of the last month have established, in the poet Robert Browning’s phrase, that it will never be “glad confident morning again” for Johnson. Also, if he has had time, in Cole Porter’s great line, to “brush up” his Shakespeare, no doubt the words of Claudius will be haunting him: “When sorrows come, they come not single spies / But in battalions.” Yes, it has been one damn thing after another, the climax being the North Shropshire byelection, in which a constituency that had voted 60% in favour of Brexit, and been Tory for donkey’s years, turned against the prime minister who claimed to have “got Brexit done”. The byelection was forced upon the Conservatives because their addiction to “sleaze” had finally caught up with them. Sorry: did I say “Conservatives”? We owe it to a no less respectable figure than Chris – now Lord – Patten, a former chairman of the Conservative and Unionist party, to acknowledge that the present party is more appropriately referred to as the English Nationalist party. But the big issue at the byelection was righteous indignation at the revelation of the government’s blatant hypocrisy last December in flouting its own rules and partying, while most of the populace were obeying the restrictions. In the end, the British public, about whose judgment one sometimes despairs – that Brexit vote! – decides that enough is enough. For British business, long suffering under Johnson’s arrogant attitude – “[expletive deleted] business”, as he is reported to have said in 2018 – enough was enough when the prime minister gave his rambling “Peppa Pig World” address to the annual Confederation of British Industry conference. The CBI speech was in Newcastle, the byelection in Shropshire. At the time, in the interest of switching off from Brexit and Covid in the evenings, I was re-reading the novels of PG Wodehouse. Johnson is often referred to as resembling a character out of Wodehouse, although I suspect that if Wodehouse were still with us, he would not give Johnson the time of day. The Lord Emsworth novels are set in Shropshire; but Blandings Castle – modelled, I think, on Weston Park – is in southern Shropshire. Nevertheless, I think Johnson made a mistake in drawing attention to pigs in his CBI speech. The pig industry, and much of English farming, is in a bad way as a consequence of Brexit, and I suspect that their travails also played a role in the angry vote in North Shropshire, which is a rural constituency. In one Wodehouse novel, Lord Emsworth’s prize pig, the Empress of Blandings, goes off her food, but finally yields to an American pig farmer’s magic cry: “Pig-hoo-o-o-o-ey!” The American word “hooey”, not in popular use these days, means nonsense or rubbish. It deserves a revival. It epitomises much of what Johnson’s English Nationalist party stands for. But back to the battalions: out goes Brexit “negotiator” Lord Frost; in comes Brexit negotiator Liz Truss. What do Johnson, Frost and Truss have in common? They are all living practitioners of Groucho Marx’s great pronouncement: “These are my principles, and if you don’t like them … well, I have others.” We know that both Johnson and Frost are on record before the Brexit referendum as being well aware that, as members of the EU, we had the best of both worlds: we were members of a great trading bloc, and enjoyed the equivalent of a “get out of jail free” card for most of the things we didn’t want. But what of Truss? It has been widely reported that she, too, used to be a Remainer, but seized the main chance of elevation by becoming a Brexiter. However, we owe it to that great student of all things European, my old friend Charles Grant, to discover that all is not what it seems with the Rt Hon Truss. Grant has known her a long time. In an article for the Centre for European Reform thinktank, of which he is director, he reveals that, before converting to the Remain cause for Cameron’s referendum, Truss was a Eurosceptic. She gets about in the course of her career, she does.As Billy Connolly observed, there is no such thing as bad weather, just the wrong clothing. The office workers caught in a sudden blizzard on London’s High Holborn in 1966 illustrate Connolly’s point to varying degrees: the young woman on the left, in particular, seems to have dressed for winter sunshine, only to regret her choices more and more as the day has progressed. She now stands poised on the edge of a street of slush, in lacy tights and leaky shoes, preparing for the arctic expedition back to her desk wearing a beret of sleet. She may be some time. A new book, London in the Snow, features several comparable wardrobe errors. Whiteouts are such infrequent events in the capital that they invariably catch a reasonable haul of high heels and shirt sleeves. The book takes in images of the black-and-white decades of the last century, from the years in which the Thames still froze over to the centrally heated 1970s, when the city centre rarely dropped below freezing (there were 116 snow days in London in the 1950s, compared with 36 in the last decade of the 20th century). In the earlier pictures there are shades of those Dickensian scenes that remain a staple of lamplit Christmas cards (scenes that were already, in Victorian times, nostalgic relics of the “little ice age” of the author’s childhood). Children lining up for a turn on icy slides across playgrounds; pipe-smoking dads tobogganing in tweed and gaberdine; chestnuts roasting on open fires; schoolboys in short trousers with armfuls of snowballs; carollers coated with layers of snow. In most of the later pictures, like this one, the white stuff may be a little thin on the ground – its joys melting into the gutter under bus wheels – but still it retains the soft power of bringing the whole city to a surprising halt. London in the Snow is published by Hoxton Mini Press (£16.95)The Yad Vashem Holocaust memorial in Jerusalem honours 25,000 individuals who helped to save Jewish lives during the second world war. Among this roll call of the “Righteous among the Nations”, there is only one named Arab: Dr Mohamed Helmy. This remarkable book tells the story of Helmy’s life, in particular the years in which he helped a young Jewish girl, Anna Boros (later Gutman), evade the Nazis in the heart of Berlin from 1936 until the end of the war. Ronen Steinke, a political commentator at German broadsheet Süddeutsche Zeitung, has painstakingly pieced together these events from the state archive in Berlin, and from Gestapo correspondence, and interviews with the surviving relatives of Helmy and Gutman in New York and Cairo. His story, deftly translated by Sharon Howe, wears this research lightly. Steinke’s history sheds a light on what he argues is a deliberately forgotten world, the old Arabic Berlin of the Weimar period, centred around the grand mosque in the Wilmersdorf district, which was “open, progressive and far from antisemitic” and which welcomed Jewish luminaries, including Albert Einstein and philosopher Martin Buber, to its cultural events. “It is a perception shared by many Muslims in western countries that the Holocaust was nothing to do with them, that Muslim migrants played no part in that history,” Steinke writes. “This book is evidence to the contrary.” Mohamed Helmy, the son of an Egyptian army major, had come to Berlin from Cairo in 1922 to study medicine. He was apprenticed to a professor of medicine at Moabit hospital near the largest synagogue in the city. The professor was Georg Klemperer, brother of Victor, later the forensic diarist of daily life under the terror of the Third Reich. Helmy witnessed first-hand the terrible day in 1933 when all the Jewish doctors at Moabit were rounded up and taken by Nazi stormtroopers to the hospital basement and savagely beaten; those who survived never returned to work. Helmy was spared this fate because he was in a nebulous category in the perverted hierarchy of Hitler’s race laws – not Jewish, not Aryan, and with a native German fiancee. He was promoted to run a department partly staffed by newly employed Nazi surgeons, “devoid of technical expertise”, who had been instructed in part to sterilise young women who had come before the “genetic health courts”. There is a photograph in this book of Helmy seated, surrounded by a smiling cohort of junior Nazi doctors, his murderous underlings. This arrangement did not last long. Helmy, a gifted consultant, was openly derisive of his colleagues and their political masters. When greeted in the hospital corridors with “Heil Hitler!”, he was brave enough to answer with a measured “guten tag”. In 1936, colleagues signed a petition against his continued employment, suspicious that he continued to treat Jewish patients out of hours. He held on for another year, with the help of the Foreign Office at the Reichstag, which did not at that time want to alienate Egypt, then a British protectorate, by persecuting Egyptian citizens. His contract was not renewed in 1937, however, and he was forced to set up his own practice, more or less in secret. A year earlier, Helmy had visited the house of one of his elderly Jewish patients, Cecilie Rudnik. It was not entirely a medical call. Rudnik lived with her daughter, Julie, and granddaughter Anna, then 11. The greengrocer business that Rudnik’s husband ran had been an early victim of the new race laws: Jews were barred from visiting wholesale markets until the afternoons when all the sellable produce had gone. The persecution was getting worse by the day; shops in Moabit were being appropriated by the Nazis, money seized. Rudnik and her daughter offered tea to the doctor and pleaded with him to do something to help Anna. Helmy kept in touch with the family, and when Anna was 14, he took her on as his assistant at his GP practice. At the outbreak of war Helmy’s status was once more in jeopardy. He was imprisoned in 1939 by the Gestapo for apparently calling Rudolf Hess “an idiot”. Some months later, he was released as part of a change of heart at the Nazi foreign office in a bid to persuade prominent Muslims to their cause, or to hold them as future bargaining chips in prisoner exchanges. Helmy was unable to leave Berlin, but allowed to restart his practice. Anna remained his assistant. When the transports began, and Cecilie Rudnik was summoned to the embarkation point, Helmy helped her to go into hiding with a friend. Rudnik’s daughter, Julie, was safe for the time being because she was married to a German gentile. Anna’s status was less secure. Helmy decided, recklessly, to hide her in plain sight. He created the story that Anna had escaped to Romania, while giving her a headscarfed identity as his Muslim niece, Nadia, his new receptionist. What follows is a tense and extraordinary account of their years of subterfuge, which also provides a visceral reminder of the bureaucratic and investigative lengths to which the Gestapo would go to discover Jews still hiding in their midst. With enormous courage and cunning, Helmy and Anna maintained their fiction despite SS raids and constant suspicion and the threats of denunciation and exposure (not least from Anna’s mother’s gossipy habits). Their connection continued in visits and correspondence until Helmy’s death in Berlin in 1982 (Anna lived a further four years in New York), by which time the story of an Egyptian Arab who risked his life for his Jewish friend had, as Steinke details, become a far more complicated one to tell. • Anna &amp; Dr Helmy: How an Arab Doctor Saved a Jewish Girl in Hitler’s Berlin by Ronen Steinke (translated by Sharon Howe) is published by Oxford University Press (£18.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply1. Which two other sports, as well as darts, has PDC World No 1, Gerwyn “The Iceman” Price, played professionally, before retiring in 2014 to concentrate on darts? a. Rallying and BMX b. Rugby union and rugby league c. Volleyball and handball d. Greco-Roman wrestling and MMA 2. On 10 January 2021, North Korean Supreme Leader Kim Jong-un was elected general secretary of the Workers Party of Korea. Who did he replace? a. His late father, Kim Jong-il, who died in 2011, but held the office for a decade posthumously b. His late grandfather Kim Il-Sung, who died in 1994, but held the office for 27 years posthumously c. His uncle Jang Song-thaek, who was executed for treason in 2014 d. His sister Kim Yo-jong, who became a social media sex symbol in 2020 3. In March, Christies sold Everydays by artist Mike Winkelmann for $69m. What was notable about this sale? a. The artwork was created by AIartificial intelligence b. It was a Picasso painting he’d bought and added his own signature to c. It was a non-fungible token or NFT, the highest such price ever garnered for one d. It was an microscopic engraving on a single human hair 4. New Zealand farmer Colin Craig-Brown hit the headlines this November when he unearthed what surprising find in his back garden? a. A potato weighing 7.8kg, believed to be the largest ever found b. A Second World War sea mine containing 80kg of live explosives c. The jewelled star of the Order of St Patrick, one of the crown jewels of Ireland stolen from Dublin Castle in 1907 d. An abandoned attempt at digging a tunnel through the centre of the earth, started by the land’s previous owner 5. On 1 February, aerobics instructor Khing Hnin Wai became briefly world famous. Why? a. She broke the world sit-ups record, completing 45,005 in 58.5hrs b. She was arrested for a social media post comparing Chinese Premier Xi Jinping to Winnie the Pooh c. She recorded a fitness video for Instagram in the Myanmar capital Nay Pyi Taw that inadvertently broke the news that there had been a military coup in the country d. Due to a computer error, she was mistakenly listed as No 1 on the FBI’s Most Wanted Fugitives list 6. 2021 saw one of the world’s most popular games, Minecraft, surpass 140m users. Its gameworld is now estimated to be 3.6bn square kilometres. Approximately how many times could this contain the planet Earth? a. Three b. Four c. Seven d. 25 7. Argentine racer Manuel Andújar won the 2021 Dakar rally in which discipline? a. Rally cars b. Motorcycle c. Trucks d. Quad bikes 8. Kevin Andre McKenzie of Guyana was apprehended at New York’s Kennedy Airport, with what unlikely cargo? a. 35 rare butterflies hidden in his underpants b. 35 rare songbirds hidden in hair curlers c. 35 rare earth metals hidden inside smoke alarms d. 35 screenshots of NFTs hidden inside his phone 9. Adele’s long-awaited album, 30, was the bestselling LP of 2021. But just how bestselling was it in its first week of release? a. It outsold the rest of the Billboard Top 10 combined b. It outsold the rest of the Billboard Top 20 combined c. It outsold the rest of the Billboard Top 40 combined d. It outsold the rest of the Billboard Top 50 combined 10. Having been postponed by the pandemic, Euro 2020 finally got under way in June and was the highest-scoring in the tournament’s history. Despite this, goals by which method outstripped Ronaldo’s top-scoring tally of six goals? a. Penalties b. Own goals c. Goals disallowed by video-assisted refereeing d. Each of the above 11. Line of Duty season six concluded, with yet another increasingly unlikely plot about police officers who care about corruption. But by what means did Ted Hastings explain to suspects he was a difficult man to fool? a. “I didn’t come up the Foyle on a leaf” b. “I didn’t come up the Lagan in a bubble” c. “I didn’t come up the Erne in a teapot” d. “I didn’t come up the Mournes in a polystyrene cup” 12. Notorious restaurateur Nusret Gökçe, better known by the meme-begotten soubriquet Salt Bae, opened a restaurant in Knightsbridge this year, attracting attention for its eye-wateringly high prices. Other than wine, what is understood to be the most expensive single item on its menu? a. A truffle-infused hotdog, priced at £800 b. A goldleaf-laden giant tomahawk steak, at £1,450 c. A “billionaire burger” served with diamond shavings for £2,450 d. One can of Red Bull energy drink, costing £4,765 13. An enterprising anti-vaxxer in Italy had people in mind of a scene from Father Ted this December. For what reason? a. He disrupted a pro-vaccine sermon in his local church by kicking a bishop up the arse b. He stole money from a health charity, claiming the money was “just resting in his account” c. He attempted to fool health workers by presenting a fake arm at his vaccine appointment d. He staged an anti-lockdown protest in a shopping centre, only to become lost in Milan’s largest lingerie department 14. The Omicron variant is the latest sortie in Covid’s ongoing war to forcibly teach us the Greek alphabet. Which of the following is not to be found within that ancient alphabetic script’s 24 letters? a. Pi b. Phi c. Psi d. Si 15. The announcement of the abortive European Super League in April 2021 led to much turmoil between Uefa and the 12 founder clubs, not least between Uefa president Alexander Ceferin and which spearhead behind the project, who happens to be his goddaughter’s father? a. Juventus president Andrea Agnelli b. Barcelona president Josep Maria Bartomeu c. Tottenham Hotspur CEO Daniel Levy d. Manchester United CEO Ed Woodward 16. In a hopeful move, the United Nations designated 2021 “The Year of Peace and Trust”. It was also designated several other things. Which of the following was 2021 not officially declared as the year of by the UN? a. The International Year of Creative Economy for Sustainable Development b. The International Year of Fruit and Veg c. The International Year of Nuts and Pulses d. The International Year for the Elimination of Child Labour 17. Matt Hancock resigned from the government in 2021, after being caught on CCTV breaching social distancing rules with Gina Coladangelo. As well as having been non-executive director of the Department of Health and Social Care, she is also the niece of which former Arsenal goalkeeper? a. David Seaman b. Pat Jennings c. Bob Wilson d. John Lukic 18. For the second year running, the highest grossing film was a Chinese epic. 2021’s biggest box office draw, The Battle at Lake Changin, is about a battle in which conflict? a. Second World War b. The Korean War c. The Boxer Rebellion d. The Jintian Uprising 19. The men’s high jump at this year’s Tokyo Olympics was decided in an unusual fashion once Qatar’s Mutaz Essa Barshim and Italy’s Gianmarco Tamberi reached a stalemate in the final – in what way? a. By doing a 100m sprint b. By awarding both competitors gold c. By tossing a coin d. By making them do a hilarious, year-end quiz of the year 20. Turkish man Beyhan Mutlu made news in September for which unlikely reason? a. He unknowingly joined a search party that had been formed to find him after he’d become lost in a forest while intoxicated b. He declared himself “the Emperor of Batman” and held an armed standoff with the Turkish army c. He finished his 12-year attempt to eat an entire train carriage, piece by piece d. He was found in possession of 14 long-missing Romanov family Fabergé eggs 21. Josiah Kenyon was arrested and charged in December for his alleged role in the Capitol Riots. Which animated character was he dressed as when he allegedly assaulted several Capitol police officers? a. Jake Skellington from The Nightmare Before Christmas b. Carl Fredriksen from Up c. Wall-E from Wall-E d. Maid Marian from Robin Hood 22. In September, Nicki Minaj tweeted her opposition to the Met Gala’s policy of insisting attendees be vaccinated, citing which alarming and tenuous anecdote of vaccination tragedy? a. Her mother’s friend broke out in “full body hives” b. Her father’s cousin had a heart attack c. Her cousin’s friend’s “testicles became swollen” and he was rendered impotent d. Her friend’s cousin’s nipples fell off 23. Merriam-Webster had no such hesitation and named “vaccine” its word of the year, but from which Latin word does it come? a. Vacca, “cow” b. Vaco, “to be free from” c. Vacuus, “empty or void” d. Vaccilo, “to be in a weak condition” 24. Upon Barbados becoming a republic this November, Rihanna was inducted as a National Hero of Barbados. What is her new title? a. The Right Reverend Robyn Rihanna Fenty b. The Right Excellent Robyn Rihanna Fenty c. The Right Honourable Robyn Rihanna Fenty d. The Right Respectful Robyn Rihanna Fenty 25. December saw the North Atlantic battered by Storm Barra. For the seventh straight season, the UK and Ireland’s storm names were chosen in advance by European meteorologists, running from A-Z, alternating between male and female. Which of the following is not a storm to come? a. Gladys b. Herman c. Nasim d. Quentin 26. Squid Game, a Korean-language series about a dystopian and murderous televised competition, was the unexpected streaming hit of 2021. But what show did it replace as Netflix’s most streamed show ever? a. Friends b. Bridgerton c. Money Heist d. Tiger King The answers 1. (b) Rugby union and rugby league 2. (a) His long dead father, Kim Jong-il 3. (c) It was an NFT, credited to Winklemann’s alias, Beeple 4. (a) A very large potato indeed, nearly 3kg heavier than the current record 5. (c) She inadvertently broke news of a coup with her fitness video 6. (c) Seven – it would, in fact, rank as the fifth largest planet in our solar system, behind only Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune. 7. (d) Quad bikes 8. (b) 35 rare songbirds (the exact number of hair curlers is unrecorded) 9. (d) It outsold the rest of the Billboard Top 50 combined. 10. (d) Each of the above: 9 penalties, 11 own goals, and 7 disallowed by VAR 11. (b) Lagan via bubble 12. (b) The goldleaf tomahawk steak. For the record a Red Bull costs a measly £11 13. (c) He used a fake arm, and no bishops’ arses were harmed at any time 14. (d) Si is not a Greek letter 15. (a) Juventus President Andrea Agnelli 16. (c) The International Year of Nuts and Pulses was, of course, in 2016 17. (c) Bob Wilson 18. (b) The Korean War or, as China officially terms the military campaign, “Resist America and Assist Korea” 19. (b) It was the first time the games had seen joint winners by choice since 1912 20. (a) He joined his own search party, echoing a similar story from Iceland in 2012 21. (a) Jake Skellington 22. (c) Her cousin’s friend in Trinidad developed swollen testicles and became impotent. She added: “He was weeks away from getting married, now the girl called off the wedding. So just pray on it &amp; make sure you’re comfortable with ur decision, not bullied.” 23. (a) Vacca, meaning cow, derived from its being developed to combat cowpox. 24. (b) The Right Excellent. 25. (d) Quentin – names beginning with Q, U, X, Y and Z are not used due to the relative paucity of options 26. (b) BridgertonLeslie Winer – Hold On Postcards Leslie Winer’s mesmerising face – strong jaw, stern lips, graceful cheekbones – made her a muse to Jean-Paul Gaultier, a star of Dior and Valentino ads and a cover girl for Vogue, though girlish she wasn’t: her tough androgyny and power dressing was the perfect expression of an uncaring yet increasingly permissive 1980s. “I was a reluctant model for five junkie years,” she later said, “I’m also a former nasty alcoholic and former Tampax user, each for more than five years and with considerably more enthusiasm.” That career discarded, her next act was astonishing: music that delved into industrial, dub and – influentially – trip-hop, Winer issuing drawled monologues over the top with Gobi-arid humour. Her work was reissued this year by Light in the Attic on the compilation When I Hit You – You’ll Feel It. Hold On Postcards is its sole unreleased track but maybe its very best. Slurring as if after a boozy nap on a sunbed, her vocal as fried as a bit of fritto misto, Winer slowly recites banal postcard observations from Europe: “Lovely weather, we go to the beach, I’ve been playing boules,” this last revelation with a funny note of astonishment as she stirs briefly out of total indolence. Slipping sunburned and omnipotent from Ajaccio to Nice to Guernsey and beyond, she conjures the listlessness of holidays, and of the wealthy, with a supernatural accuracy. With its piano motifs and sing-song backing vocals, there’s something lulling about this song, and yet a mistral of disquiet feels like it’s about to blow in. “Thinking of you all the time,” she admits amid aloof statements about how many new friends she’s making. Tellingly, her holiday ends – or at least her postcards do – at somewhere called the Hotel Nadir. Ben Beaumont-Thomas PE – The Reason for My Love One of the most unfairly overlooked songs of 2021 could just as easily have come out during the sooty New York summer of 1981. The Reason for My Love, by the young Brooklyn quintet PE, channels the fidgety, dark, and inescapably danceable sound of Mudd Club-era, underground bands like Bush Tetras, the Contortions and ESG. From the fractured, no-wave sax to its briskly undulating bass line to the haunted vocal of Veronica Torres, every sound in the song confronts and thrills. Like some avant-garde ear worm, the falling-apart sound in the song oddly coheres. More, it extends a mini-trend of young bands who have been refiguring New York’s aural history. Just as the debut album by the teenage Brooklyn group Geese recast the sound of local guitar bands like Television and the Feelies, PE’s song gives Manhattan’s underground club history its own dynamic twist. Jim Farber Doss – Look In less than three minutes and about five lines of lyrics, the mysterious New York/Baltimore producer (and sometime PC Music associate) Doss draws an addictive portrait of power, temptation and danger. “You see me on my own,” she chants, and depending on which way she limns the line, it’s either an invitation to approach or a warning to back away. She repeats her mantras of isolation – “not looking at my phone / Myself, on my own” – with the cadence of an expertly bounced basketball; around her, an intense bubblegum synth motif that contains strange echoes of Benny Benassi’s Satisfaction pings and bungees. It’s a tightly snatched, head-down burst that doubles as a defiant anthem for these past two lonely years. Laura Snapes Jenna Esposito – The Other Side of Forever It’s the heartbreak and hopefulness of a turbulent 2021 from the mind of a songwriter who knows them all too well. Ernie Rossi, owner of the century-old gift and music shop E Rossi and Company in New York City’s Little Italy, was sidelined by health problems after reopening following the long city-mandated shutdown. Margaret, his wife of 51 years, knew the neighborhood icon might not stay afloat if doors closed once again and solely took over duties with the couple’s best friend, Freddy. Then this past spring, both Margaret and Freddy caught and died of Covid-19. In the wake of their consecutive deaths, Rossi wrote The Other Side of Forever, a heartfelt tribute to the bond the trio shared and the immense loss he feels. Recorded by the New York indie artist Jenna Esposito, the earworm ballad with a momentous opening and climatic finale was produced in the Italian folk style the store was known for being a chief importer of nearly 100 years ago. And today, Rossi is continuing his fight to stay in business. Rob LeDonne DijahSB – New Harrison “I’m not sure what to do, at this point I didn’t plan to survive,” DijahSB matter of factly spits on New Harrison, a standout from their latest album Head Above the Waters. Be it such commendably frank rhymes (along with social media posts) about mental health, or being an out-and-proud non-binary artist in a genre once notorious for its heteronormativity, the rising Canadian MC certainly is a trailblazer. But aside from breaking such ground, DijahSB is also a student of the game. Rather than chase trap-rap trends, they choose instrumentals that are both breezy and fresh but also frequently steeped in rap’s soulful old-school grooves. The mellow, melancholy yet cheeky beat for New Harrison is a prime example of DijahSB’s past-meets-future motif. That, along with the MC’s penchant for on-point NBA-inspired punchlines throughout the song’s three-and-a-half-minute runtime, make DijahSB’s potential to be an all-star in their own right abundantly clear. Kyle Mullin Dylan Fraser – I’d Rather Be Here There’s something horribly, embarrassingly familiar about the predicament at the centre of 20-year-old Scottish singer Dylan Fraser’s hair-raising track I’d Rather Be Here, released to quiet acclaim this past autumn. The song, which starts with a whisper for attention and ends with a cry for help, is about a specifically awful place to be: in love with someone who is detrimental to your mental health (“the top of these buildings used to feel so tall but maybe that’s ‘cause you made me feel so small”). While many songwriters would use this as a jump-off to celebrate the empowerment that comes attached to then taking flight, Fraser instead focuses in on something far messier: staying there because being with someone harmful is better than being without them. It’s slickly produced but Fraser’s alternately sad and furious desperation is nothing but heartbreakingly genuine. Benjamin LeeThe damaging effects of Covid-19 on employment and earnings for young people from less affluent backgrounds is revealed in a stark new report on the economic and social fallout from the pandemic. The study – a collaboration between the Resolution Foundation and the London School of Economics and Political Science – finds that young people from less wealthy backgrounds were more than twice as likely to have left work during the first 12 months of the pandemic than those from richer households. The effects, it argues, would further widen the pay gap between those from rich and poorer backgrounds, and so damage social mobility. Published for The Economy 2030 Inquiry and funded by the Nuffield Foundation, the study also finds that between April 2020 and March 2021, those aged 25 and under who were in work before the pandemic were almost three times as likely to leave work than those aged 26 and over. It found that 41% of young people from the poorest fifth of households left work, compared with 16% of young people from the richest fifth of households. This, the report says, has resulted in deteriorating financial security for many young people from poorer backgrounds. The proportion of young people saying that their financial situation was “all right” or “comfortable” fell from 64% pre-pandemic, to 54% earlier this year. In contrast, levels of financial security among young people from richer backgrounds rose from 79% to 94%. “The economic impact of the pandemic has fallen heavily on young people, and those from less-affluent backgrounds have been at the epicentre of this crisis,” said Andrew Eyles, research economist at the Centre for Economic Performance at the LSE. “While young people have returned to work in droves during the post-lockdown jobs recovery, the legacy of that earlier unemployment risks scarring their wages for years to come. This could risk worsening social mobility in Britain, as the pay gap between those from rich and poor backgrounds could widen over the course of the 2020s.” Previous Resolution Foundation research has shown that young people losing their jobs during a recession can subsequently face wage penalties of between 13% and 21% up to the age of 42, largely as a result of not working, or working in jobs that they are over-qualified for, during the crucial early phase of their careers. The report also finds that children from poorer backgrounds are likely to have been disproportionately affected by Covid’s economic hit to the labour market. It shows that their parents are twice as likely to have lost their jobs at the start of the year compared with parents from richer households. This is likely to cause a knock-on effect on families’ financial security, which is known to affect children’s subsequent performance and attainment at school. “The pandemic has exacerbated existing inequalities and risks a decline in social mobility over the coming years,” said Alex Beer, welfare programme head at the Nuffield Foundation. “This research highlights the importance of effective catch-up in schools, and the need for greater opportunities for adult training and reskilling.” Last month concerns were raised that chancellor Rishi Sunak’s flagship £2bn pandemic jobs scheme to get young people into work might not be delivering value for money. A report by the National Audit Office (NAO), and a separate one by a group of peers, highlighted concerns over the Kickstart scheme, launched by Sunak in September 2020, which offers government-funded “high-quality” job placements for 16- to 24-year-olds who are on universal credit and at risk of long-term unemployment. The NAO, which monitors value for money on public spending, said the Department for Work and Pensions had only “limited assurance” that the scheme was working as intended. Private sector firms that received state subsidies to hire young people might well have done so anyway, the NAO said, because the economy was reopening just as the scheme began to ramp up. The report also found that there was relatively little early take-up for Kickstart due to successive lockdowns depressing demand for workers. Labour said its own analysis had found that the scheme was heavily weighted towards the south, with as many jobs created there as in the north and Midlands combined, despite higher youth unemployment in those regions. The government says its plans for jobs is working with the number of young employees on payrolls back above pre-pandemic levels.The past week has seen tensions rising about scientific modelling during the pandemic. Projections cited by UK and devolved governments as they tightened Covid restrictions have led to strained exchanges. But modelling is essential because it tell us: • What are the range of possible outcomes based on what we know? Society can’t just wait for things to happen. We can and do save lives by being prepared for a range of things, only some of which happen. As information increases, the model improves, and the range of outcomes narrows as scenarios are eliminated. • What assumptions make the most difference to these outcomes? Modelling told us that hospitalisations per 1,000 infections is important to outcomes, so its measurement was prioritised. Modelling can also show that by the time we know something, it is too late. Thus, it tells when decisions matter. • How do different interventions affect different scenarios? In a world of limited resources, the government may have to choose one measure over another. But some things we can’t test, for example what happens when 10% of ambulance drivers are ill? (We won’t send home 10% one day just to document the consequences.) • The “what if” question. What if Omicron has a short generation time or co-exists with Delta? Scientific models are not set in stone; they are open for inspection, updated with new information and, as errors are discovered, they are corrected. To date, the actual outcomes have been within the range of scenarios. For example, in the autumn, Scotland mandated mask-wearing with exceptions that some ignored, while England made masks voluntary but many wore masks anyway. What actually mattered to case numbers is what people did, not the legislation; no model can capture this perfectly. Governments make the decisions about restrictions. I don’t envy them this burden during Covid but politicians and the public must hear the unvarnished truth about the range of health outcomes of Omicron; this means modelling. But it’s not the only input – economic, political and social considerations (outside science) need to be heard. I do worry that media coverage of Covid has shifted from science journalists to higher profile political journalists. Not for nothing is the political slogan “if you are explaining you are losing” often employed. There is an important role for science-based policy advocates and scientists who explain the conflicting data to the public but avoid policy advocacy. I try hard to be the latter and admire the former; but I caution that it seems impossible to do both. If science becomes a tribal identity, then a chunk of fellow citizens will close their ears, to their and our detriment. Professor Chris Whitty, England’s chief medical officer, is a model of compassion, honesty and humility that we should all aspire to, and some in the science community have fallen short of during Omicron. Some usual suspects, mostly from politics, state they knew all along Omicron was less severe; they did not. There were signs that it could be milder right at the outset and I hoped it would be, but there were good reasons to suspect the opposite. False certainty does harm all round. Proper modelling must consider all plausible outcomes. When the new data was published on Wednesday, the models changed. We are not out of the woods; should Omicron continue to spread rapidly, there are risks for the NHS and those developing long Covid. Those arguing against further restrictions must be given airtime – some have interesting things to say. But those who smear modellers and scientists as “gloomsters” are dishonest and irresponsible. It’s a tactic of the political world, playing the man not the ball. Let’s talk about your models, tell us what you don’t know, what you assume and the risks you are prepared for the UK to run. Just under 150,000 people have died from Covid in the UK. Every one of them meant something. To date, more people have died from Covid in the UK as a portion of the population than in most other advanced countries. We got things wrong. There will be a next time, and we must all do better if such tragedy is to serve a higher purpose. I would urge anyone who gets in front of a microphone or tweets or writes to think of the loss and show a little humility and humanity. James H Naismith is director of the Rosalind Franklin Institute, Didcot, OxfordshirePerhaps I won’t have woken up this morning to the sound of clattering England wickets in the Boxing Day heat of Melbourne. Perhaps, by the time you read this, England will have taken control of the game, even after having capitulated lamely in the first two Tests of the Ashes series. But I would not bet on it. Insanity, they say, is doing the same thing again and expecting a different outcome. There is certainly a touch of insanity in watching England play Test cricket. For those who don’t follow cricket, all this might seem as meaningful as an arcane theological debate over Christmas lunch. England’s travails on the cricket field tell us something, however, about more than just cricket. They illuminate the yearning of our age for immediate highs and instant gratification – and show why that rarely satisfies. The paradox of England’s abysmal Test showing is its success in T20 cricket. For those whose lives are lived beyond the boundary of cricket, I should explain that the game is now split into three distinct formats. In Test cricket, the match can last for up to five days. The “one-day” game was introduced as a shortened version in the 1960s. An even shorter version, Twenty20 (or T20), was born in 2003, a format in which the whole match is completed in around three hours. (There is a shorter version still called The Hundred, but it is played only in England.) In Test cricket, England have lost recent series against India and New Zealand and are currently being dismantled by Australia. Yet, despite being bundled out of the T20 World Cup by New Zealand in November, England remain the top-ranked T20 nation in the world and have reset the way the game is played with their swashbuckling, adventurous style. The desire to invent shorter forms of cricket has been part of the longstanding quest to fit the game into the rhythms of modern life and to make it more exciting. With five-day matches, baffling rules and arcane traditions, Test cricket, of all contemporary sports, must be the one least adapted to the demands of daily life or to the modern temperament. The idea of T20 has been not just to shorten the play but to make it a more thrill-a-minute game. It has certainly attracted the fans, especially in India, where the Indian Premier League has become a magnet for the world’s best players and helped turn the nation into a powerhouse of the game. It has transformed players, making them more athletic, inventive and skilful, some of which has been transferred to the Test arena. Yet much of the guile, craft and patience that defines the longer form of the game has been eroded. And nowhere more so, it would seem, than within the England team. T20 is to Test cricket as a burger is to filet mignon. It’s more exciting only if we confuse cheap thrills with true drama. Drama is what lies at the heart of sport, drama both in the sense of telling a story and as the distillation of moments of great tension. In every game, whether cricket, football or kabaddi, a story unfolds, with villains and heroes, humiliation and catharsis, despair and redemption. The games we remember most are those with the graded shades of highs and lows, of tension and tedium, the ones that leave you feeling as if you have lived a novella. And no sport embodies drama as much as cricket. Cricket has the space and the structure to allow for complex narratives to develop. Complaining that a Test match lasts five days is a bit like moaning that watching Hamlet takes four hours out of your life. It’s no accident that so many great dramatists – Beckett, Pinter, Stoppard, Ayckbourn, Rattigan – have been drawn to the game. The storylines of sport come not just from within the game but from how it is embedded in society and in history, too. Every sport inspires myths, engenders rivalries, arouses a collective sense of hope and aspiration, is infused by broader threads of politics and themes of race, class, gender and nationhood. And all are worked into the drama of sport. Great moments of drama cannot be manufactured artificially to create a thrill, but emerge organically from the narrative. England all-rounder Ben Stokes’s sensational innings to defeat Australia at Headingley in 2019, in a game that by all logic England should have lost; the “miracle of Istanbul” in 2005 when Liverpool were crowned champions of Europe despite the game seemingly being beyond them by half-time; the “Rumble in the Jungle” in 1974, when Muhammad Ali defeated George Foreman to regain his world title in the heat of Kinshasa after having been stripped of it seven years earlier for refusing to fight in Vietnam – all are exhilarating only because of the storyline that built up to the climax and, especially in the Ali-Foreman fight, of the deeper context in which the event is embedded. This is why, compared to Test cricket, T20 can seem more exciting yet less satisfying. It can electrify but, stripped of the wider storyline that infuses it with meaning, it can also feel soulless. This is true not just of cricket. At the climax of this year’s Formula One season in Abu Dhabi, a genuinely thrilling showdown between Lewis Hamilton and Max Verstappen descended into controversy and farce thanks to the decision by the race controller to ignore the rulebook and create a one-lap contest in the final lap. It was a stark reminder that contrived thrills rarely satisfy in sport. In an age in which the 24-hour news cycle puts a premium on the scandalous and the shocking; in which we demand instant streaming rather than have to wait a week for the next episode of a TV series; in which it feels difficult to spend a day immersed in a book without reaching for the distraction of the phone to view the latest WhatsApp message – it is not surprising that sport, too, should seek to satisfy our craving for the instant fix and the constant high. We should resist the temptation. There are certainly times when I hanker for a burger as comfort food. But if I really want to feast, I need that slab of proper steak. Not to mention an England victory in Melbourne. • Kenan Malik is an Observer columnistExploring Leicester Museum &amp; Art Gallery 12 years ago, trainee curator Tara Munroe came across a stack of discarded oil paintings. The troubling scenes they portrayed would go on to change the direction of her career and may soon alter wider attitudes to art history. The paintings depicted wealthy colonial life in South America and the Caribbean, and had been marked for destruction by the gallery. But the images, which each subtly grade racial and social distinctions, spoke clearly and powerfully to Munroe. “To me, they are beautiful paintings but they have a very dark message within them,” she told the Observer as she prepared for the first public display of the unrestored paintings, in Leicester in the new year. Now an expert in black heritage and the director of Opal 22 Arts and Edutainment, Munroe has doggedly continued her research into the origin and meaning of the five rare late-18th-century works she found. First, she persuaded the city’s art gallery &amp; museum to save the works that had originally been categorised as distasteful and irrelevant, then she started to try to discover who had painted them and why. In the last few months, she has won funding from the Heritage Lottery Fund to curate a further, bigger exhibition of the paintings in 2023. The works are examples of a genre known as “casta paintings” and there is only one other collection in Britain. It is also thought there are only about 100 complete or partial paintings known of anywhere, making the Leicester find of international significance. “I want to help people understand the history of racial stereotyping in the colonial era and how the colour bar actually worked. I’d also like to link it to the academic discipline of critical race theory,” explained Munroe. “I’m from a mixed Caribbean background myself, although I am paler skinned, and so I know it is important to study the way colour has been used. It is why the paintings connected with me so much,” she said. The re-evaluation of the paintings Munroe put in train is an instance of allowing prejudiced art back into the visual arts canon, or even “un-cancelling”, and it remains an unorthodox, sometimes controversial approach. Some of the terms used then are now regarded as offensive. “Mulatto is still understood,” said Munroe. “And there are others such as Lobo, or wolf, which was what someone half-Indian and half-black was called. I want to move away from these labels without losing the history, and to be honest I’m scratching my head about the best way to do it.” Munroe, who grew up in Luton, has Chinese and African heritage, and recalls that at school fellow pupils would ask what she was. “My mother would just say ‘green with pink spots’, but that didn’t really help me,” she recalls. Casta paintings date from the 1600s to the beginning of the 19th century and were designed to show race and class divisions in Spanish colonies. Facial expressions and physical attitudes all encode the hierarchy and status of the people painted, and sometimes racial mixtures are identified and inscribed on the canvas. The works Munroe found, which also express contemporary anxieties about racial mixing, were originally donated to the Leicester museum in 1852, by Joseph Noble, a lord mayor of the city. “For me, perhaps the biggest interest to this story is how it shows that we see things differently when we come from a different perspective,” Munroe explains. “A lot of people had looked at these paintings before, and they were just being used to train picture restorers before they were destroyed. It was only because I was working there that I saw something in them. There is a new level of understanding that comes when you have different people working somewhere.” After the restoration work is complete later next year, Munroe plans a series of events and lectures with the aim of understanding the progression of academic attitudes to racial identity.Would Donald Trump make a good pantomime dame? His orange face, crazy talk, weird hair and baggy, saggy outfits are a natural fit for Mother Goose or Widow Twankey. Choleric, chaotic, always changeable, Trump might find cross-dressing a challenge. Then again, maybe not. The future role of America’s “very stable genius” is but one of many dramatic questions marking the end of a grim year when politics frequently descended into dark farce. World leaders too often served up political pantomime, not serious, sensible statecraft. You had to laugh, or else you’d cry. Pantomimes – theatrical entertainments based on folk stories and fairytales that feature clownish caricatures, old songs and corny gags, slapstick comedy, saucy innuendo and a degree of gender switching – have their roots in Italian commedia dell’arte. They offer light relief, distraction and a chance to poke fun at the powerful. Characters such as Harlequin, Scaramouche, Pierrot and Pantaloon were transmogrified on the 19th- century English and American stage into dashing heroes and soppy heroines, despicable villains, incorrigible scallywags, feeble fops and hilarious fools. All are lampooned and ridiculed, often with satirical intent. Modern pantos remain highly popular – and Boxing Day is traditionally the moment when the curtain goes up. Some UK performances have been cancelled or postponed again this year because of Covid worries. But as players and directors always insist, the show must go on. So after all the crises, catastrophes, and avoidable and unavoidable grief that world leaders put everyone through in the past 12 months, it’s only fair to indulge in a bit of virtual seasonal tomfoolery and raillery at their expense. Please give a big hand for the cast of Political Panto 2021! The Dame: Physical characteristics aside, Trump’s claim to be dame is boosted by his unmatched ability to bluster, boast and brag. He can also be extremely, unintentionally amusing. Only last week, the “once and future king” claimed the pandemic was a Chinese plot to foil his rightful bid to rule the world. US presidents often overthrow foreign governments. Trump was the first to try to overthrow his own, thereby redefining the banana republic concept. He jokes he won the 2020 election – and keeps a straight face. He even thinks Vlad “the Impaler” Putin is cool. Besides, Trump would look cute in a dress. Gee, what a dame! The Clown: Many contenders vie for the role of comic lead. Top acts include Éric Zemmour, the far-right presidential candidate of Algerian parentage, who says immigrants are destroying France, and Armin Laschet, the German conservative who thought floods were a laughing matter – until he was drowned out. Channelling Dick Whittington, fallen idol Daniel Ortega voted himself lord mayor of Nicaragua – again! Iran’s turbaned mullah-in-chief, Ebrahim Raisi, who successfully hides his funny side, insisted he really doesn’t want nuclear bombs. Yo, Netanyahu! Just kidding! Turkish straight man Recep Tayyip Erdoğan would jail Cinders, Goldilocks and the Pantomime Horse and Cow if he thought they supported the Kurds. Yet after multiple standup auditions in posh boys’ drinking clubs at Eton, Oxford and Westminster, this year’s comic crown goes to Downing Street’s Buttons: knockabout gagster Boris Johnson, Britain’s pretend prime minister. BoJo partied on regardless as a locked-down nation died of laughter (or just died). As fools, humbugs and charlatans go, there’s no beating Boris! The Fairy Godmother: This wondrous panto sprite dispenses universal goodwill, starlight and transcendental happiness without resorting to class A drugs. In Cinderella and Sleeping Beauty, her magical powers protect her protege from a horrid fate, ensuring she lives happily ever after. Sic. This godparent gig was performed for 16 years by Good Fairy Angela Merkel, known to Germans as “Mutti” (Mummy), firmly guiding a sleepy, slipshod EU. Merkel made the role her own. Now she’s hanging up her wand. Boo! Bad Fairies Liz Truss and Ursula von der Leyen are less glamorous understudies. The Principal Boy: This goody-goody character, traditionally played by a woman in tights and thigh-length boots, could suit Joe Biden, who’s so nice it hurts – although he might trip on his heels. Gabriel Boric, the young socialist voted in as Chile’s president last week, may go far – except the same was said of Salvador Allende. Yet with his charisma, sexy sideburns and strategic vision (as stated in his CV), Emmanuel Macron, the pocket-sized French president also known as Manu, Jupiter and “choupinet” (poppet or sweetie), is a boyish shoo-in. Macron vows to save Europe. Carol singers gratefully chorus: “O come, O come, Emmanuel!” The Baddie: Villains were 10 a penny in 2021, and it’s hard to say who was worst. Belarus’s Alexander Lukashenko staged a vicious parody of Babes in the Wood using helpless refugees. Hungary’s Viktor Orbán, like the mean-spirited Grinch who stole Christmas, tried to cancel democracy. In Brazil, Jair Bolsonaro, the climate-change-denying Wicked Witch of the West, could not see the wood for chopped-down trees. Like Aladdin, Saudi Arabia’s crown prince, Mohammed bin Salman, rubbed his lamp – and dreamed of rubbing out opponents. Myanmar’s genocidal general, Min Aung Hlaing, North Korea’s Kim Jong-un and the Philippines’ Rodrigo Duterte made the Three Ugly Sisters look positively attractive. In Russia, Putin – when not threatening to invade Ukraine – played Robin Hood backwards, stealing from the poor to make oligarchs rich. But it’s China’s leader, Xi Jinping, who gets the nod as the baddiest baddie of them all. Whether it was horror in Xinjiang, hooliganism in Hong Kong, threats to bash Taiwan, dodgy debt deals in Africa, or cyberspying around the world, Xi seemed to be everywhere, like some wicked beanstalk giant or goggle-eyed, fire-breathing dragon. Where’s St George when you really need him? As 2022’s political pantomime season opens, watch out for Xi. He’s behind you! Oh yes he is!I’ll leave it to David Gower to close down the day: “I thought when we got to lunch at nearly two down we’d done ok, then losing Malan right at the cusp of lunch was a body blow. The other one, just before tea from Jos Buttler, at that stage we just needed to get through and start again after the break. My favourite bowler was Mark Wood, even Warner was playing and missing, Woody looked really dangerous. Jimmy did pitch it up and was clipped for a four and another couple which was the right thing to be doing but Jimmy getting hit for runs ... he hates that. The danger man is Mark Wood, if he gets some luck.” A big if and a lot of luck needed. Thanks for all the messages and for sticking through the mis-match. I’ll be here tomorrow to pick through the entrails , see you then! Rob Smyth has rummaged around in the stats bin: here are England’s batting averages since 2012. Root and Cook apart, it’s a sorry old tale. Tinkered team, same flaws. Another innings of fits and starts, spearheaded, as always, by Joe Root, who played beautifully for his fifty before, in the spirit of the season, giving his wicket away. Stokes too did the hard work, Buttler suffered a monumental flush of blood on the stroke of tea. There wasn’t much left for the doughty Bairstow to work with before he too fell to the upper cut. Late runs with gusto from Robinson and Leach added some cheer but the bowlers weren’t able to capitalise - superbly though Wood bowled. Warner’s wicket was a consolation prize, to be pocketed silently. 16th over: Australia 61-1 (Harris 20, Lyon 0) The physio manages to stem the flow of blood and Stokes continues his over. One zips past Harris’ outside edge as he prods forward at a full one and the last ball of the day is edged past gully and rolls perkily over the boundary rope for four. Root looks to the heavens and that is that. Australia stride from the pitch; England shuffle. We’re pausing for some repair work to Harris’s finger... 15th over: Australia 57-1 (Harris 16, Lyon 0) Australia send in the nightwatchman as Anderson returns a wicket-maiden and he and Root exchange rare grins at the end of the over. Root appears to be wearing Anderson’s jumper while he’s bowling. England need another in the next ten minutes. Root turns to Anderson again and he strikes first ball with a beauty that Warner can just fence at and is sucked up by Crawley at gully. At last, a balm. 14th over: Australia 57-0 (Harris 16, Warner 38) Stokes it is, bowling in his short-sleeved jumper, but full. He tumbles over in his follow through as Harris rises up balletically and drives him for four. Harris pokes forward at Stokes’ next one and is beaten. Rob Smyth has woken up and his brain has sparked into a cascade of information. “Calendar years in which England have averaged less than 25 runs per wicket: this is their worst year since 1999, and if they work hard in the second innings they can make it the worst since 1950 (I think they’d have to be out for less than 98 though). Plenty of mitigating circumstances with the pitches and quality of the opposition, but still a pretty damning stat - this is only the third time it’s happened in the last 99 years.” 13th over: Australia 53-0 (Harris 12, Warner 38) Warner brings up the fifty with a perky paddle towards midwicket and is looking ominously good. The ball not really doing much for Robinson here. Ah, looks as if Stokes is going to going to get a go, with about 20 minutes left in the day. 12th over: Australia 48-0 (Harris 11, Warner 35) Magnificent from Wood here who careers the ball into Warner’s body again. Warner escapes the heat with a steer through third man. Wood, not a spare bit of flesh on him, flies into Harris who plays and misses. And some very sad news from South Africa. RIP, great man. 11th over: Australia 44-0 (Harris 11, Warner 32) With an ominous slap through midwicket, Warner plunders a four off a short sit-up-and-beg from Robinson. A enthusiastic shout for lbw is turned down, and England decide not to review. Rightly as it turns out, but I can’t help thinking they’re starting to doubt their judgement even with the DRS. 10th over: Australia 39-0 (Harris 11, Warner 26) Mark Wood hitting the heights, with two balls over 150kph - beats Harris with a beauty, full and fast, but just can’t get the edge. He bleeds effort and exertion. “Hello Tanya,”Hello Abhi Saxena! “As well as Root is batting, this is not very good captaincy. England need some wickets here and he looks so down already. Now I can completely understand why he is feeling burdened but this ain’t good enough if England wants to even draw a game in this series. Forget about any skills, the team looks so passive and lost on the field. Only Wood seems to have some energy. (Please get him another slip)I feel since other things are not working England should go full out attack. Not with the batting playing weird lofts but with the bowling which is their strong suit.” 9th over: Australia 39-0 (Harris 11, Warner 26) Robinson takes over from Anderson and immediately gets one to nip back on Harris. Warner then nips in for a quick three with a cover-drive, and Harris drives another for a couple. Runs-a-flowing. “Don Easter said he was sipping wine,” writes Robert Wong. “I’m drinking wine too but with my dinner, not in celebration!” 8th over: Australia 33-0 (Harris 8, Warner 23) Wood beats Warner for pace, he tries to pull but is hit in the guts. The next ball he chops over gully for four, but the last is brutish and Warner is lucky to edge through the slips for fo. 7th over: Australia 25-0 (Harris 8, Warner 15) Eyeing up a mince pie and wondering if watching England burns calories through nervous exhaustion? Anderson rolls through another over, length generally more pleasing to Root I’d think, and Harris pulls a short one dangerously. An email arrives from Peter Salmon, “Just woke to this horror. Would it be quicker and easier to just fill in the scorecard without having to go through the motions? Haseeb a duck, Zak something between 0 and 15, Malan slightly better than the others except Root, Root a classy half century but no ton, Stokes 20-odd mostly blocking but then has to accelerate and get out, Bairstow looking quite good but no hope of a big score, Buttler doing something stupid because Test cricket is a mystery to him. Perhaps one should at least admire their consistency, but struggling with that right now.” 6th over: Australia 24-0 (Harris 8, Warner 14) Wood replaces Robinson after two overs. He glides in and with his third ball beats Warner at 147mph, Warner’s mouth makes a perfect “o” as the ball slides past the outside edge. Warner takes three from a pull. The camera pans to Root who has his hands on his hips and is wearing his troubles heavily. 5th over: Australia 21-0 (Harris 8, Warner 11) The sun has whipped off its veil now and bakes down on England’s bowlers. Anderson sends down a wide one and Warner shrugs on his matador cloak and carves into a square drive for four. 4th over: Australia 16-0 (Harris 8, Warner 6) Warner upper-cuts Robinson for four over the slips. He’s just laughing at England now. Harris pops an inside edge into the air but there is no fielder to greet it. There are just under 60,000 people watching the great capitulaiton at the MCG today. Boom-boom. 3rd over: Australia 11-0 (Harris 8, Warner 2) Tip and run from Australia as Anderson steams in, no swing to be seen yet. Writes Harry Laing: “Stuffing in the turkey yesterday, felt stuffed once the final cheese board had been dispatched and now watching what can only have been ordained as an inevitable Third Test stuffing by Australia. At least this Ashes is now absolutely over rather than ‘on a knife edge’, ‘Australia’s to lose’ or (even worse) a ‘long shot for England’. “It’s done, dusted and expired. The performances have been so poor, at least we’ll now get the required, significant and long overdue changes. As much as I like Buttler the man, I’ve always felt for Foakes – who has been rated by everyone for ages and yet hasn’t had the chance to shine. Unlike Bairstow (many) and Buttler (too many). “Thanks for keeping us in the loop as the goose cooks.” 2nd over: Australia 8-0 (Harris 7, Warner 0) Ah, its not Wood with the new ball, but Robinson. Blots his copy book with a pick-me ball outside leg stump and an early no- ball. He’s been put together in the same way as Angus Fraser, only with a chirpier disposition. 1st over: Australia 5-0 (Harris 5, Warner 0) Anderson gets the new cherry, carrying the resentment of the bowlers’ union on his shoulders. He pitches full from the start, till Harris get off the mark with a four from a half volley through the onside. “Good evening,” Hello Glenn Houlihan! “It’s still Christmas Day in Cheyenne, Wyoming and somehow I’m watching Robinson and Anderson swatting at Lyon before 11pm. I shouldn’t be surprised, but these dismals have been diabolical beyond belief. Nutcrackers would offer more than England’s current top six. “To make things worse, Boxing Day doesn’t even exist here and the USA v Ireland ODI has been postponed due to COVID. Holiday spirit well and truly crushed.” This is the 13th time (in 28 innings) that England have been out for under 200 for in Test cricket in 2021 (thank you, Tim Wigmore). With a squint, I can look at 185 and think it could have been worse - in the way a hostage eyes up a jam sandwich. Australia were excellent. England’s batting was a dog’s breakfast of attack and defence - the frustration that Root, Bairstow and Stokes all got in before getting themselves out. Oh god, and Warner and Harris are already out there swinging their bats. Allez Mark Wood! A fling too far as Robinson goes large, and the ball soars high and into the hands of the retreating deep midwicket. That’s three for Lyon, three for Cummins and two for Starc. Australia’s big names doing the business, England’s not so much. 65th over: England 185-9 ( Anderson 0, Robinson 22) This is Robinson’s boldest (and most amusing) performance with the bat since his debut for England. Starc gets a disdainful full-blooded slap to the mid-wicket rope. A dirty squirt down to third man for four more. A hoik towards mid-on. A bouncer. A single and Anderson survives the last ball. Can they squeeze another 20 from Australia? 64th over: England 176-9 ( Anderson 0, Robinson 12) Nicely done by Lyon. Time for Robinson to attempt a final-heave ho as Anderson walks to the crease. “I’m sitting sipping wine at a Boxing Day long lunch,” taps Don Easter. “One of the guests is a dental hygienist and people are talking about pulling teeth. It’s a small step away from the cricket.” Leach pushes carefully forward at Lyon but is flummoxed by the turn and spin and pouched by Smith at slip. 63rd over: England 175-8 ( Leach 13, Robinson 12) Leach tickles Starc behind square for a couple then plays out the rest of the over like a child pushing unwanted sprouts around a Christmas plate. “Good morning Tanya,” hello Kim Thonger! “I awake to discover it’s entirely appropriate that we’re having a duck for Boxing Day lunch, but the way England are batting I feel I should have ordered a grouse as well, and possibly baked some humble pie for afters. This feels like the end of the Silverwood era, Root’s captaincy, and Buttler’s wicketkeeping too. I have indigestion before I’ve even had a morning cuppa.” 62nd over: England 173-8 ( Leach 11, Robinson 12) Glasses twinkling through the helmet bars, Jack Leach strides towards Nathan Lyon and bats him down the ground, for six. The next pings through covers as he ruins Lyon for 11 from the over. Writes Jaakko from Queanbeyan. “Regarding Stokes, I’d forget the stats and just ask an Aussie which English batter they fear the most. Always a great relief to see the back of him.” 61st over: England 162-8 ( Leach 0, Robinson 12) A couple of leg byes to put in the basket from Starc. To be honest, Robinson doesn’t look the worst bet for a quick 35. 60th over: England 159-8 ( Leach 0, Robinson 12) If England can make it to 200... 59th over: England 159-8 ( Leach 0, Robinson 11) First riches - an on-drive for three from Robinson, a crunchy Bairstow off-drive full of promise - then rags: a fitting illustration of where England’s innings has ended up. Ah, darn it. Bairstow gets cramped by Starc as the attempted upper-cut brings another victim. He slips inelegantly, drops onto his bum and the ball loops into the hands of the balletic diving Green at gully. 58th over: England 152-7 (Bairstow 31, Robinson 8) Dapper from Robinson, an off-drive straight to the boundary, followed by a flamingo flick off the hips for three off Boland. Of course! They’re very thin, twig-like chocolates, which, at least in the late 80s, were a popular Christmas gift between teenage girls. Group them with jellied fruits and After Eights. 57th over: England 142-7 (Bairstow 29, Robinson 0) Bairstow plays an immaculate defensive block to Cummins, then hauls him square but can only pick up the single. Robinson is greeted with a bouncer but sees out the over with competence. “Good morning.” Hello Damian Clarke. “I’ve always been sceptical of the ‘coffee on my keyboard’ trope, but Mr Kimber’s ‘leg hump’ phrase has taught this old dog a new trick.Not impressed” Outside, the dawn chorus is starting. 56th over: England 141-7 (Bairstow 28, Robinson 0) A first Test wicket for Boland, who is engulfed by his teammates and roared down to the rope as he takes his place on the boundary at the end of his over, pulling his baggy green into place. A cruel take from Richard Williams:“Not so much thought as a suggestion, perhaps all those English batsmen who have got out playing daft shots should be subject to the worst kind of Boxing Day tea break... Having to eat their own bodyweight in bubble and squeak. At this point I’m struggling to think of any better coaching ideas.” Wood stops to give Ollie Robinson some advice on the long walk back to the pavilion. Ball hits pad fractionally before bat and it’s a great decision by Paul Reiffel. Looks pretty out from the sofa... 55th over: England 140-6 (Bairstow 27, Wood 6) Wood plays out a Cummins over, pulling his last ball for a sprightly two. 54th over: England 138-6 (Bairstow 27, Wood 4) Bairstow picks up a Christmas present of a boundary from an inside-edge that air-kisses the bails. Jonny grins, and Boland’s first Test wicket remains elusive. “So, Joe Root, it’s the bowlers that are responsible for England’s woes? Pull the other one,” rattles Darryl Accone. “And surely adieu now to the hopeless Buttler. Foakes will not only score more runs batting steadily but also save a lot more by taking both the regulation catches Buttler can’t and the spectacular ones that Buttler occasionally can - and with less ostentation, in the best keeping tradition. Rusticate Buttler, send him down to the ODIs and the even more brutish T20 arena where he belongs.” “What the lamentable schoolboys’ standard of the English batting shows is that the flat-track bullying that is now one-day cricket does not work in the rarefied, more demanding and subtle Test arena.” 53rd over: England 134-6 (Bairstow 23, Wood 4) The wind has picked up and pushes back at Cummins shirt as he walks back to his mark. A beauty dips in and thwacks Wood on the pad - a huge appeal but they don’t review ... and it was probably just too high. And, with a sigh, WinVIz shows England with a 17 per cent chance of a win just after tea on the first day. “Stokes may not be a great batter” writes Tom Kirkpatrick, “but I wonder what his career would look like if he usually walked to the crease with England 250-4 instead of 50 or 80 odd. Same for Buttler and Bairstow. I think England have wasted a generation of brilliant middle-order batters because they are nearly always needed to make the whole total, rather than turn up and pile runs on top of a total.” There is a thesis to be written on this! 52nd over: England 132-6 (Bairstow 22, Wood 3) Wood is handed the poisoned chalice, but gets off the mark with a perky shovel through point off Lyon. From Australia, Robert Moore thunders: “The top order is gone, so Ben Stokes thinks “I’ll just chip this bouncy big guy over slips. What could possibly go wrong?” The team’s now in real trouble so Jos Buttler thinks, “It’s five minutes before tea, so I’ll hoist their best spinner over that big guy at midwicket. What could possibly go wrong?” Personal responsibility fails again, as does discretion. And I disagree, Tanya, Buttler’s shot was awful, but Stokes’ was worse.” I stand corrected. Is all hope now gone? Does Bairstow glance at the tail and now throw the bat? Is Cameron Green going to be leading Australia in ten year’s time? 52nd over: England 128-6 (Bairstow 21) It’s a difficult one to judge but I think that wins the prize for worst shot of the tour. England’s senior batsmen seem to have come into this match with intent to attack, but without the necessary judgement. Time for another coffee - ping me your thoughts. Oh. Buttler charges down the pitch to Lyon and throws the bat extravagantly but succeeds only in skitting the ball straight to Boland at deep midwicket. Buttler drops his head as he realises where the ball is going. He’s had a shocker. And they take tea. 51st over: England 128-5 (Bairstow 21, Buttler 3) Cummins’ over is interrupted by a pitch invader - so the television runs through the England wickets to fall today - Root and Stokes’s shots were certainly the most culpable. Ooof, Bairstow raises his bat extravagantly to leave Cummins’ last ball - a stroke to induce palpatations - and the ball keeps low. Five minutes till tea. A graphic of woe: 50th over: England 128-5 (Bairstow 21, Buttler 3) Bairstow plays out four dots from Starc before upper-cutting (grimace emoji) ,but successfully over the slips. This is nicely put. Stokes is definitely more than the sum of his parts, but the parts individually wouldn’t get him in the team. Put together though, he’s got magic in his fingertips. 49th over: England 125-5 (Bairstow 17, Buttler 3) A breeze ruffles Cummins’ shirt as he accelerates in. Buttler is off the mark with a waft through mid-wicket. He leaves the last ball elegantly - there’s been so much emphasis on it since the last Test that every England lead feels rather like performance art. Brian Withington writes: “Since you asked, we are off to my brother’s (he of OBO cocktail fame) for a veritable feast. A few years ago we hit upon the perfect festive lunch arrangement which guarantees that our Goodmans goose is cooked to perfection with the minimum culinary effort. We buy it online, collect it from the farm in deepest Worcestershire on or around the 23rd and drop it off at brother John’s on the way home. Then just turn back up a couple of days later and hey presto it’s cooked, sliced and served with all the trimmings (and no washing up). Seriously recommended.” “Did I mention I had a good feeling about this Buttler/Bairstow partnership?” Alas. 48th over: England 121-5 (Bairstow 17, Buttler 0) Starc again, and YJB swivels round and pulls him for four behind the slips - he didn’t get the full bat on it - but enough. Martin asks: 47th over: England 115-5 (Bairstow 11, Buttler 0) The -increasingly magnificent Green greets Buttler with a beauty that squeezes between bat and pad and misses the stump by the width of a Christmas Matchmaker. A wicket maiden and this really is the last knockings of England’s batsmen. “Oh dear, oh dear, oh dear,” says David Gower. Some extra bounce from Green as Stokes tries again to upper-cut and only manages to loop the ball to gully. 46th over: England 115-4 (Stokes 25, Bairstow 11 ) The sun has made an appearance, Lyon’s shadow sprouting out to his left as he approaches the wicket. He pulls at the cuffs of his long-sleeved shirt before starting his run-up. A maiden - and the scoring has slowed down a bit in recent overs. 45th over: England 115-4 (Stokes 25, Bairstow 11 ) Naughty Ben! He slops a foot down the pitch and has a wild swish outside off. Great bowling from Green to pull him in. 44th over: England 114-4 (Stokes 25, Bairstow 11 ) Lyon turns the screw, and Bairstow can’t get past Labuschagne crouching under the helmet at short leg. Next to me on the sofa, the dog snores. Anyone got catering plans for today beyond leftovers? What’s in your MCG picnic? 43rd over: England 114-4 (Stokes 24, Bairstow 11 ) Cameron Green, perfect casting if anyone is looking to make a film of the BFG, wheels in. A better over, good lengths mixed up with a bouncer, that Jonny ducks. The beard, btw, is back. 42nd over: England 113-4 (Stokes 23, Bairstow 11 ) Bairstow is hit on the pad attempting the sweep, picks a single off the next ball. I don’t want to put the mockers on him, but there seems more solidity to Stokes-Bairstow than Stokes-Pope. Brian Withington agrees. “Morning Tanya and a Happy Boxing Day.” Coming right back at you! “Whisper it very quietly, but (despite all indications to the contrary) I have got a sneakingly good feeling about another meaningful Stokes and Bairstow partnership here. Meanwhile, what a relief to listen to a Warne less TV broadcast - as a commentator he really does remain a great bowler.” 41st over: England 111-4 (Stokes 22, Bairstow 10 ) Cameron Green picks up after the drinks - his radar a little wonky. Stokes leans back crab-like and tries to upper cut him but just slices thin air. Some Root stats for you - no sign of him yet on the TV cameras since he marched off in a fury wit himself. 40th over: England 110-4 (Stokes 22, Bairstow 10 ) Oh Stokesy baby, down the pitch ands slams the ball straight into the lower tier of the stand. Bairstow had already crunched Lyon to the brink of the boundary for three and there’s suddenly some intent from England. Perhaps inevitably, they pause for DRINKS. 39th over: England 101-4 (Stokes 16, Bairstow 7 ) There’s no sun to be seen in the MCG sky and both Stokes and Bairstow are in short sleeved woolies, with a black armband in honour of Ray Illingworth, whose death was announced yesterday . Stokes dabbles a loose one from Starc past fine leg for four to bring up the hundred. Baby steps . He then carves into an off-drive straight to the fielder and is visibly irritated. “Ahhh, 3am dirty-wet Manchester, that brings back memories,” writes Andrew Cooper. “I’m 18 years in New York now, and I miss Manchester drizzle. English collapses bring back memories too...” 38th over: England 96-4 (Stokes 12, Bairstow 6) Cummins shuffles his pack and comes up with Lyon, who races through an accurate over - his sixth of the day - in the time it takes to pour a coffee. Enough turn to raise a quarter of an eyebrow. 37th over: England 95-4 (Stokes 12, Bairstow 5) A one-handed cover drive by Stokes to start the over, fetched with tail-wagging enthusiasm by Labuschagne just before the rope. YJB has a somewhat dicey throw of the bat up and over the slips for a couple more. Starc looks unimpressed. 36th over: England 89-4 (Stokes 9, Bairstow 2) Boland, on his Test debut, accelerates into the crease, all bustle and Darren Gough-like broad backside. Fielders surround Bairstow like locusts, but they scamper through for a couple of singles. Rapid running between the wicket could be their secret weapon - if Stokes’ body is up for it. 35th over: England 87-4 (Stokes 8, Bairstow 1) Thank you Jonathan, great stuff and good morning from 3am dirty-wet Manchester. I paused in the kitchen for a Boxing day spoonful of trifle just as Joe Root went fishing outside off stump - I don’t think there’s a link. Anyway, here we are again: Stokes improves the addition slightly by pulling Starc for four off the last ball of the over. 34th over: England 82-4 (Stokes 4, Bairstow 0) Stokes continues to wander down the pitch to bowlers who seem to relish the prospect. Boland is the paceman on this occasion who roars an appeal for leg before with Stokes in no-man’s land. England in quicksand. And with that, I shall hand you over to Tanya Aldred. Catch you here tomorrow! “Greetings from dark and cold -9 degree Berlin,” begins Richard Williams. “Have tried to explain cricket to my German guests but to be honest they have quickly given up asking about the rules and are more intrigued as to why I would subject myself to staying up all night to watch an inevitable defeat. I’ve got nothing... At least you’re getting paid for this.” I think their line of enquiry is the more interesting of the two conversations. Cricket is an inherently silly game, one that would never be invented today. However, why we remain fixated by it, and waste hours arguing over its eccentricities (especially in support of a hapless side), can reveal much about the human condition. You know the script by now. Root passes 50 but fails to make a ton. This time he chases a Starc length delivery angling across him into Carey’s gloves. He needn’t have played at it. Australia cock-a-hoop. 33rd over: England 82-4 (Stokes 4) 32nd over: England 82-3 (Root 50, Stokes 4) Beauty from Boland to herald the start of his eighth over, beating Root on the outside with a delivery that kissed the deck and snuck from its expected trajectory by a fraction. The bowler loses his line soon afterwards though, and Root milks the single down to fine-leg for his 53rd 50 in 112 Tests. This one has been industrious and effortless so far, in the face of some excellent bowling, and no shortage of failure at the non-striker’s end. 31st over: England 81-3 (Root 49, Stokes 4) Starc, bowling in a sleeveless sweater, over-pitches to Stokes who leans into an off drive that again has to be run for three - the outfield still feeling the effects of the morning drizzle. Starc continues to search for line and length on a frustrating day for the big quick, leaking a couple of deliveries down the leg side and scrunching his face up in puzzlement at his absence of rhythm. 30th over: England 77-3 (Root 48, Stokes 1) Boland’s seventh over begins with a short and wide loosener and Root is ruthless, carving it behind point for four. He makes it back-to-back boundaries with a controlled thick-edge along the ground through the cordon. It’s almost three in the over, but a square drive to a full delivery holds up in the slow outfield and he has to settle for two. Typical Root, almost 50, at a handy strike-rate, with the minimum of fuss. 29th over: England 67-3 (Root 38, Stokes 1) Now thee’s a sight, the lesser spotted Mitchell Starc is handed the ball for the first time since the fifth over, and he begins his spell replacing Cummins with his two best deliveries of the day - straight to Root, just short of a good length. He then over-pitches and Root is onto it in a flash, driving for a handsome three. Stokes again finds himself fending with a gloved hand at ball that gets big on him. This tweet does not reflect well on the English system. 28th over: England 64-3 (Root 35, Stokes 1) Boland has been selected to complement his skipper after lunch, which means Mitchell Starc, who bowled only three poor overs with the new ball, remains on ice. Stokes, who hinted, unwisely, at walking at Cummins, does follow through against Boland, and is immediately rapped on the gloves from a length delivery. Back to the drawing board. Boland then gifts Stokes a single to get off the mark into the on-side. Root meanwhile continues to rotate the strike and accumulate steadily. 27th over: England 61-3 (Root 33, Stokes 0) Cummins completes the 27th over that was curtailed after three deliveries and the wicket of Malan. He sends down three more balls to Stokes, the second of which was a ripsnorter that lifted off a length and whistled past the startled batter. And we’re back after lunch... That was two hours of high-class nip-and-tuck Test cricket on the opening morning at the MCG. But it could all be distilled into two words: Pat Cummins. The Australian skipper won the toss then ripped out England’s top three before lunch to guide his side into a strong position at the interval. Cummins is really pushing hard in this spell and again he finds an extra ounce of energy to make the ball lift and seam off a length, beating an unnecessary fish from Root. The follow-up jags back in towards Root’s personal pipe but he manages to squirt his way off strike with a single. And then Cummins is rewarded. Masterful bowling. The same line and length to Malan as the previous over, this time the edge carries straight to Warner at first slip. Massive moment as the players walk off for lunch. Pat Cummins, take a bow. 27th over: England 60-3 (Root 32) 26th over: England 60-2 (Malan 14, Root 32) Lyon moves around the wicket to Root to cut off the release single through midwicket. The batter responds by dropping deep in his crease and milking a run through gully. Lunch is imminent. 25th over: England 59-2 (Malan 14, Root 31) More excellent Test cricket. Full and wide and fast from Cummins for three deliveries, then a bumper at Root’s helmet that the England skipper pulls cleanly for a single. Cummins then draws a healthy outside edge but Malan played with a dead bat from the crease and the ball died long before it reached second slip. When Cummins bowls there’s always something happening. 24th over: England 58-2 (Malan 14, Root 30) A lovely over of cat-and-mouse between Lyon and Root. The field is set to entice Root into going over the top, the ball is offered up outside off, but the England skipper is not biting. Eventually he exchanges leg-side nurdles with Malan to keep England rolling. Root has skipped to 30 relatively drama-free and the best batting of the day remains ahead of him. 23rd over: England 55-2 (Malan 15, Root 28) Almost everything has been full this morning, so when Cummins bends his back and drops one short Malan isn’t quick to sway out of the way. The leftie keeps his composure, continues to play languidly from the crease, and earns a couple with a checked drive through the covers. Not for the first time this series, this partnership has stabilised England’s innings and kept Australia honest. 22nd over: England 53-2 (Malan 11, Root 28) Root works Lyon away for a single to move up to third on the all-time list for runs in a calendar year. He remains a chance to knock off Viv Richards and then Mohammad Yousuf before the Test is over. Malan copies his skipper, getting down to the non-striker’s end and denying Lyon the opportunity to bed in. Tom Newman has emailed in suggesting Scott Boland, Australia’s debutant, resembles Benedict Cumberbatch. 21st over: England 51-2 (Malan 10, Root 27) Green did well in his holding role (four overs 0/6) but captain Cummins has decided he needs to break this vital England partnership. He begins his second spell over-pitching and Root elegantly strokes the ball down the ground for three. Malan then follows suit, although with less elegance, but it’s not how, it’s how many, right? Three more singles keep the scoreboard moving in a veritable avalanche of runs for England. 20th over: England 42-2 (Malan 6, Root 22) Malan is getting bogged down out there (six from 50), and he does not look happy facing Lyon. The bowler definitely has the upper hand, dictating whether the batter moves forward or back. He even gets away with a long-hop that Malan can only carve to point. Good signs for Australia with Lyon in the mix so early. 19th over: England 42-2 (Malan 6, Root 22) Green is straight to Root, too straight, according to Ricky Ponting. But the batsman will not have appreciated another blow to his midriff. The deflection earned a leg-bye, preceding a handsome drive from Malan for one - courtesy of some superb point fielding from Lyon, then a neatly clipped off drive for a couple from Root. This is tight nip-and-tuck Test cricket, but there has been nothing to demonstrate this was an automatic bowl-first surface. Australia have been disciplined but only Cummins has looked inspired. “What, please, is a heavy ball?” asks Ross McGillivray, not unreasonably. “I thought they all weighed pretty much the same, as stipulated the the laws of the game.” Try this excellent recent piece from Cricinfo, for an answer. 18th over: England 38-2 (Malan 5, Root 20) Nathan Lyon is introduced early to probe the outside edge of Malan’s bat. There’s bounce on offer (as usual for a bowler who generates so much overspin) and some turn too, albeit slow off the grassy surface. Malan sees off a maiden from deep in his crease. 17th over: England 38-2 (Malan 5, Root 20) Green finally gets a look at Root, and it’s an even contest with the bowler’s heavy balls being resisted by the batter hanging on his back foot. A neat backfoot drive square adds a couple to the total. 16th over: England 36-2 (Malan 5, Root 18) Boland continues to blow in, putting heart and soul into every delivery. Malan is reed-like, allowing each gust to blow through him while he remains patient. Stephen Herzenberg is making the case for Liam Livingstone to open the batting, and become England’s frontline spinner: “... with Crawley (or Bairstow). And Liam should also be the spinner so they don’t need Leach/Bess. His bowling figures (FC, T20, less so list A) compare favourably with Moeen Ali’s and are comparable with Adil Rashid’s.” What I like about an approach like that is England seem continually to reject selections that may provide some impetus at the top of the order. Instead of “taking the shine off the new ball” why not find the next Trescothick and adopt a David Warner approach to put the pressure on the new ball bowlers? The Jason Roy experiment didn’t work, but surely a side so powerful in white-ball cricket can find a dasher that can come off one in every three or four knocks, and sell the message of such a that trade off? 15th over: England 36-2 (Malan 5, Root 18) A second over on the trot from Green to Malan, this one ending with a single off the hip. It was an over dominated by the bowler though, including a cross-seamer that held its line from around the wicket to beat the outside edge. There is something Flintoff 2005 about Green. Great physique, high arm, heavy ball, ability to bowl from around the wicket to left-hand batters. Serious all-round talent. 14th over: England 35-2 (Malan 4, Root 18) Boland does indeed replace Cummins, and his first delivery after drinks is edged along the ground through gully for four by Joe Root. The next five balls are a splendid tussle between bowler and batter with Root eager to get off strike and Boland varying his length to deny his foe any control of timing. The ball really does seem to hit the bat hard from Boland’s deliveries, despite the mid-130kph speed gun. “It’ll be interesting to see how England react to being under the cosh in Australia, seeing as they’ve never been in this position before. Eh? EH??” Thanks Simon McMahon. 13th over: England 31-2 (Malan 4, Root 14) Boland is off - presumably to swap ends and replace Cummins - which means Cameron Green, Joe Root’s tormenter in chief this series, is into the attack. Green has Malan on strike to begin with though, and batter and bowler are happy to play out a maiden of rangefinders. Drinks. 12th over: England 31-2 (Malan 4, Root 14) The England skipper looks to have his eye in now and his hands are feet are moving in sync, getting in line with the ball and always probing for runs. A couple arrive through the on-side during a high-class duel with his Australian counterpart, one that ends with the ball arcing away from the bat and into the wicketkeeper’s gloves. The Aussie skipper’s new-ball spell stands at 2-14 from six overs. Outstanding. “Is there any point in thinking that England might make a match of it,” emails Trevor Tutu. 11th over: England 29-2 (Malan 4, Root 12) Another couple to Root at the start of Boland’s third over, but he doesn’t look totally at ease against the debutant. After rotating strike Malan finds the third-man boundary with that trademark angled thick-edge of his down through the gully region. “Whatever your opinion on Joe Root the captain, whenever he goes out to bat, he is always, always, smiling. The pressure he must be feeling, yet somehow he can compartmentalise and keep on smiling - bravo Joe.” Hear hear Sam Johnson. 10th over: England 22-2 (Malan 0, Root 9) More brilliance from Cummins, bruising that perfect line and length repeatedly, squaring-up Root and almost inducing an edge. Again Root replies by calmly rotating the strike, this time working three wide of midwicket. The G can do that. The acoustics are very echoey, tinny, and loud. If it sounds off right now, just wait until after tea when the cheap seats are lubricated. 9th over: England 19-2 (Malan 0, Root 6) Boland strays onto Root’s pads so the No 2 ranked batter in the world clips the ball away to the square-leg fence for the first boundary of the day. Lovely follow-up from the Victorian though, getting some movement off a length to beat Root’s forward prod twice in a row. On both occasions the ball strikes Root near his Adelaide Oval unmentionables. And a third! This time repelled by a combination of splice and glove. Excellent bowling. Cummins honours the endeavour with a short-leg. Root responds with a clear head, rotating the strike with a nudge into the covers. 8th over: England 14-2 (Malan 0, Root 1) Root’s off the mark first ball with some tip and run. Not for the first time this series he and Malan are in the middle much earlier than they would have preferred. If they fail to dovetail for an hour or so, this Test could be all-but over by lunch. “Jono, Here we go again,” begins David Griffiths. “It’s always a delicate choice, whether to dare to hope, or whether to just enjoy wallowing in the self-loathing &amp; recriminations of yet another England Ashes defeat. For me, it all started going pear-shaped when TV cameras showed Root sprinting up the tunnel, presumably to get his pads on in time to bat. (Probably, an easy canter would have just about sufficed).” David, if you haven’t already, engage self-loathing mode. Check back after lunch for further instructions. Pat Cummins is brilliant. He’s been full all morning but just bent his back a fraction more early in his fourth over and the extra zip and bounce squares Crawley up, finds the shoulder of the bat, and Green does the rest at point. Crawley looked in decent nick but such is the lot of the opening bat that occasionally the new ball bowler can make something happen. 7th over: England 13-1 (Crawley 12, Malan 0) Starc has been hooked after three disappointing overs, which means a huge moment for Scott Boland, the Victorian coming on to bowl his first over in Test cricket, and at his home ground too. For those unfamiliar, Boland is a strong, barrel-chested seam bowler who sends down a very heavy ball. Not dissimilar to peak Tim Bresnan. He’s been taking Sheffield Shield wickets for fun in recent seasons. He quickly settles into a nice fifth-stump line to Crawley, but he’s yet to nail his length, although he’s erring on the side of full, which is encouraging. A tip-and-run single keeps the scoreboard moving. 6th over: England 12-1 (Crawley 11, Malan 0) More runs to Crawley, this time driving a couple through the covers, then clipping three off his pads, profiting from Cummins over-pitching in search of the fuller length this surface demands. There are no demons in this pitch, nor is there an abundance of movement in the air. As tends to be the case here, the toss should not prove pivotal. 5th over: England 7-1 (Crawley 6, Malan 0) Starc still hasn’t adjusted his line and length. He’s getting no swing into the right-handed batters and he’s wasting the new ball giving Crawley plenty of sighters. But on the final delivery of the over Crawley gets a healthy slice of luck, aiming to tuck away a rare delivery on his pads into the leg-side, but instead getting a leading edge that flies harmlessly over cover. “Hi Jonathan,” hi Des Platt. “Apart from last year’s lockdown it’s the first year for years that my local pub hasn’t been open on Christmas night and I’ve usually enjoyed watching the first couple of hours of the Melbourne Test whoever Australia’s opponents are. Many years I would’ve been disappointed not to be able to watch but I have to say that this year I really can’t be bothered. I don’t really care whether England win or not anymore. Apart from the scrambled thinking by the coach and captain, I really find it difficult to support any cause the ECB might support. They will probably commission a special report directed to find it’s all the fault of stick-in-the-mud county members and recommend abolishing the counties and playing all franchise pub cricket. Sorry to be so gloomy but I really can’t see it any other way.” 4th over: England 4-1 (Crawley 3, Malan 0) Cummins is bowling beautifully, moving the ball off the seam at serious pace, befuddling Dawid Malan. There’s a hint of shape into the left-handed batter from the right-arm over bowler too, which makes the job of gauging line and length even more perilous. 3rd over: England 4-1 (Crawley 3, Malan 0) Starc has not looked anywhere near as dangerous as his skipper, continuing to bowl both too short and too wide with the new ball. There are ‘oohs’ when Crawley throws his hands at a wide one - and misses - but there’s no rhythm at the moment from the big leftie. Replays of Hameed’s dismissal do not bode well for his Test future - trapped on the crease to a stock new ball delivery, pushing forward with his hands away from his body after taking a big step backwards. 2nd over: England 4-1 (Crawley 3, Malan 0) Cummins completes his successful first over by ripping a jaffa just past the shoulder of Malan’s bat. He’s already just about justified his decision at the toss. Beautiful start to the Boxing Day Test for Zak Crawley, presenting the full face of the bat to a half-volley from Pat Cummins that would be four most days here, but because of the early rain it holds up in the outfield. The Australian skipper responds by landing a textbook delivery in the corridor of uncertainty that Hameed nicks behind. I think for most fans it’s a day out over Christmas, like a family trip to the panto or a Boxing Day football match in England. But slaughter, always slaughter. 1st over: England 1-0 (Hameed 0, Crawley 0) Mitchell Starc begins the Boxing Day Test with a huge no-ball, coming over the wicket to the right-handed Hameed. It’s the only run from an over Hameed watches through to Carey’s gloves. Starc’s length is just short of good, but his line is wayward, starting outside off and slanting the ball further away. He straightens later in the over, but Hameed can then leave on length. All a bit anticlimactic. Perhaps, but I think Cummins has taken away England’s only sniff of a possible advantage. Australia are out taking their fielding positions. Haseeb Hameed and Zak Crawley are in the middle. It’s a short-sleeve sweater day. Game on. Anthems done, Welcome to Country observed, half-an-hour later than planned we are ready to go. “Having read Robert Wilson’s email, I now have to live with the knowledge that I’m the sort of person that would read Richard Hadlee’s righteous condemnation of the Lee/Morgan video and then click to watch it anyway. I’ll try to be a better person next year.” Me too Tom Hopkins, me too. Anyone visiting the MCG during this Test, be sure to check out the superb library. The librarians are always helpful to show a newcomer around and explain some of the fascinating items in the collection. Interesting Tweet. I think Smith and Australia benefited from how last-minute and hurried it all was, as well as there being no shortage of other issues to discuss. Winning always helps too. One for readers to chew over... After Andy Flintoff (not that one) we have now been contacted by Mark Lathwall (not that one either!). “Too many people focus on the extent to which project Universe Jos has sacrificed the talents of Jonny Bairstow and Ben Foakes, when perhaps the true victim has been the last English batsman to average over 40: Sussex’s Ben Brown. I sometimes feel that if he and Foakes didn’t keep wicket they’d have played more tests by virtue of not getting dragged into Buttler’s ever-collapsing star.” The art/science of selection is fascinating, isn’t it? Some players are picked, some pick themselves, others just don’t fit the fashion, for whatever reason. The revised schedule: Lunch 1-1.40pm Tea 3.40-4pm Official stumps 6pm with an extra 30 minutes possible. “I managed to convince my very heavily pregnant wife to allow me to spend a day at the MCG today based on my argument that it was halfway to the Royal Women’s Hospital should there be any movement,” emails Vincent. “I’m hoping for no movement today, as much as the English batting order are.” Fingers crossed for you and your wife. My progeny is now six, and I can recall the hours either side of him busting out vividly. In hindsight, I’d have preferred to have been at the G. Joe Root didn’t seem overly bullish at the toss - presumably gutted he wasn’t bowling first on an overcast day, on a strip with plenty of grass coverage - but he was on the front foot earlier this week. A reminder of the changes made my both sides coming into this clash. Australia David Warner, Marcus Harris, Marnus Labuschagne, Steve Smith, Travis Head, Cameron Green, Alex Carey (wk), Pat Cummins (c), Mitchell Starc, Nathan Lyon, Scott Boland. England Zak Crawley, Haseeb Hameed, Dawid Malan, Joe Root (c), Ben Stokes, Jonny Bairstow, Jos Buttler (wk), Ollie Robinson, Mark Wood, Jack Leach, Jimmy Anderson. Joe Root: “We probably would have done the same (bowled first), to be perfectly honest. You speak to a lot of local guys who played a lot of Shield cricket recently when the wicket looked like this it was a reasonable place to bat. The first hour is crucial as always. An opportunity to put runs on the board early... We are a better side than what we have played so far and this is a great opportunity to show even that we are just that.” Pat Cummins: “Feels like a bowling day. There is good grass coverage on the wicket. Doesn’t mean we are going to bowl them out, but we think we are well suited to bowl.” On Scott Boland: “He has been a seasoned performer. He plays on this wicket very, very well. We earmarked him and a few injuries that made the decision easier. He is a great option for us. We are lucky to have him.” Joe Root called heads, the coin landed tails, England are padding up. Theo in Colchester is up late, and he has used his time well. “With a delayed toss I think it’s time to share my theory about this Aussie team’s likability, which has been percolating since the World Cup. As an England fan, it’s impossible not to notice that the current crop of Aussie fast bowlers are all troublingly likeable: Cummins, Starc and Hazlewood seem consistently delightful, and Richardson, Neser &amp; now Boland have all come across very well. The batters, on the other hand, are essentially a list of people I’d love to see taken down a few pegs. Smith &amp; Warner obviously, Labuschagne probably just because he’s a bit too good. And the ODI team brings more examples, Finch in particular. So the question is, where does that leave us with Nathan Lyon? I can’t quite work out where spinners fit.” Some thoughts of my own. Isn’t this true the world over? Seam bowlers are better, nicer, more handsome, erudite, charming, honest, and brave than batters*. I’m surprised you dislike Aaron Finch, I thought he always came across well to non-Aussies. Nathan Lyon... try this on for size. *I may have been a bowler / No 11 in a former life. “Dear Jonathan, Merry Christmas, girls and boys.” Seasons greetings to you too Robert WIlson. “I see you popped the Brett Lee v Piers Morgan vid in our stockings for good measure. A nice opportunity for me to come over all Bah Humbug and go full Scrooge. Like everyone else, I laughed myself sick at it at the time (even Piers’ mum must struggle with her gag reflex when he comes looming in under the mistletoe). Then I read what the real Gandalf, Richard Hadlee, had to say about it and I burned and twisted in an agony of shame. Hadlee’s sense of humour failure was total and glorious. Armoured in virile probity, he made me (and ol’ Brett) look like horrid little squits. To the White Kiwi wizard, it was a vile dereliction for an elite athlete to risk the health of a middle-aged amateur however obnoxious. I hadn’t been shown so comprehensively the difference between a man and a boy since I was about six. I recommend his text. It will make your nads retract right back in. That said, if anyone has a video of them peeing in his coffee, I’m up for that.” Here is Sir Richard, in all his glory: 30 minute delay. Toss at 10.30am, play to begin at 11am. England entered the Melbourne Test 2-0 down during the 1998-99 Ashes tour and managed to pull off one of the most satisfying victories in Mark Ramprakash’s career. What England need at this point is for some players to find that inner steel. I do believe they have it in them. The squad contains some strong personalities – Ben Stokes, Root, Dawid Malan – who are perfectly capable of imposing themselves as Stewart did in 1998. On paper the gap between the sides is not so big, but if England don’t find the inner strength to come out and compete the Aussies will continue to steamroller them. On the subject of England recovering from 2-0 down with three to play, senior players made the right noises pre-Test. Brollies down, covers coming off. We might have a toss soon. “Festive greetings, Jonathan,” and to you Andrew Benton. “As Elton John once sang, ‘It’s a sad, sad situation, and it’s getting more and more absurd’. It would be a fair miracle if England were to regain the urn, the change in attitude and aptitude needed to win three in a row is surely beyond them. If miracles are going to happen, there are many far more worthy causes to which they should be applied. Fielding mistakes and giving away wickets should have been ironed out in the summer, and it will be interesting to see if the pressure applied by management over the past few days has any result. At least some learning could then be legitimately be said to be happening.” All relevant points. However, I think the most salient is simple one: that this cohort of Australians are better at cricket than their English rivals. This is magnified in Australian conditions. Exacerbated further by injuries and lack of preparation to the tourists. I feel like much of the “Root must to do this” analysis, and heated discussions about application or concentration are mostly performative and largely empty. What really needs resolving is the problem of why this England side is so poorly equipped for this challenge; repeatedly. Until then, the incidental gripes around fielding and captaincy will be little more than piddling into the wind. Pass the time while the drizzle hangs around with Simon Burton’s look at Boxing Day Tests of yore. The Boxing Day Test has become, in the words of Mark Butcher, “a major part of cricketing folklore”, but it was a surprisingly recent addition to the calendar. England and Australia first met on that date in 1950, when the second Test resumed on 26 December after two days off. The following year, West Indies played Test cricket on Christmas Day itself, which one tourist declared “sacrilegious” and was not much more popular with the home side. “I have never played on Christmas Day before in my life and don’t like having to do so now,” an unnamed Australian said. Here is the cut strip that won’t be used for a while yet. Confirmation the toss has been delayed. Good luck to Dave. By midway through the afternoon session, being in the outer at the G is not always the most relaxing place for an Englishman. (I speak from personal experience.) As for the toss. Yes, you’d reckon it’s a bowl-first, but a wet outfield may force some second-guessing. I’m not sure it matters much for Cummins, but Root really has to attack, and with such a weak batting order around him, making early inroads with the new ball may be his only route to victory. There’s been plenty of talk about the pitch here at the MCG, but - Melbourne being Melbourne - the start of play is under threat from drizzle. Just ten minutes out from the toss, the pitch is under cover as some rain drifts across the arena. It’s been midsummer beautiful in Victoria for a week or so, but conditions today are cool, there’s a blanket of cloud swaddling the CBD, and some of it is heavy enough to reach ground level. Some sad news to begin with following the announcement of the death of former England allrounder, captain, coach, selector, and self-appointed supremo, Ray Illingworth. Hello everybody and welcome to live over-by-over coverage of the Boxing Day Ashes Test. We’re underway at the Melbourne Cricket Ground at 10.30am local time (11.30pm UK). I hope you’re all well-fed, well-rested, and ready for one of the landmark days on the sporting calendar. As Cliff Richard sang, it’s a time for giving (your wicket away reverse-sweeping to point during a blockathon) a time for getting (dropped), a time for forgiving (Jos Buttler) and a time for forgetting (Joe Root winning the toss in Brisbane). Now let’s rejoice in the good that we see. That good includes the selection of Scott Boland, only the second Indigenous Australian man to be awarded a baggy green, as well as the prospect of 70,000 or so fans inside the MCG, providing one of sport’s most incredible audiences. There’s England’s final chance to right some wrongs in the battle to regain the Ashes. Pat Cummins is back. So is Jonny Bairstow. And Zak Crawley. So put the wrapping paper in the recycling, lay out your selection box on the table, and settle in for one of the best days (or nights) of sport of the year. I’ll be back with more shortly, but if you would like to join in, you can reach me by email or Twitter (@JPHowcroft).The space between Christmas and New Year is normally treated as pretty sacred in political circles. There are a few modest pre-prepared government and opposition announcements to keep journalists in business while everyone else switches off and remembers what their families look like. Not so this year. In the next few days, there will most likely be a cabinet meeting, albeit one on Zoom, to discuss whether England needs more restrictions to stop the spread of Omicron. After nearly two years of Zoom meetings, everyone is well aware of how hard it is to read the mood of a group of people through a computer screen. Some of Boris Johnson’s problems with his party have stemmed from the lack of real contact between the prime minister and MPs. It hasn’t helped that the internet in Downing Street is about as reliable as Johnson’s commitment to being straight with people. But even when the wifi signal is strong, the prime minister has failed to read the virtual room and has often ploughed ahead with jokes and upbeat speeches while his colleagues stare disconsolately at their screens. But Johnson can’t have failed to notice that the mood on his cabinet calls is now very different to just a couple of months ago. It’s not the internet connection that’s breaking up, but his relationships with his own ministers, some of whom used to be very happy to support and cheer him along. Now the mood has soured. The next Zoom will be a tense affair and not just because there is a split in the PM’s top team over whether to shut down more parts of society again to keep Omicron under control. His own authority is in question, too. Last week’s cabinet call felt different partly because of the conspicuous absence of Lord Frost, who had sensationally resigned over the weekend. It also, according to those taking part, was mildly unsettling because Johnson wanted to hear what they thought and didn’t seem confident about making a decision. The ministers most sceptical about the wisdom of more restrictions also felt safe enough to push Johnson on whether he had enough data and whether the modelling on how infections might spread was right. Not only is the prime minister weak after months of political mistakes and the biggest Commons revolt of his leadership on vaccine passports, but cabinet ministers are also aware that their colleagues on the backbenches want them to be more challenging so that there aren’t further mistakes in the new year. It is no coincidence that two of the most outspoken ministers against early restrictions last week were also the two most prominent leadership contenders: Liz Truss and Rishi Sunak. Both have been busily courting backbenchers as they start to build their own campaigns for the top job. All this canvassing work means they’ve got a much better grasp of how Tory MPs are feeling than Johnson does. They know there is a growing anxiety that the Conservative party is becoming what one senior Tory warns is a “patrician Covid-state party” that signs off more curbs on people’s freedom, partly out of fear that it could knock over the fragile NHS at any moment. Sunak has the added frustration of having to find more and more funding for the health service while the businesses whose activities end up funding the NHS through taxation keep struggling because of the ongoing uncertainty and on-and-off nature of restrictions. Kwasi Kwarteng, the business secretary, has similar concerns and has been increasingly resistant to more curbs. He and his junior ministers have often overstepped the government line in media interviews to try to push policy in their direction. There are now few consequences for going against the agreed line, not least because there isn’t always a line to break. Mind you, recently it has been a miracle that any minister agrees to go out and do media at all. On some of the worst days of the rows about Downing Street Christmas parties, the cabinet were nowhere to be seen. It wasn’t just the indefensible behaviour at the heart of the stories, but also that Johnson has squandered a great deal of loyalty among his ministers over the preceding months. Take Grant Shapps. He has long been known as someone who would happily go on to any broadcast outlet and bat for the government, but allies of the normally Tiggerish transport secretary say he’s felt badly burned recently by the way Downing Street managed to botch the briefing of the government’s integrated rail plan so that a £96bn programme of upgrades ended up sounding like swingeing cuts to the railways. Chief whip Mark Spencer isn’t at all visible in the media but his efforts to defend the prime minister to the rest of the party have gone without any real thanks. Indeed, Johnson has left Spencer feeling humiliated in recent months by making him sack a junior ministerial aide, Angela Richardson, over her refusal to support his attempt to overhaul the parliamentary standards regime and help Owen Paterson escape his punishment for breaking lobbying rules. Spencer then had the grim task of reinstating Richardson 24 hours later. “Boris shot Mark in the head,” says one pal of Spencer’s. “The chief backed him all the way through the leadership. All the way.” Last week, Spencer saw more Downing Street briefings against him, as Johnson still blames the chief whip for persuading him to try to get Paterson off the hook in the first place. Other MPs point out that Johnson can’t blame Spencer for his own failure to read the “absolutely damning” report about Paterson. But there is little trust or affection between the prime minister and the man who is supposed to be his top enforcer. Jacob Rees-Mogg is another recipient of hostile briefings from No 10. He could leave the cabinet in a mini-reshuffle in the new year, but that’s only if things go to plan for Johnson. Currently, the bigger risk is that the leader of the House resigns before then, having also been made to look a fool during the Paterson row and now anxious about Covid restrictions. Other ministers who aren’t going anywhere are nonetheless frustrated that they’ve had to go out and clarify things that their prime minister, who is supposed to be a natural communicator, has made a mess of. A number of them had to dampen down a furious row in the party sparked by Johnson thinking aloud about a “national conversation” about mandatory vaccinations. The health secretary, Sajid Javid, was the one who managed to stop a backbench explosion by ruling out this policy, but it left many middle-of-the-road Conservatives wondering what was going on if the prime minister had to rely on Javid, quite a dry character, to clarify his words. Johnson does have a few genuine loyalists left at his top table: the culture secretary, Nadine Dorries, is the fiercest among them and was recently booted out of a WhatsApp group with fellow Tory MPs for telling her colleagues to give the PM more credit. But even those who are quite comfortable with more Covid restrictions are still milking their leader’s current weakness. The levelling-up secretary, Michael Gove, has been in a stand-off with Sunak over the amount of money he wants to commit to infrastructure, housing and other projects in the north and Midlands. But colleagues also suspect he has delayed his big levelling-up white paper partly because he knows that waiting a little longer will mean the prime minister is weaker and will have to give in to more of his demands. Of course, ministers always try to play games to get their way. But normally the Downing Street operation is strong and effective enough to spot these sorts of tactics and deal with them. The risk at the moment is that Johnson is so weak and distracted that he and his team don’t realise how many colleagues aren’t really on his side any more – and then don’t have the wherewithal to do anything about it. An aggravating factor in all this is that the Labour party is now starting to make more of an impression, having been on mute for months. Keir Starmer’s new-look shadow cabinet is louder, more professional and quicker to respond to ministerial counterparts. Johnson doesn’t have as much room to mess up as he did a few months ago. But the bulk of the pressure is coming from within his cabinet. And even when they are all back together around their traditional boat-shaped table in Downing Street, proceedings will be awkward until Johnson works out how to fix his broken connection. • Isabel Hardman is assistant editor of the SpectatorBack in the mid-90s, David Cronenberg’s Crash – a film about auto-eroticism adapted from JG Ballard’s 1973 novel – became a scandalous Cannes festival cause celebre when jury president Francis Ford Coppola reportedly campaigned against it winning the Palme d’Or (instead, it received a “special jury prize”). Here in the UK, the Evening Standard labelled Crash “beyond the bounds of depravity”, while the Daily Mail called for a ban – a call answered within the hallowed borough of Westminster. How delicious, then, that a quarter of a century later, the French film-maker Julia Ducournau – who made a Cannes splash with her 2016 feature debut, Raw – should take the Palme d’Or with a film that owes a striking debt to Cronenberg’s body-horror back catalogue in general, and Crash in particular. As with all full-blooded genre movies, there’s little mileage in describing Titane in terms of plot. Like Cronenberg’s The Brood, this is an adult fairytale (rated 18 for “strong violence, horror, sex”) about love, rage and loneliness, that operates on a visceral level, employing outlandish physical metaphors to describe down-to-earth emotional truths. Suffice to say that the story centres on Alexia (the remarkable Agathe Rousselle), a young woman with titanium plates in her head after a car accident as a child. It’s a trauma (her father’s fault?) to which she compulsively returns, earning a living as an exotic dancer at car shows, simulating erotic encounters with metal and glass. There’s a car-crash quality to her relationships too – turbocharged encounters with men and women alike that breathe new meaning into the phrase la petite mort. Only a fantastical bump-and-grind with an automobile offers an emotional gear change, achieving the ecstatic highs that Alexia lacks elsewhere. So far, so twisted. But after an orgy of carnage, Alexia needs to disappear. So she cuts her hair, breaks her nose, binds her breasts and strangely distended stomach, torches her home, and adopts the identity of Adrien, who disappeared as a young boy many years ago. There are narrative echoes of films such as Daniel Vigne’s The Return of Martin Guerre (1982) or Clint Eastwood’s Changeling (2008) in what follows, as bereaved fire chief Vincent (a transformative turn from Vincent Lindon) simply accepts this unspeaking stranger as his son, and insists that his colleagues do the same. “Anyone hurts you, I’ll kill ’em,” he tells “Adrien”. “Even if it’s me. I’d kill myself, I swear.” Ducournau has described Titane as an attempt to talk about love without words, so it’s significant that dance plays an important role. From the commodified exhibition of Alexia’s car-show routine to the tragicomic sight of Vincent trying to win Adrien’s confidence by flailing around to the Zombies hit She’s Not There (title pun surely intended), movement and physicality speak volumes. Indeed, for all its onscreen metamorphoses and extreme-cinema revelations, it’s the sight of Rousselle androgynously gyrating to Wayfaring Stranger that offers the film’s most startling moment – taking us right back to the opening scene, reminding us just how far we have travelled. There’s a neat symmetry between the changing bodies of Alexia and Vincent, both of whom habitually gaze at their own reflections as they struggle to control their corporeal selves. While Alexia wraps her rebellious flesh in bandages, Vincent self-medicates with injections, raging against old age. Both inhabit bodies that refuse to behave; both have intense emotional needs they cannot contain. It’s easy to become dazzled by the headline-grabbing car-sex set pieces and Tetsuo-style flesh-and-metal mutations of Titane. Yet unlike Zoé Wittock’s 2020 gem Jumbo, for example, in which Noémie Merlant has a passionate relationship with a fairground ride, this is not a film about “mechanophilia”. On the contrary, it’s a fable that uses the lexicon of horror (serial killings, bodily eruptions, transposed identities) to get under the skin of unconditional love – just as Raw used cannibalism to discuss family bonds and coming-of-age traumas. Some will be repelled, many will be bamboozled. But for those with an appetite for cinema that gets you in the gut, Ducournau delivers the goods, superbly aided by Raw cinematographer Ruben Impens’s glowing visuals, all underpinned by a soundscape that throbs and groans like a beating celluloid heart.For most of 1991 I was employed as secretary to the Dowager Duchess of Argyll, the fourth and final wife of Ian Campbell, the 11th duke. Mathilda was the wife after the more famous Margaret, the subject of A Very British Scandal, Sarah Phelps’s brilliant and frankly horrifying BBC three-part drama. Whenever I talk about Mathilda I usually have to clarify: “Not that duchess, the next one.” Margaret always cast a shadow, or as she writes briefly and drily in her autobiography Forget Not, published in 1975: “Three weeks after our divorce became final Ian Argyll married again, for the fourth time, to a Mrs Matilda Heller. She had been in Ian’s life for some years before our divorce.” Presumably the misspelling of Mathilda’s name was deliberate. By 1991 the Duke’s first son from his second marriage had inherited the title and the castle, and neither of the later wives were regular visitors. The two women did, however, occasionally speak on the phone. “Desperately sad,” Mathilda would say, gently replacing the receiver. “Poor woman, thinks she’s on an ocean liner.” “Where is she?” “Claridge’s.” I had this job because in the days before keypads anyone could walk into anywhere. Aged 23, on my regular route to a teaching position that wasn’t really me, I used to cycle past the Oxford University careers building. One day I stopped and wandered in, and instantly fell for a box-file marked Miscellaneous. That afternoon I applied to tutor Paul McCartney’s son, and for something espionagy in west Africa, but a few months later ended up on the west coast of Scotland in a miniature castle at the end of a rutted track. Mathilda rented the top two floors of Lunga House, a castellated and turreted 16th century manor owned by the local laird. She offset the heavy Scottish stonework with bright interiors and hand-painted chinoiserie wallpaper, while from her bedroom (in an actual tower) she had a view over the Atlantic to Jura. By this time Mathilda was 65 years old, and “famous for serving the best food in Scotland”. Her face had softened with butter and cream, though her blue eyes sharpened when she acted out her policy of halfies. At meals, if she finished her plate first she could say “halfies”, and take half of whatever was left on my plate. As for what she was really like, in those pre-internet days I knew mainly what she chose to tell me. In her own estimation, Mathilda was whatever Margaret was not. Her 10 years at Inveraray Castle had been happy, free of scandal, and she was pleased to display the duke’s photo on her many occasional tables. To her, Ian Campbell was not the dark soul of his reputation. She was his fourth wife, yes, but also the dowager duchess. Like Catherine Parr, Mathilda was the survivor, loyal to the new duke (same as the old duke) though she wished he’d invite her more often to dinner. So I knew all that, and then the gossip. Margaret, by the 1990s, was a composite of gossip – erotic images, forged letters, headless naked Hollywood stars – and Mathilda couldn’t stand entirely aloof. Described in the BBC drama as “an American heiress”, I heard whispers that she too was a victim bride. “Pay the bills,” as Paul Bettany’s duke spits at Claire Foy’s Margaret in A Very British Scandal, “it’s what you’re for”. Except it wasn’t quite that simple. Mathilda had grown up in France with her grandparents, was previously married to an Austrian intellectual and had a cut-glass British accent to add to her three other languages. She’d studied at Radcliffe in Cambridge, Massachusetts, but she wasn’t fresh off the boat. Perhaps she’d dodged the worst of her husband, and her reward was a contented dowager retirement in a downsized version of her former marital home. Partly, my job was to keep this illusion intact. I was paid 70 guineas a week, which meant £77 “all found”, including a house in the nearby village of Craobh Haven and an unlimited account in the shop. The original job description was vague, but above all I came for the ghostwriting. Mathilda had a contract with the publisher John Murray for a memoir, and for one simple reason: everyone was interested in Margaret. Ruby Wax hoped for a TV interview, and there was talk of Wogan. Thirty years on, a three-part drama can still be pitched to the BBC, because photographs of a duchess dressed only in her pearls will do that. Mathilda was the other woman; she had an angle. Her book, however, would never be finished. Mathilda didn’t want to write about Argyll vs Argyll, except possibly for her success at escaping the press, she and the duke daring the hills of Provence in a racy convertible Sunbeam. She preferred to dwell on her sunlit pre-war life as a child, and her evacuation to the States on a ship with a full-sized on-deck carousel. She was always open to remembering her married life at Inveraray Castle. The balls, the pomp, the sheer exhilaration of a duchess castle with the fancy duchess trimmings. Every morning, I watched her complicated breakfast go up the stairs to her bedroom, and then took dictation at her bedside. I wrote letters. We worked on the memoir, usually the Inveraray section. We agonised over menus, toyed with travel plans and employed a new cook after Mathilda communicated her hatred of garnish by throwing anything decorative and green on to the floor. Repeatedly. Then we’d pack up and head for Paris, and Mathilda’s flat in the Rue de Tournon. The magnificent central room contained her bed and a bath and a swing hanging from the rafters, but our unchanging daily routine included lunch with wine and at six sharp some iced Wyborowa and games of backgammon before dinner. I was often politely drunk. We were nearly always smoking. Mathilda liked to tell me she was my finishing school, and it’s true I learned how to open oysters. And to drive her Ford Mustang across the Place de la Concorde at rush hour, and the correct pronunciation of Inveraray as “Inverarer”. She introduced me to the great brasseries of Paris, Vagenende (my favourite) and Le Procope and also the old Nazi favourite La Coupole. Sometimes I waited up late, so that when she came home from some party I could unhook the back of her dress, and make a start on the zip. “Thank God,” she’d say, “it’s so much easier when there’s two of one.” But however hard we pretended, and whatever the heiress situation when she married, the duchess had money worries. The good Chablis was running low in the cellar, and the dealer from Christie’s who stayed for lunch left with a rolled-up rug beneath his arm. In Scotland, the oysters we ate were rejects from the local bay at Craobh Haven, too big to be sold to the trade. Poor us. I was sent to Paris on my motorbike to sell a first edition Ulysses. A secretary was an indulgence, but I wasn’t really that and nor was I a ghostwriter. My role was mostly to be present, especially at meal times, like a “lady-help” from the 19th century. I was the paid companion. So, naturally I judged her. In the early 60s Margaret had the tabloids to question her integrity. In 1991 Mathilda had me, exuding disapproval as proof I wasn’t entirely servile. With little else to compensate for the power imbalance (70 guineas a week), I got angry at Mathilda for what I hated in myself. She was lonely, and wasting her advantages in life. She was banal. She wanted to be a writer but couldn’t buckle down. I felt I ought to have an opinion, and decided the aristocracy was terrible. Mathilda was terrible, but – the lackey’s delusion here – without me everything would have been worse. I wasn’t deluded, she was deluded. I refused to be grateful, in the way expected of me. I was very rude to Ruby Wax’s people. And then one morning in September, Mathilda woke up and forgot who she was. The baffled doctor prescribed aspirin and rest, and Mathilda sat patiently in her four-poster bed, the white lace drapes drawn back. I pulled up a chair. Her long, hennaed hair was spread over the pillows and she crossed her hands above the whiteness of the duvet. She waited, perfectly serenely, for me to refresh her memory, to summarise her life. It was very sad, so much of it. She’d lost two children, a son from her first marriage and with the duke a daughter who lived only a few days. Her own father was a wealthy homosexual seduced in the 20s by her mother for a bet. Quite possibly a bet made by the duke himself, Mathilda’s future husband, who at 23 years her senior had once been a friend of her mother’s. A close friend. Margaret had no monopoly on unsettling and salacious stories. “You own a five-litre convertible Mustang,” I said, going in softly. “It plays the Star-Spangled Banner when placed in reverse.” I liked to make her smile. I told her about her easy-going friendships with the artist Brion Gysin and the composer Pierre Boulez. In Edinburgh, she lunched with the photographer Brodrick Haldane, and in Paris with the sculptor Joseph Erhardy. “Nudes or motorbikes,” I reminded her. “He was good fun, but told us subject was a problem.” She sent a monthly cheque to the ageing poet Peter Russell. Yes, I said, of course we’d continue to do that. Warming to my task, I reminded her of her rare talent for liking anybody who had anything at all likeable about them, which was pretty much everybody. Including me. Her houses were equally open to judgmental non-writing writers and convicted drug smugglers, and to Steven Berkoff. “You are the Dowager Duchess of Argyll.” This was not something anyone else could say, and especially not Margaret. “You survived your husband the duke, after 10 happy years at Inveraray Castle.” For verification, she could read the pages of her memoir. Her life had been an admirable adventure, and was definitely worth remembering. Mathilda did recover, up to a point. After I stopped working for her we became friends, and the last time I saw her we had dinner at the Hotel Continental in Lausanne. We shared affectionate memories, and talked up the pool house in Vézelay where she dreamed of ending her days. A year later, in 1997 not long before her 72nd birthday, I was surprised by her name in the papers. The funeral was held in Vézelay, and three of her former secretaries attended, one from before my time and one after. Despite Margaret’s shadow we came to pay our respects. To Mathilda, not the famous Duchess of Argyll but the next one. The one we knew and loved. • This article was amended on 26 December 2021. Due to an editing error, Richard Beard’s age at the time he taught in Oxford was incorrectly given as 27 rather than 23. • Richard Beard is the author of Sad Little Men (Harvill Secker)Even before summer heatwaves sent temperatures soaring across the west, lakebeds had already begun ceding ground to the cracked, dried earth. Rings showed around reservoirs where water levels fell to historic lows, verdant hillsides took on brown hues, and trees became tinder in forests primed to burn. The conditions fueled unstoppable fires that grew large and ferocious enough to create their own weather patterns. But along with the desiccation, there were downpours. Even as states grappled with the effects of a devastating drought, storms delivered heavy rains that caused floods and damaging debris flows. In the American west it was a year of extremes. Scientists say it is likely just a taste of what’s to come if the climate crisis continues on its present course. “We have known this for a while,” said Steve Ostoja, director of the USDA California Climate Hub. “The question is, how extreme is this going to go? What is the ceiling and what is the floor?” Houseboats sit in a narrow section of water in a depleted Lake Oroville. Kamala Harris tours Lake Mead in Nevada in October. As of early December, roughly 80% of the American west was still experiencing “severe drought” as categorized by the US Drought Monitor. Nearly half still qualifies for the “extreme drought” category. The critically dry conditions left some communities with water shortages, fields were left to fallow, and reservoir storage in California – which has been among the states hardest hit by the catastrophe – fell to 60% of average. This year, Lake Mead, which straddles Nevada and Arizona and is the largest reservoir in the country, sank to record-low levels and for the first time ever, a water allocation shortage was declared for the Colorado River, which provides water for numerous western states and Mexico. All of California remains under a statewide drought emergency and the state’s governor, Gavin Newsom, has called on residents to reduce water use by 15%. “This is without precedent,” Newsom said at a news conference announcing the first two drought declarations in April, standing on the dried and cracked ground once covered by the waters of Lake Mendocino. “Oftentimes we overstate the word historic, but this is indeed an historic moment.” The ebbs and flows of precipitation are normal in most western climates, especially in California. But human-caused heating has changed the stakes and added compounding characteristics. Rising temperatures limit the snowpack and also speed evaporation out of parched environments. That’s why, scientists fear, this isn’t just a disaster but a troubling trend. “The drought in the American west is not a passing crisis,” Justin Mankin, a climate scientist and co-lead of the Noaa drought task force wrote in a Washington Post op-ed in September. “It is the shape of things to come.” A kayaker paddles in Lake Oroville in August as water levels remained low. Empty boat slips sit on a dry lake bed at Folsom Lake marina in May. Rows of almond trees sit on the ground during an orchard removal project in Snelling, California, in May. High temperatures and drought also set the stage for intense and difficult-to-contain wildfires, which blackened more than 7.6m acres across the US in 2021. Ancient trees and mountain towns were consumed by the fast-moving flames, which spewed embers miles into the distance. The infernos grew large and violent enough to force thousands to flee their homes. “This year’s fire season in the western US, and especially in three west-coast states, was the second exceptional wildfire year in a row,” says Park Williams, a climate scientist at the University of California, Los Angeles. He cited the extreme drought and heat wave events “which dried out fuels and made it easy for fires to escape our control in dense forested areas”. The Caldor fire burns as a chairlift sits motionless at the Sierra-at-Tahoe ski resort in August. The Bootleg Fire smoke cloud in Beatty, Oregon, in July. A firefighter sprays water while trying to stop the Sugar fire, part of the Beckwourth complex fire, in Doyle, California, in July. A firefighter prepares to battle the North fire from a backyard on Via Patina in Santa Clarita, California. A satellite image of fires raging in California in August. The remains of houses and businesses that were destroyed by the Dixie fire in Greenville, California. Firefighters wrap the historic General Sherman Tree, thought to be up to 2,700 years old, in fireproof blankets in the Sequoia national park in September. The Windy fire blazes through the Long Meadow Grove in Sequoia national park. The Sugar fire, part of the Beckwourth complex fire, consumes a home. The Caldor fire approaches South Lake Tahoe in August. Record-breaking heatwaves – hot enough to cook small sea creatures alive along the shores of the Pacific north-west this summer – wreaked havoc on residents, agriculture and infrastructure. Hundreds of people perished during the dangerously high temperatures. Across the US, 18% of the country broke heat records and summer temperatures were 2.6F above average, according to Noaa. Climate models indicate that these extreme events could become more common by mid-century and there could be up to 30 big heatwaves a year. The norm now is between four and six. “That’s a huge difference,” Ostoja said. “That basically means it is going to be that hot all the time.” They are also expected grow in size, affecting more people and places, according to research from Bradfield Lyon, a professor at the Climate Change Institute at the University of Maine. “By mid-century, the spacial size of heatwaves in the US are expected to increase between about 50% to 80% from what they are in the current climate,” he said. “The frequency will increase, the duration will increase, as well as the intensity.” A thermometer at Badwater Basin in Death Valley national park in July. People at a cooling station in Portland in June. A man rests at Willow’s Beach, British Columbia, during the ‘heat dome’, in June. The sun shines near the Space Needle in Seattle in June. A dead chinook salmon floats in a fish trap on the lower Klamath River in Weitchpec, California, in June. While much of the west remained mired in drought through the autumn, some areas of the south-west, including Arizona and New Mexico, were drenched between June and September. The heavy rains tampered fire threats but also caused deadly flash floods and debris flows. The Pacific north-west was also pummeled by downpours. Residents in western Canada and Washington state had to leave their homes as the waters rose. Water treatment facilities became overwhelmed in the city of Merritt in British Columbia, where officials called for evacuations due to “risk of mass sewage back-up and personal health risk”. The warnings came mere months after the last evacuations issued during the summer as wildfires laid siege on nearby towns. The province also endured punishing heatwaves that broke records and claimed hundreds of lives across the region. Northern California was also hit hard by two rain storms that left behind submerged streets, downed trees and power lines, and crumbling hillsides. Evacuations were ordered near burn scars from recent years, where the danger of debris flows was high. Unhoused residents bore the brunt, as tents and shelters were overcome by the rains. Photojournalists who documented the scene at one waterlogged encampment in Santa Cruz, California, said it looked “like a nightmare”. Heavy rain in LA in October. Heavy waves break against a sea wall in Depoe Bay, Oregon, in October. Crews work to upright an overturned truck on the Richmond-San Rafael Bridge in Richmond, California, in October. Rocks and vegetation cover Highway 70 after a landslide in the Dixie fire zone in October. Strong winds whipped up harrowing dust storms across the central US in December, gusting more than 100mph. Driven by high temperatures, the unusual conditions were reminiscent of the Dust Bowl that devastated the region in the 1930s. High wind warnings stretched from New Mexico to upper Michigan. A storm cloud of dust in Niwot, Colorado, in December. An overturned truck pushed high power lines over along Highway 93 in Superior, Colorado, in December. The extreme events that defined 2021 were destructive and devastating – but scientists hope they serve as warnings against a future that can still be avoided. Ostoja, from the USDA, likened humanity’s approach to climate change as a frog sitting in water that’s slowly starting to boil. But when disasters strike, it’s more difficult to look away. “At least the extreme events kick that a little,” he says, “and my hope is that that’s what we start paying attention.”Maxine Peake remembers the day she got the call from her agent. “He said: ‘A script has come in. It’s about Anne Williams, the Hillsborough campaigner, and… ’ and straight away,” Peake says, “I got in there and said: ‘Yes!’ My agent said: ‘Don’t you want to read it first?’ I said: ‘Oh, all right, then… Can’t we just get cracking on it?’” Peake had seen Anne Williams on the news, campaigning for justice for her teenage son Kevin, who died at the Hillsborough football stadium disaster in 1989. But she never met Anne, who died in 2013. Soon, the doubts set in. “I sat back and thought: ‘Can I play her? I don’t look like her, I don’t sound like her, Anne’s a mother…’ [As an actor] you think of all the things that you’re not. But then I just thought: ‘This is not about me, it’s about telling a story. It’s about the privilege of being a part of something like this.’” It’s early December, and Peake, her co-star Stephen Walters and scriptwriter Kevin Sampson are talking to me via Zoom about Anne, ITV’s new dramatisation of the life of Anne Williams, a shopkeeper from Formby who spent 20 years battling the Hillsborough cover-up and grew into one of the most inspirational justice campaigners of the late 20th century. Anne airs over four consecutive nights in January, a drama that spans 24 years, from 15 April 1989 to Williams’s premature death from cancer in 2013. It’s a powerful portrait of an unassuming mother and her fight for the truth – and the toll it took on her family and her health. Made by World Productions, the team behind Line of Duty, Vigil and The Pembrokeshire Murders, Anne was written and conceived by Sampson, an author and Liverpool fan who survived the crush outside the Leppings Lane end at Hillsborough, then witnessed the tragedy unfold inside. At the heart of his adaptation is what Sampson rightly describes as a “phenomenal” performance by Peake. “It’s one of the reasons I do what I do, to be involved in projects like this,” Peake tells me. “I had so many actors calling me, saying: ‘Can you get me a scene in this?’ Actors who would never normally do this.” Anne begins with 15-year-old Kevin Williams waking up on a sunny spring day in 1989 to his mum telling him that he can go to the FA Cup semi-final between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest after all, and follows her through the two decades during which she confronted police lies, political corruption and a sneering judiciary to secure the rightful inquest verdict into how he died at the match. Much of Anne is painful to watch – some scenes will have viewers shouting at their screens in frustration – but it’s subtle, too; an inspiring story about a mother’s love for her family, and how goodness can endure in people exposed even to the most cynical power in the land. “It’s deeply harrowing in parts,” Sampson says. “But it has to be that way. When I first mentioned the idea of doing a film to Anne [back in 2012, when Sampson was writing the book Hillsborough Voices] I told her that compared to what she had been through, Erin Brockovich was light entertainment.” Kevin was crushed to death in pen 3 at Hillsborough: one of 37 teenagers among the 97 men, women and children killed by catastrophic police negligence. In episode one, Peake plays Anne in the first year of her bereavement; poleaxed by grief, buried under the bedsheets, pushed from pillar to post simply trying to establish what happened to Kevin in his final moments. Anne initially believes the official line that Kevin died rapidly, of compression asphyxia – that there had been no chance of him being saved once severe neck injuries were inflicted. While at first she takes some solace in the belief his death was instantaneous, by the second episode, in 1990, cracks are starting to appear in the official narrative. As Anne begins to piece together the truth, with the help of lawyers, medical experts and two police officers who refuse to toe the line, Kevin’s death emerges as one of the keys to a cover-up. At the original Hillsborough inquests in 1990-91, the coroner, Stefan Popper, imposed the infamous “3.15 cut-off”: essentially, Popper ruled that all those who died had received fatal injuries that were irreversible by 3.15pm. Thus there was no need to hear evidence into the emergency services’ response beyond that time. In 1990, Popper’s ruling was largely taken at face value. But over the four episodes of Anne, which follow her campaign from 1990 to 2012, it becomes evident that the South Yorkshire coroner’s ruling meant the full extent of the South Yorkshire Police negligence at Hillsborough, under Chief Supt David Duckenfield, was never scrutinised in Sheffield Town Hall. It took the Hillsborough Independent Panel’s landmark report, in 2012, to establish that if there had been a properly coordinated emergency response, Kevin – and 40 others who died that day – might have been saved after 3.15pm. The wider truth was not, initially, Anne’s concern; she simply wanted to know what happened to “my little boy”. “So many of the campaigners were heartbroken mums in search of answers,” says Sampson, “and the idea of a mother’s love as the most potent adversary to corruption is a powerful one. It’s also completely relatable.” The relatability is also there in the depiction of a family breaking down in their grief, and their need for truth. While Anne and her indefatigable ally Sheila Coleman, a researcher from Liverpool city council, become amateur sleuths (“They used to describe themselves as Cagney and Lacey,” Sampson says), Anne’s husband, Steve, pleads with her not to describe Kevin’s fatal injuries to their elder son over tea, despairs over family holidays ruined, and looks on hopelessly as his wife drifts away, physically and emotionally. As Steve begins to realise family life will never be the same again, he retreats into the garden shed with his record player. One night, as Anne is drinking in a Kilburn pub after an encounter with the high court, Steve packs up his record collection and moves on. As Sampson says: “For Anne and all these bereaved mums, their job description changed, unbidden, overnight. When they woke up on that Sunday in April 1989 they were truth-seekers and detectives and campaigners. Viewers will, I think, empathise with that – seeing the little people rise up in adversity to become mighty.” When he first mooted the idea of adapting her story in 2012, Sampson was losing his own mother. “I felt inspired to write about these doughty mums, rolling up their sleeves.” Among all the bereaved Hillsborough mothers, why Anne? “Of all the people I’ve met, she was the one who best embodied the humility, the determination and the humour,” he says. “Anne embodied the universality of the Hillsborough experience.” * * * Anne was a friend of mine. I survived the crush in pen 3 that killed Kevin, and in 2009, on the eve of the 20th anniversary of the disaster, with the cover-up stretching endlessly ahead, I wrote a story for the Observer about my experience of surviving Hillsborough, and how others had been affected – including Anne. We became friends, as Anne did with so many survivors. I tell Peake that her performance is remarkable – all the more so for the fact that she never met Anne. She smiles, sweetly. “Ah, thank you. You can’t help but go out with your fingers crossed that people see some resemblance to Anne, and who she was.” What did she draw on? “As an actor, you’ve got your instinct and your empathy. I also read Phil Scraton’s book Hillsborough: The Truth, Kevin’s Hillsborough Voices, I watched archive news footage, and met [Anne’s daughter] Sara. But at the end of the day, you go with the words on the page.” Sampson’s script is subtle and, for all its pain, free of sentimentality – something that appealed to Peake. “Right at the start,” she says, “I said to [the director] Bruce Goodison: ‘I don’t want this to be too sentimental. I don’t want Anne to be in tears all the time… ’ Anne reminded me of my mum: that generation of understated, quiet women who weren’t political but had a strong sense of justice.” Peake lost her mum to pancreatic cancer at 66, six months after she was diagnosed. “I saw her cry [only] once,” she says. “Those women didn’t… You see lots of dramas now and everybody’s always crying! And I actually think it takes a lot for real people to cry. We cry at not the most tragic things, sometimes. It’s always surprising, people’s reaction to trauma.” Anne is indeed a story of trauma, of what Sampson describes as the “collateral damage of Hillsborough”, but it’s a story in which hope endures. It’s there in what Peake describes as “such a beautiful relationship between Anne and her husband, Steve”, played by Stephen Walters (Outlander, Little Boy Blue) in his first role since a stellar performance in season four of Shetland as released murderer Thomas Malone. Walters had the benefit of being able to meet the inspiration for his character. Steve Williams had become a virtual recluse; content just left alone with his music. To Sara’s surprise, her dad invited Walters to his home. “It was the guitar, and music, that we bonded over,” Walters says. “Just talking for an hour about blues records. I had a go at his guitar – his hands are not so good now, but you could tell he was a player, and I play too. And it helped; he was really open. He said: ‘Ask me anything.’” As filming progressed, Walters would listen to Van Morrison’s Into the Mystic “every morning, and evening, as that was Steve and Anne’s song”. And he would text Steve for insights into how he reacted to certain events. “These are things that inform a role, things you could never get from a book,” Walters says. For Sampson, an Anfield season ticket holder who has lived with Hillsborough since day one, there was “a huge burden of responsibility” in writing the screenplay. “Our country has, in the main, looked the other way while this abhorrent abuse of the most basic human rights has gnawed away at these people, over decades, in plain sight,” he says. “And you don’t want people to look away. Too many people think that those touched by the disaster should put it behind them. I think those people need to know a bit more about why it’s so hard to do that – and the telling of that is quite tough.” As a survivor, I can see where one or two punches may have been pulled. “I consulted with Anne’s family at every step,” Sampson says, “and if we felt that something was too close to the bone, we’d pull back.” And yet, frequently, there are moments so moving that the use of archive footage from the day of the disaster comes as something of a relief. Peake and Walters are compelling; spinning round each other in their grief like two dancers in the dark. And at about 9.45pm on 3 January, when the second episode airs, I won’t be surprised to hear the cry of millions across the country: “But there’s an ambulance right there, on their own fucking videotape!” Was it draining for Peake and Walters, playing Anne and Steve? “No, I find it quite energising when you get to play people like these,” Peake says. “We had the most fantastic conversations with people around the campaign. They were so human, and full of humanity. People like Bishop James [Jones, chair of the Hillsborough Independent Panel] spoke about his spiritualism, and Anne’s spiritualism. And I came away thinking: ‘Wow!’” Peake describes herself as “a card-carrying atheist”. But sometimes, “maybe there are other elements. Back in the day, actors were shamans, weren’t they… Maybe you get help from other places.” Walters agrees. “I do believe [in God]. I remember having these philosophical discussions with Maxine about life… and, again, that feeds the work.” The scripts took Sampson a year to write, and the entire four hours of drama was shot in just nine weeks. “Bruce [the director] got us together three or four days before we started principal photography, and we went over all of the scenes between Steve and Anne, and that wedded us in,” Walters says. “And we hooked up together for a night in Wales before filming the first scene, and just talked. It cemented something before we actually started. There was a sense of us together. It’s not always that a director does this,” he says. It was a clever approach, given the tight schedule. Peake might be playing Anne in her 30s one morning, then Anne in her 50s that afternoon, and as she wrapped the morning’s shoot she’d be told: “You’re 20 years older after lunch, Maxine.” Throughout, her ability to capture Anne’s mannerisms, her compassion, her resolve, is extraordinary. Anne’s daughter, Sara, said: “When I first heard that Maxine would play my mum, I thought: ‘Well, she looks a bit like her. But by the end, I felt like I was watching my mum.” For Peake “it was never conscious. I didn’t watch Anne and go: ‘Oh, these are her mannerisms, I must do those.’ But Anne had a slower rhythm than me, so it was about slowing things down. You have to check yourself sometimes. I would have to say to myself: ‘You’re not feeling sorry for Anne, you are playing Anne.’ You have to navigate your emotions sometimes: it’s a case of ‘Am I in the moment, as Anne, or is this me going ‘This is overwhelming’?” Scenes shot on the beach at Formby allow for some of the air we all needed to breathe – Anne as she refuses to buckle under her suffocating anguish; the survivors, her allies, struggling with PTSD. There is humour, in parts. But this is essentially a love story, of a mother’s devotion to her family. It is also a tribute to Anne’s unyielding faith in the goodness of people. In episode one, she is moved by the generosity of a farmer outside Sheffield the morning after the disaster, who refuels their empty petrol tank as she and Steve head into the city to find Kevin. “Most people are good, Anne,” Steve says, as they set off towards Hillsborough, and into a 24-year ordeal. Anne’s faith in the good endures the carnival of corruption ahead, even if her marriage can’t. By the end of episode four, we see her at the Royal Courts of Justice on the Strand in London, in 2012, to see the lord chief justice quash the original Hillsborough inquest verdicts of accidental death – effectively, Anne’s dying wish. While physically diminished by cancer, she appears a giant of a justice seeker. As the final credits remind us, no one has served a moment’s jail time for unlawfully killing Kevin and 96 other people at Hillsborough. And yet the truth that Anne Williams helped to establish has become something purer, more enduring than the “justice” delivered by a legal system that became transparent only in its unwillingness to hold the guilty to account. “Anne was always able to find hope,” says Sampson. “She believed that most people were good, and that the truth would, eventually, out. She was right. That basic belief in the power of truth is Anne’s legacy, and it is, for many of us, the ultimate verdict on Hillsborough. The establishment lied. The ordinary people told the truth.” • Anne is on ITV on 6 January, 9pm • The documentary The Real Anne: Unfinished Business starts on ITV on 2 January And the Sun Shines Now: How Hillsborough and the Premier League Changed Britain by Adrian Tempany was shortlisted for the Orwell prizeI am writing from the past, so many things remain uncertain for me about Christmas 2021. Will my husband’s parents have managed to adjust their tablet screen to show us something other than the ceiling, or my mother-in-law’s ear? Did we have our usual fight about my husband eating foods at a time other than that which I have arbitrarily decreed to be the correct time? (No crystal ball required for this: yes.) Where have we landed on the farce-to-fury British politics rollercoaster and how deftly has the Queen’s speech skirted it? Specifically, I find myself wondering what’s on television: not the programmes, the adverts. Usually, the evening of the 25th marks an abrupt shift from lingering shots of whatever salted caramel prawn crown Frankenfood Heston has dreamed up this year and baffling perfume ads in which Johnny Depp stamps on a guitar in cowboy boots then uses the shards to carve his name into a buffalo or something, to soft white sandy beaches lapped by Tiffany blue seas set to calypso tunes. Traditionally this is the travel industry’s peak period, as we collectively realise there is nothing to look forward to other than endless night and scrabble to book a fortnight in Crete, our deposit a down payment on optimism. I enjoy this moment, which habitually marks my shift from anticlimactic Yule sulk (25 December, 8am onwards) to acceptance of the sofa-bound enfattening that follows. I can usually sag comfortably into these empty days, thanks to a TV-fuelled realisation that a time will eventually come when I won’t be sitting in the dark eating crumbs from my dressing gown at 3pm. But who’s planning a foreign holiday now? I have become so feral, I can barely restrain myself from meting out violent summary justice on speakerphone callers on a short bus journey; there’s no way I could survive a Ryanair flight. What with that, and trying to work out which Tory donor is least likely to mislay your £120 PCR, I would be astonished if the beleaguered travel industry is planning an all-singing, all-dancing Cop26 defying televisual hymn to the escapist glamour of international holidays this year. So what can we look forward to if it’s not getting out of here? I don’t imagine many of us will be tackling the seasonal slump at the Next sale: climate anxiety made even Christmas shopping a guilty, half-hearted business for me. I love writer Naomi Alderman’s suggestion of using multiple Advent calendars to incentivise yourself in the day-by-day trudge through January and February, but it’s probably too late for this year. Instead, why not try the social media trend that had a brief moment recently: find a photograph of yourself from exactly two years ago, before, well, you know. That might sound melancholy, but I promise you, it’s not. The only picture I could locate was taken at an axe throwing venue with my family, which is the kind of thing we did back then, apparently. I’m celebrating a fluke throw that hit the tiny bullseye, after an afternoon of dangerously casting axes everywhere but the target. Thrilled at my axe achievement, I look happily carefree, brighter and better rested, plumper of cheek, less bloodshot of eye. But apart from my axe exploits, I remember I was very exercised back then about a company’s inability to sell me the pint-sized mug I desired, genuinely upset and expending angry emailing time about this mug “issue”. Checking back through my messages, I see I was also fretting about my husband taking most of January off work and hanging around at home, my precious solo workspace. Ha. Two years later, the handle broke off my only intact pint mug last week as I carried it upstairs, spilling tea everywhere. Barely peeved, I called my husband, with whom I have been coworking and living 24/7 all this time. He came and helped me mop up, then we had a cup of coffee together, as we do most mornings. It was very nice, even with substandard mugs. I don’t believe adversity or stress necessarily makes you stronger: if it doesn’t work for paperclips, why would it for people? But here we all are, still going: wearier than our fresh-faced 2019 selves, having faced a bucketload of loss, fear and hardship, perhaps a touch wiser. That feels quite comforting to me. Of course, the other big advertising push this season is “new year, new you”: the promise of transformation through vegan meal deliveries, orthodontics or HIIT classes. I think this is, if anything, more doomed than travel ads – surely no one has the energy for self-improvement right now? Instead, that picture might, I hope, give you the sense that the person you are now is OK, really, but also that the end-of-2019 person you were still exists in some form. I know that mug-obsessed, small-stuff-sweating innocent I was is still in here somewhere under the dressing gown crumbs, behind the eye bags. I bet yours is, too. So that’s what I’m looking forward to: new year, same me, plus the hope of a hint of old me.In Mayfield, Kentucky, storm warnings had been coming for days, then came radar observations of a rotating storm of debris to the south, and finally urgent alerts to the imminent strike of a severe tornado. In the seconds it took for the “quad-state” storm to pass over the higher elevations of the city soon after midnight on 10 December, the notional separation between the man-made and natural world was effectively obliterated – as were large sections of Mayfield. Damage to life and limb caused by the vast and powerful tornado that passed over Mayfield was epic and profound. The broader storm front also caused havoc as more than 30 powerful tornadoes tore through “Dixie Alley”. There were 76 dead in Kentucky alone, with eight lost in a candle factory where night-shift workers, some on work-release from jail, later claimed they were dissuaded from leaving their positions or seeking shelter by threats of termination. Last week, as collapsed houses were marked clear of victims and turned back in on themselves by bulldozers and condemned to demolition, Mayfield residents barely had time to assess the impact. The raging winds had left metal siding wrapped tight around dismembered trees, demolished the town hall Christmas tree, torn the roof off the building itself and scattered debris for miles around in a manner reminiscent of an air-crash. “It’s not normal to get a tornado in December, but then it’s not normal for it to be 73 degrees at night,” said Mayfield resident Tim Wetherbee, referring to the local temperature on the day the onslaught destroyed 15,000 buildings and trailer homes and caused at least $3.5bn in damage. In a world that is failing to do enough to curb emissions that cause global heating and thus make extreme weather events more likely, the wider context of what happened in Mayfield was not lost on Wetherbee. “People think about today, not tomorrow, and it’s only going to get worse,” he said. His niece, Huda Alubahi, was sheltering in a bathroom closet when the tornado struck. Clutched to her side was her three-year-old son, Jha’lil, who was struck and killed as the house collapsed. His other niece and her children narrowly escaped injury when their house over the road was struck. On the other side of the post office, which lost its roof, his sister’s house was also destroyed. In all, Wetherbee, a refrigeration and heating contractor, counted five family members whose houses were destroyed. As power company workers began restoring power to Mayfield,for some there was little to do but gawp at the scale of the destruction. Lengths of two-by-four had become airborne spears, penetrating the metal skins of cars; overturned school buses and semis; storage bins ruptured to reveal tons of grain now exposed to the elements; a collapsed water tower; and dozens of structures, from statuesque municipal buildings or private houses, that will now probably be demolished to prevent black mold from setting in. “Smaller tornadoes bounce, but an EF-4 stays on the ground,” said property owner Hoot Gibson as he surveyed several of his ruined properties. “The only difference between this and an atom bomb is that a bomb would have fried people.” The climate crisis was not a subject all were willing to be drawn on. “Most people don’t want to know,” said James Hyatte, owner of the Catfish House. “They’ll go with what Fox News or their church tell them.” Joava Good, deputy director of the Church of Scientology’s disaster response team, ascribed the event to an act of “evil”. Good, who has attended the aftermath of 45 tornadoes, said that to have one of this magnitude in December was open to interpretation. “It’s quite amazing to see what’s happening. Something has changed.” Following the track of a tornado is a relatively straightforward task of following a trail of broken trees and debris. Half a mile out of town is the Mayfield Candle Factory, which had 110 workers on night shift when the storm hit. For many, it was work of last resort: poorly paid but easily accessible to those without transport. It offered consistent work, running 10- to 12- hour shifts around the clock at starting pay of $8 an hour to meet demand from customers like Bed, Bath &amp; Beyond. “It’s pitiful,” said a project manager for the factory. “We lost eight lives, but we could have lost more.” The factory, reduced to a pile of twisted metal and concrete, lies a quarter mile from a feed factory that was relatively unscathed, a demolished chicken hatchery missing its chicks, probably drawn 35,000ft up into the storm; a tractor dealership that while badly damaged lost none of its equipment. Many in town, including workers at the factory that night, contradicted management’s claims that employees had been free to leave after multiple tornado warnings were issued for the area. “Even with weather like this, you’re still going to fire me?” 20-year-old worker Evan Johnson reportedly asked a manager. Their response: “Yes.” Amos Jones, an attorney representing Haley Conder, one of those trapped in the factory after it collapsed, said the candle factory, along with the partial collapse of an Amazon fulfillment center in Edwardsville that killed six, could be a turning point for labor rights. “Amid the tragedy, we hope there will be more responsible care for employees and an end to all American sweatshops,” Jones said. Jones said he he was compelled to file a workers compensation suit after a spokesperson for the factory’s owner, Mayfield Consumer Products, continued to discredit eyewitness declarations that workers were prevented from leaving and were subjected to roll-calls and line-ups to determine who had left so they could be disciplined or fired. Company officials denied the allegations. The tornado also helped focus some minds on exactly who those workers were. Jaime Massó, pastor of Primera Iglesia Bautista Hispana, who had turned his small church into an outreach to supply Mayfield’s Mexican and Central American migrant worker population with food, said many workers at the factory registered under assumed names – leading to confusion over who was missing. “It’s part of the problem – they’ve been looking for the wrong people,” Massó said. “There’s a fear of authorities, and they’re not going to risk exposing themselves. They’re here, but we’ve got emergency responders searching the rubble.” Jane Hoopingarner, a crisis responder with the Red Cross, said the job for emergency workers was to start to build trust with communities that often see themselves – and are seen – as outsiders. “We are here to walk beside and support them – not provide everything they need – because they’re already being provided for by their own community.” The storm itself, though, did not discriminate. Ten miles south-west of Mayfield, Amish farms dot the landscape, and the communities’ horse-drawn buggies are a common sight on the country lanes and in town. The storm tore apart the house of Jacob and Emma Gingerich, killing both along with two of their five children. Chris Crawford, a nearby farm owner – an “Englisher” to the Amish – said he’d been over to warn the couple of the storm’s approach. “They had no way to know what was coming. We talked, they thanked me, and then 30 minutes later it came through.” Crawford went back after it had passed to find the couple’s infant baby, Ben, wearing only a diaper, under a vehicle more than 50 yards from the house and some distance from where his mother lay dead. “I heard the whimper. He was laying in the driveway. I cuddled him up, and just ask God don’t let him die on me.” Timber supplier Ronnie Murphy, helping to co-ordinate the barn rebuilds, said he believed the infant had been ripped from his mother’s arms. “All the babies that made it through are miracles, but this one…” he trailed off. By midweek, the family were buried in a single grave, and 200 of the community were coming from as far away as Canada by train to help rebuild the sawmills that had been destroyed. “I guess that’s the way God wanted it,” commented neighbor Joe Stutzman. He declined to speculate on climate-science interpretations. “We don’t get involved in stuff like that, but the end is getting closer for sure. Why did this thing come through here? I think it was to wake people up. ‘Hey! Work together better. Show your love. Pray.’” Much of the Gingerich’s farm ended up a quarter-mile away in the wood next to Joey Rogers, who lost his house, four barns, poultry and livestock. Many of his surviving cattle were still too spooked to be rounded up. “They sense the storm coming and go crazy, but there’s not much place to go when you’re out in a field,” said local vet Timothy Jones. But in the manner of natural disasters, he said, human life was first and foremost, but the animals were part of the trickle down, expansive consequences of a tornado strike. Domestic animals, too, had been injured – a dog with a splinter in his chest, another that required a leg amputated. Others, though, had been simply swept up into the storm and lost for good. “How far they go, who knows?” It maybe too early to talk of recovery in Mayfield. For some, it is a going to be a haul that goes on long after the immediate dizzying intensity of the event itself and its aftermath subsides. Sandra Delk, co-ordinator for Mayfield’s community response, said she slept in her car the first two nights, then moved into a trailer with electrical problems, and finally moved back home, though still without light or heating. “People are in a daze, and some are never going to go back to their homes,” she said.When Sean Williams, 50, caught a breakthrough case of Covid-19 in November, he felt guilty and embarrassed. His 14-year-old tested positive, too; both were “double-vaxxed” and probably caught it from his 11-year-old daughter, who got it in school two days before her scheduled first vaccination. “It’s impossible to talk about without going through this whole tortured thing about how careful you were before you got it,” says Williams, who lives with his family in New York City. “Also, this horrible feeling that you have to stutter your way through a clarification that you do believe in science, you did get vaccinated, you’re, like, not a fascist, even. It’s landmines all the way down.” When people who were fully vaccinated against Covid began testing positive for the virus in greater numbers during the rise of the Delta variant, it threw a wrench in the CDC’s summertime declaration that the pandemic was merely “a pandemic of the unvaccinated”. Instead, breakthrough cases proved that vaccines are both extremely helpful and imperfect in stopping the spread of illness. Mass vaccination is imperative; individual vaccination isn’t enough. Absent clear government guidance or the infrastructure to support overlapping safety measures, vaccinated individuals have been left on their own to decide what “responsible” pandemic behavior should look like, beyond getting the vaccine. After testing positive for a breakthrough infection, many find themselves left to defend or reevaluate their actions. Now, as the Omicron variant accelerates a new seasonal surge – and fast-rising breakthrough cases – people are more frustrated and confused than ever. ‘I was really ashamed’ Williams wasn’t alone in feeling that a breakthrough Covid diagnosis was “landmines all the way down” when it came to the responsibility to notify contacts and the anticipatory anxiety of disappointing a community, or being judged for making what only in hindsight felt like a not-cautious-enough call. Many people reported feeling guilt or shame over having possibly put others at risk without intending to. Liam Neess, a 29-year-old auto mechanic in Cincinnati, Ohio, tested positive about six months after his second Pfizer shot. He was about to embark on a 10-day road trip to attend two weddings, and was disappointed to have to skip the first of them. He worried that he would also have to miss the second, his sister’s, which he was supposed to officiate. “The process of telling people I had tested positive, telling them they should get tested, was vastly less stressful than the implication of how it was going to impact my family,” Neess says. But it still “was a pretty jarring experience”, and he felt uncomfortable knowing his co-workers were at risk and that he had to inform any of the shop’s clients that may have had contact with him. If his co-workers tested positive for the virus, the shop would have needed to shut down. Discomfort aside, Neess felt that disclosing his Covid status was a matter of social etiquette and ethics. “Apart from the sort of queasiness you get from inconveniencing someone, it was a ‘bite the bullet and just get it over with’ kind of thing,” he says. Ultimately, Neess got two negative test results the day before his sister’s wedding, and all his co-workers tested negative as well. Neess’ apprehension deeply resonates for Jess, 32, who lives in Pennsylvania and caught a breakthrough case in September. “I was so nervous to tell contacts and even my family who I didn’t have contact with,” says Jess. Jess assumes she caught the virus when she attended a small, ticketed event that involved 18 people seated near each other, unmasked, over a period of about three hours. It was the only time she had relaxed her generally strict personal safety protocols of masking and social distancing. She took a risk that night because she was vaccinated – and because she felt like it had been so long since she let herself do something like that. “Once I found out I tested positive, I was really ashamed about the fact that I put myself in that risky situation and didn’t want anyone to find that that’s where I got it,” says Jess, who asked that the Guardian publish only her first name to protect the privacy of the others who attended the event. She even considered lying about having attended an unmasked, indoor gathering. When she ultimately decided to tell the truth, it “wasn’t as big of a deal” as she’d initially feared. “Getting through a pandemic requires coming together and taking coordinated action,” says Dr Julia Raifman, an assistant professor at the Boston University School of Public Health. “Everybody’s actions affect other people. In this context, that’s what government is for: to lead us in coordinating our actions to do what’s most important to contain spread.” In lieu of such leadership from elected officials, Raifman is sympathetic to people like Jess and Neess, who are doing their best to balance living a decent life and making responsible choices with ever-changing, complex and often incomplete information after nearly two years of an unparalleled and traumatic pandemic experience. “It’s a pandemic of people who are being underserved by the government, and that includes everybody,” Raifman says. ‘Was it worth it? I don’t know’ Aaron Ghitelman, 30, caught breakthrough Covid during a weekend of back-to-back concerts for the band, Phish, in August. He had been attending Phish shows for a decade, and wanted to share the experience with his girlfriend for the first time. “It was so stupid,” he says in retrospect, the self-reproach immediately present in his voice. Ghitelman and his girlfriend had planned to self-isolate for a bit when they returned home to New York City, but they hadn’t planned for a full quarantine. After testing positive, the pair had to scramble to cancel plans and tell people. Ghitelman also immediately announced his Covid status on social media, though he felt anxious about potential blowback. His sense of social responsibility was, however, bigger than the sheepishness he felt. Looking back, Ghitelman still can’t say with certainty if he would have done anything differently knowing what he does now. Though he had what amounted to a mild case of Covid, it was unlike any illness he’d experienced before. On the other hand, the concerts brought him a long overdue experience of joy. “The question I ask myself is: ‘If every time I go to a Phish show, I got Covid, would I keep going?’” Ghitelman says. “This is something that means a lot to me, and brings me a lot of joy. This is something I love so much in my life. I want to figure out a way to do it safely and not be consumed by fear.” Jess expresses similar ambivalence about the decisions that led to her breakthrough case. “In the moment, it feels so good to release your mind from the mental anguish of following the strict protocols,” she says. “For a short moment, I wasn’t stressing about hand sanitizer and staying six feet apart and keeping my mask on. But in the end I got sick, so was it worth it? I don’t know.” With the apparently highly transmissible Omicron in the picture, “Was it worth it?” is a question that more people will undoubtedly soon be asking themselves – and increasingly, it seems, about choices that feel frustratingly mundane. “People are frustrated that we’re still here at this point, this long after we’ve had very effective vaccines,” says Raifman. “I think it’s really hard for anybody to make any decision that feels good.”Earlier this month, Kamala Harris convened the inaugural meeting of the National Space Council, an important summit that brought together cabinet secretaries and top space and military officials in the sun-drenched atrium of the US Institute of Peace. Over the course of nearly two hours, the vice-president engaged the panel in discussion with real, earthly implications for national security, the climate crisis and workforce development. But attention in Washington was diverted elsewhere. At the supreme court, the justices were weighing the future of abortion rights. Republicans in Congress were threatening a government shutdown over their opposition to Covid-19 mask mandates. And as Harris spoke, public health experts confirmed the first case of the Omicron coronavirus variant in the US. Such is the challenge of Harris’s mission: a historic first navigating an inescapably secondary role. Her work on the president’s most urgent priorities – combatting the coronavirus pandemic and enacting his legislative agenda – is often overlooked, while her efforts on her own policy portfolio often goes unnoticed. It is a dynamic that has frustrated past occupants of the office, which comes with great influence but few formal responsibilities. But the expectations – and the stakes – are even higher for Harris, both because she made history as the first Black, South Asian and female vice-president, and because she is next in line to Joe Biden, who, at 79, is the oldest president ever to hold office. Speaking to the space council, Harris shared a piece of wisdom given to her by an astronaut, offering it as a guiding principle for tackling the myriad challenges before them: “Just focus on what’s right in front of you. And from there, widen your view.” Nearly a year into her vice-presidency, Harris has plenty to focus on – and more than enough distractions. ‘There is no playbook for this’ Harris has been handed a portfolio packed with politically thorny issues, voting rights and the root causes of immigration from Central America, among them. That work comes in addition to a host of other assignments that includes selling the president’s infrastructure plan, advocating for his sprawling social policy bill, representing women in the workforce, highlighting maternal health disparities, combatting vaccine hesitancy and championing small businesses. The Biden administration continues to face a global pandemic that has not receded, rising inflation and uncertainty over the centerpiece of the president’s legislative agenda. Since taking office, her approval numbers have fallen precipitously alongside Biden’s, fanning early chatter about possible Democratic alternatives should Biden not run for re-election in 2024. She is a frequent target of attacks from conservative media outlets, where some pundits still willfully mispronounce her first name. But she has also come under pressure from activists frustrated by the slow pace of progress on issues like immigration and voting rights. And the recent departures of high-profile aides from her office have renewed scrutiny of her management style. In the churn, Harris has struggled to chart her own course in a position that can be simultaneously forgettable and highly visible. “When you are second in command, not first in command, no one understands your role,” said Donna Brazile, a veteran Democratic strategist who is close to Harris. “So you have to constantly define your role and shape your own narrative. That is the challenge that she has.” The pandemic, and the possibility of being summoned to cast a tie-breaking vote in the Senate, have made travel tricky. But Harris said recently she hopes to spend more time away from Washington next year, selling the president’s agenda. And she will surely be a sought-after surrogate for Democrats on the campaign trail ahead of November’s midterm elections. Already, Harris has made dozens of domestic trips, hosting roundtables and giving local interviews to spotlight the administration’s work. On a recent trip to Charlotte to promote the infrastructure law, Harris was joined by the transportation secretary, Pete Buttigieg. During a tour of a bus depot, Harris sought to keep the focus on infrastructure, quizzing a local transit official about the features of a brand-new electric-powered bus. But after the event, Harris was peppered with questions from reporters about 2024, the rumored rivalry between her and Buttigieg and reports of a “staff shake-up” in the vice-president’s office. Harris has expressed frustration with the breathless coverage, which includes a recent report on her skepticism of Bluetooth headphones and an interview with a body-language expert analyzing her interactions with Buttigieg during the North Carolina trip. In an interview with the San Francisco Chronicle, Harris called the coverage “ridiculous” and said she would not allow herself to be distracted. “There is no playbook for this,” said Karen Finney, a longtime Democratic strategist who is close to the Harris team. Noting that Harris has broken barriers in every job she’s held, Finney said she came into office with her eyes wide open. “She’s tough,” Finney said. “She’s focused on the job.” Some stories are harder to dismiss. Stories about staff dysfunction have dogged Harris throughout her nearly two decades in elected office, from San Francisco district attorney to the US Senate to her 2020 presidential campaign, which fell apart amid reports of internal discord. Allies see overtones of sexism and racism in the coverage of Harris. They say the portrait of her as an overbearing boss is a trope used to diminish women in politics, and that male politicians are rarely subject to the same level of scrutiny over their leadership style. And former aides have come to her defense, saying she is demanding but not unfair. But critics say Harris stands apart. She burns through staffers who have a high tolerance for difficult work environments under both male and female bosses. They point to the high turnover in her office and the lack of longtime aides by her side, a sharp contrast with Biden, who is surrounded by advisers who have been with him for decades. Gil Duran, a columnist for the San Francisco Examiner, worked for Harris in 2013, when she was attorney general. He left five months later. In a recent column, he wrote that Harris was repeating the “same old destructive patterns”. Those concerns did little to slow her political rise, Duran told the Guardian, but now that she is seen as Biden’s heir apparent, they could color perceptions of her ability to manage the presidency. “It’s important to put a stop to this narrative,” he said. If she can do that, he believes the stories of internal dysfunction will be “old news” by the time she might face voters again. “But if it continues to be refreshed by new drama,” Duran warned, “then I think it’s going to be hard to escape.” Rise to the presidency? Harris’s difficult portfolio has caused angst among supporters and allies who hope to see her rise to the presidency. Some have argued that tasking the vice president with politically sensitive – and potentially intractable – policy issues positions her poorly for future endeavors. Others have argued she is being sidelined in her current role, left to handle matters that are either unpleasant or peripheral to the administration’s priorities. When asked by ABC’s George Stephanopoulos if she felt “misused or underused” by the White House, Harris disagreed. “No,” she said. “I don’t. I’m very, very excited about the work that we have accomplished.” Elaine Kamarck, a senior research fellow at the Brookings Institution and author of Picking the Vice President, says the concern is misguided. “The measure of a successful vice-president is whether or not the president trusts them enough to give them major duties,” she said. “That she has been given important jobs by the president means that he trusts her. And of course, they’re tough. If they weren’t tough, they wouldn’t be important.” But she has also frustrated immigration advocates and progressives, who consider the California Democrat, herself the daughter of immigrants, as a close ally. Many were upset that she used her first international trip to Central America to warn migrants: “Do not come.” They are also disappointed by the slow pace of progress on the administration’s long-promised immigration reform. For several days, immigrant rights activists protested outside Harris’s residence at the Naval Observatory, demanding the administration make good on their promise to deliver pathway to citizenship for millions of undocumented immigrants. Carving her own path Harris has stressed that progress will be slow. Combating corruption and violence in Central America, not to mention addressing the threat of climate change, will take years to bear fruit. But she has made some headway. Harris recently announced a slew of new pledges from companies like PepsiCo, Mastercard and Microsoft, as part of her efforts to improve economic opportunity in the region. Perhaps no issue in her charge is of more urgent concern for her party than voting rights. It is a task even Biden conceded would take “a hell of a lot of work”, but one that has personal resonance for Harris, who likes to say that she attended civil rights protests as a child, when she was still in a stroller. Activists have spent months pressuring Biden and Harris to use their bully pulpit more aggressively to push for voting rights legislation. A pair of voting rights bills are stalled in the Senate, where Republicans have used the filibuster to block the measures on four separate occasions. A recent meeting with Harris left leading voting rights advocates frustrated and alarmed that the White House did not have a strategy to pass federal voting rights legislation as Republicans roll back access to the ballot box in state legislatures across the country and enact new electoral maps designed to benefit them politically. “We need to see that sense of urgency as they have done with other priorities in administration,” said Melanie Campbell, president and CEO of the National Coalition on Black Civic Participation. “We’ve not seen that level of urgency yet.” One of the few concrete duties the constitution provides for the vice president is to serve as president of the Senate, casting tie-breaking votes when they arise. It’s a job that keeps her busy – and nearby – as she can be summoned to Capitol Hill at any hour of the day to push legislation or one of the president’s nominee through the evenly divided chamber. “Every time I vote, we win,” Harris told NBC News after casting her 14th and 15th tie-breaking votes. Despite her time on Capitol Hill, she has not served as the administration’s lead negotiator on its legislative agenda, a role Biden relished as Barack Obama’s vice-president. Harris, who spent a large part of her nearly four years in the Senate running for president, lacks the deep bonds Biden forged with lawmakers over his decades in Congress. But Harris has worked to strengthen those relationships with her former colleagues. Earlier this year, she invited all 24 female senators for dinner at her residence. And during the fraught, final negotiations over the infrastructure law, she huddled with Biden at the White House, making late-night calls to members of Congress that helped seal the deal. Carving her own path, Harris has sought to use her ceremonial office to elevate issues and voices that are often underrepresented in Washington. Earlier this year, she met with disability advocates to discuss how the administration could make voting more accessible. She also recently convened the first White House’s first day of action on maternal health. During the summit, she highlighted the racial disparities in the nation’s maternal mortality rate, which is more than double that of most other developed nations. “I wonder what my mother would say today, had she been here to see this, or my grandmother or any other woman from that era, including Shirley Chisholm, who I had the great opportunity to work for,” Brazile, who was the first Black woman to manage a presidential campaign, said, becoming emotional. “What would they say if they got up every morning knowing that the person who is a heartbeat away from the presidency, the person who is second in command, is someone who looks like them?” On 19 November, Harris became the first woman in American history to hold presidential powers. The brief transfer of power occurred from 10:10 am to 11:35 am EST, while Biden was under anesthesia for a routine colonoscopy. Harris spent the time working from her office in the West Wing and most would agree her stint in the role of president left the glass ceiling largely intact. Yet for her supporters, the moment was a glimpse of a future they still believe to be possible. History has shown that the best path forward for a vice-president with higher ambitions is to ensure the success of the president, said Kamarck. “In the end, what matters is whether people end up liking the Biden years,” Kamarck said. “Do they want it to continue or are they sick of the Biden years and want something different?”More than 500,000 UK participants in one of the biggest ever surveys of the prevalence of Covid-19 have been given shopping vouchers worth more than £210m, figures reveal. The Covid-19 Infection Survey is the largest regular survey of coronavirus infections and antibodies in the UK, helping to provide information to shape the government’s response to the pandemic. As an incentive to take tests, participants are offered vouchers. These can be redeemed for specific retailers, including supermarkets, fashion stores, hotels and airlines. Some households have picked up vouchers worth a total of more than £1,000. The Office for National Statistics (ONS), which jointly leads the survey with the Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC), said participants were not obliged to accept the payouts, and that they were kept under regular review to ensure they were an effective incentive and offered value for money. New figures reveal that 528,541 enrolment vouchers, with a face value of £50 each, were issued between the start of the survey, in April 2020, and November 2021. The total value of these vouchers is £26,427,050.Participants, who are selected at random, are regularly visited by arrangement at weekly or monthly intervals to be tested for Covid and are given £25 vouchers for each visit. Vouchers worth £184,095,175 have been handed out for the testing visits. The vouchers can be spent at more than 100 outlets, including Argos, Asda, Sainsbury’s, Tesco, John Lewis, Deliveroo, Cineworld, All Bar One, Zizzi, Eurostar and Jet2holidays. The vouchers initially included Amazon among the retailers, but when details of the scheme first emerged, MPs questioned why the vouchers were not being targeted to ensure the cash would help boost high street stores. The Amazon vouchers are no longer available, but the ONS said this was not connected to any criticism of the online giant potentially benefiting from the scheme. The survey aims to find out how many people are getting Covid, how many people previously had Covid, and how many people have had a strong immune response to the vaccination. It is one of the largest surveys in the world of individuals sampled at random for possible infection. Dr James Doidge, a senior statistician at the Intensive Care National Audit and Research Centre, has described it as “one of the most valuable resources on the planet” in understanding the pandemic. One of the other major UK studies gathering data during the pandemic, the React study commissioned by DHSC and carried out by Imperial College London in partnership with Ipsos Mori and Imperial College healthcare NHS trust, does not offer vouchers. Each month more than 100,000 people across England are randomly sent a one-off nose/throat swab test to take at home. The ONS said: “The Covid-19 Infection Survey has been vital in understanding the spread of coronavirus in the community and informing the government’s pandemic response. “It is routine practice in surveys to offer modest compensation and the payment of vouchers was considered appropriate. Participants are not obliged to accept the vouchers; however, we offer them to reflect the time and inconvenience whole households experience taking part in this crucial study, and in particular allowing study workers to come to their homes.” The ONS and the DHSC carry out the study in partnership with the University of Oxford, the University of Manchester, the UK Health Security Agency and the Wellcome Trust.In the winter break, away from the everyday craziness of my normal work schedule, one of my favourite annual rituals is to delve through the latest batch of seed catalogues. To me there is something so therapeutic about the escape of planning for a summer ahead, of colour and life, curled up safely away from the cold on the sofa. With so many beautiful and unusual new introductions on the horizon for 2022, here are four that have really caught my eye. As someone with a bit of an obsession for trialling out tomato varieties old and new, when I got wind of a novel, dwarf variety with good flavour, I had to investigate further. Growing to only around 70cm high, ‘Patio Plum’ has a really compact, stocky growth habit with curious crinkled leaves that look a bit like a savoy cabbage, which makes it far more visually striking than its rather boring name suggests. Unlike essentially all other varieties, this doesn’t produce side shoots, which we normally need to spend ages pruning out, and also offers a very respectable yield of fruit with a classic, rich tomato flavour. If it is perennials you are after, Festuca ‘Sunrise’ to me is a real show-stopper. This deep green variety that flushes into a range of sunrise hues when it flowers in the summer, and intensifies as the leaf tips then join the show in the cooler months, creates a stunning graduated ombre effect. They are a great choice for any bright spot with well-drained soil. Truly blue flowers are actually incredibly rare in nature, and that’s because the compounds used to create this hue are metabolically tricky to make. Some garden designers, I have heard, will ask job candidates to list 20 blue flowers as the ultimate test of plant knowledge, and Corydalis ‘Blue Heron’ is as blue as they get. With electric azure flowers erupting each spring over soft, ferny foliage, this looks like it is a CGI species lifted from the scenes of Avatar. It’s a perfect plant of dappled shade that will stop visitors in their tracks in the early summer. Finally, if fruit and veg is your passion, might I offer a new fig variety that is really worth investigating further. ‘Little Miss Figgy’ is a super dwarf cultivar that at around 90cm never gets much taller than waist height. With finely divided, snowflake-like leaves, on plants that are hardy to at least -15C and suitable for pot culture, it seems to have everything. One small caveat: I have yet to try their flavour, but frankly anything would be better than the watery ‘Brown Turkey’ that currently dominates the market. Follow James on Twitter @BotanygeekThousands of hopefuls auditioned for the lead role of a blind character in an epic second world war drama series for Netflix that is based on a Pulitzer prize-winning novel. But the producers of All the Light We Cannot See have chosen a student with no formal acting training who is registered blind, in a move that has been welcomed by disability rights activists. Although Aria Mia Loberti has no formal training, her natural ability has led to her being cast in a four-part adaptation of Anthony Doerr’s novel. She will portray Marie-Laure, a blind teenager whose path collides with Werner, a German soldier, as they try to survive the devastation of war in Nazi-occupied France. The book is being adapted by Steven Knight, the British creator of the Bafta-winning gangster drama Peaky Blinders, whose acclaimed films include Dirty Pretty Things, a thriller about illegal immigrants in London, starring Chiwetel Ejiofor and directed by Stephen Frears. “She did several auditions which are absolutely remarkable,” Knight said. “She’s amazing.” Asked whether such natural acting talent can ever be taught, he replied: “You can perfect it. I don’t think you can learn it. You are born with it. She has got it. So we’ve been very fortunate.” Last weekend, actor Rose Ayling-Ellis captivated audiences in winning Strictly Come Dancing as the competition’s first-ever deaf contestant, proving, as she put it, “that deaf people can do anything”. For Loberti, being cast in such a high-profile production is similarly significant for blind and partially sighted people, for whom she has campaigned. She said: “I have a rare and severe form of a genetic eye condition called achromatopsia. As a result, I’m completely blind in some environments and have minimal, variable residual vision in others.”In the novel, her character says: “When I lost my sight, Werner, people said I was brave. When my father left, people said I was brave. But it is not bravery; I have no choice. I wake up and live my life. Don’t you do the same?” Lauren Appelbaum of RespectAbility, a non-profit organisation dedicated to changing how society views people with disabilities, said: “Netflix is really going to be able to play a role in changing these stigmas surrounding what it means to be blind. Just because you’re blind, it doesn’t mean you can’t be an actress in a major role … It’s not overcoming blindness or in spite of being blind. She just happens to be blind and is going to play this role.” Appelbaum, who herself has a disability, added: “It’s almost impossible to truly portray someone with disability without having that disability. The nuances that you can bring to that role are just going to make that character so much more dynamic. You don’t have the risk of the actor making a mistake that would show that it’s inauthentic casting, which I’ve seen happen time and time again.” The novel became a global phenomenon, selling more than 15m copies after its publication in 2014. In the Observer, Justin Cartwright wrote: “It is easy to understand why Doerr’s book is regarded by many as an epic and a masterpiece.” The New York Times’s critic blamed its author “for lost sleep because once I started reading his new novel … there was no putting it down”. Loberti had been similarly inspired when she decided to audition for the screen adaptation after hearing of the casting search from a former teacher. She is currently a PhD student in rhetoric at Penn State University in Pennsylvania, having received her master’s in ancient rhetoric at Royal Holloway, University of London this year as a US-UK Fulbright scholar. In a statement, she described the book as an “intricately crafted story of hope, forgiveness, power and resilience … Not in a million years did I think anything like this would ever happen to me … I am massively lucky. More lucky and humbled and grateful than I can express.” The drama is being directed by Shawn Levy, whose previous productions include Stranger Things and the Night at the Museum franchise. Of Loberti’s casting, he said: “We searched the world and reviewed thousands of auditions. We never thought our path would lead to someone who has not only never acted professionally, but never auditioned before. “It was a jaw-drop moment when we first saw Aria Mia Loberti, who is both a natural performer and an advocate for disability … I can’t wait to tell this beautiful story with her at the centre.”We live in capitalist economies that deliver great wealth, innovation and dynamism but lurch from systemic crisis to crisis, throw up gigantic inequalities and are careless about nature and the societies of which they are part. It’s obvious that we want more of the former and less of the latter – but how? Never easy, this question is now so bitterly dividing western politics that in the US there is even talk of a second civil war. Post-Brexit Britain is only fractionally less toxic. There are two increasingly hostile camps living in their intellectual and political silos. On the one hand, there are the “me firsts”, the apostles of salvation through individualism. Capitalism propelled by individuals aggressively pursuing their own self-interest will deliver the goods. It is essentially self-organising, self-propelling and self-dynamic. Don’t worry about booms, busts, monopoly and disastrous social side-effects; we have to put up with them as we do with the weather. They will sort themselves out in time. Any public intervention will bring errors and costs that outweigh the benefits. Allow the tall poppies to grow even taller and wealth will ultimately trickle down; inequality is the price paid for capitalist effectiveness. Capitalism harnesses the base metals of human greed and self-interest to deliver the alchemy of economic dynamism. On the other hand, are the “we firsts”. They are equally passionate in their insistence that salvation lies in the group and society and convinced, whether on the climate emergency, hi-tech monopolies, crippling uncertainties about living standards or just the evident truth that we humans are altruists as much as individualists, that to follow the “me firsts” is the road to perdition. What is crucial to us as social beings is the group, society, the commonweal and belonging as equals. After all, it was associating in groups that was fundamental to our evolutionary capacity to hunt and to see off predators. That primeval urge to associate in the group is what underpins happiness and wellbeing. What people want is less the exercise of choice in markets, more to control their lives in the service of what they value – and that is best done collectively and, as far as possible, equitably. And so the “I’s” and “we’s” confront each other in intense enmity, crystallised in the debates about the proper reaction to the virus. The “I’s” inhabit a world in which we must make our own choices, even over vaccination, and the state must be minimalist. The “we’s” urge mandatory vaccination, early lockdowns and Covid passports. Yet the sustainable policy is to blend the two: to find ways of persuading individuals, by choice and shaming, to get vaccinated and to ensure that Covid passports are employed, but only when it is clear that public health demands it – for NHS and care workers and for any large events. Too much “we” zeal and there is insupportable state intrusion into our lives; too much “I” libertarianism and you are free to infect and maybe kill me. Yes, we need the pluralism of different options and individual agency; equally, we need an agile public realm and collective action to serve the group. The good society (and successful public policy) is one that cleverly uses its institutions to reconcile the “we” with the “I”. It is great institutions, in the private and public sectors, which bind society and mitigate the worst excesses of both group force and individual licence. The problem is that we have too few of them and those we do have are being undermined by the dominance of the “me firsts” who insist anything to do with the “we” is coercive and undermines liberty. Thus, despite the “me firsts”, we witness the success of the NHS through this pandemic, plainly dedicated to serve the “we” but never in such a way as to be oppressive. Thus, too, the amazing vaccines incubated in Oxford’s Jenner Institute, the university itself an example of combining the “we” of a shared academic vocation but with 37 individual, competing colleges. These were then rolled out with the impetus of the Cell and Gene Therapy Catapult, an institution part tax-funded and part funded from its own commercial activities but one consecrated to promoting the public interest of a strong cell and gene ecology. And all further enabled by an enlightened capitalist enterprise, AstraZeneca, which institutionally recognised its social purpose of promoting health by selling a billion doses at cost. Another institution that has proved its worth in the pandemic is the BBC, particularly its political and health teams. Laura Kuenssberg and Ros Atkins, for example, have shown the power of impartiality, while Fergus Walsh and Hugh Pym have been models of rock-solid, informed reporting. It has had a cascade effect on much of the media. In a deadly pandemic, beyond some on the Conservative backbenches and rightwing columnists, there can be no luxuriating in ideology. Everyone wants to get to the other side in the best and safest way they can. Our democratic institutions have been less secure. The checks and balances vital to political integrity have been found wanting. It should never have been possible for the prime minister to use executive discretion, backed by a parliamentary majority, retrospectively to change the terms of the committee on standards in public life; it should be understood that these institutions, including the Electoral Commission, can be reformed only deliberatively and with cross-party support. They represent the “we”. Public procurement, too, has proved spectacularlyopen to abuse. Meanwhile, the Tory party has demonstrated its institutional weakness, becoming hostage to its ultra-libertarian wing and arriving at public health policies erratically and often too late. The wider lesson is clear. If we want the best of capitalism and less of the worst, we need to build institutions across our economy, society and democracy that covenant through their constitutions, from a company to a university, that they will respect values we hold dear: equality, fairness, universality, transparency, societal obligation and sustainability. Indeed, in the face of 21st-century challenges – AI, the drive to net zero, levelling up – great institutions are more important than ever. They will not emerge spontaneously from markets and the operation of capitalism. They have to be created and sustained, the progressive project of the decades ahead. • Will Hutton is an Observer columnist. His December lecture to the Academy of Social Sciences, “It’s institutions stupid – the moralisation of capitalism”, from which this column is drawn, is available hereSuicidal asylum seekers were subject to force by guards who the Home Office allowed to remain on duty despite being “effectively uncertified” in the safe use of restraint techniques, according to internal documents charting conditions inside one of the UK’s most controversial immigration centres. Experts say the department endangered lives last year by deploying custody staff whose training in the safe use of force had expired, as it detained hundreds of people who had crossed the Channel in a fast-track scheme to remove them. The cache of 180 documents, obtained through freedom of information laws by the Observer and Liberty Investigates, reveal the desperation of those held at Brook House as the Home Office mounted an intensive programme of flights removing people who had arrived in small boats to mainland Europe. They show that the proportion of detainees subjected to force inside the removal centre near Gatwick airport more than doubled last year. The documents – which include officers’ written accounts, minutes taken during oversight meetings and complaints filed by detainees and staff – also offer a rare insight into allegations of excessive force by staff. Serco, the contractor that took over Brook House in May 2020, said it “completely refutes” the allegations, although it did not specify which claims. The disclosures reveal that after the first lockdown in March 2020, custody officers, who Home Office guidance states should take at least eight hours of training in the safe use of control and restraint techniques every year, were given a “dispensation” allowing them to keep working. “The danger created by staff being overdue for refreshers is the increased risk of death in custody due to staff loss of knowledge and skill,” said Joanne Caffrey, a former police officer of 24 years and an expert witness in the use of force. In normal circumstances more than one person out of date would represent a “significant institutional failure”, she added. Between July and December last year, Brook House was the government’s base for Operation Esparto – a schedule of 22 removal flights under a deportation option that allowed the UK to send people to the first EU country they had entered. The process finished on 31 December with the end of the Brexit transition period. Many detainees are believed to have been survivors of torture and trafficking. Officers used force, including techniques that deliberately cause suffering to gain compliance – called pain-inducing restraint – to prevent self-harm on 62 occasions from July to December. The population of Brook House was about 100 people at any one time. Self-harm attempts clustered around the flights themselves. The day before a charter to France and Germany on 25 August, officers intervened four times, including one in which a man was taken to hospital after being found in a pool of blood with slash wounds to his arms, head and chest. Between August and December, there were 14 attempts by detainees to end their lives using improvised ligatures. Two tried to suffocate themselves using plastic bags. On 21 September, the day before a flight, a man jumped from an upper floor but was caught in safety netting before trying “to push himself through the edge of the netting so he could fall head first to the ground”, officers wrote. One claimed torture survivor who attempted suicide in detention described Brook House as his “worst nightmare”. He said: “I thought at least if I kill myself, they’ll be able to learn a lesson – they’ll listen, and they wouldn’t treat other people the way they treated us.” Serco warned the Home Office during monthly updates that incidents of self-harm linked to the Esparto programme were driving up rates of force. In fact, the proportion of detainees subjected to force by officers rose from between 7% and 8% in 2018 and 2019 to 17% in 2020, according to monitors. Yet the Home Office didn’t release any detainees through the legal mechanism to identify those at risk of suicide despite guidance permitting this. Instead, when training shortages emerged because of Covid-19, it relied on a loophole quietly introduced to keep officers on duty across the immigration estate after their safe use-of-force training had expired. Home Office guidance usually requires custody officers to take at least eight hours of refresher training every year in the safe use of control and restraint techniques – some of which can kill if performed incorrectly. Expired staff “must not work as a [custody officer]” and their certificate is marked “invalid” on a central database, guidance states. In March 2020, the Home Office created a “dispensation,” allowing out-of-date officers to remain operational until the end of September, taking part in any use-of-force incident unless it was “planned”. Documents reveal that officers used force on detainees at Brook House during Operation Esparto while “out of ticket” on at least six occasions. On three of these, the officers were on constant watch duties – a shift during which they monitor a detainee at risk of self-harm or suicide. For example, just after 9pm on 3 August 2020, an asylum seeker – on constant watch after saying he’d rather die than return to France – began head-butting a cell window. The officer monitoring him – who ticked a box in his form stating he had not received refresher training – stepped in to pull the man back. The detainee then picked up a kettle and hit himself on the head with it “multiple times”, internal reports state. The kettle was taken from the man’s grip but he wrapped the power cable around his neck to strangle himself. A second officer grabbed the man’s hand. She then used a technique known as the back hammer, which risks dislocation if used incorrectly. She also ticked a box on her use-of-force report stating she had not received refresher training. When contacted by the Observer, the Home Office did not say whether it carried out a risk assessment of the move, nor how many staff went on duty while expired. “Deploying effectively uncertified officers to use force against detainees just to meet Home Office deportation targets is completely unacceptable,” said Alistair Carmichael, Lib Dem spokesman for home affairs. “Ministers should come before parliament to address these serious allegations.” Disclosures included in the documents revealed other concerning allegations. Documents show how a staff member complained that pain-inducing restraint was used on a detainee to force him to accept an ad-hoc medical assessment after a planned use of force. Serco said that this was done in the detainee’s best interests. The investigation also spoke to a former detainee who complained after officers placed a shield on top of him while he lay, not moving, in bed. Reviewing reports of the incident, Caffrey said force appeared “excessive”, which Serco denies. The Home Office said it reviews reports filled in by officers justifying the techniques they have used. But minutes taken during an oversight meeting in November 2020 warned the paperwork was being filled out incorrectly. The following month, officials said “accuracy” should be addressed. Officers were also found to be writing that they reserved the right to later change their reports, raising fears they could try to attempt to dodge accountability. Serco said the issue occurred in the aftermath of its takeover of Brook House and has since been corrected. A spokesperson for the Home Office said: “We have a range of safeguards in place to protect the vulnerable, including round-the-clock access to healthcare professionals, and contractors are also duty-bound to maintain our safety standards.” But in internal email exchanges, officials appeared to acknowledge that some of the material was controversial. A reporter’s request to see officers’ use-of-force accounts was sent for ministerial clearance, during which one official wrote to another: “I don’t need to see all the forms but pls do send me any that are likely to be contentious.” The reply came: “There are a lot of them that are.” Although not addressing specific allegations in a statement, Sarah Burnett, Serco’s operations director of immigration, said: “We have provided comprehensive evidence to demonstrate the accusations are untrue and there is no evidence to support them, only supposition and incorrect third-party commentary.” Burnett said that since taking over Brook House, Serco had recruited 170 extra staff and established an “open, inclusive culture” where “officers behave professionally and are properly trained and certified notwithstanding the challenges faced during the Covid pandemic”. She added: “Our officers have a duty of care to the people in the centre, and only use appropriate and proportionate force as a last resort, which in many cases prevents self-harm by detainees and on some occasions has saved lives.”Barack Obama could be forgiven for considering himself a big shot. But Patrick Gaspard used to keep his ego in check. “You’re of course an extraordinary historic figure but I’m sorry, this doesn’t compare,” Gaspard would joke, “meeting Nelson Mandela will always be the top of Mount Kilimanjaro for me.” The 53-year-old has a unique perspective on the men who became the US’s and South Africa’s first Black presidents. As a trade unionist and community activist, he first met Mandela a few months after his release from prison. Later he became close to Obama, serving in his White House and as his diplomat in South Africa. Now Gaspard is the new president and chief executive of the Center for American Progress (CAP), described by the Politico website as “the most influential think tank of the Biden era”. He succeeds Neera Tanden, who left to become a senior adviser to the president. In a wide-ranging interview in his corner office, Gaspard offered lessons learned from Mandela and Obama, his verdict on Biden’s first year in office and what his global perspective tells him about the survival of American democracy. He was born near Kinshasa, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (then Zaire), to Haitian parents. The family moved to New York when he was four. “All of my interest in politics comes from the origin story of my family,” he says. His father was a qualified lawyer in Haiti who belonged to a generation of young activists pushing for free and fair elections and open society. But this was the start of the dictatorship of François ‘Papa Doc’ Duvalier, who waged political violence to crush dissent. “My father had a shotgun put to his head and [was] told in no uncertain terms he had to cease and desist from that kind of rhetoric,” Gaspard says. “He had the opportunity to leave Haiti as hundreds of thousands of Haitian intellectuals did in that moment, and he became an educator in the Congo. Unfortunately, many of his classmates couldn’t leave and they were jailed or killed in Haiti.” Congo was experiencing its own exodus of Belgian and French educators. A UN programme encouraged French-speaking educators and intellectuals from the African diaspora to come to the country and train the next generation of leaders. Gaspard’s father was among them and, when he moved to the US, he remained connected to a new pan-African community. Gaspard grew up in this milieu, mingling with South African exiles and Black trade unionists who organised national demonstrations against the apartheid regime. He joined Jesse Jackson and others protesting outside the South African embassy. When he was 19, Congress overrode President Ronald Reagan’s veto of sanctions against the white minority government. “That sent me on a path that this work was important, collective action was impactful and this was a government here in America that could self-correct,” recalls the Columbia University graduate. “That’s the thing that most inspired me about politics in America.” In February 1990 Mandela walked to freedom after 27 years in prison. A few months later he visited the US, where Gaspard was a lead organiser of New York’s rapturous welcome. He met Mandela a second time in 1991 when David Dinkins, the mayor of New York, led a delegation to South Africa. “I was quite moved by the combination of conviction and humility that I had never experienced before,” he said. After leadership roles at the Service Employees International Union, one of the biggest unions in the US, Gaspard served as national political director of Obama’s 2008 presidential election campaign, which culminated in the once unthinkable fall of a racial barrier. “It is an extraordinary thing for someone who comes from a minority community in a country to be elected to the highest office in that country,” Gaspard says. “That moment says something about America, but it also says something about the world that we exist in and the possibilities here. “There is an unmistakeable history of brutality towards Black people in this country that was legal, systemic and tied to profit systems in America and that legacy continues to be manifesting in so many ways. It’s undeniable but what’s also undeniable is the fact that America has made a journey at every level of society to push through that, overcome that, recognise it and in this strange twist of history, even use some of that to its extraordinary strength in the world. “When I had the privilege of serving in South Africa, I was asked constantly about how America could be lecturing the world about human rights when it had this condition inside of its own country, the historic treatment of Black people. I would say it was actually because of that history that we had a perspective that was unique, that gave us a sense of what we could contribute to the broader conversation of rights in the world and what it means to promote and then protect the interests of the most vulnerable in society.” He adds: “So the night that Barack Obama was elected, and I was standing in Grant Park [in Chicago] with tears streaming down my face, it was a moment of reflection on a long arc of the American journey, but also a sense that I had as an immigrant, as an Africanist, of how that would be reflected in the rest of the world and the opening and the opportunity that it would create for America to be a more consequential standard bearer of the principle.” From 2009 until 2011, Gaspard was director of the White House office of political affairs before switching to executive director of the Democratic National Committee. He was the US ambassador to South Africa from 2013 to 2016, witnessing the nationwide eruption of grief and gratitude that met Mandela’s death at the age of 95. South Africa has made rare headlines in the US in recent weeks because it was the first country to identify the Omicron variant of the coronavirus. Subsequent evidence suggests that this may have had more to do with the country’s world class scientists rather than it being the variant’s ground zero. Yet South Africa was a victim of its own success, punished by a US flight ban even as Omicron raged elsewhere. What do Americans get wrong about South Africa, and Africa generally? “Everything,” Gaspard says. “In general, Americans writ large know very little about the continent and what they know falls into a space of negative information and, until that changes, I think they will continue to get bad policy and I think we’ll continue to have our lunch eaten by China, for instance, in those spaces. The flight ban against South Africa is a perfect example of how very little we understand about the continent.” It must have been strange for Gaspard, whose neighbourhood included Zimbabwe and other embattled democracies, to watch the rise of Donald Trump rise from afar. Just as in South Africa, there was no understanding it without understanding race. “So here’s the funny thing. I’m sitting in South Africa in the run-up to the 2016 election and all of my white progressive friends in politics in America – I’m emailing with them, I’m calling with them, constant conversations – they’re all telling me, ‘No way is Donald Trump going to become the nominee of the Republican party’. “All of my Black friends in America, ‘Oh no, he gonna be the nominee. They are definitely nominating that guy.’ All my Black friends to a person, the ones in politics and the ones who have nothing to do with politics are like, ‘Yeah, he’ll be the nominee and he’ll win’. I was like, ‘What?’ “There’s dismay, fear, but no surprise because when you have suffered the blows of history, you’re always anticipating the next blow and African Americans understand that in America there is a very clear story that can be told about elections.” Trump infamously referred to Haiti, El Salvador and parts of Africa as “shithole countries” and never travelled to Africa. He eventually filled the diplomatic vacancy created by Gaspard’s departure from Pretoria with Lana Marks, a luxury handbag designer from Palm Beach, Florida. Gaspard, meanwhile, returned to the US and became president of the Open Society Foundations, founded by George Soros and one of the biggest private philanthropies in the world. He oversaw a $1.4bn budget and staff of 1,600, grappling with the Covid-19 pandemic and rise of authoritarian regimes around the world. Then came the CAP which, founded in 2003 by John Podesta, former White House chief of staff to President Bill Clinton, is accustomed to having the ear of Democratic presidents. Gaspard says he is in regular contact with the Biden administration, key agencies and “the progressive ecosystem that’s helping to stand up the agenda”. The CAP can also be a critical friend. “During the spike in Haitian asylum seekers at the Texas border, when the world saw those reprehensible images of how those asylum seekers were being treated, I didn’t hesitate as the president of CAP to speak out against the policies and to personally go to the border to bear witness to what was occurring and to call for and demand different practises in how we adjudicate those matters.” There has been “tremendous progress” at the border since then, he says. But Biden’s approval rating remains stubbornly low and there is a sense of gloom in the air. As the president nears his first anniversary in office, what is Gaspard’s verdict so far? “My god, can we step back for a second and have some perspective? “If someone had told me or anyone on January 5th that 11 months later Joe Biden would have managed to pass a bipartisan infrastructure bill, successfully advanced a historic stimulus bill that’s led to the fastest 11 month job growth in America that we’ve ever had … and was also on the precipice of passing a piece of legislation that will expand access to Medicare benefits, lift up low wage workers who are the frontlines of the care economy, make the most progress on investments in climate change in two generations, I would have taken all of that if you’d offered it to me.” In his inaugural address, Biden vowed to address the interlocking crises of climate, coronavirus, economy and racial justice. On the last of these, police reform and voting rights have stalled in Congress, raising fears that last year’s Black Lives Matter protests after the police murder of George Floyd could prove a moment, not a movement, after all. Gaspard, however, believes the momentum is sustainable. “Of course there was the white knuckle moment of George Floyd and the explosion of pent-up advocacy and rage but now there’s a lot of good, thoughtful work. You’re going to have your setbacks but there’s also been extraordinary progress in a number of states – Missouri, Ohio, California – where you can quantify what’s changed. That will continue. Civil rights just does not move in a linear way.” Less than a year after the 6 January insurrection at the US Capitol, however, the existential threats to democracy itself persist in a deeply divided nation. Gaspard describes himself as “radically optimistic” but not “Pollyannish” about the gathering storm. “This is a thing I hesitate to say out loud but I really do believe that we should have the understanding that in 2024, when we are conducting elections across the country, there is the potential for us to experience January 6 on steroids, for us to see it in state after state in state capitols.” “There’s the potential for that kind of civil disruption if we are not on our side intentional about pushing back now and about making as persuasive an argument for democracy as we can and an argument that’s manifest in actual legislation and executive orders.” Reagan famously referred to America as a “shining city on a hill”; Biden has said the country can be defined in one word: “possibilities”. It was such promises that enticed Gaspard’s parents here half a century ago. But the turmoil of recent years has tarnished its image. Does he think his mother and father would have made the same choice today? “We have seen that America, as an aspirational brand, has taken a hit the last several years. There’s a direct relationship between that and the previous president of the United States and how he postured on the world stage and projected us as a closed, hyper sovereign space that did not cooperate in a multilateral way and that led with military might and ‘America first’ as opposed to partnership and cooperation. “There is a fear that I hear among immigrants that are in our community: they worry that the face of America has changed. When they see things like ‘the great replacement’ conspiracy that’s driving all kinds of not just rhetoric but actual policy on the ground for conservatives, they worry about what kind of violence it can visit on their children. All that anxiety is real.” But again he sees the glass as half full. “I can tell you I’m pretty confident that if my parents were faced with that choice today that America is still the place they would see as this shining beacon of hope and opportunity, irrespective of its challenges which are real and more nakedly exposed than they have been in some time.Once upon a time there was a mouse mat. A mouse mat that threatened to undermine global efforts to avert nuclear warfare. The sales photo on Etsy showed a blameless-looking rubber rectangle, hand made in Leicester, with a Persian rug motif. But PayPal decided that it violated international sanctions and suspended the account of the unsuspecting purchaser. To understand the modern business model – and the contents of my consumer inbox – look no further than this “illicit” item. A computer algorithm had decided the mat was Iranian contraband, computer software suspended the customer’s PayPal account, automated warnings threatened termination unless the customer could prove its provenance, and customer service agents seemed powerless to apply human logic. It was the same artificial intelligence and human apathy that forced graduates to keep funding repaid loans , informed an Ovo customer that they owed £19,000 for two months of energy and allowed a 10-minute flight schedule change to scupper a honeymoon. Add to the mix this year’s double act, Brexit and Covid, which gave companies two cast-iron new excuses for skirting consumer rights law. As much of the nation retreated to the sofa to work, and Brexit muddied the rule book, the computer was given ever greater control and customers found themselves trapped in limbo. “Kafkaesque nightmare” is a recurring phrase from our literary readers. As always, there are so many worthy contenders for an award, but it’s been a pleasure to narrow them down to the following standout takes on customer service. In all cases, the customer was only offered effective service after I intervened. Most rubbish excuse A joint gong for eBay and delivery firm UPS. When MS of Manchester sought a refund from an eBay seller for a £130 satnav that never arrived, he was refused. eBay sided with the seller, since tracking showed that the item had been delivered – to his rubbish bin. How could UPS have known that, without a notification card, MS would not think to check his wheelie bin before collection day? Bleeding heart for empathy Legal &amp; General tried hard for this honour. It twice informed a grieving man that he had been bequeathed £14,000 from his late sister’s pension plan before realising it had sent the forms to the wrong relative. Then it erroneously told the deceased’s father to expect £19,000. The bequest was, in fact, intended for the grandson who, in proud Scottish tradition, bore the same name, but a different address to his father and grandfather. The comically named “sensitive claims” department discovered it had lost the late woman’s letter of instruction and, in its absence, refused to discuss the legacy with her executors. Surrealism in Whitehall The UK government sweeps the table. Take your pick. The Department for Work and Pensions misunderstood its own rules and penalised a universal credit claimant for not applying while in an induced coma. The Home Office, whose rules on residency permits are so misleading and whose stance, when applicants are duly misled, so intransigent, that an eligible spouse was denied indefinite leave to remain and presented with a £1,000 bill for NHS services. Or there’s the Ministry of Justice’s multimillion- pound reforms to streamline the probate service. Closure of local probate offices, a new online system declared unfit for purpose by legal firms, and a Covid backlog, have left families in legal limbo for up to nine months. Most cunning cop-out What’s more risky – explosives or footwear? Both score equally, according to courier firm DPD. Its stance makes perfect sense. It allows customers to book a delivery for an identified item, pay extra for insurance cover, and then, if the consignment goes missing and a claim is made, it can duck a payout by declaring it’s on a list of prohibited items along with human flesh and counterfeit currency. Vigilant customers, who study delivery exclusions, may be none the wiser. DPD forbids the mailing of “personal effects”, while Hermes refuses to pay compensation in the event it wrecks or loses “composite items of any description” or “items which can be exchanged by themselves, or with any other item, for money or goods or services”. Brexit bonus prize WK of Cumbria’s purposeful lockdown hours were spent contesting a £111 customs charge on a £12 wall bracket. It had been omitted from a delivery from the German company Loxhome in November 2020, and sent separately in the new year. By then, post-Brexit customs charges had kicked in. The duty for the bracket was applied to the entire £460 order. WK refused delivery to avoid the charges. But courier UPS returned to slip it through his letter box and, by the time the Observer intervened, debt collectors were pursuing him for £115. Meanwhile, a new identity was the Brexit bonus for some startled EU nationals who had been granted EU Settled Status in the UK. A Home Office computer anomaly meant that women who had lived for decades under their married surname, were registered under their birth name which appears first on some EU passports. They faced losing access to services because their proof of residency rights did not match official documents. Great escape artists Holidays! Remember those jaunts to Mediterranean beaches in the old days? While the few who dared set their sights on sunny climes battle for refunds for cancelled trips, many who played safe and booked local are also out of pocket. One reader did get as far as Cornwall, only to discover that the five-star water resort he’d booked had no record of him. Booking.com reassured the family they had been rebooked – in the beguiling suburb of Uxbridge, 250 miles away. Airbnb, meanwhile, decided that lockdowns are not an extenuating circumstance for cancellation and refused to require hosts to refund customers whose trips were banned by government rules, while deducting its 15% service fee from hosts who decided to do the right thing. Distinguished desertion order The high street banks can share this between them for abandoning scam victims to penury. Criminals have again been the biggest Covid winners with increasingly sophisticated strategies to access personal accounts . The good news is, major banks have pledged to refund victims who were not unduly negligent. The bad is, they often try their darnedest to wriggle out of it. I’ve investigated unrefunded losses of £900,000 this year and persuaded banks to return 54%, including a £225,000 pension pot stolen from a retired detective by a cloned investment firm. Nationwide deserves the spotlight for failing to protect, and refusing to refund, a pensioner’s £70,000 life savings, stolen in a similarly sophisticated scam. It finally offered to refund her a year later following contact from the Financial Ombudsman Service. • This article was amended on 26 December 2021. The company that twice incorrectly informed a grieving man he had been bequeathed £14,000 from his late sister’s pension plan was Legal &amp; General. An earlier version incorrectly named that company as NS&amp;I. We apologise to NS&amp;I for the error.As cinemas once again struggled with the closures, cancellations and uncertainties of the pandemic, the biggest film story this year was surely the long-delayed release of No Time to Die. Originally slated to open in early 2020, Daniel Craig’s final outing as 007 became the first high-profile release to announce a major Covid-related postponement. For many UK cinemas, the new November 2020 opening date became a mast to which to tie their hopes of recovery – hopes that were crushed when the release date was pushed back again, to April 2021, and then again to autumn. So when Craig’s Bond swan song was finally unveiled at the Albert Hall at the end of September, the sense of relief was palpable – not least because the film didn’t disappoint. Ably directed by Cary Joji Fukunaga (Beasts of No Nation ), No Time to Die opened to strong reviews and solid box-office – although in yet another indication of how much the world has changed in recent years, a streaming release came hot on the heels of the film’s theatrical debut, meaning that right now, viewers can choose to watch No Time to Die in cinemas or at home: the model of the future. Among the many names that have been mooted to breathe new life into the role of 007, Riz Ahmed is popular with audiences. A versatile actor, musician and writer, he proved his mettle in the 2019 drama Sound of Metal, which opened in UK cinemas in April 2021, just ahead of the Oscars, where he was nominated for best actor (he lost out to Anthony Hopkins in The Father). Ahmed is currently on the Oscar radar again with the short film The Long Goodbye, a terrifying dystopian vision of modern Britain, directed by Aneil Karia, which generated debate in parliament when first released in 2020, and has now been shortlisted for the 94th Academy Awards. At the 93rd Oscars in April, Chloé Zhao, director of the recent Marvel blockbuster Eternals, became only the second woman to win best director, following in the footsteps of Kathryn Bigelow (who won for The Hurt Locker in 2010) with Nomadland, which also won best picture, and best actress for Frances McDormand. At Cannes, French film-maker Julia Ducournau became the second woman to win the Palme d’Or (after Jane Campion), with her extraordinary second feature, Titane, a full-blooded body-horror fable that channels the controversial spirit of David Cronenberg’s Crash, and which opens in the UK today . June saw the UK release of English-Pakistani film-maker Aleem Khan’s brilliant feature debut, After Love, which recently swept the board at the British independent film awards, where its trophies included best British independent film, best director and best screenplay, alongside best actress for Joanna Scanlan. There were significant wins too for the documentary Poly Styrene: I Am a Cliché, which opened here in March, and the for the tense, one-shot drama Boiling Point, starring Stephen Graham, which UK audiences can see from 5 January 2022. The most remarkable film of the summer of 2021 was Summer of Soul, Ahmir “Questlove” Thompson’s rediscovery of footage from the 1969 Harlem Cultural festival, featuring jaw-dropping performances by Nina Simone, Stevie Wonder, Sly and the Family Stone, Mahalia Jackson and more. Then in August, the Welsh film-maker Prano Bailey-Bond took audiences back to the 80s heyday of the video nasties with her thrilling feature debut, Censor. But my favourite film of 2021 was Céline Sciamma’s Petite Maman, a flawless gem from the creator of Girlhood and Portrait of a Lady on Fire. Just 73 minutes long, and rated “suitable for all” by the BBFC, this U-certificate masterpiece reminds us of the universal power of cinema to transform, engage and ultimately redeem audiences, transcending boundaries of age, gender and nationality. The top 10 films of 2021 1. Petite Maman Céline Sciamma’s masterpiece is proof of the regenerative power of cinema. 2. Summer of Soul Perhaps the greatest concert movie ever made. 3. The Green Knight David Lowery brings the Middle English poem to life in the 21st century. 4. Another Round A deserving winner of best international feature at the Oscars in April. 5. Titane Julia Ducournau’s Palme d’Or winner; a visceral follow-up to Raw. 6. Censor Prano Bailey-Bond’s genre-bending feature debut has so much more than just nostalgia for the video nasties. 7. Sound of Metal Riz Ahmed is note perfect in Darius Marder’s tale of a drummer learning to live with deafness. 8. After Love Joanna Scanlan turns in a career-best performance in Aleem Khan’s feature debut. 9. Spencer Jonny Greenwood’s electrifying score elevates Pablo Larraín’s “fable from a true tragedy”. 10. Quo Vadis, Aida? Bosnian film-maker Jasmila Žbanić’s harrowing real-life drama took top honours at this month’s European film awards. Turkey Stardust A Bowie film without Bowie’s music, lyrics, wit or glamour.In the next 12 months, Britain is expected to make a remarkable aerospace breakthrough. For the first time, a satellite will be fired into orbit from a launch pad in the United Kingdom. It will be a historic moment – though exactly where this grand adventure will begin is not yet clear. A series of fledgling operations, backed by the UK Space Agency, are now competing to be the first to launch a satellite from British soil. One is based in Cornwall, where a Virgin Orbit jumbo jet is set to carry a LauncherOne rocket to a height of 35,000 feet, where it will then be fired to propel its satellite cargo into orbit. The first flight is scheduled for late summer. By contrast, rival Scottish spaceports – one in Sutherland and one on Shetland – are preparing more direct routes, with each announcing plans to launch two-staged rockets that could put satellites round the Earth in late autumn. In addition, proposals have been announced to build spaceports in Scotland at Campbeltown, Prestwick and North Uist, while Wales’s B2Space, based in Snowdonia, has revealed its own, unusual method for getting into space: by balloon. It plans to release a helium-filled dirigible which will carry a rocket to a height of more than 20 miles. The launcher will then be fired, carrying its satellite cargo into orbit. Some of the remotest parts of the British Isles will soon reverberate to the sound of rocketry and space launches, with the Cornish, Sutherland and Shetland programmes rated as the most likely to see first successes next year. Each of these spaceports has stressed the carbon-friendly, re-usable aspects of its operations and, in general, have received cautious support from most local people. An example is provided by Sutherland Spaceport – which is based on a 12-acre site in the middle of the Melness Crofters‘ Estate on the A’Mhoine peninsula on the very northernmost part of mainland Scotland. Crofters there graze cattle, catch fish and tend the land but have welcomed the £17.5m project that could soon see rockets fired over their remote homeland. “This is not going to be the Cape Canaveral of the Highlands,” said Dorothy Pritchard, chair of Melness Crofters’ Estate. “There will only be a few launches every year. But the spaceport will provide skilled jobs for young people, and that is desperately important here. The oil industry is going, young adults are leaving, and the population around here is ageing. A spaceport will bring a tremendous boost to the area by providing jobs for skilled, educated young folk.” Not everyone has been enthusiastic. Local landowner, the Danish billionaire Anders Povlsen, has claimed the spaceport would harm his plans to rewild the area. Earlier this year, a judicial review threw out a bid by him to have the project blocked, however, and Povlsen has since announced that he will not appeal against the decision. Space Hub Sutherland’s first launch is tipped for late autumn when a Prime rocket – built by Orbex, a UK-based launcher manufacturer – is scheduled to make its maiden flight from the spaceport. Orbex describes its Prime rocket as “one of the most advanced, low-carbon, high-performance micro-launch vehicles in the world”. The spaceport lies on mainland Britain’s remotest corner, though its location looks positively bustling compared with its Shetland rival, SaxaVord Space Port, which is being built at Lamba Ness on Unst, the most northerly inhabited island in the UK, 400 miles north of Edinburgh. Its Pathfinder rockets will be delivered next year. The site, like Sutherland’s, offers special advantages. Many satellites – in particular, Earth monitoring spacecraft that study sea-level fluctuations and ice-sheet changes – often fly in polar orbit round the Earth, on trajectories inclined at 90 degrees to the equator. On orbits like these, the Earth revolves beneath the craft as it sweeps over the poles, allowing it to monitor the entire planet underneath it. So, blasting a rocket northwards, safely over open seas and not over inhabited land, gives spaceports such as Sutherland’s and SaxaVord a key benefit. “What we really have to concentrate on is making sure we have as much flexibility as possible in our operations,” said Scott Hammond, operations director of the Shetland spaceport. “We need to be able to launch fairly big satellites, say 500kg, as well as small ones, down to 10kg, in order to attract as many different customers – who will have varying requirements for the objects that they want to put in space – as possible. And that, precisely, is what our rockets are designed to do.” A different approach is taken by operators at Cornwall’s spaceport. Their satellite launcher will involve no fiery blast-offs but will, instead, be carried aloft, strapped to the underside of Cosmic Girl, a retrofitted 747 jet that is operated by Virgin Orbit and which will take off from Newquay airport. Virgin Orbit has already launched satellites this way, over the Pacific, and has plans to use this spaceport as its European base. “Instead of customers having to take their satellites to a rocket pad to have them blasted into space, Virgin Orbit takes the opposite route – by coming to a site near you to offer a launch,” said Melissa Thorpe, head of Spaceport Cornwall. “It has set up bases round the world, and Cornwall will be the centre of its European operations. That will make it much easier for UK satellite builders to get their craft into orbit.” In total, it is a striking set of launch plans with Britain concentrating on the growing market for launching small satellites, which are usually less than 500kg in weight. “In 2012, there were around 50 launches of small satellites,” said Ian Annett, deputy chief officer of the UK Space Agency, which has played a key role in setting up the nation’s spaceport network. “By 2019, there were more than 400 and the market continues to grow. “It used to cost hundreds of thousands of dollars to put a kilo of material into orbit. However, commercial launching companies – like Elon Musk’s SpaceX – have brought that cost down to nearer $1,000.” Such reductions are opening up low Earth orbit for exploitation by a wide range of users, from single university departments to companies planning to exploit global markets. For example, internet providers such as OneWeb have announced plans to put hundreds of small satellites into orbit to generate global broadband coverage. Others want to use them to study the impacts of climate change, carry out disaster monitoring, manufacture alloys and drugs in microgravity, test new communication technologies and to implement a host of other applications. Small satellites range from the size of an oven to a phone, and can be launched individually or in clusters. It remains to be seen whether the UK’s fledgling space launch industry can attract enough business to keep all seven proposed spaceports busy launching these satellites. At present, however, there is confidence for their prospects. “The market potential is immense, and Britain has a chance to exploit that operation from within its own shores, for the first time,” said Annett.Historical biography always involves a certain amount of detective work, but Professor Zoë Playdon has had to contend with an additional challenge in the writing of her first book, The Hidden Case of Ewan Forbes. As the title implies, information about her subject was not just scant, but much had been actively suppressed. Now Playdon’s determined labours have brought this extraordinary story to light. Playdon first came across Sir Ewan Forbes-Sempill in 1996 as the result of advising on a legal challenge to allow transgender people to change their birth certificate – something that had been the norm in the UK until the late 1960s, although it was unclear how or why the law had changed. In the wake of their defeat, they were approached by a solicitor named Terrence Walton, who provided a missing piece of the puzzle. Walton had represented a trans woman, April Ashley, in a landmark case in 1969. She was a model who had married the Hon Arthur Corbett, but when the relationship broke down and Ashley tried to claim financial support, Corbett took her to court on the grounds that she was male (as recorded on her birth certificate, which she had not changed) and that therefore the marriage had never been legitimate. The case created a precedent that meant a person’s birth certificate was the final word on their legal sex. Walton told Playdon and her colleagues that he and Ashley had been made aware at the time of an earlier case also concerned with establishing an individual’s legal sex, but told they could not refer to it. “All traces of it had been removed from the public eye.” It took Playdon two years and a good deal of persistence to gain access to the 500-page transcript of Sir Ewan’s court case, and it was not until her retirement in 2014 that she was able to devote a further five years of research to his life and historical significance. The result is a detailed and wide-ranging work, piecing together the largely forgotten story of one individual and situating it in a broader context of trans rights, gay rights and the laws of primogeniture over the past century. Sir Ewan’s life is the stuff of costume drama, and it’s no surprise to learn that the television rights have already been sold. He was born in 1912 at Craigievar Castle near Balmoral, the third child of the Lord and Lady Sempill, was registered as female and christened Elisabeth. “But as far as Ewan was concerned,” Playdon writes, “he was a boy, and his certainty about this was so firm that his tranquil memoir, The Aul’ Days, published when he was 72, mentions no other possibility.” His parents seem to have had an ambivalent attitude to their youngest child’s gender. His mother in particular appears surprisingly progressive in some ways; in adolescence, she takes him to European medical specialists for treatments that sound like testosterone injections. But he is still expected to appear in women’s clothes on formal occasions, and to be presented at court as a debutante even after he has developed facial hair. He waited until after his parents’ deaths to change his name and his birth certificate formally so that he could legally marry. At the time, this was “a relatively easy process”, requiring letters from a doctor, though Ewan’s family connections and his own medical career clearly smoothed his path. But in his 50s, Ewan’s quiet life with his wife Patty was thrown into chaos by the death of his older brother, William, the 10th Baronet Forbes of Craigievar. The title was limited by primogeniture; only males could inherit, and William had no sons. At William’s funeral, like the villain in a melodrama, Ewan’s cousin John appeared, claiming his right to the title on the grounds that Ewan was not a man. There followed a legal battle with so many dramatic twists and turns it almost stretches credulity; bribery, sibling rivalry and the sudden death of a key witness is only the half of it. The potential ramifications of the verdict were huge, not only for Sir Ewan, who could have faced two years in prison for perjury, along with Patty, if he was found to be female, but for the future of male succession. “There are some interests that it is more important to protect than the rights of individuals,” as Walton says darkly. As emeritus professor of medical humanities at the University of London and a campaigner with 30 years’ experience in LGBTQ+ rights, Playdon is well placed to examine this story in context and she tells it, as you would expect, from the perspective of her own views on the issues. Ewan Forbes’s story, and the cases that have a bearing on his, are presented with empathy and respect, though at times her strong views can tip her into hyperbole. It is a shame, too, that she feels the need to deploy the derogatory term “Terf” repeatedly throughout her concluding chapter, “Ewan’s Legacy”, which presents selective arguments from the current debate over gender identity. Despite these jarring notes, Playdon has unearthed a fascinating and important story, the impact of which is sure to reverberate through future discussions on trans rights and the rights of daughters to inherit. The Hidden Case of Ewan Forbes by Zoë Playdon is published by Bloomsbury (£20). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyManchester United’s Ralf Rangnick has experienced something like a Christmas miracle: from having 11 players in total available last week (including three goalkeepers), he now has an almost fully fit squad to select from, with the sole exception of Paul Pogba. That means 25 outfield players are ready to go, Rangnick said – bad news for Eddie Howe and Newcastle in their hunt for a second Premier League win. In his own pre-match press conference Howe harked back to the eras of Kevin Keegan and Sir Bobby Robson, urging his players to recreate that “attacking verve and swagger”. But those vibrant times seem a long way away, with a relegation dogfight to look forward to in the new year. Luke McLaughlin Monday 8pm Venue St James’ Park Last season Newcastle 1 Manchester United 4 Odds H 6-1 A 4-9 D 7-2 Referee Craig Pawson This season G10 Y36 R1 3.80 cards/game NEWCASTLE Subs from Darlow, Gillespie, Langley, Woodman, Clark, Shelvey, Hendrick, Krafth, Manquillo, Fraser, Anderson, Gayle Doubtful Krafth (illness), Manquillo (illness), Shelvey (knock) Injured Lewis (hamstring, 15 Jan), Fernández (thigh, Feb), Dummett (calf, unknown) Suspended Hayden (one match) Form LDWLLL Discipline Y43 R2 Leading scorer Wilson 6 MANCHESTER UNITED Subs from Grant, Heaton, Henderson, Lindelöf, Bailly, Jones, Mata, Martial, Greenwood, Lingard, Diallo, Cavani, Wan-Bissaka, Matic, Van de Beek, Elanga, Mengi, Mejbri, Shoretire Doubtful None Injured Pogba (thigh, unknown) Suspended None Form LLDWWW Discipline Y36 R2 Leading scorer Ronaldo 7I don’t remember a time in my life when I was not afraid of swans. It’s not that I think a swan could kill me, but I’m pretty sure it could dislocate my shoulder. Or at the very least peck me somewhere nasty. All I know is this: I don’t want to find out what they’re capable of. For me, I imagine it feels much like any other phobia must feel for other people: a perfectly natural and rational reaction to something completely terrifying. Being afraid of swans was not really an issue in my life until I started swimming outdoors during the lockdowns last year. My swan anxiety is well publicised among the group I swim with. Everyone is cautious around nesting birds between March and June, but someone will come and swim next to me if there’s a swan in the vicinity all year round. I’m also a figure of well-intentioned ridicule. For my birthday, friends put on a surprise rendition of Swan Lake in a shallow stretch of the Thames in Surrey, complete with tutus, white face paint and feathered headbands. Lately, I’ve had a few hairy moments. There are “friendly” swans at one lake we go to and, as they glide over, my breathing turns shallow and I can feel myself physically shutting down. A while ago, I realised that my jitters risk exposing me to other dangers: swimming out further than I want to, or being longer in the cold than is sensible, or having a panic attack in the water. It also occurred to me that I’m exposing others to unnecessary stress: their job is to keep themselves safe in the water, not to look after me. I needed to get this phobia under control. My fear – like many fears – is not completely groundless. As a child, I worshipped my grandad, a gentle but strong man who had been a bantamweight boxer during his time in the RAF. When I was about five or six, we were walking alongside a riverbank in a family group. Out of nowhere my grandad, just ahead of us, was accosted by a swan protecting her babies. He must have brushed past the nest. All the adults around me laughed it off, as he was never in any real danger, but I had seen the shock flash in his eyes: this creature was not to be messed with. The thing I remember most is the effect of its gigantic, deafening wing span. It was monstrous. The message for me was clear: avoid the wrath of the swan. You cannot fight it and you cannot outrun it. The swan didn’t get him on that day. But it could get me now. The only way I could think of overcoming my kyknophobia responsibly – seeing as there is no official “Embrace the Swan” treatment programme – was to enlist the help of Steve Knight, who runs the Swan Sanctuary in Shepperton, Surrey, near the stretches of the Thames where I swim regularly. Knight’s late partner, Dot Beeson, started rescuing swans and tending to them in her garden in the early 1980s. She sold her house to finance the first national swan sanctuary on a hectare of land in Egham, eventually moving operations to Shepperton in 2005. Beeson was awarded an MBE for her services to swan rescue and rehabilitation in 2015. Since she died of cancer last year, at the age of 72, Knight has taken on her mantle as (my name for him) “the swan whisperer”. We cannot meet at the Swan Sanctuary itself because of recent precautions around avian flu; dozens of swans died after an outbreak in Stratford-upon-Avon in early November. So we meet instead at Truss’s Island, Staines, a place where flocks of swans regularly gather. We both know some people who swim here, but this is exactly the kind of swim spot I would usually avoid. I take my swim buddy John for moral support (and because, in any case, none of us ever swim alone). Knight is sympathetic about my phobia but he also thinks I am silly: “There are far greater dangers in the water than the swans.” He’s right, of course. More importantly, the swans themselves are in far greater danger than I am. The sanctuary has recently taken in several swans with sewage poisoning. If it’s not sewage then it’s diesel. And now another round of this bird flu. I kind of knew all this, but I had blocked out the real impact. Hearing it face to face, from someone who devotes their time to saving wildlife, finally makes me take in the horror of it. The actual plight of these creatures is far more profound than my imaginary one. However, the reality is that I am still terrified. Armed with a loaf of bread, Knight guides me gently towards a group of what must be two dozen swans. He recommends feeding swans at this time of year as their natural food is scarce during winter. But you should always feed them in the water or near the water’s edge so that they’re not tempted to roam towards traffic or dogs. In my mind, there are hundreds of swans, maybe millions, and I am Tippi Hedren in The Birds. But there is something calming about Knight’s presence and, when one swan doesn’t want to move out of his way, he calmly grasps it by the neck like a python and moves it firmly aside. All the swans are brushing up against us, snorting like pigs (“They are just saying hello,” Knight says). I realise to my amazement that they are not crazed maniacs – even though they are quite hungry and really want the bread – and they are not actually attacking us. After a while, I do almost get pecked – by accident, I think – but even that is not as frightening as I thought it would be. I can feel an undercurrent of panic from a part of my brain I can’t quite switch off: “DANGER. SWANS.” But I can also see the truth of the situation: I am not in physical danger. I am hugely inspired and impressed by how calm Knight is. I don’t want to get too Freudian about this, but I realise later that he is not unlike my grandad in his manner. Something shifts. I remember the words of my swim friend Debbie, an occupational therapist who is not remotely afraid of swans, despite having had a few incidents that involved “circling” during nesting season. “I’m really frightened of a lot of animals. But with birds, I know they are more afraid of us than we are of them. You just have to do everything you can to make sure they don’t think you’re a threat. Don’t look at the cygnets. Don’t make eye contact.” Knight echoes this: “Stay calm. Be relaxed. Breathe. Don’t move away too quickly because you mark yourself out as prey.” Good advice. No one wants to feel like prey. Ahead of me, I see John walk carefully into the water, surrounded by long white necks. He splashes very slightly as he launches off and a swan backs away, frightened. They really are the prey and not us. Astonishingly, after the Hitchcockian immersion therapy, it feels like I really believe this. My fear has not lifted. But it has muted into watchful respect. Now I just have to figure out what to do about seagulls.Around this time of year it’s not easy to write about chocolate. People are either surrounded by it, or making a plan in the diary to avoid it. So this week we’ll talk small bites. One of the things I’ve noticed is, because I have to test chocolate very regularly, I do ration how much I eat and this does, perversely, augment the experience. Gone – or rare – are the days when I would wolf down a whole bar. Unless it’s a tiny one. I’m very fond of Green &amp; Black’s Tasting Collection (£12.99, 24 x 15g mini bars), although there are never quite enough of the bars I like. There is something wonderfully complete about starting and finishing the whole, tiny bar. Although not individually wrapped, Neary Nógs Irish stout chocolate cups (£6.25 for 4) are deeply satisfying. Small batch craft chocolate – this one is 63% dark Togo cacao – contains a Guinness ganache and is topped with Irish cream. Delicious. If you like to avoid dairy then look for their Irish sea-salt chocolate caramel cups(£5.25 for 4) – 60% Ecuadorian chocolate and vegan caramel. But my absolute favourite small bites at the moment are Friis Holm’s tiny 5g bars. These delicious Danish babies are not overly easy to get, but I have used my power for good and they are now stocked by Cocoa Runners for £9.45. My favourite is the close to perfect 50% O’Payo Milk. I could buy a whole 100g bar, of course, for £9.95, and there’s a hazelnut version, but therein lies danger. Stay small and stay safe. Follow Annalisa on Twitter @AnnalisaBLondoners bought more than 112,000 homes outside the capital this year –in the biggest “great escape” from the capital since 2007 as the coronavirus pandemic drove people to seek more space to comfortably work from home. The number of homes bought by Londoners outside the capital increased by 62% compared with 2020, according to estate agent Hamptons. Aneisha Beveridge, the firm’s head of research, said: “City leavers have changed the geography of not only the commuter belt, but smaller towns and cities across southern England.” Beveridge said that while most (57%) of those leaving London were selling a home in the capital and buying a new one elsewhere, a record number of London renters were buying their first home in a more affordable location. “The rise of flexible working coupled with affordability barriers have meant that a record 40% of first-time buyers now leave the capital to buy their first home,” she said. “The capital’s loss is the home counties’ gain with these buyers prepared to move 24% further than before the pandemic began, taking their wealth and experience with them.” The research shows that the switch to flexible working has encouraged Londoners to buy homes further outside the capital than in pre-pandemic times. The average London leaver moved 34.7 miles away from Charing Cross (used as the marker for the centre of the capital) – 6.4 miles (or 23%) further than previously. Alice Fry, a public relations consultant, and her husband Ed, a finance director, and their three-year-old and seven-month-old children, Willa and Cressida, joined the exodus, moving from a two-bedroom flat in South Kensington to a six-bedroom Georgian house in Arundel, West Sussex. Fry said the family had planned to move out of London “in theory” in a few years time when Willa would be starting school, but the pandemic accelerated their plan. “After spending three months of the first lockdown at my parents’ house in Sussex, we realised that the way of life is just much better, especially for children,” she said. “So we shifted the house search out of London to the country, and then I found out I was pregnant again, and we were definitely moving out of London. “We got a lot more for our money. We weren’t looking for acres and acres of land, but we have got a nice big garden and the countryside on our doorstep.” The family visits London often, but Fry said lockdown had taught them that more space, a garden and easy access to wide open natural spaces is “more important to us than the buzz of the big city”. “We love London so much – the convenience, and all the excitement that comes with it – but the quality of life is just much better here and we can get to London in no time and enjoy it for its best bits without having to live with its worse bits.” The departing Londoners have bought 112,780 homes outside the capital, so far this year, up from 69,810 in 2020. They spent £54.9bn, the highest annual spend on record and more than double that London leavers spent in 2015. The big increase in total spending reflects soaring property prices, which have been lifted by the government’s temporary cut to stamp duty. The average price which Londoners paid for properties outside the capital has risen from £450,460 in 2020 to £486,890 in 2021, according to Hamptons. Henry Pryor, an independent property buying agent who has helped find properties for many Londoners leaving the capital this year, said: “It’s no surprise that the housing market has been on fire this year – cheap and easy money has rained down on those with a good enough credit rating to qualify. “Covid has made most people reappraise what they want from a home. We now want our homes to do more – we need them to be places we can work from, that can be converted into home schools, that have flexible spaces if one of us needs to isolate, that has outdoor areas in case we can only see family and friends outside and that has recreational space in case we have to spend our holidays in them. “Many people don’t need to be so close to their work and commutes can be longer and coincidently we want better services like faster broadband to make these homes work better. • This article was amended on 27 and 28 December 2021. An earlier version, quoting research by Hamptons, said that Londoners bought more than 112,000 homes outside the capital this year but incorrectly equated this figure to “creating two new cities roughly the size of Leeds.” Also it is the average price which Londoners paid for properties outside the capital which has risen from £450,460 in 2020 to £486,890 in 2021 (according to Hamptons), not the average UK house price.The system for taking control of a person’s financial affairs is “wide open” to fraud, an investigation has found. It revealed that the application process for obtaining the document known as lasting power of attorney (LPA) has no routine identity checks or effective fraud controls. Labour said it was a “national scandal” and called for an urgent inquiry. The scheme is intended to help manage the affairs of those who are vulnerable or seriously ill. The stamped paper documents can be checked by organisations such as banks and investment firms against a national register. But lawyers warned that a fraudster could submit a “complete work of fiction” to the government body overseeing the scheme, with falsified names and addresses, and be handed the legal document entitling them to take over the affairs of the victim. An investigation by the BBC Radio 4 consumer programme You and Yours has spoken to one victim whose empty home was targeted by a fraudster or fraudsters who obtained an LPA without any proper checks. The fraudsters briefly visited the woman’s flat to drill out the locks and then tried to sell it using the document. This weekend, Steve Reed, the shadow justice secretary, called for an inquiry into the scheme, which is overseen by the government agency the Office of the Public Guardian. He has also written to Dominic Raab, the secretary of state for justice, urging action. He said: “Every single one of us should be worried sick about the immense risks involved in this. It is a national scandal.” The lasting power of attorney was introduced in 2007, but its operation is based on decades of case law. A document can give the holder access to a person’s bank accounts, investments and savings, but there are no routine fraud or identity checks. It can also be used to sell a house. There are estimated to be about 3m such documents in the official registry. It can take up to 40 days for an application for a Lasting Power of Attorney to be registered, and it costs £82. In the case identified by You and Yours, the fraudster successfully obtained the LPA using falsified names and addresses. The victim’s signature was forged, and the date of birth for the victim was incorrect. The fraud was foiled when lawyers who had been approached to handle the flat sale asked for a doctor’s note confirming that the victim was not well enough to deal with the matter. The victim was then informed last June that a suspected fraudster had tried to sell her home, using the official LPA document and claiming to be a sister. The victim is an only child. The fraudster is believed to have targeted the victim’s home because it was empty while she was away to look after her mother. When the victim complained to the Office of the Public Guardian, she was shocked to be advised on at least two separate occasions by the government agency that the fastest way to resolve the matter would be to say that she had allowed the fraudster to take over her financial affairs, and then to ask for the lasting power of attorney to be revoked. Shari Vahl, a reporter for You and Yours, said that the lasting power of attorney system was “wide open” to fraud. She said: “This is probably the most powerful document in anyone’s financial life. Once someone has this document, they have control of your money. And they are being given out without any checks.” The investigation established that a person with the same name as the fraudster had made various applications to local councils, asking for the addresses of known empty properties. It suggests that other properties may be at risk from a similar fraud. Samantha Hamilton, who heads the Court of Protection team at the legal firm Mullis and Peake, said that routine identity checks should be required for such a powerful document. She said: “You could put in a complete work of fiction at the moment and still have the document registered.” The annual report of the Office of the Public Guardian for 2020-21 warns of the risk that the “weakness in the current process allows the registration of a fraudulent [lasting power of attorney].” It says less than 0.1% of registrations are suspected to be fraudulent. There were more than 680,000 successful LPA applications in 2020-21. Officials say that the current scheme requires documents to be signed by witnesses, and that when the agency becomes aware of fraud, it informs the police and cancels the LPA. It says that the advice given to the victim in the You and Yours case was given in error and that the staff involved have been retrained. An Office of the Public Guardian spokesperson said: “Abuse of lasting power of attorney is extremely rare but we intend to introduce more safeguards against fraud and misuse.” The Ministry of Justice has recently completed a consultation on proposals to modernise LPAs aimed at making the system more secure. This includes proposals for better identity checks. The You and Yours investigation is on Radio 4 on 27 December at 12.18pm and will also be available on BBC Sounds.There are two fundamental truths that I’ve learned during my time in politics. First, the best leaders are those who see politics in the longer term, can look around corners and shut out the day-to-day noise. Second, incompetent, tired and sleazy governments lose elections. I vividly remember the first time I typed “one rule for them” in a press release. It was the evening of Friday 22 May 2020. Britain was in lockdown, the best thing on television was the 5pm press conference and it was only seven weeks since my then boss, Keir Starmer, had been elected Labour leader. At 8pm, the Mirror and the Guardian revealed that Dominic Cummings had broken lockdown rules. Within minutes, my phone lit up with every working journalist wanting Labour’s response. I scanned Pippa Crerar’s article in the Mirror and spotted the perfect line from someone in Durham: “It’s one rule for Dominic Cummings and one rule for the rest of us.” I tapped out Labour’s response, spent a worthless 10 minutes trying to get hold of any politicians to put their name to it, cleared it with colleagues and issued: “The British people do not expect there to be one rule for them and another rule for Dominic Cummings.” The next day the story was everywhere. The outrage was real and the sentiment – first uttered by a member of the public in Durham (and if you’re reading, I owe you a beer) – was being shared by the British people and repeated everywhere. We captured that message and hammered it home relentlessly. In attack videos, Starmer’s clips and press statements. What happened to Cummings next is well documented. However, that incident introduced a potent dividing line that could be drawn between Labour’s new leadership and Boris Johnson’s Conservatives. Why? Because one rule for them was not a one-off. It was a pattern of behaviour that happened time and again, exposed by some outstanding journalism and pursed with vigour by the shadow cabinet and my old colleagues. The Conservatives believed then, as they do now, that they were above the rules and even the law. Contrast that with a new Labour leader who built a career defending the rule of law and prosecuted politicians who broke it. It seems obvious now, but at the time there was criticism of Labour’s focus on sleaze. Some argued that it was “priced in” with Johnson. That the British people didn’t care or didn’t notice. That was wrong for three reasons. First, people do care. The public reaction to Cummings and the recent Downing Street revelations come from a very British sense of fairness and dislike for hypocrisy. Second, Johnson has never been universally popular. His personal ratings during the 2019 election campaign were lower than Theresa May’s in 2017. And third, the political impact of the vaccine at the start of the year was hugely underestimated. Talk of the “vaccine bounce” in January was more than just expectation management before local elections. If the government could lift restrictions, reopen the pubs and deliver a successful vaccine programme, then it would be rewarded at the ballot box. I would be lying if I said I didn’t question my instincts at times, especially after the Hartlepool byelection, or reflect on our mistakes in the first year. However, politics is a marathon, not a sprint. It takes more than one scandal or one bad headline to turn the public against their government. It is a cumulative effect. Cummings, “cash for favours”, cronyism, the Owen Paterson affair and the Downing Street parties have collectively damaged this administration’s standing. Poll after poll now shows Labour are ahead, Johnson’s ratings are down and the government is seen as incompetent. Voters might have given Johnson’s government the benefit of the doubt but now they don’t – and that’s a difficult position to recover from. My former colleagues have reason to end the year feeling optimistic, while knowing all too well that nothing can be taken for granted. As quickly as the polls go up, they can go down again. Arguably, British politics is more volatile today than it has ever been. And the Conservatives are the world’s most successful political party for a reason: when they need to change, they change. Many people know why they won’t vote Conservative, but are still asking why they should vote Labour. Tarnishing Johnson’s reputation is not enough. To win in two years’ time, Labour needs to go after the Conservative brand and regain trust on the central issue of the next 12 months and, I suspect, the next election – the economy. There is a strong argument to be made about the Conservatives’ economic record: high tax, low pay and low growth. The rises in inflation, interest rates, tax and energy bills will only make this more compelling. Labour must pursue this, while communicating that it is the party of economic growth. For most voters, the questions they ask at the ballot box are straightforward. Do this lot know what they are doing? Do they have some good ideas? Would I trust them with my money and the security of myself and my family? How Starmer responds to these questions will take time to cut through, but by staying focused on the long term, rather than chasing headlines, his position can grow from strength to strength. And if Labour is ever looking for a good soundbite, I suggest asking someone from Durham. • Ben Nunn was Keir Starmer’s director of communications from 2017 to 2021 and is senior counsel at Lexington CommunicationsIn January, when England’s third national lockdown was just beginning and most of us were blissfully ignorant of the middle letters of the Greek alphabet, I used these pages to make a prediction. Not about the pandemic but about another equally tedious and long-running nightmare that most people hoped would be over by now: the culture wars. I predicted that during 2021 what are called “contested histories” – those relating to empire, slavery and race – would be increasingly “weaponised for political gain” and that the historians who study them, along with the minority communities for whom contested histories are family histories, would be among the “new enemies” paraded before the culture war gallows. It really wasn’t much of a prediction. Rather than unerringly foreseeing future events, I merely assumed that stuff that was already happening was going to keep happening and then get a bit worse. Not exactly a Nostradamus level prescience and, as it turned out, behind my attempt at prediction was a presumption that turned out to be wholly wide of the mark. What I utterly failed to foresee in January was that the Johnson government, along with the other branches of the UK’s vast ecosystem of performative outrage, would prosecute the war they themselves had fomented so incompetently. While millions were taken in by their false-flag arguments and confected divisions, over the course of 2021 much of their culture war schtick just didn’t land and at times it blew up in their faces. The most audacious culture war play of 2021 was the publication in March of the Sewell report, a cynical attempt to dismiss the importance and even the existence of structural racism and pit poor black people against poor white people in a zero-sum game for resources and legitimacy. Characterised by the government’s supporters as a piece of work that would reframe the national conversation around race, this masterclass in gaslighting began to disintegrate within hours of publication. What the Sewell report came up against were the very people from whom it had drawn its evidence, the experts across many fields who rapidly dissected the report line by line, showing how their work had been misinterpreted or misrepresented. Both the report’s findings and the methodology were trashed. Rolled out as culture war super-weapon, the Sewell report has only rarely been mentioned by government since. The other culture war lowlights of 2021 crashed and burned because time and again the government and its fellow travellers chose the wrong targets. It takes a special level of hubris for politicians, members of what is repeatedly voted the least trusted profession, to pick a fight with the England football team, superstars with millions of fans and Twitter followers, led by a manager who, according to one survey, has a popularity rating higher not just than both party leaders but even Winston Churchill. This summer, while most people in England were watching the Euros with hearts in mouths and fingers crossed, the government’s culture warriors were watching in sweaty-palmed horror, as the team whose anti-racist stance they had derided at the start of the tournament kept winning and growing in esteem. This led to the ludicrous pantomime of politicians dispatching their aides to the shops to buy replica England jerseys for last-minute photo-ops in which they expressed their support for players whom weeks earlier they had accused of “gesture politics”. Yet for real ineptitude we have to turn to Nigel Farage and his attempt to take on the Royal National Lifeboat Institution, one of the most beloved and respected organisations in the country. What Farage accused the RNLI of doing was saving lives at sea, so not exactly a case of mission creep. However, as the lives in question were those of desperate migrants, Farage set out to mobilise the thankfully small demographic who can be roused to frenzied anger at the thought of migrants not being left to drown in the English Channel. His attacks inspired a wave of abuse directed at RNLI staff, which has not subsided. But such ugly sentiments led to a huge upsurge of support for the RNLI and a 3,000% increase in donations. Even the supposed culture war victories of 2021 existed only in a strange, rightwing metaverse. The Common Sense Group of Conservative MPs, with the help of its allies in the press, has successfully convinced millions that the National Trust has been taken over by woke radicals and had been punished by its membership who had abandoned it in droves. Yet none of that was true. The illusion that such events had taken place was generated by some of the most dishonest reporting of recent years. Yet the only tangible long-term effect of the attacks on the trust has been the formation of a campaign group dedicated to saving it from non-existent threats. Its website largely consists of links to the same inaccurate articles that led to its formation, in an endless loop of falsehood and fury. The ineptitude of the culture wars reflects the fact that there is no deeper philosophy behind them. They are not fought in order to achieve some sort of cultural victory, or to defend, but merely to win elections. Target selection has been clumsy because the groups targeted are merely those against whom it was believed anger might be manufactured and then manipulated. With no objective or outcome in mind, the culture wars are a forever-war, a conflict that can end only if the electoral coalitions they were invented to forge can no longer be assembled. Launched out of cynicism and executed incompetently, the culture wars are nonetheless corrosive and dangerous. The person who best captured that reality in 2021 was the Conservative peer Baroness Warsi who, in a tweet directed at the home secretary, Priti Patel, wrote: “It’s time to stop the culture wars that are feeding division. Dog whistles win votes but destroy nations.” • David Olusoga is a historian and broadcasterLast week we took the boy into Big Town for his first live, musical experience: a performance of The Lion King in the West End. It was a gift from his Uncle Darragh and Auntie Emilie, who clearly like him more than any of my aunts or uncles ever liked me. I didn’t get trips to see The Lion King when I was a kid. The best we could manage was pantos and nativity plays – and most of those had our own siblings in, which rather denuded them of mystique. I had my own time in the spotlight, of course, and few within Nazareth House Primary School’s Class of 1997 will ever forget my star turn as Reuben, the inexplicably French brother of Joseph in The Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat, which I conducted entirely dressed as Eric Cantona. Nor my role in our primary school nativity, in which I played an unlikely master of ceremonies named Pablo the Mexican Reindeer. Maybe it’s my former mastery of the stage which has me questioning the allure of taking a toddler to a two-hour theatrical extravaganza. Or maybe it’s the idea of making a three-year-old sit still without talking, screaming, crying or wetting himself throughout its duration. Luckily, the boy enjoyed The Lion King very much. He clapped at every act break and as each new animal appeared, he helpfully shouted their name out loud, as if taking a roll of attendance for the theatre. He growled like a lion and, in case this didn’t get the point across, said quite loudly, ‘I’m a lion.’ He laughed at the funny parts and did seem suitably shaken by the more tragic moments, on which I won’t dwell here. It does feel weird to think I should avoid spoiling the bestselling musical of all time, which has been open for 23 years and grossed over $8bn, spun from the identical plot of a film which every single person on earth has also seen. I mean, at this point, it feels a little like spoiling the plot of that movie where those French lads land on the moon but, in any case, such was my son’s unwillingness to leave his seat he decided to hold in a wee well past straining point and interrupted his growling to shout: ‘I need toilet!!!!’ I leapt into action with the alacrity of one of those French lads who landed right in the moon’s eye, sashayed through 20 people to get my way to the only available toilet, mounting my son on the seat just in time for the trickle to start with no soiling or seepage whatsoever. My newfound appreciation for myself as an Action Dad was only slightly dimmed by the trip back, where I managed to hoist my son over my own head in such a fashion that, unbeknown to me, he kicked every single head of the row in front of us all the way back to our seats. Within minutes he was asleep and, by the time of curtain up, lay strewn across our laps like a long, snoring draught excluder. His trip to the jungle, the mighty jungle, had been a roaring success, and the lion slept tonight. Did Ye Hear Mammy Died? by Séamas O’Reilly is out now (Little, Brown, £16.99). Buy a copy from guardianbookshop at £14.78 Follow Séamas on Twitter @shockproofbeatsThe number of women in temporary accommodation has increased by 88% over the last decade, according to research suggesting single mothers have been disproportionately affected by homelessness. Almost one in three lone mothers are either in arrears with their rent or facing a constant struggle to keep their home, equating to 321,000 women. There are now 75,410 women in temporary accommodation, an increase on pre-Covid levels despite the extra help put in place during the pandemic. Women have made up a disproportionate share of those in temporary accommodation as they are more often in lower-paid, less-secure work and likely to have caring responsibilities. About 60% of the people in temporary accommodation in England are women. However, the sheer number of women requiring help is causing serious concern among homeless charities, with the increased cost of living pressures coming next year. The number has risen from 40,030 in 2011 to 75,410 today, according to Shelter research. It found that women with housing costs were 36% more likely than men to be in arrears or constantly struggling to afford them. More than two-thirds (69%) of women who rent privately worry they will not be able to afford anywhere decent to live if their relationship broke down. A series of in-depth interviews with 34 women and one non-binary person found a third of them had experienced domestic abuse, which often triggered their housing problems. Some lone mothers said they did not seek help as they were worried about having their children removed. Others said that their housing benefit no longer covered their rent, as private rents have continued to increase. Two-thirds said some professionals who dealt with their cases made them feel like a burden, with one woman describing feeling “fobbed off”. More than half the group said they did not know where to get help. Toni, 38, from Birmingham, who was made homeless after a relationship breakdown, said she was having to live in unsuitable temporary accommodation full of mould and areas inaccessible to her disabled son. “When you’re homeless, you don’t even get spoken to like you’re human,” she said. “Because you’re in temporary accommodation, people make assumptions about you. It doesn’t make me feel great – I’m not homeless through any choice of my own. I put on a brave face for the kids, but we can’t live a life in a temporary flat for ever. “This will be our fourth Christmas spent homeless - every year I say we’ll be gone by the next, but we’re still here. Temporary accommodation doesn’t feel very temporary when it’s been that long. I feel like we’ve been forgotten about.” The news comes as ministers attempt to curb homelessness this winter by ordering local authorities to offer “safe and appropriate” accommodation to thousands of people sleeping rough - including those with restricted eligibility because of immigration status. Polly Neate, Shelter’s chief executive, warned that women were bearing the brunt of a housing crisis that continued to escalate. “The hike in living costs and cuts to universal credit mean it’s only going to get tougher for thousands of women barely hanging on to their homes,” she said. “It’s appalling that women are being fobbed off by professionals who are supposed to help them, and it’s no wonder they feel scared and alone. To turn back the tide on women’s homelessness, we need to listen to women and better understand their needs.” The Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities said: “These figures reflect the increase in support for vulnerable groups which is preventing thousands of women from becoming homeless. However, we’re clear that temporary accommodation should only be a last resort. “Tackling homelessness is a government priority – that’s why we are spending £316m on this in the next year to build on the success of the Homelessness Reduction Act, which has prevented 400,000 households from becoming homeless or supported them to settled accommodation. We are continuing to work with councils and charities to meet our target of ending rough sleeping by the end of this parliament.”The Amazing Mr Blunden | Sky Max The Girl Before (BBC One) | iPlayer The Wonder Years | Disney+ BBC Sports Personality of the Year (BBC One) | iPlayer Emily in Paris | Netflix How was your Christmas Day? All life-affirming wonder or bah, humbug? Either way, there’s still time to view Sky’s seasonal offering, The Amazing Mr Blunden. Based on Antonia Barber’s 1969 book The Ghosts, which was made into a 1972 film by Lionel “Railway Children” Jeffries, The Amazing Mr Blunden is a ghost story set in the modern day and 1821, with Mark Gatiss as writer, co-star and director. While not about Christmas, it resonates with yuletide themes: love, redemption, ghost orphans in pantaloons and petticoats needing help, a gothic, vine-choked mansion, and Simon Callow, as Blunden, enunciating dialogue with such magnificent violence, it’s a festive miracle there weren’t reports of plasma screens shattering nationwide. In the present day, a widowed, impoverished mother (Vinette Robinson) becomes the caretaker of a mansion. While there, her children, Lucy and Jamie (Tsion Habte and Jason Rennie), meet two child spirits, Sara and Georgie (India Fowler and Xavier Wilkins) – not ghosts but time-travellers who perished 200 years ago in a fire set by the scheming Mr and Mrs Wickens (Gatiss and Tamsin Greig, the latter resembling a Crimewatch photofit of Nanny McPhee) in order to steal Sara and Georgie’s inheritance. Blunden, their lawyer, ignored the children’s pleas for help: can this centuries-old wrong be righted? Gatiss’s adaptation has big britches to fill: the 70s film, starring Laurence Naismith, is a cult supernatural classic (check out Diana Dors as a chilling Mrs Wickens). Gatiss’s new version focuses far less on visceral creepiness, which is a shame: call me an old goth, but I like to feel spooked by spooks. Similarly – spoiler alert – whereas in the film, Blunden’s self-sacrifice is devastating, there isn’t quite the emotional connection here. What this update has in abundance is charm, humour, sterling child casting and excellent comic-grotesque turns, particularly from Amanda Lawrence as a hunched-over servant. For all his fruitiness, Callow is a convincingly regretful and magical Blunden. Alas, just not my Mr Blunden. Maybe in the new year we’ll see some complete dumps on television again. Instead of the show-home kitchens so beloved of current dramas, we’ll get woodchip wallpaper, maybe even some tone-lowering fridge magnets. For now, there’s BBC One’s The Girl Before, a four-part, London-set thriller directed by Lisa Brühlmann (Killing Eve), adapted by JP Delaney (AKA Tony Strong) from his own book, with Marissa Lestrade. Here, not just the kitchen but the entire place is a brick, steel, ultra-modernist smart house that you could imagine Tin Machine-era David Bowie living in. Architect Edward (David Oyelowo) charges minimal rent to people who agree to live by his rules: no pictures, ornaments, rugs, pets (breathing?). An extension of Edward’s control freakery, and a character in its own right, the house harvests data and has screens asking probing questions. An open staircase doubles as a death-drop. In different timezones, Edward accepts as residents a couple – Emma and Simon (Jessica Plummer and Ben Hardy) – and then a single woman, Jane, played by Gugu Mbatha-Raw. Both women are reeling from extreme personal trauma, both end up in relationships with sinister Edward, but why do they bear a striking resemblance to each other? Furthermore, how did someone die in the house, and what happened to Edward’s wife? What starts out promisingly, almost like a latterday spin on Bluebeard folk tale, sadly unravels until you’re left with a lukewarm 50 Shades bolted on to an uneven murder mystery. The main performances are strong (Oyelowo in his icy control; Mbatha-Raw and Plummer in their despair and determination), but the women’s capitulation to Edward’s invasive demands verges on farcical – even given London’s deranged housing market – while the shock denouement seems reverse-engineered to be as unlikely as possible. The cosy late 80s/early 90s sitcom The Wonder Years has been resurrected on Disney+, and this time the focus is on a black family living the American dream in 1968 Alabama, with Don Cheadle narrating. The original series featured the growing pains of Kevin, memorably played by Fred Savage, who, along with Saladin K Patterson (Psych) and Lee Daniels (Empire), exec-produces this new 22-episode series, and directs some of the episodes. The result is thoughtful, even bold, with 12-year-old Dean (Elisha Williams), his parents (Dulé Hill and Saycon Sengbloh) and siblings (Laura Kariuki and Spence Moore II) placed in the context of the volatile times. While the parents are upwardly mobile – “You’re going to college. I’m sure the revolution’s going to need a good dentist or accountant” – racism isn’t shied away from. In the opening two episodes, Dean’s daily frustrations (mainly involving an unrequited crush) are juxtaposed with everything from white pupils at his desegregated high school not wishing to share the same drinking fountain, to the shooting of Martin Luther King. As Savage, of all people, would know, it all hinges on the “everyboy”, and Williams glides winningly between drama, emotion and mischief. At this year’s BBC Sports Personality of the Year, 19-year-old US Openchampion Emma Raducanu triumphed, delightedly accepting her trophy remotely on screen, while the runners up – Olympic diver Tom Daley and Olympic swimmer Adam Peaty – applauded in the socially distanced studio. Over on Netflix, another enterprising young woman returned for a second 10-part series of Emily in Paris, starring Lily Collins as the young American marketer working, loving and dreaming in the city of love, while styled as Violet Elizabeth Bott crossed with Bertie Bassett. Since Emily in Paris was widely panned for crass stereotyping (it was also a huge lockdown hit, and Golden Globe-nominated), it’s dialled down the “aghast” American reactions to “scandalous” French behaviour (smoking, affairs et al). Though now there’s a caricatured English love interest (Lucien Laviscount) who barely stops short of doing the Lambeth walk. And, yes, we’re still supposed to sympathise with Emily for sleeping with her friend’s boyfriend (Lucas Bravo). I’m afraid I don’t. Still, it’s hard to remain angry, or indeed awake, as the episodes churn on. With its plaintive cultural asides (Balzac; Jules et Jim), Emily in Paris is merely frothy nonsense that yearns to be more. Be kind. What else I’m watching Quentin Blake: The Drawing of My Life (BBC Two) A documentary about illustrator Quentin Blake, best known for his Roald Dahl work. Blake, 89, talks about his life, all the while drawing a huge frieze. Superworm (BBC One) A Christmas animation from inimitable Gruffalo-creators Julia Donaldson and Axel Schleffer. Voices are provided by Olivia Colman (narrator) and Matt Smith as Superworm. We Wish You a Mandy Christmas (BBC Two) Diane Morgan’s Mandy character’s festive special, spoofing A Christmas Carol, is a 16-minute, gag-rich blast. Visiting ghosts include John Cooper Clarke, who refuses to be translucent: “I don’t go in for all those gimmicks.”Eating less meat will play a key role in helping Spain mitigate the effects of the climate emergency, slow the process of desertification, and protect its vital tourism industry, the country’s consumer affairs minister has said. Alberto Garzón said people in Spain needed to realise the huge impact that eating meat – particularly beef raised on industrial megafarms – had on the environment, and to change their eating habits accordingly. “People here know about the part that greenhouse gases play in climate change, but they tend to link it to cars and transport,” Garzón told the Guardian. “It was only very recently that everyone started to look at the impact of the animal consumer chain and, especially, at the impact of beef. Other countries were pretty advanced on that but in Spain it’s been a taboo.” The minister said that the country’s geography made it profoundly vulnerable to climate change, adding the Spain people know and love is in danger of disappearing forever. “If we don’t act, it won’t just be climate change we’re dealing with – it’ll be the triple crisis: the loss of biodiversity; pollution, and climate change,” he said. “It would be the end for a country like Spain. Spain is a country in the Mediterranean basin – it isn’t the UK or Germany – and desertification is a very serious problem for our country, not least because it depends so much on tourism. Visiting a desert isn’t quite as attractive as visiting the Costa del Sol.” Garzón says Spaniards need not stop eating meat altogether but suggests they eat far less and ensure it’s good quality for the sake of their health and the environment. He contrasts cheap, mass-produced products with traditionally reared meat. “Extensive farming is an environmentally sustainable means of cattle farming and one that has a lot of heft in parts of Spain such as Asturias, parts of Castilla y León, Andalucía and Extremadura,” he said. “That is sustainable; what isn’t at all sustainable is these so-called mega-farms … They find a village in a depopulated bit of Spain and put in 4,000, or 5,000, or 10,000 head of cattle. They pollute the soil, they pollute the water and then they export this poor quality meat from these ill-treated animals.” The minister also pointed to a recent report that found that 20 livestock companies are responsible for more greenhouse gas emissions than either Germany, Britain or France. Garzón, an economist who is the coordinator for the United Left alliance in Spain’s Socialist-led coalition government, made headlines when he urged people to reduce their meat consumption in July. He noted the average Spaniard eats more than 1kg of meat a week although the country’s food agency recommends people eat between 200g and 500g, and that Spain eats more meat than any other EU country, slaughtering 70 million pigs, cows, sheep, goats, horses and birds each year to produce 7.6m tonnes of meat. His calls were roundly mocked and dismissed – not least by his own partners in government. The agriculture minister said the farming sector was being subjected to “profoundly unfair criticisms when it deserved respect for the honest work it does for both our food and our economy”, while the prime minister, Pedro Sánchez, appeared to scoff at the suggestion, saying: “Speaking personally, a medium-rare steak is hard to beat.” Garzón attributes the friendly fire to what he diplomatically terms “the differing programmes and policies” of the coalition parties, and says he always knew taking on the industrial meat industry would provoke a furious response. “We knew from the start that the issue would be controversial, but it needed to be done,” he said. “Other countries – like Germany, the UK and France – are well ahead of us on this. This was the first time in Spain that someone in the government was saying what the scientists have been saying for a long time.” The minister also noticed that most of the public criticism came from men who apparently “felt their masculinity would be affected by not being able to eat a piece of meat or have a barbecue”. Women, on the other hand, were far more open to the message. “We think that part of society was already ready for this and had got its head round this,” he said. “But we still needed to push and there wasn’t a single political party that supported us. Not one. Not even within the governing coalition.” Nevertheless, Garzón is convinced that Spain is finally having a long overdue public discussion over meat. “Civil society organisations and associations of ecologists, paediatricians, doctors and nutritionists all came out to defend us all the way,” he said. “I think that helped us win the debate because the issue was debated for three days on all the news programmes and in bars.” The minister’s other reforms – which include a crackdown on Spain’s betting industry, a ban on unhealthy food advertisements aimed at children and a symbolic toy strike to highlight gender stereotypes – have not always endeared him to certain businesses. They have also made him a favourite target for the Spanish right, who accuse him of meddling in people’s lives. Garzón’s attempts to point out the sexism inherent in many toys was recently given short shrift by the far-right Vox party. “I think Garzón forgets that it’s up to us as parent to decide what we buy,” said its Madrid spokesperson, Rocío Monasterio. “I’m going to go out and buy loads of dolls and cribs for my girls and I’m going to get cars and tractors and tanks for my nephews. And I think over Christmas we should all stuff our faces with meat.”If Joe Marchant had any nerves before his first Twickenham start for England against South Africa last month they were quickly settled when a trademark Marcus Smith crossfield kick provided him with an early first touch. It has become a familiar sight in Harlequins colours – the pair were at it again against Cardiff last weekend for Marchant’s try – and it is uncanny how often it comes off. They are both too young to remember but it is reminiscent of the old Darren Anderton-Teddy Sheringham corner routine that gave Tottenham and England so much joy in the 1990s. “It’s nice to have that relationship with someone at international level,” says Marchant. “Knowing how Marcus plays and to be able to work off that is a good way for me to be able to get into the game.” Not long after that first touch against the Springboks Marchant was forced to move from the right wing to his more familiar position of outside centre and, in unison with Henry Slade, he turned in the kind of performance that suggests he will make many more international starts at Twickenham. It was he who made the break for Raffi Quirke’s crucial try and it was Marchant who won the late penalty that led to Siya Kolisi’s yellow card. He did so by gathering a Smith chip over the top, lest we forget. The 25-year-old was a surprise selection on the wing against the Springboks – there is a heartwarming video of Eddie Jones telling Marchant how proud his father will be, boasting to his mates in the pub – but he has been on the fringes of the England set-up for a while and it is to his credit that he has not disappeared from view. Jones often cites Marchant as one of the players most unlucky to miss out on the 2019 World Cup squad but thereafter he took himself off to Auckland on an enriching sabbatical with the Blues and, as luck would have it, honed his skills as a winger. “I hadn’t really played too much on the wing for Quins until I went there and when I was out there, in one of my earliest conversations with [the coach] Leon MacDonald, it was very much about playing at 13 and on the wing as well,” says Marchant. “To get that experience, when we went to South Africa my first game on the wing was against the Stormers, I got another against the Hurricanes. “Then coming back to Quins they saw that I could do it, it became transferable and I ended up doing a couple of games on the wing for Quins and more regularly this season and the back end of last. We’ve got so many good players, we can all play in different positions. It’s more just about getting everyone on the pitch together.” Evidently it is paying off and Marchant, alongside Smith and Alex Dombrandt and a host of other bright young things, were instrumental in Harlequins’ unforgettable Premiership triumph last season. “Last season was just special for all of us,” says Marchant. “When we came into this season, we wanted to not just emulate that but work on the things we can improve and become a better team. For us that came with all the connections we made with each other, making sure the environment was good fun and everyone was having a good time, enjoying themselves on the pitch.” Theories as to how Harlequins turned their fortunes around last season are plentiful but most can be simplified into rekindling a sense of enjoyment in what they were doing, in removing anything – including their captain’s run training sessions – that made things feel too much like a grind. And listen to the players involved in the autumn and Jones’s side have also reaped the rewards of refreshing and building new relationships, or “connections” as Marchant calls them. He and Freddie Steward – the 20-year-old Leicester full-back and arguably England’s star turn of the autumn – hit it off, for example. Both are keen musicians with Marchant on guitar and Steward a dab hand on either the piano or guitar. That he was giving Ben Youngs a few tips on tinkling the ivories suggests a relaxed camp too, which has not always been the case of late. “I don’t know about a band but we enjoyed a little jam,” says Marchant, who can also list a black belt in karate as a string to his bow. “[Freddie is] unreal at the guitar and he’s really good at the piano, Ben Youngs was trying to learn piano a bit so we had a few sessions in his room, he had a piano in there which helped. It’s just little things like that which made the camp enjoyable, being able to switch from rugby and explore our different passions.” Harlequins return to Twickenham on Monday for their annual festive match there against Northampton and for what will be a first appearance there since beating Exeter 40-38 in May in last season’s Premiership final. It is the 13th edition but this one will be extra special after having to forgo the Twickenham match last season. It is a key stage of the season for Harlequins financially and has always been a firm fixture as a family outing between Christmas and New Year. Whether that is the case again this year is unclear with the Omicron variant spreading but at last estimate, Harlequins were anticipating more than 70,000 and hopeful of late walk-ups, perhaps from those mindful that bumper crowds at sporting events may soon be put on hold. They have won both their opening Champions Cup matches but before that had slipped to two narrow Premiership defeats, so returning to winning ways is also at the forefront of Marchant’s mind. “Being able to have so many fans there, because we couldn’t last year, is massive for us,” he said. “And there’s a real family vibe, it’s around Christmas, people have time off and they get together and make the occasion very special. It’s always a spectacle where we as a club like to put on a show. To do that in midwinter in front of 80,000 would just be so good. The thought of it gets everyone up for it.”In The Wicker Man (Robin Hardy, 1973), the key to the sacrifice’s efficacy is that Sergeant Howie (Edward Woodwoodward, 1930), embraces victimhood willingly. And so Liz Truss climbs into her photo-op tank and trundles gladly toward the burning wicker effigy of the role of Chief Negotiator for Exiting the European Union Brexit (formerly Secretary of State for Exiting the European Union), and the poisoned post claims another scalp. Greater love hath no man. Lord Frost understood. Did he really exit his Exit Secretary job because he no longer agreed with Boris Johnson’s general direction of travel, namely lurching from one leaking honeypot to another like a priapic bear? Or did the lordly Exiteer realise he could not exit the European Union in a fashion that would garnish his square head with coveted laurels? And so, unzipping the tent flap into the howling Arctic gale of public opinion, Lord Frost declared: “I’m just going to the pub with Brexit hardman Steve Baker’s European Research Group. I may be some time. Masks optional, of course.” The artfully cantilevered Good Friday pivot, which discreetly emolliated the island of Ireland in 1998, fractures and ferments; furious fishermen and farmers fulminate fruitlessly into foam and fertiliser, respectively; our brightest creative talents lower their life expectations accordingly as earnings, market access, postal rates, touring options and cross-border collaborations collapse; despite Michael Gove’s claims to better EU environmental rules post-Brexit, once more we are swimming in human sewage; once more we are known as the “dirty man of Europe” (at least until Allegra Stratton’s revelations about Boris Johnson’s love life surface); and a scheme to lure Nobel laureates to work in buccaneering Brexit Britain attracted precisely no takers worldwide, making us the intellectual destination equivalent of Eddie Murphy’s 2002 box office bomb, The Adventures of Pluto Nash. Was Boris Johnson’s finally all-too obvious incompetence, dishonesty and lack of any coherent plan, beyond what might get him either elected or noshed off, merely a useful fig leaf to cover the chief Exiteer’s exit from the unwinnable forever war against the phantoms of Europe? The lie-fuelled promises of the Brexit campaign can never be delivered. It is a package, like that gatefold vinyl copy of Hawkwind’s Space Ritual I ordered from a previously reliable French dealer via discogs.com, that appears undeliverable in the post-Brexit world. Brexit did, however, deliver the most right-leaning government in living memory. Was that the idea all along? Slaps head. Falls over. Cries. Faithful leave-voting red wall constituents, pining for levelling up and Brexit dividends, will be delighted that Lord Frost’s Exiteer replacement, Liz Truss, voted remain in 2016, and was the co-author of the 2012 Tory manifesto-in-waiting, Britannia Unchained. Britannia Unchained opined that “the British are among the worst idlers in the world… Whereas Indian children aspire to be doctors or businessmen, the British are more interested in football and pop music.” What is a “Beatle”, eh Liz? And why have all the footballers got long hair now, like girls? For your information, Truss, both British football and British pop music have been massive engines for your vaunted social mobility, and key elements of the soft diplomacy that briefly made Britain less universally hated all around the world. A Kurdish nomad on the Syrian border in 1988 bonded with me over his tape of Sheffield’s Def Leppard. With all due respect, the goat-herding tent-dweller had nothing to say about the quality of British businessmen. And there’s a generation of British schoolchildren that take their moral inspiration from Marcus Rashford, not from vegetable magnate Andrew Bridgen, the Igor homunculus of Brexit hardman Steve Baker, who so delighted in his master’s performative online defenestration of snowflake Nadine Dorries this week. (“Go on Steve! Bloody Nadine with her confusing shiny hair!! Get her!!! Oh!!!!! I’ve made a mess in my pants, Steve!!!!!”) Believe it or not, the kids aren’t doing collages of Bridgen’s stinking Leicestershire vegetable distribution hub, or Boris Johnson’s lockdown cheese-and-wine work non-party. They’re making murals of Marcus Rashford. To be fair, Truss didn’t write Britannia Unchained alone. Her co-authors were: the thinking woman’s thug Kwasi Kwarteng, Boris Johnson’s brutish Golem-enforcer, who spent a November press round trying to bully parliamentary standards commissioner Kathryn Stone into resigning, unaware that focus-polling at CCHQ had already decided to ditch Owen Paterson, leaving Kwarteng looking like a gormlessly obedient snap-on tool, both fanatically loyal and fatally un-looped; Dominic Raab, who lasted four months as Truss’s Exiteer predecessor, having revealed he didn’t know where Calais was, defended the Tories’ falsified online independent fact checking service during the 2019 election, and floated about on a paddle board during the rout of Kabul, like the devil made flesh by Silvia Pinal in a Luis Buñuel film; Priti Patel, who was bailed out personally by Boris Johnson when she breached the ministerial code for bullying, and threatens regulations against dying drowning children, Darth Vader pointing the Death Star at Alderaan; and Chris Skidmore, the MP for Kingswood, only known at all because a covert 2019 investigation into the Westminster laundry service by Vice magazine found Skidmore to have more skids in his pants than any other politician, a nominatively determined quirk which Andrew Bridgen secretly envied. Everything that is awful about the modern Conservative party is embodied by Truss’s collaborators in Britannia Unchained, which should make her a perfect fit for the Wicker Woman’s flaming frame. Britannia ashamed requires a sacrifice. So far, the role of Chief Negotiator for Exiting the European Union has claimed five victims, six if you remember that David Davis did it twice, having forgotten that he’d already done it all wrong once already. Nothing is achieved. Another body goes up in flames, the carcass shunted into another cabinet position. The peasants dance and sing, and wait out the winter. Rescheduled national 2022 dates of Stewart’s 2020 tour, Snowflake Tornado, are on sale now; the December 2022 London dates of his 2023 tour, Basic Lee, are also on sale. Stewart Lee winter hats are available hereWith cases, deaths, reproduction numbers, opinion polls and more, we get bombarded with statistics every day. But how can you spot a naughty number, a shabby statistic or dubious data? Lists of questions have been given by Tim Harford, Dave and Tom Chivers, and in The Art of Statistics (which David wrote), with considerable overlap as they grapple with the same essentials. Here is the short list that we use ourselves. The first question: how trustworthy is the source of the story? Are they honest, competent and reliable or are they trying to manipulate my emotions, say by provoking anxiety or reassurance? Are they giving the whole picture or selecting bits to suit themselves? Like the review that found insects had declined, but it turned out had only searched for studies that showed a decline. Second: how reliable is the statistic? A count may not be counting what we think it is: Covid-19 cases only represent those who decide to have viral tests, often after showing symptoms, and are becoming increasingly distinct from infections. Survey estimates seek to generalise from a sample to a target population, but have both margins of error and possible systematic biases, while model outputs reflect assumptions and selected scenarios. The uncertainty and the quality of the underlying evidence should be communicated with due humility. Third: how trustworthy is any claim being made on the basis of the data? Context is all; a “100% increased risk” may make the headlines, but twice not very much is still not very much. Historical statistics can provide a guide to whether something really is a big number. Differences may be attributed to cause rather than just correlation, since observational analyses can have systematic biases or lingering confounders. And sometimes there is basic misunderstanding of good data; ONS found that, among people testing positive, vaccination increased the chance someone would be Omicron rather than Delta, but this led to the claim that vaccination increased the risk of testing positive. Statistics enlighten our uncertain world, helping people make decisions. We need thoughtful consideration, not reflexive cynicism, when we see claims derived from statistical evidence. • This article was amended on 27 December 2021. An earlier version said that “Covid-19 cases only represent those who decide to have PCR tests”. In fact the reference should have been to viral tests to reflect the inclusion of positive tests from lateral flow devices. • David Spiegelhalter is chair of the Winton Centre for Risk and Evidence Communication at Cambridge. Anthony Masters is statistical ambassador for the Royal Statistical SocietyIt is one of the great causes célèbres of the cold war. At around noon on 29 October 1965, Mehdi ben Barka, a Moroccan opposition leader and hero of the international left, was abducted as he arrived at a brasserie on Paris’s left bank. Over the years, much of the truth about the murder of the 46-year-old dissident has emerged: how he was taken to a house south of Paris, tortured and killed by Moroccan intelligence agents. But many of Ben Barka’s activities before his death have remained shrouded in mystery. Now new research in the archives of former Soviet satellite states has revealed that the charismatic intellectual, propagandist and political organiser may also have been a spy. Previously classified files from Prague show that Ben Barka not only had a close relationship with the Státní Bezpečnost (StB), the feared Czechoslovak security service, but that he received substantial payments from it, both in cash and in kind. “Ben Barka is often depicted as a fighter against colonial interests and for the third world, but the documents reveal a very different picture: a man who was playing many sides, who knew a lot and knew too that information was very valuable in the cold war; an opportunist who was playing a very dangerous game,” said Dr Jan Koura, an assistant professor at Charles University in Prague, who gained access to the file. The findings will be controversial. Ben Barka is still a hero for many on the left, and his family adamantly deny any accusations that he was involved in espionage or had close ties with any state. A possibility of a link between Ben Barka and the StB was first raised almost 15 years ago, though few paid much attention to investigations by a Czech journalist. But Koura was not only able to access the entire Ben Barka file in the StB archives but cross-check its 1,500 pages with thousands of other newly released secret documents. “There is no doubt about [the Czech connection]. All the documents confirm it,” Koura told the Observer. According to the file consulted by Koura, Ben Barka’s relationship with the StB began in 1960, when he met its most senior spy in Paris after leaving Morocco to escape the increasingly authoritarian rule of King Mohammed V. His homeland, a former French colony, had been pro-western since the beginning of the cold war but had recently tilted closer to Moscow. Prague’s spies hoped this prominent leader of Morocco’s fight for independence and founder of its first socialist opposition party would provide valuable intelligence, not just about political developments in the kingdom but also about the thinking of Arab leaders such as Egypt’s president, Gamal Abdel Nasser. Ben Barka was also a major figure in the “anti-imperialist movement of African and Asian nations”, the StB noted, whose contacts included Malcolm X, Che Guevara and the young Nelson Mandela. Soon after their first meetings, the StB was reporting that Ben Barka was a source of “extremely valuable” information and gave him the codename “Sheikh”, the archives reveal. By September 1961, according to the file, Ben Barka had received 1,000 French francs from the StB for reports about Morocco that he claimed were copied from the internal bulletin of France’s overseas intelligence service. In fact, the material was publicly available, which led to anger and embarrassment in Prague when the deception was discovered. Ben Barka was nonetheless then offered an all-expenses-paid trip to west Africa to gather intelligence on US activities in Equatorial Guinea. This mission was considered a success. The Czechoslovaks soon began to suspect that Ben Barka had relationships with other cold war players too, hearing in February 1962 from an operative in France that “Sheikh” had met an American trade unionist at L’Éléphant Blanc bar in Paris and received a cheque made out in US dollars. This led to concerns that Ben Barka had connections to the CIA, which was keen to support democratic reform in Morocco and secure the kingdom for the western camp. The StB was to receive further reports alleging Ben Barka was in contact with the US, though the Moroccan politician always denied this when confronted, Koura said. The relationship continued nonetheless. The Czechoslovaks invited Ben Barka to Prague, where he agreed to help influence politics and leaders in Africa in return for £1,500 a year. Ben Barka was despatched to Iraq to obtain information on the coup of February 1963, for which he received £250, according to the documents. In Algeria, he repeatedly met Ahmed ben Bella, the president and a friend, and reported on the situation in the newly independent state. In Cairo, he was asked to gather information from senior Egyptian officials that could help the Soviets in negotiations during a visit by Nikita Khrushchev, the Soviet premier. Ben Barka’s reports reached Soviet intelligence services, which judged the material provided as “highly valuable”. As a reward for his services, he and his four children were invited on holiday to a spa in Czechoslovakia, Koura’s research reveals. “Ben Barka never admitted that he was collaborating [with intelligence services], and the StB never listed him as an agent, just as a “confidential contact”. But he was providing information, and was paid,” Koura said. “He was very clever, a very smart guy. There is no document with his signature, there are no samples of his writing. He was questioned orally for hours ... Occasionally, he used a typewriter but refused to write anything by hand.” The motives of Ben Barka, a committed activist who was arrested and imprisoned repeatedly in Morocco, remain unclear. His defenders say he was willing to repeatedly discuss the international situation with Czechoslovak officials as this was the best way to influence them. They also say that although Ben Barka’s analyses may have been useful to the StB, this does not make him “an agent”, whatever was written by ambitious bureaucrats and spies on internal memos. They argue too that such a role would have been incompatible with Ben Barka’s dedication to preserving “the third world movement from both Soviet and Chinese influence”. Bachir ben Barka, who lives in eastern France, told the Observer that his father’s relationships with socialist and other states were simply those to be expected of anyone deeply engaged in the global struggle against imperialism and colonial exploitation at the time, pointing out that the documents studied by Koura had been “produced by an intelligence service, [and so were] perhaps edited or incomplete”. Koura is less convinced of Ben Barka’s altruism. “There was both pragmatism and idealism. I don’t condemn him. The cold war was not just black and white,” he said. In his final months, Ben Barka was busy organising the Tricontinental Conference, an event that would bring together in Cuba dozens of liberation movements, revolutionary groups and their sponsors. The conference would become a crucial moment in the history of international anti-colonialism in the 1960s and 1970s, and the veteran activist wanted to chair the event. But the Soviets suspected he had become too close to the Chinese, their rivals for leadership of the global left. Soviet officials told the StB that Ben Barka had received $10,000 from Beijing, and pressured the service to withdraw any support or protection for him. Nonetheless, the StB brought Ben Barka to Prague for a week’s training in communications, codes, surveillance and counter-surveillance. This was too little, too late, however. A week after requesting a handgun from the StB, Ben Barka was abducted and killed. Though he ordered an investigation, President Charles de Gaulle denied any involvement of the French secret services and the police. France and the US have yet to release key secret documents on the case. Prague tried to blame the apparent assassination of Ben Barka on the CIA, the new Czechoslovak documents reveal. This fooled few. In a document obtained by the Observer under British Freedom of Information laws, London’s diplomats praise the “moderation” shown by Paris in the face of “overwhelming” evidence that Morocco’s intelligence services were responsible.Nicole Kidman sleeps badly. Recently she got up at 3am to Google that thing, with the leg, where, “It feels like it needs to move?” But more often she will lie there in the dark beside her husband, in her Nashville bed, their two daughters sleeping some rooms away, and make decisions. She will “contemplate”. Between midnight and seven, she says, coolly, is the most “confronting time”. It says a lot about Kidman, her prolific career, her sustained presence on film and glossy TV, that we can immediately picture her there, hair coiled on a pillow, eyes wide, the restless sense she has become claustrophobic in her own body. Kidman, 54, has been acting since she was 14, already 5ft 9in then, with skin that burned easily. She started in theatre partly as a way to get out of the Australian sun – a year later she was known locally (she told an early interviewer) for playing “older, sexually frustrated women”. Over the next 40 years she extended that repertoire, so now she is known for playing cryptic, adventurous, troubled women, too, in brave work that might not have been made were it not for her glittering star-power. We were meant to be meeting in London, but the slipperiness of the pandemic meant a last-minute “pivot”, she says (“I must stop using that word!”), so Kidman greets me from New York in a pinstriped shirt and Zoom window labelled “Nic”. She is here to talk about Being the Ricardos, Aaron Sorkin’s new Oscar-tipped biopic about the relationship between I Love Lucy stars Lucille Ball and Desi Arnaz. So it’s there we start, listing its themes with a certain glee: ideas of home, family, marriage, of power and how gender complicates that, of motherhood. “Well that’s just it,” she says. “That’s my whole life. I love that you can describe the film, and then it correlates to my life. Isn’t that fantastic?” The film takes place across one fraught week in the 1950s at the height of the “queen of comedy’s” fame, when Ball and Arnaz (played by Javier Bardem) are juggling the professional implications of a new pregnancy, accusations of communism and allegations of infidelity that eventually lead to divorce. “It’s about a creative and romantic relationship that doesn’t work out. But from it come some extraordinary things. And I love that. I love that it’s not a happy ending.” She takes a swig from a large bottle of water that, at first glance, appears to be wine. “This film says you can make an extraordinary relationship thrive and leave remnants of it that exist forever. Yeah, that’s really gorgeous. You can’t make people behave how you want them to, and sometimes you’re going to fall in love with someone who isn’t going to be the person you spend the rest of your life with. And I think that’s all very relatable. You may have kids with them. You may not, but they were very much in love.” We pause. Is this, I ask with exquisite care, your way of talking about Tom Cruise? She chokes, just a little. “Oh, my God, no, no. Absolutely not. No. I mean, that’s, honestly, so long ago that that isn’t in this equation. So no.” She is angry. “And I would ask not to be pigeonholed that way, either. It feels to me almost sexist, because I’m not sure anyone would say that to a man. And at some point, you go, ‘Give me my life. In its own right.’” It is a more than fair point. Though the two were married (and adopted two children) she has had at least two whole lives since their split, a year after the 1999 release of Eyes Wide Shut, the psychosexual drama they made with Stanley Kubrick. A decade of bold films followed, including Moulin Rouge and The Hours, for which she won a best actress Oscar. In 2006, she married country music star Keith Urban and she still dissolves a little at the mention of his name. “We say to each other,” she smiles: “‘You’re enough’.” But when she reached her 40s and gave birth to a daughter, she found the industry suddenly less hospitable. She decided to politely retire. To, “have my baby and sit on a farm. Until my mum said to me, ‘I don’t think you should just give up.’ I was quite convinced I could grow vegetables and be at home and be very satisfied with that, but was pushed quite substantially by my mum. Friends, too – I have friendships that have permeated my life.” She’s known Jane Campion, who directed her in The Portrait of a Lady and Top of the Lake, since she was 14. “Those relationships are relevant. They’re the threads that pull you through, when people show up and go, ‘I know you and I believe in you’, and push you forward.” Her life and career choices, like the decision to set up her own production company as a response to an ageist industry, are, “Not always coming from a sense of confidence, like I know what I’m doing. Not at all. A lot of times I’m relying heavily on the people around to say, ‘You’ve got more in you.’” And then, after a fourth child (using a surrogate), came another life, where alongside a series of blockbusters and twisted indie films she carved out a career in “prestige” television, the kinds of glamorous programmes (like The Undoing and Nine Perfect Strangers) that we watched without once looking down at our phones. Critics said she was making her best work yet. That her midlife career renaissance was not just good for her, but good for women everywhere. She was surprised. “I would never have thought television would be an avenue for growth for me.” The breakthrough was Big Little Lies, which she produced with an old friend, Reese Witherspoon, and won an Emmy for her portrayal of Celeste, whose poise and perfection masked violent abuse. “Television gives you a much stronger connection with an audience, because you’re in their homes. I had a far deeper response than I’d ever had, which just suddenly came hurtling towards me.” People would approach her to talk about, she says in quote marks, “A ‘friend’” in a similar situation to Celeste. “It was… quite lovely.” The last time she remembers her work resonating like that was with the film Lion – she was nominated for an Oscar for her portrayal of the adoptive mother of a boy searching for his biological family. “It was a very disarming thing. My sister sat next to me during a screening, a dark theatre, just the two of us, and she was wrecked. She was just… destroyed by it.” Which Kidman loved. “The idea of penetrating people, so their guards come down, is beautiful.” She smiles. “Then the way we reach out and help, hold each other’s hands. Which has been taken from us recently, hasn’t it? There’s something incredibly beautiful about being held. About feeling safe.” Her face suddenly shifts. “Sorry. It just makes me cry that we’ve had that taken away. People in hospitals not being able to be held in their final moments. I… can’t take it.” Does she cry often? “Yes.” What was the last thing that made her cry? “That’s too personal,” she smiles. “But yeah, I cry. I try to keep a lid on that, but everything is deeply sad. There’s a huge melancholia, right? I mean, when you really study melancholy people, we’re very present. I have an enormous amount of that. I think a lot of people walk around with it too, don’t you?” Her family are flying to Australia for Christmas, to see her 81-year-old mother who was widowed when Kidman’s beloved father, a psychologist, died in 2014. “Today I was looking at my phone, and you know how they have those memory things, where they show you random photos? I looked and then, his face was there…” She shakes her head, startled by grief. I want more on her family, on life with two young daughters, but with a gentle apology she dismisses my questions. “No, I have to really protect them. I’ve learned to keep my mouth shut.” A Hollywood grin. I grudgingly respect her boundaries, I say. “Thank you. They’re something I’ve struggled with in the past.” Is it difficult knowing what to give and what to keep? “Yes, which is why I have the work. To speak through. But also,” she pauses, and considers how much to share, “I’m ‘in life’ right now.” She leans forward, her face suddenly filling the screen. “I’m not coasting along. I’m in it.” She is raising a 10-year-old and a 13-year-old, she is caring for her elderly mother, working solidly through the pandemic and, also, being a movie star. “That term confuses me. Can you define it? It’s too cerebral for me. I can only go to what Stanley Kubrick would say to me, which was, ‘Nicole, you’re a character actress.’ Usually, I’m resistant to labels. There’s a new generation now, saying, ‘No, you don’t get to define me just this way.’ I’m hugely supportive of this. And you can also change. I love that.” How does fame impact her life? “Why are you so interested in the famous thing?” she asks, a little irritably. Well, I stutter, because you seem to be a real person – “Oh my God!” – and yet also a star. OK. She nods. “I don’t live that life. I’m deeply embedded in a family, in a very deep marriage. I’m parenting children. I’m a daughter. Those are the primary things. And yes, I have other things that circulate. But at my base are relationships that are very, to use your word, ‘real’.” She chuckles stagily. “And I’d love to have them be more rose coloured and fluffy, but they’re startlingly real, as is mortality, as are all of those things that you circle as a human being. The only thing I can bring to my work is that emotional truth. My life is my life – I’m left alone with that ultimately, right? I mean, you’re not working at 3am, lying in bed.” There is a brief pause, in which I visualise her pillow, possibly silk. She sleeps badly. The leg. The contemplation. The phone memories unbidden. “I’m in the midst of it, a woman in her 50s, with a whole lot of things, circling.” She is prepared to use some of these things, these vulnerabilities, to bring them to her work, “But not all of them. Because that’s not fair. To me. To my relationships. I can give a portion of it, really deeply. But I have to do it in a very safe place with people that I trust not to abuse it or hurt me. And we’re going to value it.” I’m interested in Kidman’s fame not just because of the dissonance between that inscrutable celebrity and the mischievous mum I meet today, but because her stardom is of the extreme kind. Never for her the Ugg-booted Starbucks run, the candid Instagram posts, even the casual political affiliations. Her wild and glittering fame, I realise, is not in spite of an audience never quite knowing her, it is because of it. Her 40-year career seems to have taught her the importance of staying a stranger to your audience, who need that distance – not just the length of a cinema or barrier of a screen, but the psychic separation – to maintain the dream and the desire, the belief that she can, over the course of a single popcorned day, be a witch, a courtesan, Lucille Ball and a gaslit Manhattan therapist with a very nice coat. One warm afternoon she was at the Cannes Film Festival chatting to Meryl Streep when the conversation turned inevitably to work, and the lack of opportunities for women. “Directors, writers, crew-members – the figures were astounding.” They paused, and I imagine them languidly nursing their sparkling waters before making a pact. “There was a lot of talk about how things were changing. But then I was like, ‘We’ve actually got to do something.’” Kidman pledged to star in a female-directed film or show every 18 months. She has exceeded that. “It was my way of going, ‘Hold me accountable.’” Success, she’s clear, comes with responsibility. “My commitment to this industry is that I will give a platform for new voices to come forward and they can piggyback on me… That’s part of the ‘paying it forward’.” What this looks like is a lot more Kidman on screen, and riskier work, and presumably a pay-cut, too. “I could rest. Or I could actually do what I promised I’d do. Sure, I’m tired. But at the same time, I feel this strong sense that I need to stop talking about it, and actually… do it.” There’s a further motivation, too. “I have a 13 year old who wants to be a director – she’s really interested in comedy.” She opens her eyes very wide, as if to say, “Imagine!” As a child, her feminist mother would take her to meetings of the Women’s Electoral Lobby. “A hundred women, sitting around talking and smoking. I can’t remember the actual conversations, but I remember eating a lot of biscuits.” The truest feminist act. It’s these meetings I think of when she tells me her dream of building a kind of studio. “Creating a real home for 10 or 15 women, all working out of one little area, supported completely. I’d love to be able to get things made without having to actually be in them, to just generate it without having to actually put my own body on screen.” I’m surprised to hear she doesn’t have that power. “Not yet.” She sits up even taller, her chin raised like battle is near. As they completed Being the Ricardos, Kidman approached Aaron Sorkin with a question. “I said, ‘The first time I see the film, I want to do it with an audience.’ He was like, ‘Are you insane?’ But I couldn’t bear the idea of sitting in a dark room and watching myself playing Lucille Ball going, ‘I’m dreadful.’” So, tentatively, Sorkin took her to a screening, where she sat in a state of clenched torture as the lights went down. And then? “Then I heard people laugh. And it was so good.” Known for the grace she brings to serious roles, she’d tried to pull out of the film at least once, scared that she wasn’t the right person to play an iconic comedy star. But then she started crushing grapes. On set as Lucille, she tucked her skirt into a belt and lowered herself barefoot into a vat of grapes, and, her mouth a lipsticked grimace, she crushed them into wine. “It was so freeing! The abandonment – it was wonderful. I didn’t want to give that up. I can do that grape sequence to a tee, but I only got to do it three times.” She’s leaning into the camera again, her eyes round, deadly serious about the transportive joy of clowning. “I kept asking Aaron, ‘Can I do it again?’” A heavy smile. “Can I do it again?” Being the Ricardos is now in select cinemas and on Amazon Prime VideoMinisters have been urged to retain a facility that can swiftly create and test new vaccines, amid concerns over the sale of a leading centre originally designed to prepare Britain for future pandemics. Some senior medical figures have privately raised concerns that government officials are examining bids for the Vaccine Manufacturing and Innovation Centre (VMIC), near Oxford, which has benefited from millions in public funding during its development. John Bell, who has held a series of influential roles in the government’s Covid-19 response, said that the centre’s vaccine manufacturing capabilities might be best placed in the hands of a large pharmaceutical company. However, he added that a facility looking at vaccine innovation and trialling – the original vision for VMIC – should be maintained. “Here’s the worry,” he said. “Let’s say we get a big [pharmaceutical company] come in and start making routine vaccines of one sort or another. That’s all fine. But the whole point of this was to further enable innovation, so that we would actually have the novel vaccines when you needed them. The AstraZeneca vaccine came out of that kind of thinking. “The real risk is we’re going to lose the ability to do that early phase stuff that actually told us that you could use the adenovirus to make really good vaccines. There’s a whole host of new vaccine platforms at very early stages of development that will need to be evaluated in what was the original vision for the VMIC. If you lose that, you really do lose a crucial bit of the puzzle. You can imagine, there’s a risk that that’ll get fudged. I think that would be a real problem.” Bell’s intervention echoes that of Clive Dix, the former head of the government’s vaccine taskforce, who said in an Observer interview in November that he had seen no evidence that his plans for preparing the country for future Covid variants were being heeded. He also said that he believed the UK was no longer “on the front foot” in tackling the pandemic. Kate Bingham, the original chair of the vaccine taskforce, has also claimed “the waters have closed over” the innovative approach taken when the pandemic arrived. Several companies are said to have submitted bids for the VMIC. Its establishment was announced by the government in 2018 to develop vaccines in the UK and deal with future pandemics. Insiders said that plans were changed as Covid struck and its manufacturing capabilities became the priority. It had been scheduled to open in 2023, but its opening was brought forward to next year. Some insiders said that placing VMIC in the hands of a large pharmaceuticals manufacturer was the best use for the facility. However, Bell said more time should be given to considering how an innovation centre for vaccines could be retained. “That would be a really interesting idea and I’m not sure whether they’ve thought about that very hard,” he said. “It’s not beyond the wit of man for the government to sell on the scale-up facility, and then go back and say: we are going to carry on with the original small-scale innovation idea. We’re just going to set it up again, as it was intended in the first place, and take 18 months to build it. I think that would be the best solution, frankly.” The government said: “We are working closely with VMIC, which is a private company, and others to ensure the UK retains our strong domestic vaccine manufacturing capability to contribute to the UK’s resilience against Covid-19 and other future health emergencies. The government has invested over £380m to secure and scale up the UK’s manufacturing capabilities to be able to respond to the impact of Covid-19, as well as any future pandemics.”Among the hundreds of thousands of seafarers left stranded by Covid-19, perhaps none have faced an ordeal as extreme as that of the i-Kiribatis. Last weekend, after a year-long odyssey across continents – shuttled between foreign nations and locked out of their homeland as waves of coronavirus closed down previously safe routes – that ordeal finally came to an end. In a palm-fringed courtyard in Tarawa, the capital of the small Pacific island nation of Kiribati, tears and shouts of joy greeted 141 seafarers during an emotional reunion with families they had not seen for almost two years. Temware Iotebwa, 39, said that at first he did not spot his children – his son, Tawati, 15, and daughters Sherlene, 11, Eilene, 6, and three-year-old AyMe – in the crowd. But their shouts quickly drew tears to his eyes. “When my younger kids first saw me, they were shouting and calling my name,” says Iotebwa, who last saw his children in February 2020. “Hearing their voices and seeing their faces brought tears of joy to my eyes. That Sunday was one of my happiest days. We laughed and we cried, and I got a lot of hugs.” Iotebwa, an able seaman, had worked a month of a nine-month contract on the Hamburg Süd/Maersk container ship MV Monte Pascoal, when the pandemic was declared. He disembarked in Belgium, before being flown to Fiji. He and his crewmates have spent the past nine months in limbo, sharing cramped hotel rooms and unable to tell their families when they would see them again. Of the estimated 1.7 million seafarers worldwide, more than half are from developing countries such as Kiribati, a low-lying nation of 33 islands with one of the lowest standards of living in Oceania and a poor healthcare system. Concerned that it might not be able to cope, Kiribati responded to the pandemic in 2020 by closing its borders. The strategy successfully kept Covid cases at zero. But for Iotebwa and his fellow i-Kiribati seafarers, it meant a year of hell, caught in the middle of protracted negotiations between the shipping companies, the International Chamber of Shipping and a Kiribati government fearful of the risks of allowing the return of seafarers who may have been exposed to Covid. Finally, in April 2021, after months of talks, the Kiribati government agreed to repatriate the seafarers, who would first be quarantined in Fiji. But then Fiji saw a sudden spike in coronavirus cases and the Kiribati government reversed its policy. After allowing about 60 seafarers back into the country, the authorities closed the border again, with no exceptions. Iotebwa had just been told he was about to be flying home when it happened. It was his lowest moment, he says. “My excitement turned to hopelessness when I heard the news,” he says over a video link from Tarawa. “The waiting time turned from days to months. My kids missed me very much and I missed them.” His family were worried too; the Grand Melanesian Hotel in the Fijian town of Nadi, paid for by the shipping company, was overcrowded and uncomfortable with no privacy. “It felt like a prison,” he says. “My wife, Takentemwanoku Matiota Iotebwa, constantly reminded me to be careful and to stay away from people to avoid getting infected. She was very worried.” They kept their spirits up by playing games of croquet and tug-of-war in the lobby. He is happy now he is back at home, but there is sadness, too. One of his friends lost his father, another his wife. Marriages broke up under the strain of waiting and the ordeal has taken a financial toll on the families. The seafarers are often their families’ main breadwinners and a source of remittances. They stopped being paid in early 2021, and now worry about their employment prospects with borders remaining closed. “I don’t blame anyone because this pandemic can happen anytime and anywhere,” says Iotebwa. “But if my government was smart, it could have found other ways to bring us seafarers home sooner. Other poorer countries arranged their seafarers’ return immediately while still on lockdown.” The World Health Organization (WHO) and the International Labour Organization (ILO) held a crisis meeting this month with transport organisations “as a matter of urgency” to protect the rights of those working at sea. Seafarers provided remittances to 12% of households in Kiribati in 2010, and the sector is an important source of employment. Pastor Matthias Ristau, a chaplain at the German Seamen’s Mission, helped care for 150 of i-Kiribati’s seafaring community who were stuck in a youth hostel in Hamburg for months before being flown to Fiji. “I could see these were really tough guys but after so many months at sea they were already exhausted,” he says. “And all the time hearing about families breaking, marriages splitting … I know it will take them a long time to finally arrive at home mentally.” Natalie Shaw, director of employment affairs at the International Chamber of Shipping (ICS), says the plight of the i-Kiribati is the biggest challenge she has faced in 18 years – including piracy. Shaw, who was instrumental in negotiations between the Kiribati government, German and Danish shipping authorities and various UN agencies, said it had caused sleepless nights for her. An additional 110 i-Kiribati men remain stranded. “I won’t be happy until we get the rest home,” she says. “We’ve had families in tears, thinking you don’t care. Every time we started to plan we got a new challenge, which makes it really difficult. There were multidimensional, multicountry challenges. “It became a lower priority for the powers that could have made it happen. Unfortunately,” she adds, “the seafarers are collateral damage in all of this.” Most of the seafarers worked on ships operated by Hamburg Süd, a German container line now owned by the Danish firm AP Møller-Maersk. In March the seafarers, who were scattered across the world, were flown to Denmark and Hamburg by the shipping companies, in order to group them together for vaccinations and to make repatriation easier. René Pedersen, managing director of AP Møller-Maersk, said they had seafarers stranded in Denmark, Egypt, Korea, Malaysia and Australia. ““We entered into a dialogue with different governments” he says. “But the Kiribati government was very determined: the border was closed and we could not repatriate them.” Finally, in late 2021, Kiribati agreed the seafarers could sail home from Fiji on a small cruise ship, the MV Reef Endeavour, as long as they quarantined before landing on Kiribati soil. It took eight weeks, plus a two-week quarantine at either end. “It’s an indication of how fragile the global maritime industry is,” says Steve Cotton, general secretary of the International Transport Workers’ Federation (ITF), who worked with the ICS to help the stranded seafarers. “We take labour from the global south – that definitely has cost advantages. But when the system breaks down, there’s no safety net.” The new action group led by the WHO and the ILO includes representatives from the ITF, the ICS, International Air Transport Association (Iata), and the International Road Transport Union. Together, they represent 65 million seafarers, aircrew and drivers. One of the group’s concerns is that many of those workers’ home nations lag significantly behind richer nations in vaccinations. Although the situation has improved recently, with an estimated 50% of seafarers vaccinated and the number working beyond their contracts dropping to 4.7% from 7%, the arrival of the Omicron variant has upended matters again, with at least 56 countries reimposing travel restrictions since its emergence. Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a fortnightly roundup of our top stories, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues: That means more seafarers will be stranded, and raises fears that the tortuous experience of the i-Kiribati could be repeated. “The Kiribati government [was] trying to protect its citizens for the right reasons, but there is no understanding of the hardship of individual seafarers,” says Cotton. “They’re providing for their families.” The Guardian has approached the Kiribati government for comment.Santa hats and Christmas jumpers added festive colour to the usual PPE for the “jingle jabs” NHS campaign in east London on Christmas Day. In one of at least eight vaccination centres open in England, volunteers decorated Redbridge town hall with Christmas-themed pictures and festive messages as they dealt with a fast-moving queue for booster jabs. “We’ve tried to jazz it up a little bit, tried to decorate some of the bays. There’s only a limited amount we can do from a clinical point of view, but we’ve tried. Those with their Christmas hats have got them on while trying to observe full PPE,” said Imran Khan, a senior clinical pharmacist at the centre. Khan said the campaign to get people vaccinated at centres open from Christmas Eve to Boxing Day was useful in a diverse area like Ilford and especially for workers who did not have the luxury of working from home. Sadique Shikder, 46, said his job as a bartender meant he was usually too busy to get to a vaccination centre, as did 54-year-old Azmat Hussain, who said he would normally be travelling as a salesman in the financial sector. “We usually do a dinner today and it’s my mum’s birthday as well but because of Covid we’ve had to scale back so I’ll go back and watch TV,” said Hussain. Health secretary Sajid Javid encouraged people to “make the booster a part of your Christmas this year” in response to Omicron, and the NHS tweeted its gratitude to everyone working through the festive period. Primary school teacher Anam Choudhury, 28, said she booked in to get vaccinated on Christmas Day because she expected it to be quiet. “I’m a teacher so wanted to time it for the Christmas holiday and thought I’d get it done today. I’m surprised it’s so busy – I thought I’d be the only one here,” she said. “I think it’s good they’ve got it open as much as possible so people can make the most of it before they go back to work.” “Normally I go and see family but we’ve obviously been a bit wary and reduced it, so it’s just my children and my husband at home. My husband does the cooking so he’s at home preparing.” Volunteer Hashminder Singh Kohli, who is Sikh, said he was happy to be working on Christmas Day and considered it part of his religion to be helping out. Kohli, 54, said he was semi-retired after he closed a business importing Italian clothes because of Brexit. “I didn’t want to sit down and become a couch potato so I volunteered, and it’s also part of my faith to help whoever needs it, whoever they are,” said Kohli, who was encouraged at the centre by Khan, his longtime friend. His plan was to go and see friends for dinner after finishing at the vaccine centre, while Khan said their usual family dinner, though scaled down, was already being prepared. “I prepped my roast potatoes yesterday as I’m the roast-potato man in our house and they’ll be going in the oven later on, and my wife’s getting the roast chicken ready – the halal chicken,” he said.Theatre is directly vulnerable to the moment in which it happens, and this can give it extra edge. In London, with many theatres closing as Omicron calls the shots, it was touch and go as to whether Spring Awakening would be put on hold. This is a multiple Tony award-winning rock musical, first performed in 2006, with music by Duncan Sheik and lyrics by Steven Sater, based on Frank Wedekind’s cause célèbre of an expressionist 1891 play. And when the first night did go ahead, before some subsequent performances were halted, it was as thrillingly charged as if it were the young cast’s last night on Earth – or on stage (many actors are recent drama school graduates). It was an evening of such unparalleled dynamism that it has left me holding superlatives up to the light, wondering which, if any, could possibly begin to live up to this production. The Almeida’s artistic director, Rupert Goold, and designer Miriam Buether have created a dark world in which spring shows no sign of awakening and adults have the potential to nip young souls in the bud. Steps rake steeply up to the back of the stage and double as slates for luminous chalked scribblings that change with the scenes as they shift between classroom, forest and graveyard. In contrast to their oppressive surroundings, the teenagers are primed to break free, aided and abetted by Lynne Page’s breathtaking choreography – flights of imagination that exploit the set. In a magically improbable moment, two boys, Hänschen (Nathan Armarkwei-Laryea) and Ernst (Zheng Xi Yong), slide slowly downstairs on their backs, hand-in-hand, head first: falling in love has never been more physically precise. But the musical begins with a lesson overseen by a sadistic Latin master (the admirably unhackneyed Mark Lockyer). Latin is mandatory but sex education fatally withheld, and Catherine Cusack plays a suitably severe matriarch of misinformation. The teenagers and their music are driven by an erotic energy that does – and does not – know where to go. Laurie Kynaston’s Melchior has a compelling intensity in his high-necked, double-breasted attire – a childish rig he has outgrown along with his childhood. He is a clever boy whose cleverness puts him at risk: he composes a 10-page essay on the facts of life to assist Moritz, his bemused friend. Moritz’s emotions prove precarious, and Stuart Thompson is heartbreaking in the role: it is fascinating to observe the nuanced fluctuation between the child he was and the adult he dare not become. Amara Okereke plays Wendla – with whom Melchior has his first doomed experience of sex – with core stillness and a marvellous singing voice. And the diverse supporting cast shows that each adolescent journey is different yet the same. Asha Banks, Taylor Bradshaw, Carly-Sophia Davies, Kit Esuruoso, Bella Maclean, Emily Ooi, Joe Pitts, Maia Tamrakar – it is a register of brilliance, the classiest of classes. But the production’s most striking achievement is in its containing of the uncontainable, especially during songs intent on bringing the house down. The power is in seizing the moment beyond the musical itself, using it to express defiance at the crushing effect on young people of nearly two years of pandemic. Elegy and rebellion become interchangeable. Rage deepens the mix. And when the cast comes together to sing Totally Fucked, it seems like an outlet for all the pain, frustration and subjugation of the past two years. A Covid generation expressing itself in an unforgettable blast of energy. Alan Plater’s Peggy for You, first performed in 2000, is about the legendary theatrical agent Peggy Ramsay, who represented playwrights from Alan Ayckbourn to David Hare to Plater himself – plus scores of distinguished others. It is expertly crafted, lightly entertaining and an ideal vehicle for Tamsin Greig’s comic talent – no one could play Peggy better. She is first sighted reclining on her couch, peering myopically at manuscripts. Her voice is as languorous as she is. She is syrup one moment, acid the next. Ramsay’s eccentricity is beautifully captured: she might seem distrait, but her concentration on the submissions she rejects is devastatingly focused. She tiptoes about in stockinged feet, a law unto herself. She calls everyone “dear” but is capable of putdowns such as: “You have set new standards for impertinence.” I’d have been interested in a more serious exploration of how Ramsay’s theatrical judgment evolved, but Plater, perhaps understandably, never strays from entertainment into documentary. Peggy’s visitors include Simon from Crouch End (nicely played by Josh Finan), a wannabe writer whose dazed gormlessness does not obscure his intelligence; Henry (plausible Trevor Fox), an established but aggrieved writer from Newcastle; and the strangely slow and mannered Jos Vantyler as Philip – a successful playwright, practised at uncorking champagne, for whom literary success is like attending a wedding. This affectionate piece is adroitly directed by Richard Wilson but is such a safe choice that it proves dangerous, for although it passes the time amusingly enough, it has nothing to say to our present moment. I wonder if Peggy Ramsay saw Habeas Corpus (first performed in 1973) and what she thought of it. Alan Bennett was not one of her Alans, although she made a cameo appearance in his 2007 film Prick Up Your Ears, played by Vanessa Redgrave. Habeas Corpus is another period piece, a lurching return to the 70s: a farce without furniture (unless you count the coffin). It involves two lecherous doctors, a lascivious vicar and several undercharacterised women. Jasper Britton is a wearily urbane Dr Arthur Wicksteed, with a suspect bedside manner. Catherine Russell is superbly blousy as Muriel, his large, sad and garrulous wife. Thomas Josling, making his debut, is striking as their son Dennis, a hectic hypochondriac with acne. Kirsty Besterman plays the “spinster” sister, Constance, as a feverish drip in pursuit of an enhanced bosom and a husband. Matthew Cottle is spot-on as Canon Throbbing, the vicar with chaste countenance, lewd intentions and flashing blue eyes. And Kate Bernstein scores high as sexy Felicity: all pout and doubt. Abdul Salis rallies in the unenviable role of Mr Shanks, false breast salesman, while Ria Jones strives to hold the tedious story together as Mrs Swabb, who narrates while vacuuming (a role once played by Bennett himself). You might think that comedy should have no sell-by date, but this play turns out to have expired. Patrick Marber directs and was, apparently, taken by its mix of dark and light (the play alludes as much to death as sex). But Bennett’s melancholy needs to be supported by more than flat gags about whopper breasts. Star ratings (out of five) Spring Awakening ★★★★★ Peggy for You ★★★ Habeas Corpus ★★ Spring Awakening is at the Almeida, London, until 22 January Peggy for You is at the Hampstead theatre, London, until 29 January Habeas Corpus is at the Menier Chocolate Factory, London, until 27 FebruaryIn the good old days, the fields were green, we’d never heard of Covid and pay packets grew. The last point sounds like a fairytale because stagnant wages have defined the UK’s post-financial crisis economy. Pre-pandemic, we’d only just got earnings back to where they were 12 years before. This living standards austerity means that the 15 years from 2007 to 2022 are forecast to be the worst on record for household incomes: up just 9%, compared with a pre-financial crisis average of almost 50% per 15 years. Some think the lesson from this catastrophe is that we shouldn’t care about economic growth because it has stopped feeding through to workers’ wages. When I’m in a good mood, I think that take is confused. Most of the time, I think it’s dangerous and idiotic. The real reason our pay has stagnated isn’t that growth hasn’t fed into wages, it’s the lack of growth in the first place. This is really clear in the UK as our productivity and business investment have flatlined. New research reminds us that the link from productivity growth to pay rises is still there across the Atlantic: in the US, a one percentage point increase in productivity growth leads to around 0.7 percentage points faster wage growth (0.5 per cent in Canada). The authors rightly note that higher inequality can weaken this link, creating gaps between typical pay and productivity. It’s not complicated: our new year resolutions should be to get productivity growth up and inequality down. • Torsten Bell is chief executive of the Resolution Foundation. Read more at resolutionfoundation.orgOne way to understand Richard Rogers is as a man who wanted everything. He wanted beautiful new buildings, a fair and civilised society and success for himself and his friends and collaborators. He was generous and tough, romantic and political. He wanted to be in the middle of it all. Such wishes made for a lifetime of majestic achievement, an impact as great as any British architect has ever made. Two documents from his early life sum him up. When he was born, his cousin Ernesto Rogers, a fine Milanese architect, wrote him a letter: don’t eavesdrop behind the door of life, it advised, break through it. As a student at the Architectural Association in London, R got a damning report from one of his teachers. His drawing was bad, it said, his method of work chaotic, his critical judgment inarticulate. He did indeed break the door open. The AA report was also largely true. His genius was to overcome his weaknesses with charm, charisma and determination, and to ally himself with other brilliant people who could do what he couldn’t. His early architectural career was in the partnership of Team 4, with Norman Foster, Foster’s wife, Wendy Cheeseman, and Rogers’s wife, Su, all of whom had skills that he lacked. He designed the Pompidou Centre in Paris with Renzo Piano and an array of other talents. With his second wife, Ruth, Rogers created a social universe around the River Café restaurant, which started as a canteen for his practice, and the triple-height living space of the home they made by knocking two Chelsea townhouses together. An enduring image of Rogers is of him in a cerise or lime-green shirt, standing on the house’s elegant steel staircase, with Andy Warhol prints of Chairman Mao on the walls, making a gracious if slightly incoherent speech to a party that might include a Hollywood star, a cultured footballer or a world-famous artist. With his omnivorous desire went an obliviousness to contradiction, complexity and the obstinacy of facts. This can be seen in an early house that he and Su designed for the photographer Humphrey Spender; enthralled by the steel-and-glass “case study” houses of California, Rogers wanted to achieve the same in rural Essex, without much allowance for differences in climate. In his first winter in the house, Spender sent Rogers a wry Christmas card, a photograph of the frost patterns that formed on the inside of the single-glazed walls. The same obliviousness could be seen in Rogers’s work with Tony Blair, John Prescott and Ken Livingstone to revitalise British cities with the help of good design. This achieved a true transformation of political and cultural attitudes to urban life, but it also entailed accommodations with property interests at odds with the inclusive principles he championed. There could be conflicts of interest between Rogers the social campaigner and Rogers the leader of an ambitious practice: “good design” too often turned out to mean the high-tech style that he and his allies offered. At worst, the results would be something like One Hyde Park in Knightsbridge, a block of super-luxury flats with fortress-like security systems that gives nothing very much to the public realm around it. He could be ruthless in getting his way. Often, his projects didn’t work out as advertised or came at considerable cost to his clients. He successfully wielded the power of British libel laws against the American author Stewart Brand, whose book How Buildings Learn had, in its US edition, challenged the claims of Rogers’s designs to be flexible and adaptable. In the UK version, as if in a Soviet retouched photograph, these sections were replaced by something altogether else. My relationship with Rogers was often spiky. I criticised projects such as his plan to envelop London’s Southbank arts centre with a giant glass roof, with perhaps excessive iconoclastic rage. To which he didn’t take kindly. And yet news of his death, at the age of 88, hit me hard. His courage was phenomenal. And he was, in the end, one of the good guys. The Pompidou Centre, half a century after its inception, remains a blast of joy, energy and invention in the heart of a historic city. Even clients he nearly bankrupted, even Spender with his freezing house, were won over by the power of his vision. “Naivety is an important part of creativity,” Rogers told his partner, Graham Stirk. In the case of this particular architectural giant, you couldn’t get one without the other.This was the year of the great exhibition – in spite of the plague. Galleries offered online shows when they couldn’t open and riches when they could, no matter the havoc of cancelled loans, insurance hikes and unreliable transport. Schedules were dextrously shifted and blockbusters extended, so judiciously that Tate shows ran longer and the Royal Academy’s magnificent Late Constable continues straight through until next year. Still, one curator confided, 2021 was like playing poker while also juggling eggs. Terrific surveys of female artists continued apace, though still not fast enough to make up for lost time. The wild and stirring genius of the Scottish painter Joan Eardley was celebrated in multiple centenary shows across Scotland. Swiss modernist Sophie Taeuber-Arp’s graphic wit and versatility of needle, pen and paintbrush dazzled at Tate Modern. There were lifetime commemorations of Barbara Hepworth in Wakefield, Eileen Agar at the Whitechapel, Laura Knight at Milton Keynes (still on, until 20 Feb) and US abstract expressionist Helen Frankenthaler at Dulwich – her visions diaphanous as mist, frequently vast, yet miraculously achieved through hard-line woodcut. By general consent, Yinka Shonibare brought the Royal Academy Summer Exhibition to exhilarating new life with outstanding works by black artists. And 2021 felt at least fractionally more diverse, with riveting solo shows from Charles Gaines, Michael Armitage and Samson Kambalu, Joy Labinjo and Sonia Boyce in public spaces, Carrie Mae Weems in Cardiff, whose photographs could be seen outdoors during lockdown, and every single one of the 40 and more contributors to Life Between Islands, seven decades of British Caribbean art at Tate Britain, so mind-altering I will never forget it. This was the show of the year for me. Painting soared, and was everywhere. People muttered that it was safer than installation or event art, say, during a pandemic (though that didn’t stop Yayoi Kusama’s mirror-upon-mirror Infinity Rooms from selling out at Tate Modern). Ralph Rugoff’s Mixing It Up: Painting Today offered an enthralling overview of what he called “one of the three best painting scenes in the world right now” – namely ours. His Hayward Gallery show offered an astounding range of UK-based artists – Lisa Brice, Matthew Krishanu, Vivien Zhang, rising stars Mohammed Sami and Kudzanai-Violet Hwami – almost all of them born elsewhere. Yet another irreducible argument, were it necessary, for freedom of movement. Many venerable artists died in 2021. There will be no more work from Christian Boltanski, Chuck Close, Lawrence Weiner or the Lebanese painter and poet Etel Adnan, who died at the age of 96. Her life lesson was radiantly simple: “When I paint, I am happy.” The tragic death of Tate Modern’s internationally admired head of exhibitions, Achim Borchardt-Hume, whose shows included the incomparable Picasso: 1932, was announced last month. He was 56. Memories of his acclaimed shows survive him. The Courtauld Gallery reopened after several years – clarified, beautified, masterpieces newly cleaned, the staging a sequence of surprises. So did Edinburgh’s Fruitmarket Gallery, expanding to incorporate a whole double-height warehouse. The south-west acquired a new museum with the Box in Plymouth, opening with a show of Australian art. Bournemouth got the art gallery Giant, where Debenhams once stood. You can now see the YBAs beside the seaside. Art can take you anywhere – and this year it did. To the Middle East in the V&amp;A’s Epic Iran, to Australia at Tate Modern (until Autumn 2022), and to Peru (until 22 Feb), Nero’s Ancient Rome and Hokusai’s Japan in the wondrous The Great Picture Book of Everything (ends 30 Jan), all at the British Museum. Art – international, intimate – embraced us into the world again this year, when that world felt remote. For this, and all else, I am so grateful. The top 10 art shows of 2021 1. Life Between Islands: Caribbean-British Art 1950s-Now Tate Britain, London (until 3 April) Joyous, piercing, beautiful: transatlantic life in every medium 2. Late Constable Royal Academy, London (until 13 Feb) Dark, tumultuous, triumphant works. 3. Paula Rego Tate Britain The turbulent inner life in stunning narrative paintings. 4. Joan Eardley centenary Across Scotland Multiple shows of this great Scottish painter of children, seas and wintry landscapes. 5. Frans Hals Wallace Collection, London (until 30 Jan) Revolutionising the male portrait: spies, diplomats, cavaliers, brewers. 6. Helen Frankenthaler Dulwich Picture Gallery, London (until 18 April) Captivating visions miraculously achieved in woodcut. 7. Jean Dubuffet Barbican, London Rebellious, witty pioneer of subversive art brut. 8. Sophie Taeuber-Arp Tate Modern, London Paintings, puppets, embroideries and more from this long-overlooked modernist. 9. Tokyo: Art and Photography Modern Art Oxford (until 3 Jan) Love, loneliness, life and death in the floating world. 10. Artes Mundi Cardiff Global sweep through the best in contemporary art. Turkey Turner Prize 2021 Herbert Art Gallery, Coventry (until 12 Jan) Four socially concerned collectives: worthiest yet, though possibly the worst.Husky sledding, Malvern Hills The Malvern Hills might not be the most obvious place for a dog-sledding adventure, but Arctic Quest, situated just outside Tewkesbury, offers thrilling rides and a chance to get fully involved with the pack. With only four people per session, visitors get plenty of hands-on time with the dogs, before learning how to “mush”, and embarking on a first brief ride. Once you’re feeling confident, the trails get longer and the dogs move faster, until you’re “mushing” at considerable speed. Afterwards, there’s a chance to swap stories over warming drinks around the campfire. The two-hour Full Mushing Experience costs £120pp; arcticquest.co.uk Snow shoeing and ice climbing, Glencoe, Highlands A combination of indoor and outdoor wintry activities make this a great choice for anyone looking to pep up winter days with a shot of adrenaline. Based at Glencoe, this small-group trip begins with a snow-shoeing trek, before an ice-climbing session in nearby Kinlochleven, home to the largest indoor ice-climbing centre in the world. The next day offers the chance to race through the snow on a husky-drawn sled, before sipping hot chocolate at a local artisan chocolatier. Three-night break, departing 4 February and 25 March from £929, including most meals, transfers and experiences; culturetrip.com Finnish sauna and ice dip, Northumberland A new winter experience from CBK Adventures, this evening adventure takes place on the Northumberland coast, beginning with a sociable meal in a 10-person Finnish army tent, complete with its own log-burning stove. Guests then warm up in the neighbouring four-person Finnish tent sauna, with dry heat or steam available, before a plunge into the freezing waters of the North Sea. A cold-water expert will be on hand to ensure safety (there are dry suits for those who can’t face the bracing temperatures) with hot drinks and all-weather robes available the moment you step out of the sea. The Ice Dip Social costs £99pp; cbkadventure.co.uk Night river swimming, Wye Valley, Wales Cold-water swimming is one thing, but swimming in winter – and at night – takes it to a whole new level. Outdoor and wild swimming specialist Angela Jones runs group swims in the river Wye. Swimmers are accompanied by a safety team, and there’s a chance to warm up by a firepit afterwards, with mince pies and a hot drink. Daytime cold-water swim events are available, and bespoke swims for private groups can be arranged. Stay at Creates in Monmouth, a buzzy bistro with eight bedrooms (doubles from £70 B&amp;B, createsmonmouth.com). Introduction to Cold Water Swimming costs £40pp; swimwildwye.co.uk Northern lights flight If you long to see the northern lights, but don’t fancy a trip to Scandinavia in its cold, dark winter, this three-hour flight – with departures from regional airports – is a great idea. After a pre-flight talk by the astronomy team, including the forecast for the lights, passengers are accompanied on board by Pete Lawrence, a regular astronomer on the BBC’s Sky at Night, who gives a commentary of what can be seen outside. The plane is darkened inside to enable the best views, with spectacular constellations on all sides, even if the northern lights remain elusive. The Northern Lights Flight Experience costs £229pp; omegabreaks.com The UK’s highest cabin, Cumbria For the most romantic of wintry adventures, book the Hinterlandes Hidden Hut, a simple, self-catering cabin (the highest in the UK). Ideal for a few days off-grid, the hut is located 20 minutes’ walk up an unnamed fell, surrounded by glorious mountain views, best seen through the large picture window next to the bed. The hut has a hot shower, composting toilet and pizza oven, and alongside walks from the door, ghyll-scrambling, mountain-biking and 4x4 driving are all on offer nearby. From £190 a night; canopyandstars.co.uk Otter spotting, Isle of Skye It’s not only Canada and Alaska that offer wildlife-spotting adventures in winter; the Isle of Skye is home to the International Otter Survival Fund, and this two-night package at Kinloch Lodge offers an excellent chance of seeing these elusive creatures. In the winter months, otters need to surface more often to find food, meaning there is a better chance seeing them pottering around the shores of Loch na Dal. Skye is also home to puffins, porpoise, minke whales and seals, and the package includes a day with a local nature guide. Kinloch Lodge is a charming hotel in a stunning location. A two-night break costs £520pp, dinner, B&amp;B including an otter-watching day; kinloch-lodge.co.uk Ski the Scottish Highlands Skiing in Europe still looks like a complicated prospect this winter, meaning there’s never been a better time to explore the Scottish slopes closer to home. This short break from Wilderness Travel reveals Scotland’s best skiing, from Glenshee and the back bowls of the Nevis range to off-piste routes in the Cairngorms. Every morning, the ski guide will assess the conditions and choose where the best skiing is to be found; if there’s not enough snow, other activities – from mountain biking to winter walking – will be on offer. A four-night break from £855pp B&amp;B, based on a group of four, sharing a Ski Tour Guide; wildernessscotland.com Walking with wolves, Ayside, Cumbria A unique opportunity to get up close with these wild, wintry animals, this one-hour trek through the Cumbrian countryside involves walking with wolves both on a leash and running free. Accompanied by an experienced wolf handler, who gives an insight into the evolution, physiology, social structure and communication between the animals, walkers have the chance to howl alongside the animals. A great experience for wildlife photographers and nature lovers, but children must be 16 or over to join the walk. A one-hour Walk with Wolves costs £95pp; predatorexperience.co.uk Seven Summits winter trek, Snowdonia An epic walking adventure for those with some experience of mountain trekking, this trek covers seven of Snowdonia’s mountains, with 3,000m of ascent. The walks take in glacial valley bowls, dome-shaped plateaux and breathtaking ridge walks, along with glorious views and the chance to reach the summit of Snowdon. Daily distances are around 12-15km, involving stiff ascents; fortunately, a mid-afternoon finish means there’s plenty of time to recover before having to lace up your books the next day. A three-night break is £540pp B&amp;B, including lunches and transfers; adventurousewe.co.uk.There is fog but not much filthy air to be found in Joel Coen’s bright, clean, stripped-down Shakespeare adaptation. Directing for the first time without his brother and regular collaborator Ethan, Coen casts Denzel Washington and Frances McDormand as the scheming, murderous couple seeking to secure the Scottish throne. The film has a cold, abstract beauty. The castle is a marvel of brutalist architecture, while Bruno Delbonnel’s stark black-and-white cinematography emphasises the set’s harsh lines and shadows. The three witches who prophesy Macbeth’s fate are reimagined as one “weird sister”. She is played by the acclaimed stage actor Kathryn Hunter, who snaps, twists and contorts her body to terrifying, memorable effect. The other performances feel more muted. Washington has a natural authority that lends itself to the role, but McDormand is vacant and glassy-eyed. Both should be bloodthirsty, yet instead are bloodless – too measured to match the mania of the source text. In cinemas now and on Apple TV+ from 14 JanuaryWhether it’s a hangover from a pandemic-disrupted few years, a sign that writers had particularly productive lockdowns, or perhaps it’s the many centenaries coming up – Ulysses, The Waste Land and Jacob’s Room – but 2022 is positively groaning with great novels. We’ll leave the Observer’s peerless debut feature to cover new novels from the UK and largely focus on books published in the first half of the year. Prepare your hearts, for Douglas Stuart is back. After the extraordinary success of Shuggie Bain, his second novel, Young Mungo (Picador, April), is another beautiful and moving book, a gay Romeo and Juliet set in the brutal world of Glasgow’s housing estates. Also following up a painfully affecting predecessor is Hanya Yanagihara, whose To Paradise (Macmillan, January) gives us three stories far apart in space and time but each unique in their power to summon the joy and complexity of love, the pain of loss. I’m not sure I’ve ever missed the world of a book as much as I miss To Paradise now I’ve left it. A new Kamila Shamsie novel is always worth celebrating, but Best of Friends (Bloomsbury, October) is something else: an epic story that explores the ties of childhood friendship, the possibility of escape, the way the political world intrudes into the personal, all through the lens of two sharply drawn protagonists. Tilted Axis Press is the home of some of the most incandescent and urgent writing from all corners of the globe. I’d never heard of Monique Ilboudo, who manages to be both Burkina Faso’s ambassador to Scandinavia and a prolific author. So Distant From My Life (September) is the story of Jeanphi, a young man from the fictional west African city of Ouabany. It’s beautifully translated by Yarri Kamara and the best book about the hope and despair of the migrant experience that I’ve read. NoViolet Bulawayo’s second novel, Glory (Viking, March), is set in the fictional state of Jidada. Here the “Father of the Nation” – an old horse – rules over the other farm animals, who narrate the tale. Robert Mugabe is there in all but name in this striking allegory – an Animal Farm that shows how narratives of liberation and self-determination curdle under a dictator’s power. There’s another very different Africa in Marlon James’s Moon Witch, Spider King (Penguin, March), the second in his Dark Star trilogy. Even more gripping and inventive than its predecessor, the story of the 177-year-old witch Sogolon is like Tolkien on ayahuasca. Two debuts from the States worth looking out for. The Immortal King Rao by Vauhini Vara (Grove Press, June) is a brilliant and beautifully written book about capitalism and the patriarchy, about Dalit India and digital America, about power and family and love. Honorée Fanonne Jeffers is a celebrated poet, but The Love Songs of WEB Du Bois (HarperCollins, January) is her first novel, and what a novel it is. Stretching across generations, it charts the history of an African American family from slavery to the present, all centred on (another) fictional city: Chicasetta, Georgia. Akwaeke Emezi’s debut, Freshwater, announced them as an explosive new voice in 2018. That they are already on to their seventh book – and this at the age of 34 – shows the frantic energy of their work, the range of their vision. Their third adult novel, You Made a Fool of Death With Your Beauty (Faber, May), is the story of Feyi, an artist, and her best friend, Joy. It follows Feyi through a wild summer of creation and destruction, art and music, and lots of sex. Is Deesha Philyaw’s The Secret Lives of Church Ladies (Pushkin Press, May) a novel? Is it a collection of linked stories? Whatever it is, it’s glorious – the smart, sad and very funny portrait of several generations wrestling with their desires and their faith. Jessica Andrews’s first novel, Saltwater, was wonderful. The follow-up, Milk Teeth (Hodder, July), is even better. A story of young love and desire that’s full of the most gorgeous writing. Alex Pheby’s Mordew was a stunning success for the dependably brilliant Galley Beggar Press. Now he follows it up with another super-smart piece of literary fantasy, Malarkoi (August), set amid the ruins of Mordew and with the protagonist of the first novel, Nathan Treeves, dead. I love Sandra Newman’s work and the news that she is currently writing Julia, a feminist retelling of Nineteen Eighty-Four, has got me very excited. Before that, though, is The Men (Granta, June), a dazzling work of speculative fiction that imagines a world in which all men, overnight, vanish from the Earth. Monica Ali’s long-awaited fifth novel, Love Marriage (February, Hachette), was worth the decade it took to arrive. The sharp and independent Yasmin Ghorami is set to marry Joe Sangster, the rakish son of a prominent feminist. This is a proper family saga, both deliciously old-fashioned and full of surprising reversals. Patrick Gale’s latest, Mother’s Boy (March, Headline), delivers a characteristically poised and tender novel about a young man growing up in the shadow of one war and the whispers of the next, with his mother, the indomitable Laura, always there watching over him. A few final books to look forward to… Guardian football journalist Jonathan Wilson has written a smart and cinematic novella, Streltsov (Blizzard Media, January) about the Soviet football star Eduard Streltsov, arrested on the eve of the 1958 World Cup. If you’re looking for this century’s Ulysses, look no further than Patrick McCabe’s Poguemahone (Unbound, April), a stunningly lyrical novel in free verse that takes place in Margate and in the mind and memories of Dan and Una Fogarty. It may look like a chore at more than 600 pages, but it’s a blast. Perhaps better known until now for her short stories, in These Days (Faber, March) Lucy Caldwell has written a novel of enormous heart; full of luminous passages of prose, this tale of the Belfast blitz is breathtakingly good. Finally, there’s Karen Campbell’s Paper Cup (Canongate, June), the story of a homeless woman making her way across Scotland to return a lost engagement ring. It’s magnificent and devastating and I’m welling up just writing about it.It’s getting quite hard to ignore the fact that publishers are increasingly hunting in packs, seemingly driven more by trends than by taste. Next year’s nonfiction lists are dominated to an almost ridiculous degree by books about identity and, perhaps more surprisingly, by essay collections, and the result, seen from afar, is both repetitive and a touch flimsy-seeming (great as it is that publishers are suddenly mad for essays, this is a form that requires a lot of craft and deep thinking even to be half successful). Meanwhile, pitiful neglect sets in elsewhere. If nature writing is (at last, some might say) in retreat, thunking great literary biographies are positively on the run, though we can, I’m happy to say, look forward to Katherine Rundell’s Super-infinite: The Transformations of John Donne (Faber, April), a new and groovy-sounding account of the life of the great poet of sex and death. Ah, yes: death. Grief is big business for publishing, an industry all of its own. In The Reactor: A Book About Grief and Repair (Faber, January), Nick Blackburn, a psychotherapist, worries away in modish fragmentary style at the sudden loss of his father. In This Mortal Coil: A History of Death (Bloomsbury, February), the historian Andrew Doig offers a portrait of the final exit across the centuries. Naturally, illness is all around, too. Those who have found Professor Devi Sridhar’s expertise and calm advice invaluable since the arrival of Covid-19 will be glad to know that she has written Preventable: the Politics of Pandemics and How to Stop the Next One (Viking, May). More cheerily, Gavin Francis, the Edinburgh GP who wrote so well on the pandemic last year, has now switched his attention – put the Lucozade on ice! – to life after illness in Recovery: The Lost Art of Convalescence (Wellcome Collection, January). A couple of books about art. In Bacon in Moscow (Cheerio, January), James Birch relives his comical/somewhat terrifying attempts to mount a retrospective of the artist in the USSR in 1988 (think dodgy attaches and KGB honey traps); Grayson Perry calls it “rollocking”. I’m also looking forward to The Real and the Romantic: English Art Between Two World Wars (Thames and Hudson, April) by Frances Spalding, biographer of Vanessa Bell and John Minton. In pop and rock, White Rabbit, still a new imprint, is showing how it’s done: so many women’s voices. Next year, it will publish The Sound of Being Human by Jude Rogers (April), a memoir, shaped around 12 songs, which looks at why music plays such a profound role in our lives; and Wayward: Just Another Life to Live (April), the singer songwriter Vashti Bunyan’s account of how she came to record the album Just Another Diamond Day, ignored on its release in 1970, but adored on its rediscovery 30 years later. However, I’m reserving my greatest excitement for Sound Within Sound: Opening Our Ears to the Twentieth Century (Faber, July), in which Kate Molleson, the Radio 3 presenter, will tell the story of 10 radicals who dared to challenge the conventions of classical music. A book that seems likely to prick even the most jaded ears. Under “fascinating and uncategorisable”, let’s file The Stasi Poetry Circle by Philip Oltermann (Faber, February) and The Premonitions Bureau by Sam Knight (also Faber, May). In the former, Oltermann tells the story of an experiment in weaponising poetry for politics that began in 1982 when East Germany’s secret police, convinced writers were embedding subversive messages in their work, decided to train border guards in the art of lyrical verse. In the latter, Knight goes back to 1966, when a British psychiatrist called John Barker began to investigate whether some people’s premonitions should be taken seriously in the hope of avoiding national disasters. Anyone who has ever wondered about the camp on the Isle of Man where Britain interned 30,000 German and Austrian refugees during the second world war, among them the artist Kurt Schwitters, will be keen to get hold of The Island of Extraordinary Captives (Sceptre, February) by Simon Parkin. Also heading our way, somewhat belatedly, is An Accidental Icon (Hodder, April), Norman Scott’s account of his relationship with the Liberal politician Jeremy Thorpe; thanks to the BBC hit A Very English Scandal, in which he was played by Ben Whishaw, Scott’s story may draw the attention even of those who weren’t there at the time. Finally, some memoirs. Back in the Day (Sceptre, May) is Melvyn Bragg’s first; it is about his life from the age of six to 18. In Good Pop, Bad Pop (Cape, May), Jarvis Cocker will give us, we are told, not a life story so much as a “loft story” (his book is inspired by jumble found in his attic: a Gold Star polycotton shirt, a pack of Wrigley’s Extra, several pairs of broken glasses). Hamish Hamilton will also put back into print A Black Boy at Eton (February) by the Nigerian writer Dillibe Onyeama, with an introduction by Bernardine Evaristo (the book belongs to a series, Black Britain: Writing Back, whose titles she has chosen for the imprint). Written when Onyeama was just 21, it is an account of the racism he endured in the mid-60s as only the second black student in Eton’s history. “It wouldn’t let me go,” says Evaristo of a text that in 2020 resulted in an apology to its author from the school’s headteacher.You could easily arrive at the conclusion that Patrick Cummins had been blessed by some benevolent god. The best-on-ground performance in the teenage Test debut, the personal qualities that made people speak of him as a future captain, the rise to that position despite a century and more of entrenched Australian opposition to bowlers taking the job. That interpretation, though, would be overlooking the long, long wait after that teenage beginning, when Cummins had played one Test but spent six years being denied the next, the cycle of injuries whirring as endlessly as the exercise bikes on which he did another stint of rehabilitation. Your early 20s are supposed to be a time of impulsiveness and expression, not of quiet dedication to a long-term goal. Having observed that discipline though, an age of karmic benevolence towards Cummins resumed. Almost free of injury since his Test return in 2017, he has continued rising and rising in the ranks of world players and the estimation of those watching. As it seems, even his Covid suspension from the second Test of this series has worked out, giving him a break in a packed schedule without the angst and argument that would otherwise have surrounded resting the Test captain. Twice in previous Ashes, Cummins has got through all five Tests, but none had such short turnarounds between matches across the whole series. On his return on the first morning of the Boxing Day Test, Cummins looked every bit the better for his break. He stood by while Joe Root called the coin incorrectly, chose to bowl first on a cool, cloudy morning that had just seen its last shower of rain, and immediately, immaculately locked on to an off-stump line with enough seam movement to threaten. Like any good mob boss, Cummins doesn’t make threats that he isn’t prepared to carry out. Haseeb Hameed has shown moments of composure to the adherents and moments of weakness to the doubters, but his dismissal in the first over gave nothing to either, playing a line that he had no choice but to play, left by seam and bounce that took the edge. Bounce too did for Zak Crawley, returning to the team, slicing from the shoulder of the bat to gully as he tried to nudge leg side, an innings of 12 runs in a year in which he has averaged 11.2. Then another perfect line, adjusted for a left-hander, took out Dawid Malan while his toasted cheese sandwich was being readied on the grill, ending the only partnership that has offered England any stability in this series. In that first session, Australia’s other bowlers had been manageable. Mitchell Starc looked for swing, found none, and wandered down the leg side, taken off after three overs. Scott Boland on debut was accurate and serviceable, while Cameron Green and Nathan Lyon both had a bowl without much effect. Had the attack been rounded out by someone other than Cummins, England might have got through. The middle session might have become a parade of batting incompetence, but it was the opening session, against his quality, when they were undone. All of the above was received with relish by a sizeable Melbourne crowd. The MCG’s usual Ashes threshold of 90,000 shrank this year to just over 57,000, not by any government mandate but by the choice of people to stay away during another pandemic surge. It was still a crowd that would dwarf most in world cricket, but a reduction reflecting a city that remains battered and wary after a difficult couple of years. A bit like Cummins, Melbourne has been extremely fortunate, in a way that doesn’t discount its own particular privations. Pandemic death rates have been low, vaccination rates are high, and this balance of elements was hard won by the long lockdowns that forestalled one while enabling the other. With isolation not required since October, the people like those who filled the stands today have been happy to burst back into the world. Those who left them empty remain cautious of the twists that this story could yet take. Which added some poignancy at the MCG, especially from a hometown perspective. There were crowd roars and circular waves and some all-time incompetence from a pitch invader. There were beach balls and beers. And there were absences. An atmosphere ebullient, but less than it might have been. A celebration, against a well-founded background hum of anxiety. Trying to congregate in the way of the recent past felt like trying to claim closure for something that is not yet done. The tranches of empty seats told that story without a noise. Still, in some ways the rituals of a Boxing Day felt important. The early burst of rain, the cold delay. The gradual gentling of a day into something approaching pleasantness. The packed lunches and the shouted greetings. And there were the strange new things, like a fast-bowling captain throwing himself the ball for one more quick burst before the lunch break. Knocking through England’s only partnership of resistance. Showing us someone for who, at least for the moment, most things keep going very right.At the age of 69, I am not allowed to see my original birth certificate or know the basic facts of my origin. In some private and all closed adoptions the original birth certificate is sealed by the state of California. The only way to see it is to hire a lawyer and petition the court with a “very good reason” to unseal. When I asked a clerk in Marin County, California, he couldn’t give an example of what a good reason might be, but he did say that wanting to know my origins wasn’t one of them. The names of my original parents, their ethnicities, vocations, countries of origin, ages, places of residence, and attending physician – all remain hidden. I want the date of my birth confirmed. I want to know where I came from. I want to know my original mother’s name. My adoptive parents are long gone. My original ones have likely passed too. Who is this law protecting, and from what? I am an embodiment of the Baby Scoop era, a period that spanned 1945–1973, during which approximately four million infants were adopted across the US. The stigma from that time resulted in policies that deleted my heritage. Millions of girls got “in trouble” and had unwanted children. Back then, demand for babies was high and so was the supply, thanks to the coercive homes for unwed mothers, where young women with unplanned pregnancies hid themselves away until they gave birth. It’s different now: Those homes no longer exist. Illegitimacy is no longer the taboo topic it once was. We don’t even use the term “unwed” anymore. So why are states still sealing adoptees’ birth certificates? What began in the nineteenth century as a response to a crisis of orphaned children has become a $19bn industry, serving the wants of adoption agencies and prospective parents. Facebook pages and websites promise “closed, private adoptions.” Sealed birth certificates obliterate our identity and origins – the exact things most people take for granted. Secrecy helps some adoption agencies maintain opaque business practices. It masks the workings of unregulated adoptions. Prospective parents who don’t want their child to have contact with their original family require it. The goal of closed adoptions is to turn the adopted child into a blank slate, ready for fresh imprint. But no baby is a blank slate. We all come with history, ancestry, fathers and mothers. And many of us don’t want to search; we just want to know. The little information I do have is from a social worker’s notes. My original father knew nothing of my conception. My potential father refused to parent another man’s child. Terrified and alone, my mother gave me away in exchange for the respectability and security of marriage. She was ashamed, of her situation and of me. Erasing me was a way to deal with that. There was no one at my birth to argue otherwise. There is no one in my home state capitol to argue otherwise now. When my children were born, I saw family members who looked like me for the first time in my life. After the birth of our son I felt unequipped, oddly ineligible to be his mother. I spent three or four hours in the hospital wondering whether I should give him away. I had a good marriage, a career, this was a planned pregnancy; my situation was nothing like that of my original mother. Still, some part of me believed in my own erasure. Eventually I came to my senses, my hormones stabilized, and we went home as a family. Yet the feeling that I lacked the qualifications for motherhood receded very slowly. When our daughter arrived there was a white space on her birth certificate where her name should have been. We did not want to know her sex before she was born, but an over-eager sonogram technician led us to believe I was carrying a boy. While my pregnancy progressed, we selected a handful of boys’ names. In the delivery room, my doctor announced, “You have a beautiful baby girl.” My husband looked confused. “You’d better check on that.” We spent a week trying out names for her. As I diapered her, I’d say, “Hi Caroline. Or are you Christine?” Eventually we filled the open field on her birth certificate with “Elizabeth.” Did I have an original name too? My children are grown now, building lives of their own. Perhaps they will want families one day. But my erasure looms over them. The medical history on my side of the family is solid white space. Each time I encounter a new doctor, the conversation is pretty much the same. “I see you have no family history for major illnesses – cancer, heart disease, stroke. That’s great.” “No, I have no family history.” Then follows an awkward moment as confusion travels across the physician’s face. I break the silence between us. “I was adopted.” “Oh.” Now the physician is unequipped. “Well, we’ll just be sure to keep you up-to-date with screenings.” I’ve had mammograms since I was thirty-five. Colonoscopies began at forty. I’m grateful for preventative care, but I also wonder: what are they missing? And what have I passed on to my children?” I’m getting old now. I’d like to see an end to sealed birth certificates. They were meant to protect adoptive parents from the embarrassment of infertility, the original mother from the shame of unwed pregnancy, and the child from the label of illegitimacy. None of this is necessary anymore, nor does it justify hiding personal information from adoptees. Forty-one states still restrict access to birth certificates through laws that date back as far as the 1930s. It’s time to repeal them. If not for me, then for my children, and perhaps theirs – and for all the children who will be adopted in the future. Anne Rudig has contributed to the New York Times and other publications. She is at work on a memoirThis superfluous Kingsman origin story sees writer-director Matthew Vaughn sketch a blueprint for the suited and booted secret spy organisation. The third film in the franchise, it begins with Ralph Fiennes’s Orlando Oxford, an aristocrat and widowed war veteran who regrets his part in plundering Britain’s colonies. A self-declared pacifist, he discourages his son Conrad (Harris Dickinson) from enlisting in the army – but the first world war has broken out and a global disaster must be stopped. Orlando is flanked by arse-kicking comrades played by Djimon Hounsou and Gemma Arterton (the only woman in the film offered anything resembling a speaking role). The tone lurches awkwardly from sweeping colonial melodrama to grim battle epic, camp, pseudo-Bond caper and crass, unfunny farce. All exist on a spectrum of tedious laddishness, from Rhys Ifans’s puerile Rasputin – a dancing, vomiting mystic monk – to a sombre, reverent set piece in the trenches. It’s a fun bit of historical revisionism when the war is revealed to have been masterminded by a shadowy villain with a Scottish accent, determined to topple the British empire while punishing Fiennes’s “posh prick”. Still, the film can’t resist revelling in a conservative conclusion outside Buckingham Palace, with a victory banner fluttering against a smattering of St George’s flags.My grandfather was a man with a tut as loud as a dropped plate. He’d deploy it whenever you fell short in some way: a length of the pool finished too slowly; a garden bed not weeded well enough; a portion of vegetables left unfinished. But he softened over chess, a game he bequeathed to me over long sessions, played in our pyjamas by the fireplace. Across the board, his sternness would melt into a kind of pensive calm, the admonishments replaced with instructions and then a small smile when he saw the move that would win the game and send me to bed. He played chess all his life and was chairman of his local club right up until he entered the retirement home where he died, but I didn’t follow his example myself until some 25 years later. By then it was too late to thank him. The moment came at around 6pm on New Year’s Day 2021. Lying alone on my living room carpet, watching the first rain drops of the year drizzle on to the window, all the adrenaline of the past 12 months seemed to evaporate, leaving behind an overwhelming sense of dread. Like everyone else, I’d made it to the end of 2020 only to find Covid wasn’t going anywhere, and now the thought of resuming what passed for “real life” towered over me like the biggest pile of dirty dishes – which, incidentally, was also waiting in the kitchen. Desperate for a distraction, I opened my laptop and logged into chess.com for the first time in years. With a heavy, hopeless sigh, I made the move drilled into me as my tiny primary school’s fourth best player, who was roundly beaten in the junior club semi-finals by Jason Wood in front of my father in 1992 – king’s pawn to E4. I was not alone. People all around the world were discovering chess. In the year after March 2020, chess.com picked up over 11 million new users, many no doubt inspired by Netflix’s The Queen’s Gambit. On live streaming apps, such as Twitch, blossoming communities of young chess players were revelling in the strange, shared language with which you can analyse and debate games. At a time of existential worry, something about a 1,500-year-old boardgame was drawing people in. One silver lining of Covid was the rapid development in our conversation about mental health. In Britain, this was something at least partially ignited by the sobering National Office of Statistics report in 2014 which named suicide, for the first time, as the number one killer of men under 50. The conversation kept simmering in subsequent years, with moments such as #MeToo, which made us reconsider the way victims process trauma, and then Donald Trump, a real-time experiment in untreated narcissism during which the game “would you go back in a time machine and kill baby Hitler” became replaced by “would you go back in a time machine and give baby Trump a hug”. But the pandemic was the moment for many of us when mental health went from the political to the abruptly personal. Family c onversations about my (other) grandfather – alive at the time, but on his own when lockdown started – changed quickly from keeping him physically well to how we could prevent him becoming depressed. Managers and HR departments, fearful of losing unseen staff to long-term stress, quickly learned the language of self-care. (“We just had an online seminar,” a newly evangelical 60-year-old neighbour and veteran of corporate finance told me, “called ‘It’s OK to not be OK.’”) Most of all, we had to learn coping mechanisms for ourselves. No matter where you sat on the “quite lucky, really!” continuum, Covid was a mental health challenge. For me, this meant increased bouts of acute anxiety, something I’ve experienced since childhood; an all-consuming dread, often coupled with extreme self-criticism, which makes it difficult to eat properly, sleep or feel optimism or joy. Searching for the right ways to cope had led to a skipping-in-the-garden phase, an ill-fated morning meditation regime, the month I became briefly but intensely obsessed with the teachings of Wim “the Iceman” Hof and started each day with loud breathing exercises and a cold shower (admittedly with more commitment to the former than the latter). Next came journaling – churning out pages and pages of stream-of-consciousness misery in an effort to purge my way to feeling better. Where I didn’t expect to find relief was in an ancient board game, which had previously left me so humbled and humiliated I’d retreat in frustration after a few days and swear off it for good. But this time something clicked. By the end of January, I was playing several games a week; 10 months later, I play at least three or four times a day. Chess, I quickly realised, was giving me far more than just a pleasant distraction. Instead, it was offering a window of clarity into my state of mind, a place where the fog of the day’s stresses and distractions were cleared to show me what was really going on, good or bad. My therapist had often told me: you need to find ways to tune into more of your emotions, not just anxiety but the rest of the “big four”; joy, sadness, and anger. Chess is an extremely fast route to experiencing them all – often within the course of a few moves. At a time when the outside world was too extreme to contemplate, it became a useful internal bellwether. If I was playing with frustration and impatience, I knew tackling that big problem at work or having that difficult conversation with a friend or partner was probably best left until tomorrow. If I was playing with grit and purpose, it clarified that I was strong and gave me the confidence to do what needed to be done elsewhere. In chess, there is no element of chance: no dice to throw, no bit of kit that can falter (unless the board splits in two, which is fairly unlikely), no adverse weather conditions to point to and curse. It is a pure test of your ability to master your thoughts and emotions in the moment; failure to make a good move is, ultimately, the only thing that leads to your downfall. This is why you punch the air when you win and feel unspeakably furious with yourself when you lose. In chess, there are no ways to downplay your victory or excuse your defeat. Then there is the obvious matter of resilience. Chess is a relentless, real-time test of your resolve. Can you make a mistake (called “blunders” in the game) – particularly the worst ones, like losing a queen – and keep going, or do you slam your laptop shut and be grumpy for the rest of the evening? Do you react to a setback by lashing out with an ill-considered attack, or can you take a breath, analyse the situation and make a smart move instead? Can you contain the joy of winning a clear advantage, and not get complacent? (Comebacks in chess are almost always about this.) Chess, in short, began to feel like a mindfulness exercise and an emotional HIIT class rolled into one. What was hard to tell was whether it was truly transformative, or whether I was merely projecting what I needed on to chess at that time, just as others were with birdwatching or baking. The traditional view of chess is that playing it will make us smarter, that its unique blend of arithmetic, geometry and lateral thinking offers a workout for the mind that will make us stronger at logic, strategy and problem-solving. Just as heavyweight boxers are used as shorthand for physical supremacy, chess players are considered the height of intelligence, if not genius. This is certainly the view in places such as Armenia, the only country in the world to make chess mandatory in school (resulting, unsurprisingly, in one of the world’s highest proportions of grandmasters). The problem is, this is a romantic fallacy with no scientific basis. At least that’s the conclusion of Fernand Gobet, author of The Psychology of Chess and an international master who once faced the great Garry Kasparov when part of the Swiss national team. A cognitive scientist and professor at Liverpool University, he has researched the question of chess’s relationship to intelligence. “About 15 years ago,” Gobet says, “someone from the US Chess Fan Federation asked me to research the benefits of chess on education. He told me: ‘I want the truth.’ They mailed me this big box full of about 90 studies into the topic. We realised pretty quickly they were almost all very poor quality with almost no methodology. Maybe five or six were usable.” Gobet set out to discover once and for all whether playing chess can have a positive impact on other areas of cognitive ability, particularly those that similarly combined “intelligence with working memory”. Unlike the studies in the box, Gobet and his team applied scientific conditions – properly sized control groups, placebos, standard deviations. “The conclusion we came to was that playing a lot of chess makes you very good at chess,” he says. “And no evidence for anything else.” You might think this would have sent shockwaves through the chess community, who’d been using this particular piece of propaganda for years. Instead, fingers were placed firmly in ears. “They basically totally ignored us,” Gobet says. “Every year I get invited to conferences and I often tell the same story. Sometimes they get sick of hearing it and talk about other things. There are still reports being published today claiming chess is great for mathematic intelligence, working memory capacity, Alzheimer’s – everything. But there’s no evidence.” Chess may not make us smarter in a cognitive sense, but what about the idea it can help us learn to understand and master our feelings better? “It’s possible,” Gobet says, “Although there’s absolutely no data about that.” He agrees chess is an unusually emotive game. “If you do an experiment and ask people to propose the best move in any position, they often use very emotional terms: ‘This move is disgusting, this move is lovely.’ Clearly, chess generates powerful emotions, especially when you’re losing. People hate losing at chess. You can speculate that chess teaches us a few simple things, like learning to lose graciously, to think before you move and so on. I think it’s more just a way to reveal innate abilities that people have. It’s going to reveal whether you’re resilient or not, if you can manage your emotions.” Or perhaps it can be a way to chart your personal growth in these things. The boy I was at 12, losing in front of my father, or the man I was at 26, writing it off as a waste of time after each defeat, were not as emotionally resilient as me today, whose Elo (chess-rating system) rating lingers stubbornly in the “class D” range (one step above total novice), but keeps playing anyway. This maturity may be unsurprising, but that doesn’t mean it is not worth observing: self-care is about celebrating and viewing yourself with kindness. Which leads me to another thing I value about chess. Beneath the cut and thrust of attack and defence, it is also a curious exercise in empathy – for yourself, but also your opponent. Even when you’re playing an anonymous stranger on the internet you can intuit something of their emotional state within a few moves: what opening they choose (or how they respond to yours); how quickly they move; how boldly they exchange material (pieces). Each game has a distinct texture and emotional arc. To the best of my knowledge, no one says this about Boggle. I asked my father once if my grandfather ever struggled with his mental health. Difficult or unpleasant emotions were taboo in my grandparent’s household. The only self-help they knew was the stiff upper lip, an example which has extended down the family like ivy covering a crumbling wall. He told me there had been a period when he was a child, not discussed during or since, when Grandad took to bed for weeks in a closed off room with what was euphemistically described by everyone at the time as “nerves”. I struggled to picture it. Later, when we cleared out his house, we found piles of Grandad’s chess books with pencil notes scribbled in the margins where he taught himself opening theories, just as today I spend hours watching “How to DESTROY opponents with the Sicilian Defence!” tutorials by Russian YouTubers. My grandfather lived and died before we had a shared language for the mental health struggles that are also part of his legacy to me, but chess was a journey he set me on which we undertook in the same way, decades apart. I would love to be able to ask him what relief, if any, he got from this infinitely joyful, endlessly maddening game; whether it was his refuge, too. Perhaps, like me, he appreciated how the game functions as a handy metaphor for life. You start with endless options laid out in front of you, fumble some of your earliest moves, battle through a complicated and difficult middle passage before, eventually, entering a final stretch in which the pieces and the clock start to run out. There will always be better players, silly blunders, missed wins. All you can do is make the best move you can, and when things really go wrong, try and find the will to reset the board and go again. Samaritans can be reached on 116 123; or go to mind.org.ukPost-Brexit changes to Britain’s immigration rules have triggered an unprecedented collapse in bookings for school trips from the continent, organisers say, with countries such as Ireland and the Netherlands now more popular than the UK. While the pandemic has depressed European school travel in general, the number of short-stay educational visits planned in 2022 to alternative EU destinations where English is widely spoken is significantly higher than inquiries for UK visits. Operators say that while Britain’s day two Covid test requirement is a factor, by far the most significant is the UK’s decision not to accept EU group passports or identity cards from 1 October, instead requiring full passports – plus expensive individual visas for non-EU pupils. The British government has said the collapse is because of the pandemic and that the measures are needed “to strengthen the security of our border”, but critics say they are unnecessary for under-18s on short, organised trips with teachers. They argue the slump will deprive UK host families, hostels and attractions of valuable income, and also inflict longer-term damage since school trips can prove formative experiences, promoting intercultural exchange and forging greater mutual understanding. Eurovoyages, a big French school trips operator, said that as of last month it had received 53 requests for short-stay visits to Ireland next year, as well as others for the Netherlands, Poland, Germany, Austria and the Czech Republic. “We have received precisely two requests for the UK, one of which has already changed its mind and decided to visit Ireland,” said Monique Tissot Martel, the company’s general manager. “Schools have forgotten the UK was a destination.” Tissot Martel said that French schools wanting an English-speaking environment were even considering going to Normandy, where British host families and youth hostels with native speakers were offering immersive English stays. “It is really a shame, as trips to the UK were very popular,” she said. “In 2019 we sent more than 11,000 students to the UK. Next year it will be between zero and 100.” Peter Adam said his company, CTS Reisen in Lemgo, Germany, had sent more than 1,200 school groups and 37,000 pupils to the UK in 2019 but had had no firm bookings for 2022. About 80% of the company’s customers that regularly booked trips to the UK were choosing alternative destinations, he said. “The majority see the UK as too difficult now,” Adam said. Covid-19 restrictions were not the problem, he added, “even if they are tougher in the UK than in other European countries”, and parents were “often prepared to pay the extra cost of obtaining a full passport instead of an EU identity card”. The biggest issue was “the EU ‘list of travellers’ group passport, which is no longer valid for travelling to the UK”, he said. “About 4% of all pupils in Germany are not EU nationals. They can’t afford a visa. Teachers don’t like to leave them at home so are choosing other destinations”, such as Amsterdam or Copenhagen, he said. In the UK, Susan Jones of LinguaStay, a UK homestay accommodation provider that usually welcomes 10,000 continental schoolchildren a year into about 300 host families in Chester, said the slump was “absolutely dramatic”. Continental schools typically sent about a million pupils to the UK each year on organised trips, Jones said, with France and Germany alone accounting for 850,000. But for the February to June season, it was now clear that schools across the continent had “completely abandoned the UK for other countries”, she said. “These children learn English staying in host families,” she said. “They mix with the local community, take part in workshops such as drama and cookery, have integration days at local schools and guided tours of cities and tourist attractions. They travel off peak, which helps many smaller UK towns and businesses outside peak season.” Verdié Voyages, a French company that in 2019 sent 800 coachloads of schoolchildren to England, said it had received just 146 inquiries for UK trips next year, a fall of 80%. By contrast, inquiries for trips to Ireland were down only 40%. “Requests are down for all destinations because of Covid,” said Marie Bayol, the company’s accommodation manager. The slump in interest for the UK “is due to Brexit, a second impact that makes our main destination almost unsaleable”, she said. Edward Hisbergues of PG Trips, a French operator specialising in English-speaking countries, said that besides the passport and visa issue, business to the UK had fallen more sharply than elsewhere because of Britain’s day two test requirement. His company normally books 80% of school trips to the UK and 20% to Ireland. “For next year it is more like 10% of requests for the UK and everything else is focused on Ireland, even though it is more expensive,” he said. “You only need an EU identity card to travel there, for non-EU students the ‘list of travellers’ is still accepted, and as far as Covid is concerned the EU health pass is sufficient. People much prefer to pay a little more but not have all the UK constraints.” Jones said the sector was pushing for EU nationals coming to the UK on organised short school trips to be allowed to enter with an ID card, and for non-EU nationals travelling with them to enter with just a passport. “It just seems such a small gesture compared to the benefits,” she said. “Not just the economic benefit, but the soft power.” Morag Anderson of ETSUK, another British homestay company, said the government’s stance was shortsighted. “Give me a child at 12 years old on a school trip to the UK,” Anderson said, “and I give you a future higher education student, employee, researcher, entrepreneur, tourist – with family and friends … And a future parent, encouraging a future child to travel, work and study in the UK. Once this cycle is interrupted, there is no going back.”New restrictions to control the spread of Omicron are coming in across large parts of the UK after Christmas, though Boris Johnson has yet to decide if he will impose fresh curbs in England. In Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland, here are the rules that will apply. Wales – from 26 December From Boxing Day, a maximum of six people are allowed to meet in pubs, cinemas and restaurants in Wales. A total of 30 people are allowed at indoor events while 50 people will be permitted at outdoor events. Two-metre social distancing is required in public premises and offices, and nightclubs will close. The rules come into force from 6am. Scotland – from 26-27 December Restrictions begin on Boxing Day in Scotland, where indoor events are limited to 100 people standing or 200 people sitting, and outdoor events are capped at 500 people. One-metre social distancing will be enforced. From 27 December, there will be additional rules on household mixing. Groups must be limited to three households. There will also be social distancing of 1 metre enforced in hospitality venues such as pubs and restaurants, as well as theatres, cinemas and gyms. Table service will be required in venues that serve alcohol. Northern Ireland – from 26-27 December Nightclubs have been closed and indoor standing events are banned. Further restrictions come in from 27 December, when table service will be mandatory in pubs, cafes and restaurants. A maximum of six people will be permitted to be seated together in hospitality settings. More than six will be permitted if they all belong to a single household, as long as it is not more than 10. People are strongly advised to limit the number of contacts and to gather in groups of no more than three households. England Ministers are expected to meet to discuss further restrictions on Monday – though there is no guarantee rules will change. Government sources have said they expect schools to remain open. The government has been given modelling by Sage scientists which look at the effects of returning to stage 2 restrictions – which include the closure of indoor hospitality but allow pubs and restaurants to serve outdoors, as well as a ban on indoor mixing in homes and a return to the rule of six outdoors. The models have examined imposing the measures for two weeks, four weeks and three months.If Christmas is often synonymous with hours spent indoors, the lure of the sofa and endless screentime, our second festive season spent under the shadow of Covid is presumably taking those things to their extremes. The world has shrunk: our lives are full of cautious friends and relatives, cancelled trips and the imperative to stay where we are. The cold and dark complete the picture. Once again, this threatens to be a season of seclusion. To temporarily escape, millions of us will be going for walks – that inbuilt part of many people’s Christmases, which also chimes with how many of us have coped with the past two years. According to Sport England, between January and March this year, against the backdrop of another full national lockdown, 24.7 million people said they had recently engaged in “walking for leisure”, an increase of 5.2 million people compared with 12 months before. In September, the Department for Transport published research showing that in 2020 people in England walked an average of 220 miles (the highest figure since records began nearly 20 years ago) and that the number of walks of a mile or more had jumped by 26% in a single year. The Ramblers, the UK charity and membership organisation that does a huge amount of work around walking and access to open spaces, says that in the second half of 2020 it recruited 30% more new members than it had done a year earlier. These are all fascinating numbers: proof, perhaps, that when our leisure options are suddenly shut down, a lot of us instinctively seek solace in one of the most primal pastimes there is. At which point, an admission. I walk, I am well aware of being fortunate enough to be able to do so, and I cannot imagine life without it. The habit has roots in my childhood; when I lived in London in my 20s and 30s, I eventually became a fairly committed urban walker. But it was not until I moved out of the city and became a parent that walking grew into a gloriously restorative weekly ritual. With my two kids – who, I know, will sooner or later decide to leave me to it – I spend most Sunday mornings rambling around where we live in Somerset. Given more time, we have also visited plenty of other places: Dartmoor, the Brecon Beacons, the South Downs that run parallel to the coast between Winchester and Eastbourne. But over the past two years, as Covid restrictions have kept us at home, our wellbeing has been bound up with the modest pleasures of exploring our immediate surroundings, and discovering things that were just outside the front door: ancient burial mounds, abandoned canals, the fascinating geography of the old Somerset coalfield. Rural walking is a habit I acquired from my dad, who was a keen mountaineer and the son of a south Welsh miner. He got the bug from his older brother, back in the days when access to the countryside was an issue brimming with the raw class politics dramatised by the mass trespass of 1932 at Kinder Scout in the Peak District – the amazing act of organised civil disobedience that led to the creation of the UK’s national parks, among other advances. The roots of rambling in this kind of activism – not to mention thousands of working-class lives – rather belie its latter-day reputation for being a thoroughly bourgeois pastime, and these radical undercurrents have never really gone away. In the everyday activities of local footpath preservation societies and local Ramblers branches, there is a constant echo of what brought the Kinder trespassers together, and how far there is still to go. After all, there is one unfinished story at the heart of modern walking: the so-called right to roam, and the contrast between its dire limitations in England and Wales and the way that Scotland has been opened up, a change that still meets plenty of obstruction. Five years ago, one beautifully symbolic story centred on the Aberdeenshire “golf resort” owned by Donald Trump. Freedom of information requests made by the investigative website the Ferret unearthed police documents relating to the Trump organisation’s attitude to public access: “Their belief is that the land is private and that they will be able to restrict access unconditionally,” one said. “This is obviously not the case and this is a potential area of conflict that will need to be managed diplomatically.” Almost by definition, walking any distance highlights the fundamentals of our relationship with our environment: small wonder, then, that something as seemingly innocent as a love of being outside and moving around still creates flashpoints. Walking is also the focus of a growing story about the politics of diversity, and what still needs to happen to make it a genuinely popular pursuit. Just before Christmas, I had a half-hour conversation with Cherelle Harding, a youth worker who lives in Coventry and has recently founded an organisation called Steppers UK, which aims to help “black, Asian and ethnic minority communities to build positive relationships with the outdoors”. For some years, she told me, she was a smitten rural walker, but she reached a point where “I was a bit annoyed that I didn’t see more black people out hiking”. She talked about “systemic and generational barriers” – among them the absence from images of the great outdoors of black and brown people, and the fact that her parents and grandparents’ generation “had come to a very hostile country – going to places like the countryside just isn’t something they would have done”. Her first taste of organised walking came via the inspirational group Black Girls Hike, founded in Manchester in 2019, and Steppers is about a similar ethos, made all the more vivid by people’s experience of the Covid crisis. “This has been a time when a lot of us have faced trauma, particularly people from black communities,” she said. “And what we’re doing is about joy.” Here, perhaps, is the beautifully simple key to why walking – in both rural and urban surroundings – connects with something very deep within the people who do it. As the writer and devout walker Iain Sinclair said, moving around on foot entails “opening up your system to the world, making the skin porous, [and] letting all the impressions pour through.” We all know what gets in the way: prejudice, traffic, locked gates, signs painted with the dread words “private – keep out”. I think also of those stories smattered through the past two years of overzealous police officers stopping people whose walking represented no threat to public health, and one of the few means of staying connected to a world beyond their four walls. Fresh air, inbuilt social distancing, and the modest wonders of getting from one point to the next: as an alternative to gloom and seclusion, who would argue with that? John Harris is a Guardian columnistWhen you read about all the stories around small businesses in 2021 a few general themes quickly appear. Inflation. Supply chain. Labor shortages. Covid. All true. All relevant. All important. But all these stories are relatively short term. Inflation will, someday, be under control again. Shipping will catch up. Labor will come and go. Covid will always be around but we’ll just live with it. The reality is that there was just one story about small businesses in 2021 that’s really going to have a long-term impact. It has received much less attention and yet it will be transformational. The small business story this year is about blockchain. Because in 2021, blockchain emerged as the next big thing for entrepreneurs. It’s real and it’s happening. And smart entrepreneurs know this. Richerd, for example, knows this. According to his story in CNET, Richerd is an “affable” Canadian software developer who started building cryptocurrency software in 2013 and ultimately moved into buying and selling NFT (non-fungible token) art online. Richerd bought CryptoPunk #6046 – a digital art piece – in March for about $86,000 and the next day – he says – was offered more than $9.5m to take it off his hands. Given what I know about the digital art marketplace, this story is not unbelievable. And if you can believe it, he actually rejected the offer, calling his art “priceless” and saying it wasn’t for sale no matter what the price. OK, so maybe Richerd isn’t the smartest blockchain entrepreneur around. Or maybe he is and will ultimately sell CryptoPunk #6046 for a billion. Regardless, he can certainly spot value. And he’s not alone. Quietly, a growing wave of new entrepreneurs – and big brands – are jumping into the blockchain world in what is fast becoming the next great American Gold Rush. Except that all the gold is virtual …and unlike the 1870s it actually exists and there’s plenty to go around. For those not keeping up on the tech, here’s a quick recap. Blockchain is like an unbreakable, infinite, digital accounting ledger. It’s part of a secure, dispersed database that’s shared by many computers on a distributed network (many call this Web3, the next iteration of the internet) and stores its information in such a way that guarantees the security and individuality of each record of data. Because of blockchain, cryptocurrencies such as bitcoin and Ether (and many others) can exist. NFTs are unique, inimitable and non-interchangeable units of data stored on a blockchain and can be associated with photos, videos, audio and other forms of art which then makes those assets uniquely and permanently identified. So just as there’s only one original Mona Lisa, by attaching an NFT to a digital drawing you can also make it one-of-a-kind. This means that if you create your own piece of digital art or any other similar product on the blockchain, like the products sold by online companies such as the Bored Ape Yacht Club or through markets such as OpenSea, you can create your own business. Many smart entrepreneurs are realizing this. And cashing in. And attracting cash. Which is why the cryptocurrency market is now worth more than $3tn and in 2021 venture capital firms have poured about $30bn into this universe, according to a recent Bloomberg report, which is more than all the previous years combined and quadruple the previous high mark hit in 2018. It’s why payment companies like PayPal, Block (formerly Square) and Coinbase are allowing their users to easily transfer digital currency like dollars and euros. It’s why the Staples Center in Los Angeles is now called Crypto.com Arena. It’s why big brands like Nike are buying digital art companies like RTFKT. All this buying and selling is driving the need for new technologies and platforms in the digital world, and marketplaces like OpenSea, Nifty Gateway, SingularityNET, Syscoin, Dapp and bitFlyer are small businesses profiting by creating new entrepreneurs and artists eager to serve these hungry customers. And looming in the background is the soon-to-be overwhelming Metaverse, a virtual world of future interactions and digital transactions so great that the world’s largest social media platform changed its corporate brand to prepare for it. Sure, the media will remember 2021 as the year of inflation, supply chain, labor unrest and Covid. But those types of challenges have been around forever and will always come and go. The real story this year is the explosion of a digital world of transactions that will, over the next few years, spawn a new economy of entrepreneurs and create trillions in wealth.January can feel like the longest month: a full 31-dayer to begin with, of course, but also inordinately stretched by its sense of constant renewal. New resolutions to be kept, new standards to be met, new taxes to be filed – and that’s before we factor in Omicron, which looks set to make it an especially testing start to the year. All in all, it’s a good time to investigate new ways to entertain ourselves and nourish our minds. Cue the 31-day short film diet, a sequel to last January’s much-loved literary diet. This one-a-day starter pack – to form a different, more pleasurable kind of new year habit – is aimed at enriching our lives, not depriving it of small joys. Most of us don’t think of ourselves as regular watchers of short films per se, though we can be without realising it: what is a YouTube cat video, after all, if not a short film of some description? We’ve kept to a broad remit in defining short films for this collection. Some are cinematic by design, others made by and for mobile phones. There are works by big-name film-makers such as David Lynch and Lynne Ramsay, while viral stars such as Mufasa feature alongside musical headliners including Beyoncé and Thom Yorke. High contrast is the goal: if you feel disoriented transitioning from an animated Nazi-hunter thriller one day to an ebullient viral dance video the next, all the better to keep you on your toes. What the shorts do have in common, we hope, is a certain spirit-lifting sensibility. They’re not all necessarily feelgood or inspirational in the conventional sense (though some, like the Netflix triumph-over-adversity doc Zion, certainly meet that brief), but they all offer a stimulating dose of beauty, invention, expansive thinking or occasional concentrated joy. We’ve tried to stick to free content – though some require a Netflix subscription or trial, or a free sign-up to Vimeo – and to steer away from outright downers, but themes of loss, prejudice and the climate are woven through in unexpected ways. Happy watching, and happy new year. 1 January The Man Without a Head (Juan Solanas, 18 mins) So, it’s New Year’s Day, you might be feeling a tad delicate, and what you need is a soothing bit of beautiful whimsy to ease into 2022. Argentine director Juan Solanas’s unexpectedly tender, retro-futuristic mini-romance is just the ticket, despite its seemingly morbid premise of a headless man seeking love and self-completion. Turns out the head isn’t everything. 2 January Taking Stock (Duncan Cowles, 4 mins) At a loose end professionally, an aspiring documentary film-maker resolves to make an easy buck by shooting stock footage – while drolly talking us through his fraying state of mind. A witty dedication to any creatives and freelancers who aren’t where they want to be in life, and resonant to everyone experiencing the “what am I doing?” January blues. 3 January Anima (Paul Thomas Anderson, 15 mins) Paul Thomas Anderson, whose new film, Licorice Pizza, hits cinemas in January, has long dabbled in music-video directing, making striking clips for the likes of Fiona Apple and Haim. But this Netflix-produced collaboration with Thom Yorke is his most polished and haunting effort in the medium, an overnight Prague dream odyssey from Orwellian dystopia to gentle human contact. 4 January The Cat Piano (Eddie White and Ari Gibson, 9 mins) TS Eliot died on this day in 1965, and while this beguiling Australian animation isn’t a direct tribute to him, one suspects the poet of Old Possum’s Book of Practical Cats would have been charmed by this verse-based, Nick Cave-narrated imagining of the decadent, jazz-hip nightlife of our feline friends. If these guys had made Cats, it might have all worked out. 5 January The Kármán Line (Oscar Sharp, 25 mins) This Bafta-nominated short finds an initially absurd but strangely moving metaphor for the gradual wrench of terminal disease, as Olivia Colman’s middle-class housewife is struck with a rare condition that causes her to lift off the ground at an ever-increasing, irreversible rate. But that’s not the only uplift infusing proceedings: there’s beauty amid the devastation. 6 January The Driver Is Red (Randall Christopher, 15 mins) Animation doesn’t seem like the obvious medium for a documentary short about the 1960 capture of on-the-run Nazi war criminal Adolf Eichmann, but with its sharp, austere ink-sketch aesthetic, this gripping mini-thriller proves otherwise. The visuals convey a suitable sense of subterfuge, but also the fragility of history, vulnerable to fading and being redrawn. 7 January Mufasa’s Friday Dance (Mufasa and Hypeman, 1 min) Like it or not, social media dance videos have become their own generational art form, amplified by TikTok during the pandemic – though many of them are now so polished and rehearsed that they lose their sense of fun. Scruffily shot, this early viral example explodes with manic, elated energy, inviting chronic repeat viewing. Your weekend starts here. 8 January Brown Skin Girl (Beyoncé and Jenn Nkiru, 6 mins) Beyoncé upended the form of the music video with her recent series of visual albums, merging art, activism and the simple pleasures of a good bop. Exquisitely conceived by the singer herself and British artist Nkiru, this celebratory 2020 ode to the power and pride in black and brown skin is the most joyful thing she’s made in ages. 9 January Migrants (Hugo Caby, Zoé Devise, Antoine Dupriez, Aubin Kubiak and Lucas Lermytte, 8 mins) If your environmentally minded New Year resolutions are already slipping a week into 2022, let this adorable but sneakily gut-wrenching animation renew your resolve. Its story of two polar bears left homeless by global heating, washing up on a verdant but hostile island, is unabashedly manipulative but effective – and a gentle way to explain the issues at hand to young ones. 10 January Fish Story (Charlie Shackleton, 14 mins) In collaboration with journalist Caspar Salmon, documentary-maker Shackleton unfolds an oft-shared family tale that seems too quirky to be true, as Salmon recalls his grandmother attending a 1980s gathering for fishy-surnamed folk on the Welsh island of Anglesey. What ensues is a mischievous, wickedly funny study of how personal memory and myth are formed and blurred. 11 January Zion (Floyd Russ, 12 mins) Born without legs and thrust into the foster system, where his upbringing was unstable and abusive, Zion Clark finally found his calling in high-school wrestling, rising through the ranks and pursuing Olympic dreams. With rich Netflix production values, this short documentary portrait of him wrings every ounce of inspirational joy from his story, and you can’t remain unmoved. 12 January Latifah and Himli’s Nomadic Uncle (Alnoor Dewshi, 15 mins) The BFI player is a rich source of free British shorts and archival curios, and this winning, subtly acerbic 1992 short is one of its treasures – rather ahead of its time in its good-humoured discussion of cultural appropriation and diasporic living, via the walking-and-talking of two British-Indian cousins through a timeworn tangle of London streets. 13 January The Water Diary (Jane Campion, 17 mins) With veteran New Zealand film-maker Jane Campion currently riding a fresh wave of critical acclaim for the Oscar-tipped The Power of the Dog, it’s a good time to revisit this lyrical short from 2006 – starring her own daughter Alice Englert. A child’s-eye perspective on living through drought, it blends a pertinent message of environmental sustainability with a poetic wisp of magical realism. 14 January Blue (Apichatpong Weerasethakul, 13 mins) The Thai auteur specialises in measured, meditative experimental cinema that envelops you in a hazy daze. That’s true of his latest feature, the Tilda Swinton-starring Memoria, out in cinemas on 14 January – and of this short, entrancing art piece, in which a woman’s insomnia leaves her in a limbo state, licked but not burned by spreading flames. 15 January Solemates (Bryce Dallas Howard, 1 min) Bryce Dallas Howard shows her father Ron’s aptitude for plainly effective, unapologetically sentimental heartstring-pulling in this one-minute weepie from 2015. It sweetly plays out a life cycle of courtship, marriage and family purely through the shoes – a battered pair of Converse, and some chic two-tone derbies, both bearing their own personalities – worn by two lovers. 16 January Love Connection (Hendrik Harms, 1 min) There’s more to TikTok than dance videos and memes: budding film-makers are using it as a means of demonstrating their storytelling abilities on a shoestring. This breezy, sweetly silly take on the strains of lockdown dating – complete with screen freezes and collisions – won a one-minute short competition held by the Raindance film festival. Bigger things may lie ahead. 17 January America (Garrett Bradley, 29 mins) As America marks Martin Luther King day, it feels an apt moment to savour this extraordinary reevaluation of African-American cinema and images from the Oscar-nominated director. Made before Bradley’s breakout feature Time, but only recently made viewable online, it traces a powerful, illuminating arc from rediscovered black silent cinema to present-day representation. 18 January Scenes from a Marriage (Chris Ware, 4 mins) Cartoonist Ware made this droll short for the radio show This American Life in 2009, and there’s more to it than meets the eye. Ostensibly a minor anecdote about a New York street encounter (or not), told in crucially different ways by a husband and wife, it swiftly grows into a perceptive, gendered reflection on unreliable storytelling and memory. 19 January Agnes Martin: Beauty Is in Your Mind (Lindsey Dryden, 8 mins) Part of the TateShots short film series, this affectionate, illuminating primer on the life and work of the late American abstract painter Agnes Martin is guided by the perspectives of curator Frances Morris and art dealer Arne Glimcher. “Her painting is the key to the art within you,” says Glimcher: this short reminds us that looking can be a creative act in itself. 20 January What Did Jack Do? (David Lynch, 17 mins) It’s American weirdmeister Lynch’s birthday. If you don’t have time to celebrate by watching your favourite feature of his, this perfectly bizarre short, which has been quietly sitting on Netflix for several years now, will do nicely. Behind a gauze of cigarette smoke, Lynch himself takes the lead in this one, as a detective interrogating a capuchin monkey accused of murder. Of course. 21 January Ten Meter Tower (Axel Danielson and Maximilien van Aertryck, 16 mins) The concept for this lauded Swedish short is disarmingly simple and relateably human: fix a camera on a 10-metre diving platform at an indoor pool, and watch the reactions of various would-be divers as they contemplate the jump. Some baulk, some wait, some go for it in glorious slow-motion, and the film pulses with their anxiety and adrenaline. 22 January A New York Mystery (Samantha Hartsoe, 4 mins) Back to TikTok, the ultra-short form of which can also be serialised in compelling ways – as with this viral four-part series of videos in which a young woman uncovers a decidedly unsettling portal in her apartment. Shot and narrated with a tongue-in-cheek hint of Blair Witch Project creepiness, it’s surely bound to inspire a longer horror film one of these days. Part 1 /Part 2/ Part 3/ Part 4 23 January Ticky Tacky (Brian Petsos, 15 mins) Between Dune, The Card Counter and TV’s Scenes from a Marriage, the internet reached peak Oscar Isaac thirst in 2021, and if you’re still not satisfied, this mordant revenge comedy from 2014 is a tart chaser. Staged in a heightened manner in a single room, its story of a wealthy man uncovering various intimate betrayals is minor: Isaac’s louche star quality is the draw here. 24 January Anagnorisis (Wim Wenders, 4 mins) I was unfamiliar with the work of Israeli-born singer-songwriter Asaf Avidan until last year, but a music video directed by the veteran German film-maker is one way to get my attention. Exactingly staged and composed, the video recalls Wenders’s documentary Pina as a modern dance piece interacting with urban architecture, mesmerisingly performed by American dancer Bobbi Jene Smith. 25 January Swimmer (Lynne Ramsay, 17 mins) It’s Burns Night tonight, and while we could have chosen something explicitly Burns-themed, we’ve opted for a looser interpretation of Scots poetry in motion, courtesy of their greatest working film-maker. Commissioned in 2012 by the London Olympics and ravishingly shot in black and white, it’s a hypnotic, Bafta-awarded odyssey, tracing a lone wild swimmer through Britain’s waterways. 26 January A Single Life (Job Roggeveen, Joris Oprins, Marieke Blaauw, 3 minutes) This Dutch animation collective nabbed an Oscar nomination for this ingeniously conceived, darkly hilarious stop-motion short, which squeezes a woman’s entire life and a time-travel conceit worthy of Christopher Nolan into three fat-free minutes. Its chronology is dictated by the skips and blips of a single record on a faulty turntable – just don’t let it reach the end. 27 January Love (James Gallagher, 11 minutes) A talented young tennis player is weighed down by pressure from his demanding father: the premise of Gallagher’s pristinely shot short promises a standard-issue sports drama. Yet the film’s dreamy tone and impressionistic structure defy expectations, and the film emerges as a moving essay on toxic masculinity and how to defeat it. 28 January In the Kitchen With Pedro Almodóvar (Luis Azevedo, 7 mins) The video essay has become a lively, expansive alternative form of film criticism, and Portuguese critic and film-maker Azevedo is one of its foremost practitioners. This valentine to the recurring role of the kitsch kitchen in Pedro Almodóvar’s cinema is a delight, and apt viewing with the Spanish auteur’s latest (and kitchen-tastic) melodrama, Parallel Mothers, in cinemas on 28 January. 29 January Date Night (Reggie Yates, 6 mins) Yates’s recent debut feature, Pirates, was a lively, irreverent surprise, though his short film work shows where his snappy brand of comedy came from. In this one, three contrasting Londoners vent about their various reservations about dating and relationships, from commitment phobia to wasted bikini waxes. It boasts a sharp, funny turn from Daniel Kaluuya to boot. 30 January Flight (Jonathan Glazer, 1 min) We couldn’t complete this diet without one example of the most prevalent form of short film-making in our lives – the humble TV ad. Admittedly, any ad by the elusive Brit Glazer (set to release his first feature in a decade this year) is a step up from car insurance meerkats: this simple, gravity-free Apple Watch promo is a brief blast of cold fresh air. 31 January Nian (Lulu Wang, 12 mins) There’s something pleasing about ending a month that began with New Year’s Day with New Year’s Eve – Chinese New Year’s Eve, that is. Whether or not you celebrate, this Apple-backed, holiday-themed short from Chinese-American director Lulu Wang (The Farewell) will leave you feeling warm and fuzzy, as it reimagines a new year folk legend in a youthful modern-day context.1. Saving grasslands The names running glade clover, cream tick-trefoil and Porter’s goldenrod may evoke the riotous colours of a summer meadow in bloom, but these particular plants are also quietly tucked away in a conservation seed bank that it is hoped will ensure the future of North America’s grassland plant populations. Changes in land and sea use is the key driver of biodiversity loss in the world – and grassland loss is “the single greatest conservation issue currently facing eastern North American biodiversity”, according to the Southeastern Grasslands Initiative (SGI) at the Center of Excellence for Field Biology, Austin Peay State University, which is working to conserve and restore this crucial ecosystem. Last year it launched a conservation seed bank (CSB) to preserve vulnerable populations of rare and declining grassland species. Cooper Breeden, the SGI’s plant conservation manager, says: “One of the reasons we decided to pursue the CSB was because the loss of our rare plant populations is outpacing efforts to conserve them in many cases, though not for lack of effort. There is simply not enough funding and capacity for conservation. “We sought to fill the gap by endeavouring to collect the rare and declining grassland species of the south-east, especially targeting those populations that are particularly vulnerable and currently not receiving much conservation attention.” Since August 2020, the team has squirrelled away more than 35,000 seeds in 66 collections of 29 species. But SGI’s work does not stop at banking seeds. “Ideally, we try to conserve populations where they occur,” says Breeden. “The ultimate goal of these collections is to support the survival of populations in the wild.” The next stage is an interactive map that will allow users to see which species are in the seed bank and where they came from. “The goal in making some of our collection data easily accessible to the public is that it could serve as a resource for our partners involved in grasslands conservation in the region,” he says. “As the capacity of our conservation community grows, there will be increasing opportunities to put these seeds back in the ground.” 2. Recycling wastewater Sixty billion tonnes of renewable and non-renewable resources are extracted globally each year, which makes the direct exploitation of resources, alongside the exploitation of organisms, the second biggest driver of biodiversity loss. When it comes to water, consumption has been increasing worldwide by about 1% a year since the 1980s, and global water demand is expected to continue increasing at a similar rate until 2050, according to the UN World Water Development Report 2019. Desalination plants have been the focus of attention, but as cities and towns from California to Sydney battle drought and water shortages they are turning to the likes of Israel and Singapore for guidance on how to recycle wastewater. Globally, 80% of wastewater currently flows back into the ecosystem without being treated or reused. Over decades, Israel has invested heavily in the treatment of wastewater, alongside desalination plants, recycling nearly 90% through sewage treatment facilities, which redirect the treated water to irrigation. The sludge byproduct is used as fertiliser and to generate biogas. In Singapore, five NEWater plants meet up to 40% of the country’s water needs by recycling, according to the national water agency. By 2060, NEWater is expected to meet up to 55% of demand. Its 48km-long deep tunnel sewerage system (DTSS), a used water superhighway, carries used water to reclamation plants to be treated and purified into reclaimed water, or discharged into the sea. When a second phase of the project, currently under way, is completed, pumping stations and conventional water reclamation plants will be phased out, freeing up land. 3. Protecting peatlands They neither sound glamorous nor hog the limelight, but bogs and peatlands hold one of the keys to combatting the climate crisis. While peatlands cover only 3% of the global land surface, they store nearly 550bn tonnes of carbon – twice as much as in all the world’s forests. About 10% of the UK is covered in peatland. However, much of this is degraded, and estimates suggest that UK peatlands could be emitting the equivalent of 23m tonnes of carbon dioxide a year. Restoring degraded peatlands could stop these emissions and create biodiversity benefits for wildlife, including plants, birds and insects. The Great North Bog – which includes four national parks, three areas of outstanding natural beauty, and the proposed South Pennines Park – represents about 92% of the upland peat in England and is one of the main UK restoration projects. The project, led by the North Pennines AONB Partnership, the Yorkshire Peat Partnership and the Moors for the Future Partnership, is aiming to restore nearly 7,000 sq km of upland peat, which store 400m tonnes of carbon. Damaged peat in the Great North Bog currently releases an estimated 4.4m tonnes of carbon annually but project organisers hope that “by joining up some of the most successful peatland restoration organisations in Europe we can bring about a massive and urgent step change in saving the majority of England’s upland peatlands before it is too late”. 4. Tackling plastic pollution Scientists have predicted that in the next 20 years the amount of plastic waste in the oceans is likely to nearly triple in volume, from an estimated 8m tonnes a year today to 29m tonnes by 2040. There is no single solution to the plastic crisis, but scientists, inventors and volunteers across the globe are looking at myriad ways to overcome it. A team at the Nicholas Institute for Environmental Policy Solutions at Duke University in the US is trying to gather all this information in a “plastic pollution prevention and collection technology inventory”. Among the 52 technologies included so far are the Great Bubble Barrier, where “tubes placed diagonally across the bottom of the waterway create a bubble barrier by pumping air, creating a current that brings debris to the surface and guides it to a catchment system”; the Holy Turtle, a 1,000ft floating unit which is towed by two marine vessels and captures floating waste; and Stow it, don’t throw it, a youth-driven initiative that recycles tennis ball containers into fishing line recycling bins for anglers. Zoie Diana, a PhD candidate in the marine science and conservation department at Duke University and one of the team behind the inventory, says they are aiming to add more than 40 new technologies by early next year. “We hope that our study and inventory serve as a tool to prevent plastic from entering waterways and collect existing pollution, complementing ongoing efforts to reduce the generation of plastic pollution further upstream in its life cycle.” 5. Dealing with invasive species At least 107 highly threatened birds, mammals and reptiles are estimated to have benefited from invasive mammal eradication on islands, according to a study published in 2016. “Although still few and spatially localised, such cases show that with prompt and appropriate action, it is possible to reduce human-induced extinction rates,” the Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES)’s global assessment noted. New Zealand is at the forefront of this action and has committed to eradicating stoats, possums and rats by the middle of the century under its Predator Free 2050 plan, using a mixture of trapping, hunting, poison and technology. But it is also trialling other projects. A purpose-built predator exclusion fence has been erected to protect 6,000 sq metres of prime habitat for the endangered robust grasshopper, thought to be the world’s first fenced habitat designed for an insect. The aim of New Zealand’s Predator Free 2050 is to “return the voices of the insects, bats, reptiles and birds back to the forests, farmland, towns, cities and coasts”. Currently, 74% of the country’s native terrestrial birds, 84% of its native reptile species and 46% of vascular plant species are threatened with extinction, or at risk of becoming threatened, according to the Department of Conservation. But in the five years since Predator Free 2050 was launched, the numbers of birds such as kea, kākā, kākāriki, the Antipodes snipe and the Tūī have all increased, according to a five-year progress report. Find more age of extinction coverage here, and follow biodiversity reporters Phoebe Weston and Patrick Greenfield on Twitter for all the latest news and featuresA large Roman fort believed to have played a key role in the successful invasion of Britain in AD43 has been discovered on the Dutch coast. A Roman legion of “several thousand” battle-ready soldiers was stationed in Velsen, 20 miles from Amsterdam, on the banks of the Oer-IJ, a northern branch of the Rhine, research suggests. Dr Arjen Bosman, the archaeologist behind the findings, said the evidence pointed to Velsen, or Flevum in Latin, having been the empire’s most northernly castra (fortress) built to keep a Germanic tribe, known as the Chauci, at bay as the invading Roman forces prepared to cross from Boulogne in France to England’s southern beaches. The fortified camp appears to have been established by Emperor Caligula (AD12 to AD41) in preparation for his failed attempt to take Britannia in about AD40, but was then successfully developed and exploited by his successor, Claudius, for his own invasion in AD43. Bosman said: “We know for sure Caligula was in the Netherlands as there are markings on wooden wine barrels with the initials of the emperor burnt in, suggesting that these came from the imperial court. “What Caligula came to do were the preparations for invading England – to have the same kind of military achievement as Julius Caesar – but to invade and remain there. He couldn’t finish the job as he was killed in AD41 and Claudius took over where he left off in AD43. “We have found wooden planks underneath the watchtower, or the gate of the fort, and this is the phase just before the invasion of England. The wooden plank has been dated in the winter of AD42/43. That is a lovely date. I jumped in the air when I heard it.” Claudius’s invading forces, untouched by the Germanic tribes, made their landing in Kent and by the summer of AD43 the emperor was confident enough to travel to Britain, entering Camulodunum (Colchester) in triumph to receive the submission of 12 chieftains. Within three years, the Romans had claimed the whole of “Britannia” as part of their empire. Bosman said: “The main force came from Boulogne and Calais, but the northern flank of that attack had to be covered and it was covered by the fort in Velsen. The Germanic threat comes up in Roman literature several times. “It was an early warning system to the troops in France. It didn’t matter what the Germanic tribes put in the field as there was a legion there.” The first evidence of a Roman fort in Velsen, North Holland, had been uncovered in 1945 by schoolchildren who found shards of pottery in an abandoned German anti-tank trench. Research was undertaken in the 1950s during the building of the Velsertunnel, under the Nordzeekanaal, and archaeological excavations took place in the 1960s and 70s. In 1997, Bosman’s discovery of Roman ditches in three places, and a wall and a gate were thought sufficient evidence for the area to become a state protected archaeological site. But at this stage the Velsen camp, identified as having been used between AD39 and AD47, was thought to have been small. This theory was complemented by the discovery in 1972 of an earlier fort, known as Velsen 1, which is believed to have been in operation from AD15 to AD30. A thoroughgoing excavation of that site found it had been abandoned following the revolt of the Frisians, the Germanic ethnic group indigenous to the coastal regions of the Netherlands. Archaeologists discovered human remains in some former wells, a tactic used by retreating Romans to poison the waters. The existence of the two forts within a few hundred metres of each other had led researchers to believe for decades that they were both likely to have been mere castellum, minor military camps of just one or two hectares. It was only in November, through piecing together features of the later Veslen fort that were noted in the 1960s and 70s, but not recognised at the time as Roman, and taking into account his own archaeological findings over the last quarter of a century, that a new understanding was reached. “It is not one or two hectares like the first fort in Velsen, but at least 11 hectares,” Bosman said. “We always thought it was the same size but that is not true. It was a legionary fortress and that’s something completely different.” Bosman added: “Up to this year I wondered about the number of finds at Velsen 2, a lot of military material, a lot of weapons, long daggers, javelins, far more than we found on Velsen 1. “And we know there was a battle at Velsen 1, and on a battlefield you find weapons. The number of weapons at Velsen 2 can only be explained in a legionary context. Several thousand men were occupying this fort. “At 11 hectares, this would not be a complete fort for a full legion of 5,000 to 6,000 men but we don’t where it ends in the north and so it could have been larger.” The Velsen 2 fort was abandoned in AD47 after Claudius ordered all his troops to retreat behind the Rhine. Roman rule of Britain ended around AD410 as the empire began to collapse in response to internal fighting and the ever-growing threats from Germanic tribes. • This article was amended on 28 December 2021. An earlier version referred to the Oer-IJ as a “tributary” of the Rhine; it was a branch that ran to the North Sea. It also said that within three years of the AD43 invasion, the Romans had claimed the whole “of Britain”; it meant to say “Britannia”, the name for the large parts of present-day Great Britain that the Romans had conquered.Jonny Bairstow stressed “everyone is trying” after England delivered their latest soft batting collapse in an Ashes campaign that is fast unravelling. Boxing Day at the MCG followed a familiar pattern when Joe Root’s tourists, wearing black armbands in memory of Ray Illingworth, were bowled out for 185 thanks in part to a sublime three-wicket morning from Australia’s returning Pat Cummins. Root top-scored with 50 and Bairstow marked his latest recall to the Test side with a battling 35 from 75 balls that tried to overcome a lack of match practice on tour, but both sat among a catalogue of dismissals that made for belated Christmas gifts to the hosts. Trailing 2-0 and yet to pass 300 with the bat on tour, England require a dramatic turnaround of fortunes during the remainder of the third Test if they are to prevent Australia claiming a series win at the earliest opportunity. Speaking after stumps on day one, with Australia 61 for one in reply, Bairstow said: “We’re still searching for that big score but both teams were looking to bowl first on that pitch this morning with the help of the conditions and a tinge of green. “I don’t think that you can complain when it’s obviously individuals going out and playing in the way in which they foresee is best. That’s exactly what it’s about. “Naturally the execution … wasn’t there today. But the amount of times that we’ve seen those shots being executed and going to the boundary is high. “It’s one of those days that … we will look back on and probably reassess next time and potentially take different options.” Arguably the most galling dismissal came when, on the stroke of tea with England already 128 for five, the newly arrived Jos Buttler needlessly tried to take on Nathan Lyon, only to hole out for three. From a senior player, it was quite staggering. “That’s an individual decision,” said Bairstow, when asked about his teammate’s choice. “If that’s the game plan to take the off-spinner down and put the pressure back on, to push the field back, then that’s the gameplan that was taken. “I can tell you now, everyone is trying; different methods, individual training techniques. [But] when you’ve got guys bowling 138-144kph it makes you make decisions quicker. That’s part and parcel of the game. “We’ve got to get a bit stronger and tougher with our dismissals. We know that and we’ve spoken about that. That is just being honest with ourselves.” As well as tightening their grip on the urn, Australia’s latest show of dominance had additional significance when Scott Boland was handed his Baggy Green cap and became just the second Indigenous man after Jason Gillespie to play for their Test side. The 32-year-old Victorian also got off the mark in the wickets column to the delight of his home crowd, Mark Wood trapped lbw for six and failing with a review despite uncertainty over whether the ball had struck pad or bat first. “I’m pretty proud,” said Boland, who also claimed two catches. “Obviously my family’s very proud as well. It means a lot to join a pretty small club and hopefully it’s just the start of something big for the Indigenous community in cricket. “I just hope I can be a role model for young Indigenous kids to want to play cricket. I think the Indigenous community in [Australian rules football] and rugby are so big and hopefully one day Aboriginals in cricket can be just as big.”Christmas 1941 was grim. Japan had attacked Pearl Harbor earlier in the month and its armies were advancing across the Pacific. Hitler’s advance into the Soviet Union had taken the Wehrmacht to the gates of Moscow. Britain had become used to short rations and long nights of the Blitz. Optimism for the year ahead was in short supply. Yet by the end of 1942 the mood had changed. The Germans were bogged down at Stalingrad and being pushed back in North Africa. America, mobilising its full economic power, had turned the tide in the Pacific. The publication of the Beveridge report in December 1942 came at just the right time: when confidence was growing not just that the second world war would be won but that it would be a catalyst for building back better. Like 1941, 2021 has ended on a low note. The Omicron coronavirus variant has proved to be highly transmissible, dampening consumer confidence and prompting governments to reimpose restrictions on economic activity. Living standards – while substantially higher than eight decades ago – are being eroded by rising inflation. Even without tougher official curbs, the next few months are going to be characterised by weak growth, squeezed incomes and higher taxes. Clearly, a return to lockdowns as severe as those of last winter would make matters worse. Things are likely to improve as 2022 wears on. The early evidence is that Omicron poses less of a health threat than the Delta variant and more people will be protected by booster vaccines. That, though, is not really the issue. By the end of 1942, it was obvious not just that the war would eventually be won but that solutions were being found for the problems of the years leading up to the war during the 1930s: mass unemployment, financial crises, a breakdown in international cooperation and entrenched poverty. It would be a stretch to say the same applies now, in part because governments are trying to build back better on the cheap and in part because the rich and powerful at the top of the pile are keen for things to stay pretty much the same as they are. This, as Kevin Gallagher and Richard Kozul-Wright make clear in their book, The Case for a New Bretton Woods (Polity books), is a key difference between today’s world and that of the 1940s. The roots go back some years earlier to the start of the 1930s and Franklin D Roosevelt’s New Deal. They say the plan drawn up by the US president after the Wall Street Crash and the Great Depression was a genuine build back better” programme. As the second world war was approaching its final stages, the construction of a new international economic system at Bretton Woods in 1944 – the conference in New Hampshire that gave birth to the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank – was Washington’s attempt to internationalise the New Deal. Crucially, big finance was noticeable by its absence at Bretton Woods and this was no accident because Wall Street was still on the naughty step after blowing up the economy in the late 1920s. Gallagher and Kozul-Wright note: “The New Deal programme not only abandoned the gold standard, but also broke with the wider liberal international agenda by taking on the financial elite both at home and abroad, and opened the door to an alternative narrative in support of an activist public policy agenda.” The contrast with today is stark. It is barely a decade since the egregious behaviour of poorly regulated banks brought the global economy to the brink of a second Great Depression, yet the wealth, power and influence of capital has barely been touched in the years since. Big finance was not invited to Bretton Woods, but it was crawling all over last month’s Cop26 climate change conference in Glasgow. So what lessons can be learned from the original New Deal that would make build back better more than a soundbite? First, Roosevelt legislated to alter the balance of power between labour and capital. The Wagner Act of 1935 gave employees the right to organise trade unions, while the Glass-Steagall Act of 1933 separated investment from commercial banks. The final quarter of the 20th century saw the opposite: curbs on trade unions, more power for finance. Second, governments on both sides of the Atlantic raised taxes on the rich rather than burden working people with the cost of bringing down the public debt accumulated as a result of the depression and the war. Roosevelt’s Revenue Act of 1935 was steeply progressive and levied a top rate of income tax of 75% on those earning more than $1m a year. The Clement Attlee government in the UK demonstrated its preference for taxing unearned rather than earned income by whacking up estate duty (the forerunner of inheritance tax). As Andrew Percy of University College London’s Institute for Global Prosperity shows in a recent paper, similar choices could be made today. Percy has proposed a single tax system in which income tax and national insurance are merged and in which passive incomes (such as gains from investing in the stock market) are taxed at the same rate as incomes. It would mean a tax cut of over £1,000 a year for a typical factory worker on £24,000 a year, or £10 a week for the typical social care worker on £18,000 a year, he calculates, and 88% of all taxpayers would be paying less. The final piece of the New Deal jigsaw was the system of capital controls that made it harder for the rich to shift their wealth offshore, reduced the risk of financial crises and allowed countries to pursue full employment policies without being blown off course by hot money flows. There are those who say reintroducing curbs on capital are inconceivable in the 21st century. Yet two years ago it was inconceivable that modern democracies would keep their populations under house arrest. If governments can shackle people they can shackle money.A busy, busy year for audio. As in 2020, lockdown gave all audio a boost – in status, as well as listeners. The lack of gigs, theatre, art shows or cinema from January to March meant that audio (radio, podcasts, music) jumped up the cultural ladder. Podcasts were also boosted by yet more celebrities deciding to fill their lonelier hours with a “talking to my famous mates” show. Listeners responded, and podcasts are now the fastest growing audio medium (though live radio still makes up most of what we listen to). 2021 saw some interesting big-name radio appointments. Emma Barnett and Anita Rani joined Woman’s Hour to great success, though the former started contentiously (Kelechi Okafor refused to appear when she overheard Barnett discussing with producers whether Okafor was antisemitic). Amol Rajan moved to Today, where he has brought a more conversational feel (when he remembers to slow down his natural gabble). In late spring, much-loved Radio 1 stalwarts Annie MacManus and Nick Grimshaw both announced their departures, with MacManus’s final link achieving a life of its own on social media (“Life is short. It thunders by. If you like the music, you have got to get up and dance. Just do it”). And 6 Music’s afternoon dafty Shaun Keaveny also left, but sadly not of his own accord: his funky replacement, Craig Charles, is upbeat but less of a natural fit. Graham Norton quit his Radio 2 Saturday morning show to do the same on Saturdays and Sundays for Virgin Radio (no effect on Virgin’s Rajars thus far). On 5 live breakfast, Rick Edwards joined Rachel Burden, replacing Nicky Campbell without fuss or trouble. In March, the BBC announced a gradual but compulsory move to the regions. Much of this Big Shift About meant changes for radio production teams: Newsbeat journalists are off to Birmingham, technology hacks to Glasgow, and more of Radio 3 and 6 Music’s output must come from outside the capital (Charles’s show is based in Salford). Several old-timers, including the brilliant technology correspondent Rory Cellan-Jones, chose to retire rather than move. In commercial radio, niche is still king, with Boom Radio, which launched in February, aiming for the sixtysomethings, and Greatest Hits for the uncool Gen X-ers (the likes of Alex Lester and Mark Goodier were joined by Simon Mayo in March). Times Radio has done well in its first year (around 640,000 weekly listeners), offering a sparky alternative to Radio 4 and 5 live. Outside radio, big corporations are getting serious about our ears. Spotify gave us podcasts from genuine midlife superstars Barack and Bruce (Renegades), the UK’s greatest YouTubers, the Sidemen (The Fellas, What’s Good With Miniminter and Randolph) and the most popular podcaster in the world (Joe Rogan). Its reward was to overtake Apple and BBC Sounds as the most popular podcast platform for younger audiences. Audible, known for audiobooks, has quietly been making some gripping UK podcasts, including investigative shows Finding Q, Death at Deepcut, and inventive dramas such as the Jed Mercurio-exec’d Zoetrope. Wondery, reliable banger-out of US true crime, added some UK shows this year, such as the excellent Harsh Reality. With big corporations comes big money: in June, US-celebrities-interviewing-their-mates show Smartless was bought for a reputed $80m by Amazon Music, which also snapped up Wondery. But amid all these dollar signs, the question is whether there’s enough advertising revenue to support the independent podcast sector. Some excellent shows are finding it harder to secure those all-important mattress/ bush-trimmer/ website design ads, as they’re all being hoovered up by, you guessed it, new celebrity shows. Still, there is no doubt that since lockdown 2020, audio has boomed. Expect even more next year. The top 10 shows/podcasts of 2021 1. Things Fell Apart (Radio 4) Jon Ronson traces the often surprising origin stories of today’s raging culture wars. 2. Welcome to Your Fantasy (Pineapple Street Studios/Gimlet) Brilliant in-depth telling of the true crime story you never knew you wanted: the history of the Chippendales. Host Natalia Petrzela is excellent throughout. 3. Finding Q: My Journey Into QAnon (Audible) Journalist Nicky Woolf shows the wreckage that QAnon leaves in its trail, and gets a face-to-face interview with the man most likely to be Q. 4. Harsh Reality (Wondery) Wondery uses its long-established true crime techniques to examine the life of trans woman Miriam Rivera, and how a UK reality show exploited her and others. 5. Uncanny/The Battersea Poltergeist (Radio 4) Danny Robins’s two brilliant Radio 4 series about the paranormal: The Battersea Poltergeist, a documentary (with drama sections) about the 12-year haunting of an ordinary family; and Uncanny, which examines 10 spooky real-life stories. 6. Coming in from the Cold (TalkSport/Unedited Stories This excellent six-part series traces the history of black players in English football, and includes testimony from Cyrille Regis, John Barnes and Raheem Sterling. 7. Windrush Stories (National Prison Radio) Full-length stories from the Windrush generation and their children, produced and presented by DJ Flight. NPR is nurturing some serious talent (see also Brenda Birungi, winner of best host: speech audio at this year’s Audio Production awards) 8. Comfort Eating (The Guardian) Famous people as varied as Scarlett Moffatt and Bernardine Evaristo discuss their past through the medium of their favourite comfort food with Guardian restaurant critic Grace Dent. 9. We Didn’t Start the Fire (Crowd Network) A witty and fascinating modern history lesson from Katie Puckrik and Tom Fordyce, through the lyrics of Billy Joel’s hit. 10. Sweet Bobby (Tortoise) A mad tale of the immensely complicated catfishing of a bright young UK woman, which starts off brilliantly but – as is often the case with true crime – falls away rapidly once the baddie is revealed. Turkey Any podcast of a celeb interviewing another celeb With a few honourable exceptions, such podcasts are always too cosy to offer anything more than dull anecdotes and mutual stanning. We know you need the attention, famous people, but you can all stop now.Jonathan Taylor was pleased by his first peek at a sparkling new studio apartment that could one day become his home. The 24-year-old from Exeter has been living in YMCA accommodation since he was 19 but, as he viewed freshly painted white walls, the reality of a more settled home dawned. “If I lived in this place I’d feel more important,” he said. “I’d feel I’ve landed on my feet.” Taylor, who juggles cleaning jobs at a builders’ merchant and a pub, is a victim of what many fear is a deepening housing crisis in the Devon cathedral city fuelled by surging house prices, the spread of short-term Airbnb lets and rising social waiting lists. It means the chance to rent a decent, affordable home like the one Taylor is viewing is vanishingly rare. The fact Taylor may soon be given a chance to move in is down to YMCA Exeter, which is converting a former Poundstretcher warehouse into 26 homes for priced-out young people for a £140-a-week rent – well below the market rate. The small attempt at a solution comes as Exeter and many other parts of the UK are facing a new challenge to further complicate the housing crisis: the arrival of metropolitan homebuyers seeking more space and less stress. Pandemic exiles are selling up high-value homes in places such as London and snapping up bigger properties for a fraction of the price. Latest figures show that Londoners bought more than 112,000 homes outside the capital this year, an increase of 62% compared with 2020, according to the estate agent Hamptons. They spent £54.9bn, the highest annual spend on record, reflecting soaring property prices, which have been lifted by the government’s temporary cut to stamp duty. The average price paid by Londoners for properties outside the capital has risen from £450,460 in 2020 to £486,890 in 2021, according to Hamptons estate agents. “It is getting tense,” said Rob Hannaford, leader of the Labour group of Devon county council. “People coming down with big budgets is causing anger and resentment.” Exeter is among several UK areas that have become honeypots for city people who decided during the lockdowns that another life must be possible. House prices are surging too in Richmondshire in North Yorkshire, Pembrokeshire in west Wales, and the Scottish borders. Cities such as Exeter are seeing already threadbare supplies of affordable housing pushed to breaking point. “Local people can’t get anywhere in the system,” said Hannaford. “People from London are coming in and putting in a ridiculous offer over the asking price and getting what they want. These might not be houses that local people could afford, but it does trickle down.” Exeter’s social waiting list grew 47% from 2017 to 2020 to reach about 2,600 households. House prices went up 8.5% in the last year. Meanwhile the population grows, more properties become second homes and private landlords increasingly switch long-term rentals to short-stay Airbnbs. The pressure is such that Hannaford said the council was even concerned about how to find homes for 67 Afghan refugees currently in a hotel after this summer’s evacuation from Kabul. Attracting social workers, teachers and care workers is becoming harder. There is a plan to build 500 council homes but it is playing catch-up. Blaming the arrival of outsiders may not be entirely fair given the affordable housing crisis in Exeter has been brewing for years. Landlords have bought up swathes of stock to rent to students and, in a nationally recurrent theme, there is public opposition to construction on the surrounding green fields. Newcomers resist any suggestion they are causing a problem and some stressed they wanted to become part of the community and contribute with their different skills and experience. “The pandemic and lockdown gave us some unexpectedly clarity,” said Sabrina Russo, who moved from London to Exeter with her family in December 2020. “We realised that a bigger home, time outdoors and a slower pace had become real priorities … Exeter is friendly and welcoming and we’ve started to meet people and make friends. We bought a house that we love.” But, said Laura Wright, the Exeter city councillor in charge of council housing and deputy leader, there was “growing alarm at the prices that some people are willing and able to pay to move here from London”. “As a nation, we have been locked into a way of thinking and acting over the last 20 years which values making the biggest profit possible above collective responsibility for social cohesion and welfare.” The sharpest house price rises in the year to August have been in desirable, more spacious locations outside the major cities where there have also been substantial increases in people waiting for social housing. The list includes Wychavon, Stratford-upon-Avon, County Durham, Cheshire West and Newark and Sherwood in Nottinghamshire. In these places, average house prices rose between 13% and 20% in a year while waiting lists have lengthened over the last three years. “My age group is being pushed out of the city,” said Natalie Overson, a 23-year-old who aspires to be a midwife and has been on Exeter’s social housing waiting list for five years. “A lot of it is people buying second homes, or buying to rent out. It is the middle and upper classes that are making it harder for us to live in the cities we grew up in.” Becky Merriman, 34, a youth worker, has been unable find a rental home in Exeter, which means she has to commute 40 minutes each way and continue to live with her parents. “I’ve been trying since May and it has been quite traumatic,” she said. “We would ring agents as soon as a property went up [online] and they would say the viewings were all gone in 10 minutes. It’s mentally exhausting.” In West Devon, which includes half of Dartmoor, house prices have risen 20% in the last year and 800 households are waiting for social housing. “We as a local authority have got to be building houses,” said Neil Jory, West Devon’s Conservative leader, who added that people moving from London and Bristol was “causing us a great deal of concern”. “There are cases in Devon where teachers have come to the county to work and three months later they have gone back to where they came from because they can’t afford anywhere to live.” • This article was amended on 27 and 28 December 2021. An earlier version said UK house prices had risen in 2021 to an average of £486,890. The figures quoted refer to the average price that Londoners paid for properties outside the capital, which has risen from £450,460 in 2020 to £486,890 in 2021, according to Hamptons estate agents.China has replaced the Communist party official widely associated with a security crackdown targeting ethnic Uyghurs and other Muslims in the far-west region of Xinjiang. The state-owned Xinhua news agency said in a brief announcement on Saturday that Ma Xingrui, the governor of the coastal economic powerhouse Guangdong province since 2017, had replaced Chen Quanguo as the Xinjiang party chief. Chen will move to another role. The change came amid a wider reshuffle ahead of next year’s 20th party congress, scheduled for the autumn. It is not clear whether the move signals a rethink in China’s overall approach to Xinjiang. Beijing would be sensitive to any interpretation that it was bowing to international pressure. Some Chinese observers have noted Chen may be promoted further during the party congress. Others say his replacement, Ma, may focus more on the region’s economic development. Chen, 66, was appointed party secretary of Xinjiang in 2016. He is one of the 25 members of China’s politburo and was placed on a sanctions list last year by the US. On Thursday, Joe Biden signed into law a ban on imports from Xinjiang over Washington’s concerns about forced labour. Beijing condemned the move. Rights groups and the United Nations say about 1 million Uyghurs and other Muslims have been detained in re-education camps in Xinjiang in the name of combating religious extremism and terrorism. Since 2017, Beijing’s policy in the province has faced fierce criticism from abroad. Some western lawmakers and parliamentarians have described China’s treatment of the Uyghurs as genocidal – a charge Beijing denies. There have also been calls for a boycott of the Beijing Winter Olympics in February. Chen’s replacement, 62-year-old Ma, has a background in the aerospace industry. Before becoming governor of Guangdong he served as the party boss in Shenzhen from 2015.The caller who ended a conversation with Joe Biden with the rightwing meme “Let’s go Brandon” – which means “fuck Joe Biden” – has insisted he was joking and meant no disrespect to the president. “At the end of the day I have nothing against Mr Biden,” Jared Schmeck, 35, told the Oregonian newspaper. “But I am frustrated because I think he can be doing a better job. I mean no disrespect to him.” Schmeck, from Central Point, also said he was not a “Trumper” but rather a “free-thinking American and follower of Jesus Christ”. On Christmas Eve, the president and his wife, Dr Jill Biden, took calls to the North American Aerospace Defense Command Santa Tracker, which each year purports to follow the progress of Santa and his reindeer. A traditional duty for American presidents, in 2018 it was nearly upended when Donald Trump told a seven-year-old belief in Santa Claus was “marginal” at that age. Biden and Schmeck discussed presents Schmeck’s four children were hoping to receive, and how one, Hunter, shared a name with the president’s son and grandson. Schmeck said he was hoping for a “quiet night”. Biden sad: “Lots of luck, dad.” All on the call laughed. At the end of the call, Schmeck said: “Merry Christmas and Let’s go Brandon.” “Let’s go Brandon, I agree,” Biden said, as his wife winced. Biden also said: “By the way are you in Oregon? Where’s your home?” But the call was disconnected. “Let’s go Brandon” originated in an interview with a racing car driver by a TV reporter who may have misheard a crowd’s obscene chant. It has flourished in rightwing and pro-Trump circles – even being promoted by Republican congressmen and the Texas senator Ted Cruz. Schmeck and his wife promoted the remark on social media. But they met with a tide of opprobrium, including a tweet in which the California congressman Eric Swalwell pointed to Biden’s painful personal history. “I refuse to believe we are this indecent as people,” the Democrat wrote. “Not on Christmas Eve. And not to a person who lost his wife and daughter at Christmastime. We are better than this. Be kind and Merry Christmas.” Schmeck, a former police officer, told the Oregonian he was “being attacked for utilising my freedom of speech”. He also said he had received some potentially threatening phone calls of his own. “I understand there is a vulgar meaning to ‘Lets go Brandon’ but I’m not that simple-minded, no matter how I feel about him,” Schmeck said. “[Biden] seems likes he’s a cordial guy. There’s no animosity or anything like that. It was merely just an innocent jest to also express my God-given right to express my frustrations in a joking manner.” Schmeck said subjects stoking those frustrations with Biden included vaccine mandates and supply chain problems. He also insisted: “I love him just like I love any other brother or sister.”This live blog is now closing. There is further reading on the life of Archbishop Desmond Tutu below: Church officials are reportedly planning a seven-day commemoration of Tutu, including a lying in state ceremony. According to TimesLIVE, it will also include an ecumenical service and a requiem mass. The Dalai Lama has paid tribute to Desmond Tutu, who he said was fully dedicated to serving others and a “true humanitarian”. Tibet’s spiritual leader said: “The friendship and the spiritual bond between us was something we cherished.” The leaders of the Desmond and Leah Tutu Legacy Foundation said that Tutu was “moral giant” and “a living embodiment of faith in action”. Niclas Kjellström-Matseke, the foundation’s chair, and CEO Piyushi Kotecha, said: “South Africa and the world have lost one of the great spirits and moral giants of our age.” The mayor of Cape Town, Geordin Hill-Lewis, paid tribute to Tutu, saying: “We love you Arch and we will miss you”. He has invited residents to write remembrance messages for Tutu. Mourners gathered outside Tutu’s former parish in Cape Town, St George’s cathedral, and outside his home with flowers, reported AFP. Meanwhile, the South African cricket team wore black armbands to honour Tutu in their first test against India. The British prime minister, Boris Johnson, said he is “deeply saddened” by the death of archbishop Desmond Tutu and that he would be remembered for his leadership and humour. Amnesty International in South Africa described Tutu as a “beacon of light” for human rights globally and “a much needed moral compass” for the country. The Desmond and Leah Tutu Foundation said they are “devastated” by archbishop’s death, but say it has ‘strengthened our resolve to spread his warmth and compassion’. Bernice King, the daughter of Martin Luther King, paid tribute to Tutu, saying: “I’m saddened to learn of the death of global sage, human rights leader, and powerful pilgrim on earth, Archbishop Desmond Tutu.” The archbishop of Canterbury, Justin Welby, said Tutu was “a prophet and priest”. He said: “Arch’s love transformed the lives of politicians and priests, township dwellers and world leaders. The world is different because of this man.” South African president, Cyril Ramaphosa, said Tutu was “a patriot without equal”. He added: “A leader of principle and pragmatism who gave meaning to the biblical insight that faith without works is dead.” The Nelson Mandela Foundation said Tutu’s loss is “immeasurable”. They said in a statement: “He was larger than life, and for so many in South Africa and around the world his life has been a blessing.” Tutu died “peacefully” at a care centre in Cape Town. “Ultimately, at the age of 90, he died peacefully at the Oasis Frail Care Centre in Cape Town this morning,” Dr Ramphela Mamphele, acting chairperson of the Archbishop Desmond Tutu IP Trust and co-ordinator of the Office of the Archbishop, said in a statement on behalf of the Tutu family. The first mention of Desmond Tutu in the Guardian was in 1975 when he was in London and he spoke about the “daunting task” of being appointed the first black Dean of Johannesburg. Tutu, 43 at the time, faced the prospect of not being able to live in his deanery because it was located in a white area of his cathedral parish. The Dalai Lama has paid tribute to his “enduring friendship” with Tutu and said his work on the Truth and Reconciliation Commission was “an inspiration” for the world. In a letter addressed to Tutu’s daughter, Rev Mpho Tutu, he wrote: Please accept my heartfelt condolences and convey the same to your mother and other members of your family. I pray for him. As you know, over the years, your father and I enjoyed an enduring friendship. I remember the many occasions we spent time together, including the week here at Dharamsala in 2015 when we were able to share our thoughts on how to increase peace and joy in the world. The friendship and the spiritual bond between us was something we cherished. Archbishop Desmond Tutu was entirely dedicated to serving his brothers and sisters for the greater common good. He was a true humanitarian and a committed advocate of human rights. His work for the Truth and Reconciliation Commission was an inspiration for others around the world. With his passing away, we have lost a great man, who lived a truly meaningful life. He was devoted to the service of others, especially those who are least fortunate. I am convinced the best tribute we can pay him and keep his spirit alive is to do as he did and constantly look to see how we too can be of help to others. Mohamed ElBaradei, Egypt’s former vice president and Nobel Peace Prize laureate, has paid tribute to Tutu, saying: A powerful and courageous voice for nonviolence, reconciliation and peace. He will be very much missed in our troubled world. May he rest in peace. Mohammed Shtayyeh, prime minister of the Western-backed Palestinian Authority, said Tutu’s death was “a loss for justice, truth and peace in the world...He loved Palestine and Palestine loved him.” Tutu’s daughter Naomi Tutu, the race and gender justice activist, has tweeted: The archbishop of Cape Town, Thabo Makgoba, told Newzroom Afrika that he visited Tutu yesterday, on Christmas day, to do mass with him. “He was frail, but typically him. He gave me a smile and waved and was ever grateful,” he told the broadcaster. He said he has been planning and reflecting with Tutu and his family, including talking about his favourite hymns. Church officials are reportedly planning a seven-day commemoration of Tutu, including a lying in state ceremony. According to TimesLIVE, it will also include an ecumenical service and a requiem mass. Archbishop Thabo Makgoba told the South African online newspaper that he was on his way to Tutu’s home where he would meet his family to finalise plans for the funeral. St George’s cathedral dean, Rev Michael Weeder told the outlet that Tutu would lie in state for two days so that the public could pay their respects as part of a seven day commemoration. The World Council of Churches has paid tribute to Tutu’s “unique character” with which they say he was “able to break almost any deadlock”: Desmond Mpilo Tutu was a unique character. His contagious sense of humour and laughter has helped to resolve many critical situations in South Africa’s political and church life. He was able to break almost any deadlock. He shared with us the laughter and grace of God many a time. Reuters has compiled some of Tutu’s best known quotes: Don’t raise your voice. Improve your argument. We need to stop just pulling people out of the river. We need to go upstream and find out why they’re falling in. Hope is being able to see that there is light despite all of the darkness. Without forgiveness, there’s no future. Do your little bit of good where you are; it’s those little bits of good put together that overwhelm the world. I wish I could shut up, but I can’t, and I won’t. The Dalai Lama has paid tribute to Desmond Tutu who he said was fully dedicated to serving others and a “true humanitarian”. Tibet’s spiritual leader said: The friendship and the spiritual bond between us was something we cherished. Archbishop Desmond Tutu was entirely dedicated to serving his brothers and sisters for the greater common good. He was a true humanitarian and a committed advocate of human rights. In more reaction to Tutu’s death, Raila Odinga, Kenya’s former prime minister and opposition leader, said: Tutu’s passing “closes an important chapter in Africa’s long and painful struggle for justice, liberty and democracy and the continent’s current efforts to create prosperity and stand find its competitive edge in the rest of the world. For South Africans, it is a major reckoning with the reality that one-by-one, its heroic liberators are leaving. Mary Robinson, former president of Ireland and chair of The Elders, an independent group of world leaders and human rights activists, said: We are all devastated at the loss of archbishop Desmond Tutu. The Elders would not be who they are today without his passion, commitment and keen moral compass. He inspired me to be a prisoner of hope’, in his inimitable phrase. Arch was respected around the world for his dedication to justice, equality and freedom. Today we mourn his death but affirm our determination to keep his beliefs alive. David Beresford reported from South Africa for the Guardian in 1986 when Tutu was elected the first black archbishop of Cape Town, becoming leader of South Africa’s two million-member Anglican church. In St George’s Cathedral, Tutu, a Nobel Peace Prize winner, offered prayers for “my brother”, P W Botha, and repeated a call for the state president to start negotiations with “the authentic representatives” of the people to end apartheid. Scenes from St George’s cathedral in Cape Town: The leaders of the Desmond and Leah Tutu Legacy Foundation said that Tutu was “moral giant” and “a living embodiment of faith in action”. Niclas Kjellström-Matseke, the foundation’s chair, and CEO Piyushi Kotecha, said: South Africa and the world have lost one of the great spirits and moral giants of our age. Archbishop Emeritus Desmond Mpilo Tutu passed away on the morning of 26 December 2021 in Cape Town at the age of 90. Tutu was a living embodiment of faith in action, speaking boldly against racism, injustice, corruption, and oppression, not just in apartheid South Africa but wherever in the world he saw wrongdoing, especially when it impacted the most vulnerable and voiceless in society. We, at the Desmond and Leah Tutu Legacy Foundation, mourn his passing and extend deep sympathy to Mrs Nomalizo Leah Tutu, siblings Trevor Thamsanqa Tutu, Naomi Nontombi Tutu, Theresa Thandeka Tutu, Mpho Tutu van Furth and their families. We commit ourselves to continue telling the story and emulating the example of this son of Africa who became an inspiring sign of peace, hope and justice across the world. Here’s the full statement. The mayor of Cape Town, Geordin Hill-Lewis, has paid tribute to Tutu, saying: “We love you Arch and we will miss you”. The mayor of Cape Town, Geordin Hill-Lewis, has invited residents to write remembrance messages for Tutu. Mourners have gathered outside Tutu’s former parish in Cape Town, St George’s cathedral, and outside his home with flowers, reports AFP. “It’s very very sad he died. He was such a good man,” retired accountant Diane Heard told the news agency. Meanwhile, the South African cricket team wore black armbands to honour Tutu in their first test against India. AFP reports that Kenyan president, Uhuru Kenyatta, said: “Tutu inspired a generation of African leaders who embraced his non-violent approaches in the liberation struggle”. The UK’s Labour leader, Keir Starmer, said Tutu’s legacy “echoes through generations”. He said: Desmond Tutu was a tower of a man and a leader of moral activism. He dedicated his life to tackling injustice and standing up for the oppressed. His impact on the world crosses borders and echoes through generations. May he rest in peace. The British prime minister, Boris Johnson, has said that he is “deeply saddened” by the death of archbishop Desmond Tutu and that he would be remembered for his leadership and humour. He said: I am deeply saddened to hear of the death of Archbishop Desmond Tutu. He was a critical figure in the fight against apartheid and in the struggle to create a new South Africa - and will be remembered for his spiritual leadership and irrepressible good humour. South African online newspaper TimesLIVE reports that police have cordoned off sections near Tutu’s home in Milnerton, Cape Town, and that preparations are “underway” at the city’s civic centre for a briefing by Tutu’s family members, foundation and government and city officials. Amnesty International in South Africa has described Tutu as a “beacon of light” for human rights globally and “a much needed moral compass” for South Africa. Shenilla Mohamed, Amnesty International South Africa’s executive director, said: His commitment to equality and rights for all served as a much needed moral compass during the turbulent apartheid era. Even after South Africa obtained freedom in 1994, the Archbishop continued to be an outspoken, passionate human rights activist. Mohamed added: He was never afraid to call out human rights violators no matter who they were and his legacy must be honoured by continuing his work to ensure equality for all. The organisation sent condolences to Mam Leah Tutu, the archbishop’s wife, and his family and friends. The UK foreign secretary, Liz Truss, tweeted: Saddened to hear of archbishop Desmond Tutu’s death. He was a driving force behind ending apartheid in South Africa and a worthy winner of the Nobel Peace Prize. My thoughts are with the people of South Africa. Strictly Come Dancing stars Oti and Motsi Mabuse, who grew up in South Africa, also paid tribute to Tutu. Oti, a dancer on the BBC show, wrote on Twitter that his death was “sad news” and a “major loss” for South Africa. Her sister Motsi, who is a Strictly judge, shared a Tutu quote: The Desmond and Leah Tutu Foundation, founded by the retired archbishop and his wife, said: We are devastated that the Arch is no longer with us, but his passing has strengthened our resolve to spread his warmth and compassion even further afield. In more reaction to Tutu’s death, Basim Naeem, a senior official for Palestinian Islamist militant group Hamas, told Reuters: Our Palestinian people lost a strong supporter of their march towards freedom and independence. Father Desmond Tutu spent his entire life struggling against racism and defending human rights and especially on the Palestinian land. Wasel Abu Youssef, a member of the executive committee of the Palestine Liberation Organisation, told Reuters: Father Desmond Tutu was one of the biggest supporters of the Palestinian cause. He had always advocated the rights of the Palestinians to gain their freedom and rejected Israeli occupation and Apartheid. Thebe Ikalafeng, founder of Brand Africa, told Sky that Tutu “represented the goodness of humanity”. Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, has paid tribute to Tutu: Bernice King, the daughter of Martin Luther King, said: The Archbishop of Canterbury, Justin Welby, tweeted: He added: In a statement he said: The death of Archbishop Desmond Tutu (always known as Arch) is news that we receive with profound sadness - but also with profound gratitude as we reflect upon his life. My prayers and condolences are with his family and all who loved him, with the Anglican Church of the Province of Southern Africa, and all of the people of South Africa. Arch’s love transformed the lives of politicians and priests, township dwellers and world leaders. The world is different because of this man. Stephen Cottrell, the archbishop of York, said in a statement: One of the great and abiding images of the second half of the 20th century was Desmond Tutu and Nelson Mandela dancing in the courtroom at the end of the closing session of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission in Cape Town. Nelson Mandela asked his friend Desmond Tutu to chair the Commission. It was a bold and creative way of helping a nation divided brutally between black and white learn to live in glorious technicolour by facing up to the horrors of its past and by putting the Christian imperative for forgiveness alongside the need for truth as the only way of achieving reconciliation. And Desmond Tutu was asked to chair it because this incredibly joyful little disciple of Jesus Christ was one of the few people in South Africa other than Nelson Mandela himself, who could unite the nation and carry the trust of everyone. In this respect, he was a giant. The world itself feels a little smaller without him. His expansive vision of how the Christian faith shapes the whole of life has touched many hearts and changed many lives. The Anglican church in particular gives thanks for one of its greatest saints. But Christian people everywhere, and all people of goodwill, will today be mourning the loss of someone who showed the world what following Jesus looks like and where it leads. Our prayers today are particularly with his family and with our sisters and brothers in the Anglican Church of South Africa. When I go to my chapel this morning to celebrate the Eucharist on this, Saint Stephen’s day, I may dance a little jig in thankful memory of this wonderful human being. May he rest in peace and rise in glory. Extracts from Gary Younge’s 2009 interview with Tutu: “In many ways, when you’re a Nobel peace laureate, you have an obligation to humankind, to society,” Tutu says in his slow, deep, deliberate voice. “And you are able to say things that people might take more seriously than if you were not a Nobel laureate. And with a world that faces so much conflict and suffering, there seems to be a place for those who just might help us change tack. But I am still deeply longing for a quieter life. And I really mean it when I say it. I’m really going to try. My wife says that she’s heard me say that several times. I will try next year and be ruthless. But what do you say when the prime minister of the Solomon Islands writes and says, please, could you come and be with us when we launch our truth and reconciliation commission? It seems so rude, so hard-hearted in a way, to say no and have them think, ‘We are a small nation. Perhaps we don’t count for a great deal.’ If you do go, it just might lift their morale.” Tutu has claimed that his greatest weakness is that he loves to be loved. “There are not too many who enjoy being castigated as ogres,” he says, “as someone others love to hate. I think that most of us would prefer to be popular than unpopular. I know for myself that it has tended to be a weakness - a tendency to enjoy the limelight, a weakness that would make you soften things that are hard but that you need to say. Many people would be surprised that, in fact, I’m quite shy. I know it doesn’t look like it.” UK deputy prime minister, Dominic Raab, has described Tutu as a “truly great figure”. Gary Younge quotes from his 2009 interview with Tutu: More reaction to Tutu’s death from South African president, Cyril Ramaphosa, and the archbishop of Cape Town, Thabo Makgoba: Ramaphosa said: The passing of Archbishop Emeritus Desmond Tutu is another chapter of bereavement in our nation*s farewell to a generation of outstanding South Africans who have bequeathed us a liberated South Africa. Desmond Tutu was a patriot without equal; a leader of principle and pragmatism who gave meaning to the biblical insight that faith without works is dead. Makgoba said: Desmond Tutu’s legacy is moral strength, moral courage and clarity. He felt with the people. In public and alone, he cried because he felt people’s pain. And he laughed * no, not just laughed, he cackled with delight when he shared their joy. The Nelson Mandela Foundation said in a statement: The loss of Archbishop Emeritus Desmond Mpilo Tutu is immeasurable. He was larger than life, and for so many in South Africa and around the world his life has been a blessing. His contributions to struggles against injustice, locally and globally, are matched only by the depth of his thinking about the making of liberatory futures for human societies. He was an extraordinary human being. A thinker. A leader. A shepherd. Our thoughts are with his family and friends at this most difficult time. “The Arch meant everything to me,” said foundation chief executive Sello Hatang. “I first met him during the work of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, and was privileged to work with him on a number of projects over the years. He was a friend to Madiba and to the Foundation.” Nelson Mandela and the Archbishop Emeritus first met at a debating competition in the early 1950s. It would be four decades later before they met again, on the day that Mandela was released from prison. His first night as a free man was spent at the home of the Tutus in Bishopscourt, Cape Town. On that occasion before everyone retired for the night, Tutu offered a prayer of thanksgiving and led a singing of Reverend Tiyo Soga’s famous hymn in isiXhosa, ‘Lizalis’idinga lakho’ – ‘Let your will be done’. The apartheid state had frustrated attempts by both Mandela and Tutu for the two of them to meet before the prison release on 11 February 1990. From then until Mandela passed away in 2013 they were in regular contact and their friendship deepened over time. There was a light, almost teasing quality, to their relationship. They relentlessly poked fun at each other’s preferred attire, for instance – Mandela wearing his Madiba shirts and the Arch his robes. But they also collaborated on a number of important initiatives. It was Tutu who held aloft Madiba’s hand on the balcony of Cape Town’s City Hall on 9 May 1994 and presented him to the assembled throngs as the country’s new “out of the box” President. In 1995 Mandela appointed him to chair the country’s Truth and Reconciliation Commission, a position Tutu used to drive endeavour to reckon with oppressive pasts but also to hold the new democratic government accountable. As Mandela reflected in that period: “His most characteristic quality is his readiness to take unpopular positions without fear … He speaks his mind on matters of public morality. As a result, he annoyed many of the leaders of the apartheid system. Nor has he spared those that followed them - he has from time to time annoyed many of us who belong to the new order. But such independence of mind - however wrong and unstrategic it may at times be - is vital to a thriving democracy.” Most recently, of course, Tutu spoke out robustly and insistently against state capture. In 2004 he delivered the Nelson Mandela Annual Lecture, and used the platform to deliver a stinging critique of the governing party. The thrust of his argument was the extent to which leadership had failed society’s most vulnerable. “We were involved in the struggle because we believed we would evolve a new kind of society. A caring, a compassionate society. At the moment many, too many, of our people live in gruelling, demeaning, dehumanising poverty.” Madiba and the Arch were both founding members of The Elders, an international grouping of inspirational leaders which has done human rights work in countries around the world. “We owe it both to Madiba and to the Arch to continue working for the country and the world of their dreams,” said Hatang. “Their intersecting legacies are powerful resources for social justice work.” When Nelson Mandela passed away in 2013, Archbishop Emeritus Tutu said: “This is a man who cared.” As the foundation mourns today the passing of our beloved Arch, we in turn can say precisely the same of him. May he rest in peace Key dates from Tutu’s life, as reported by Reuters: 1931 - Desmond Tutu is born in Klerksdorp, a town around 170 km (105 miles) to the west of Johannesburg. 1943 - Tutu’s Methodist family joins the Anglican Church. 1947 - Tutu falls ill with tuberculosis while studying at a secondary school near Sophiatown, Johannesburg. He befriends a priest and serves in his church after recovering from illness. 1948 - The white National Party launches apartheid in the run-up to 1948 national elections. It wins popular support among white voters who want to maintain their dominance over the Black majority. 1955 - Tutu marries Nomalizo Leah Shenxane and begins teaching at a high school in Johannesburg where his father is the headmaster. 1958 - Tutu quits the school, refusing to be part of a teaching system that promotes inequality against Black students. He joins the priesthood. 1962 - Tutu moves to Britain to study theology at King’s College London. 1966 - Tutu moves back to South Africa and starts teaching theology at a seminary in the Eastern Cape. He also begins making his views against apartheid known. 1975 - Tutu becomes the first Black Anglican Dean of Johannesburg. 1980 - As general secretary of the South African Council of Churches, Tutu leads a delegation of church leaders to prime minister PW Botha, urging him to end apartheid. Although nothing comes of the meeting it is a historical moment where a Black leader confronts a senior white government official. The government confiscates Tutu’s passport. 1984 - Tutu is awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for his efforts to bring about the end of white minority rule. 1985 - Tutu becomes the first Black bishop of Johannesburg. He publicly endorses an economic boycott of South Africa and civil disobedience as a way to dismantle apartheid. 1986 - Tutu becomes the first Black person appointed as bishop of Cape Town and head of the Anglican Church of the Province of Southern Africa. With other church leaders he mediates conflicts between Black protesters and government security forces. 1990 - State President FW de Klerk unbans the African National Congress (ANC) and announces plans to release Nelson Mandela from prison. 1991 - Apartheid laws and racist restrictions are repealed and power-sharing talks start between the state and 16 anti-apartheid groups. 1994 - After Mandela sweeps to power at the helm of the ANC in the country’s first democratic elections, Tutu coins the term “Rainbow Nation” to describe the coming together of various races in post-apartheid South Africa. 1994 - Mandela asks Tutu to chair the Truth and Reconciliation Commission that was set up to listen to, record and in some cases grant amnesty to perpetrators of human right violations under apartheid. 1996 - Tutu retires from the church to focus solely on the commission. He continues his activism, advocating for equality and reconciliation and is later named Archbishop Emeritus. 1997 - Tutu is diagnosed with prostate cancer. He has since been hospitalised to treat recurring infections. 2011 - The Dalai Lama inaugurates the annual Desmond Tutu International Peace Lecture but does so via satellite link after the South African government denies the Tibetan spiritual leader a visa to attend. 2013 - Tutu makes outspoken comments about the ANC. He says he will no longer vote for the party because it had done a bad job addressing inequality, violence and corruption. 2013 - Dubbed “the moral compass of the nation”, Tutu declares his support for gay rights, saying he would never “worship a God who is homophobic”. 2021 - A frail-looking Tutu is wheeled into his former parish at St George’s cathedral in Cape Town, which used to be a safe haven for anti-apartheid activists, for a special thanksgiving service marking his 90th birthday. 26 December 2021 - Tutu dies in Cape Town, aged 90. “Ultimately, at the age of 90, he died peacefully at the Oasis Frail Care Centre in Cape Town this morning,” Dr Ramphela Mamphele, acting chairperson of the Archbishop Desmond Tutu IP Trust and co-ordinator of the Office of the Archbishop, said in a statement on behalf of the Tutu family. Tutu was famous for coining the phrase “Rainbow Nation” to describe the new South Africa that emerged with the end of aprtheid and the presidency of nelson Mandela. However, Reuters reports that in his later years he came to regret that the prediction had not come true and was a fierce critic of successive African National Congress-led governments. “As an old man, I am sad because I had hoped that my last days would be days of rejoicing, days of praising and commending the younger people doing the things that we hoped so very much would be the case,” Tutu told Reuters in June 2014. There is a lot of reaction coming in to the death of Desmond Tutu, the anti-apartheid warrior, including from former Johannesburg mayor Herman Mashaba who said “we have lost a giant”. Desmond Tutu, the cleric who was a giant figure in the struggle against apartheid in South Africa, has died at the age of 90, the country’s president has announced. “The passing of Archbishop Emeritus Desmond Tutu is another chapter of bereavement in our nation*s farewell to a generation of outstanding South Africans who have bequeathed us a liberated South Africa,” president Cyril Ramaphosa said.In 1948, when the apartheid regime was voted into office in South Africa, Desmond Tutu was 17. It was not until the late 1960s, as the future Anglican archbishop of Cape Town approached 40, that the concept of black liberation caused him to widen his horizons, and it was only in the mid-70s that he aligned himself with the liberation struggle. Tutu, who has died aged 90, developed late in this respect because at first he was wholly a man of the church. He never wanted to enter politics: “No, I’m not smart enough. I can’t think quickly on my feet. I also think it’s a very harsh environment. I’m a crybaby … not tough enough for the hurly-burly of politics,” he claimed, perhaps disingenuously. Church and state were locked in combat, however, and choices had to be made. Anglicans, Catholics, Methodists and others condemned apartheid, while the Dutch Reformed churches in South Africa defended it. When Tutu became the first black Anglican dean of Johannesburg in 1975 he was, according to his biographer, Shirley du Boulay, “less politically aware than one might have expected. His contribution to the liberation of his people [until then] had been in becoming a good priest.” Tutu was born in Klerksdorp, a predominantly Afrikaner farming town 100 miles south-west of Johannesburg. His father, Zachariah, a Xhosa, was headteacher of the local Methodist primary school. His mother, Aletta, a Mosotho, was a domestic servant. The children were all given both European and African names and spoke Xhosa, Sotho and Tswana. Later, Tutu also learned Afrikaans and English. At the age of 14 he contracted tuberculosis and over the course of 20 months in hospital he developed a lifelong friendship with Father Trevor Huddleston, the Anglican missionary priest from Britain who, as one of the most prominent opponents of apartheid inside and outside South Africa, became his religious inspiration and mentor. Tutu obtained a teaching diploma in 1953 and a BA degree by correspondence a year later. He taught at high schools in Johannesburg (1954) and Krugersdorp (1955-57), before leaving to train at St Peter’s theological college, Rosettenville. Ordained a priest in 1961, he served in an African township. His entry into the liberation struggle followed the years he spent abroad. From 1962 until 1966 he was in London, where he secured a master’s in theology at King’s College. He served as a curate in Golders Green and at Bletchingley, Surrey, where initially standoffish Tories took him to their hearts. After teaching at the Federal Theological Seminary in the town of Alice in the Eastern Cape province, Tutu went back to Britain from 1972 until 1975 as associate director of the Theological Education Fund of the World Council of Churches. From 1976 to 1978 he served as bishop of Lesotho, returning to Johannesburg to take up the high-profile post of general secretary of the South African Council of Churches (SACC), from which the pro-apartheid Afrikaans churches had cut themselves loose. That appointment effectively marked the end of Tutu’s political innocence. He had seen the uglier side of Africa, and although his travels separated him from the struggle in his own country, they also moulded him, giving him a wider outlook, more self-confidence and a growing revulsion against race discrimination. In spite of passport restrictions, in the early 80s Tutu was probably the most travelled churchman in the world after Pope John Paul II. Britain was always a sanctuary for him. The turning point on that score, said Tutu, came when everyone at King’s College London treated him like anyone else. “So my gratitude to England and my gratitude to King’s is that I have discovered who I am.” In more than one sense Tutu became Nelson Mandela’s precursor. Both men foresaw the inevitability of liberation. Both were sufficiently above racial issues to know that, ultimately, what mattered (at least for the transition from apartheid to non-racial rule) would be reconciliation among South Africa’s races. Once the apartheid government accepted the inexorability of change, as it began to do in the 80s, the role of the prophet changed. “Demands for justice are replaced by demands for reconciliation.” However outraged they might have been by their experiences under apartheid, both Tutu and Mandela put their personal feelings aside. In African terms, both were relatively privileged, Mandela (of Xhosa royalty) even more than the highly educated Tutu. There were differences, of course. Tutu was excitable, passionate, easily hurt; Mandela composed and imperious. In the difficult dying days of apartheid the media, especially the state-controlled broadcasting corporation (SABC), demonised Tutu as the man most white South Africans loved to hate. But Tutu blazed the trail. When Mandela said the same things 10 years later, his words sounded fitting; when Tutu uttered them he outraged even his Anglican brethren. In 1980, he forecast that South Africa would have a black leader within five to 10 years (it took 14). The reason why many white people were so venomous was not only that Tutu told them that tomorrow would not be theirs, but that he did it with such certainty. The entertaining, excitable, impish little man was an old-style prophet, but also one with a dry sense of humour. White people, he observed, saw him as a politician trying hard to be a bishop, with “horns under my funny bishop’s hat and my tail tucked away under my trailing cape”. His wry assessment of the impact of their arrival in South Africa was: “We had the land and they had the Bible. Then they said, ‘Let us pray,’ and we closed our eyes. When we opened them again, they had the land and we had the Bible.” At times, Tutu was the despair of his friends. Once he said that if the Russians came to South Africa, they would be welcomed as liberators. An associate sighed, “He had this habit of going over the top.” Tutu’s support of international sanctions against South Africa caused a huge eruption among white people and also in his own church. Some liberal white South Africans classified Tutu’s Nobel peace prize in 1984 as foreign interference. Tutu could never execute the politician’s soft-shoe shuffle. He spoke his mind, was always his own man, never trendy or fully in the political mainstream. Initially, he had been drawn to the Black Consciousness Movement and to American ideas of “black theology”, but he shifted closer to the United Democratic Front (UDF), the exiled ANC’s internal surrogate. Sparing the sensitivities of white Anglicans was scarcely Tutu’s concern. By the time he arrived at the SACC in March 1978, the organisation was becoming a microcosm of a future, non-racial South Africa. Tutu aired his own opinions, sometimes provocatively, on world affairs. He blasted the Soviet puppet regime in Afghanistan and, simultaneously, the US for supporting the Contras in Nicaragua and Israel for bombing Beirut. One of his more spectacular outbursts was his condemnation as “nauseating” and “the pits” of a speech by Ronald Reagan in 1988, in which the US president defended the continued involvement of American companies in the South African economy. For his part, said Tutu, “America and the west can go to hell.” Later, in his engaging way, he half-apologised, saying that perhaps he should have used “less salty language”. Patrick Buchanan, Reagan’s chief media adviser, snapped back, “Whatever his moral splendour, the bishop is a political ignoramus.” By then, Tutu was accustomed to storms breaking over his head. In 1979, on a visit to Denmark, he criticised that country’s purchase of South African coal, thereby signalling his support for sanctions. On his return to South Africa, he was summoned to a meeting with two cabinet ministers, who asked him to retract or face possible action, not only against himself, but against the SACC as well. However, the organisation rallied, telling the government of PW Botha that a retraction could constitute a denial of Tutu’s prophetic calling. It added, though, that it was willing to meet the government to discuss fundamental reform. It was a turning point in the mighty church v state conflict that had rocked the country since the 50s. The Anglican church was flexing its muscles. Tutu advised the government to stop playing God. During the Christian church’s 2,000-year existence, he said, tyrants had acted against it, arresting its followers, killing them, proscribing their faith. “If they take the SACC and the churches on, let them know they are taking on the Church of Jesus Christ.” In 1980, Tutu and fellow clergymen went to Pretoria to meet Botha, six cabinet ministers and two deputy ministers. It was not an easy decision. Critics, clergy among them, warned Tutu’s delegation they were wasting their time, even betraying the struggle. It was Tutu’s intuitive genius to know when meeting an enemy showed strength rather than weakness. In 1982, the then archbishop of Canterbury, Robert Runcie, sent a five-member delegation to South Africa to demonstrate world support for the SACC – “to make the point [to the apartheid government] that you are not simply dealing with a domestic matter. If you touch Desmond Tutu, you touch a world family of Christians.” Tutu did not meet Botha again until 1986 when, accompanied by the liberal Afrikaner churchman Beyers Naudé, he was received at the state president’s official residence in Cape Town. Tutu met Botha on two further occasions in 1986, around the time the white regime was starting to meet Mandela secretly in prison. The days of apartheid were numbered, even though few realised it. Tutu thus began his ascent in the Anglican church just as it farsightedly started to adjust to a changing South Africa. Soon after receiving the Nobel peace prize, he left the SACC to become the first black bishop of Johannesburg (1985-86). The electoral assembly of the diocese consisted of 214 delegates – all the clergy plus one layman from each congregation. The conservative, mostly white, priests blocked Tutu, while the black priests blocked the election of a white bishop. Unable to deliver the required two-thirds majority, the assembly passed the decision to the synod of bishops, who chose the black candidate. In April 1986, Tutu was elected to the highest Anglican post in South Africa as archbishop of Cape Town, and that September was enthroned in St George’s Cathedral. This was followed by his unanimous election as head of the All-Africa Conference of Churches at its gathering in Togo. By then Tutu was in the thick of politics. Arrested for taking part in an illegal march, he was fined, imprisoned for a night and had his passport withdrawn. When it was returned, the irrepressible prelate promptly visited the pope, whereupon his passport was temporarily withdrawn again. Defying the Botha government, Tutu met the ANC-in-exile at its Zambian headquarters, where – ever his own man – he informed it that, while he supported its aim of a non-racial, democratic South Africa, he could not associate himself with the armed struggle. The ANC at first refused to end it but later agreed to suspend it. Tutu had first met Mandela in the 50s, when the latter was an adjudicator in an inter-school debate in which Tutu was a participant. He did not see Mandela again until the latter’s release from prison in 1990, although they corresponded while Mandela was a prisoner on Robben Island. When Tutu received the Nobel prize, the ANC organised a celebration for him, and on Mandela’s release from prison, he stayed at Tutu’s official archbishop’s residence in Cape Town. “With calls coming from all over the world, and even the White House,” Tutu said, “it was quite impossible to spend time with him. Even then he was ever gracious with his old-world courtesy ... His regal dignity is quite humble.” There is just a hint here of the tension that later affected the relationship. Tutu recalled that, at a state banquet for the president of Uganda, the former president FW de Klerk had not been placed at the top table. Mandela “was genuinely concerned that De Klerk had been treated so offhandedly”. However, said Tutu, Mandela could also be “horribly stubborn”. For his part, Mandela remarked, light-heartedly, on the trouble Tutu had caused him. Tutu married Leah Nomalizo Shinxani in 1955. They had four children. A journalist noted many years later: “It’s fair to say that only an astute, humorous and strong woman could have survived life with Tutu,” while a close friend said, “I think she has a helluva hard time. Desmond gives himself so much to everybody that I’m not sure whether there is a lot left for Leah.” As the ANC leaders returned from exile and prison, Tutu modestly withdrew to the wings, returning to his spiritual calling. But Mandela invited him to take the chair of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission (TRC), with a mandate not to conduct Nuremberg-style trials, but to effect reconciliation by uncovering “gross violations of human rights” committed during the apartheid years – by all sides, including the ANC. It was an offer Tutu could not refuse. Appointed in December 1995, the TRC delivered its final five-volume report to Mandela in November 1998. By then Tutu had been receiving treatment in the US for prostate cancer. His illness had a profound effect, making him consciously savour his remaining years and turn away from public life, towards his God and his wife. The TRC – the climax of Tutu’s career – was both praised and disparaged. Historians will long debate what it achieved. It could have investigated an estimated 100,000 violations of human rights, protracting the hearings endlessly, but it focused on the worst cases, finding time to listen to mea culpas and semi-apologies from the business community, the media, churches and others. For Tutu, the 1997 hearing at which De Klerk refused to accept political responsibility for the assassinations, kidnappings, torture and assorted crimes committed by agents of the apartheid state was traumatic. De Klerk made the extraordinary submission that apartheid was “a well-intentioned failure” – and that he and his predecessor, Botha, had presided over two final phases of “reform and transformation”. It was quite incorrect, De Klerk told the commission, “to refer to our administrations as the apartheid government. We were primarily concerned with the dismantling of apartheid.” Tutu confessed that there were times when his Christian charity was strained to the limit. He described the white regime’s chemical and biological warfare programme under Botha as the “most diabolical aspect of apartheid”. Tutu, however, warmly commended De Klerk’s speech in February 1990 unbanning liberation movements, and when he was consulted by the Norwegian Nobel committee for advice on whether to award a joint peace prize to Mandela and De Klerk in 1993, he endorsed it. But, he said later, “had I known then what I know now, I would have opposed it vehemently”. As for Botha, then in retirement and preparing to remarry, the TRC was a “circus” and he would not “perform” before it. Fined for contempt of court, he remained defiant to the end. The ANC’s response to the TRC report was almost as dismaying for Tutu. The report recorded that the ANC, in exile beyond South Africa’s borders for 30 years, had committed gross violations in its detention camps, torturing and executing suspected informers, rebellious members and others, and that, even after its unbanning in 1990, it had committed further crimes, including murder, mainly against black political opponents. Friends said he was saddened and perplexed by the ferocity of the criticism of the TRC by the ANC, the white rightwing and some mainstream liberals. Tutu saw the party’s attack on the TRC as a betrayal of the ANC’s finest moral traditions. But he was comforted by the knowledge that many ANC members and supporters, including Mandela (no longer president of the ANC though still president of the country when the TRC report was published), were similarly disturbed by their organisation’s official response. This dissent within the ANC prevented a lasting rupture between Tutu, the country’s “most prominent moral lodestar”, and the ANC. The ANC applied for an injunction to prevent publication of the TRC’s report (Mandela dissented), but the court rejected it. It was an inexplicable blunder by the ANC leadership, and an appalled Tutu exclaimed, “I have struggled against a tyranny. I did not do this in order to substitute another.” Having stepped down as archbishop in 1996 Tutu left for the US in October 1998 to take up a two-year theology professorship at Emory University in Atlanta. Overwhelmed by invitations to address other gatherings and institutions across the US, he turned most of them down, so that he could carry his workload at Emory, pace himself through his illness and spend more time with Leah. In Atlanta, he completed his major work, No Future Without Forgiveness, published in 1999, while remaining in close touch with those parts of the TRC that were still at work. For all its shortcomings, Tutu’s TRC was an extraordinary episode in South Africa’s history. Even if it used controversial methods and failed to deliver universal reconciliation (many white people felt they were simply in the dock), at least it uncovered much of the truth. The “gross violations” were a festering sore that had to be cleansed. Some dozen other countries have conducted their own truth commissions, but South Africa’s was the most remarkable and, for this achievement, the archbishop can take his bow before history. Tutu was credited with coining the term “rainbow nation” for the non-racial South Africa that he, Mandela and their various supporters wanted to rise from the ashes of apartheid. On his retirement as archbishop, Mandela said of Tutu at a service of thanksgiving: “His joy in our diversity and his spirit of forgiveness are as much part of his immeasurable contribution to our nation as his passion for justice and his solidarity with the poor.” In his final years, remarkably active in the light of his cancer, Tutu campaigned in many parts of the world for human rights and freedoms, and was often seen in his beloved London. He announced that he would retire from public life on his 79th birthday, in October 2010. But the flow of comments on a wide range of social and political issues continued unabated. In 2013 he announced he could no longer vote for the ruling ANC because of its corruption, inequality and use of violence, and its failure to tackle violent xenophobia and poverty in the townships. At the time of his 85th birthday, in 2016, he called for the right to assisted dying, and in 2020 he joined other faith leaders in calling for an end to the criminalisation of LGBTQ+ people. He continued in his advanced years to receive honours and awards from many countries, and in 2015 he was made a Companion of Honour by Britain. He is survived by Leah, their children, Trevor, Theresa, Naomi and Mpho, and his sister Gloria. • Desmond Mpilo Tutu, priest, born 7 October 1931; died 26 December 2021 • Stanley Uys died in 2014. • Dan van der Vat died in 2019Witchcraft has always played a large role in my life. While many kids were learning badminton or taking trombone lessons, I was reading up on spellcraft and ways to plant my herb garden. I grew up in the late 1990s when my cultural life became saturated with Buffy the Vampire Slayer, Charmed and Sabrina the Teenage Witch. Channel-hopping without stumbling across a young woman with magical powers was virtually impossible. But the draw wasn’t just the empowerment that spells and telekinetic forces threw my way; I was intensely charmed by witchcraft’s connection with the world outside and the earth around me. In the evenings I spent time in my garden wrapped up in scarves and blankets to watch the different phases of the moon pass each night; I learned the names of wildflowers growing at the side of the road where no one cast a second glance and wondered how I could use them in a spell. These small things gave me an overwhelming sense of calm, so enthralled was I by constellations, intricate root systems and the dashes of magic I found around me. Perhaps witchcraft was in my blood – my very first word was “moon”. So, as an adult, it seemed incredibly natural to me that witchcraft would be the safe haven I returned to in order to recover my mental health after a workplace ordeal left me suffering from depression. Back in 2018, the world started to look a little hazy to me. For as long as I could remember, I had been told the direction my life would take: I would do well in school, go to university and get a good job. But, in my new communications role at a fast-paced agency, I struggled to come to terms with my reality – I was waking up in cold sweats at 4am every morning and, whenever I washed my hair, long tendrils would pull free from my scalp and form a dark pool at my feet. On top of the physical symptoms of anxiety, I noticed that as the job grew more stressful, my mood tumbled downwards until I was in a state of depression for months at a time. And so, in the winter of 2018, after realising how disconnected I had become from myself and the nature-loving woman I had once been, I knew something had to change. I decided to break away – I quit. In the aftermath and panic of walking away from a job that paid my bills and gave me some semblance of a normal person, I decided to use this newfound time to re-connect with my longtime love of bubbling cauldrons, flickering candles and the occult in an effort to restore balance in my life and heal my mental health. Witchcraft falls under the umbrella term of Paganism – a form of spiritual practice that involves a deep reverence of the earth. While the term “witch” is now incredibly nuanced and there are many different names for people who practise forms of magic, I think it is hard to find a Pagan who isn’t involved in saving the planet in some way. I believe that a witch is someone who is deeply in touch with people, plants and animals, and knows how to work with their innate power to bring about change in the world, usually through magical forces. This could be through spells, ritual work or through concocting brews and elixirs made from potent ingredients, although there are many ways to work with the magical world. Much as the Romantic poets showed their appreciation for nature by writing about its beauty, now Pagans throw their arms up to the sky to welcome in the rain when it is needed, grow native plants to feed the bees and only take as many leaves from nature as they need so as not to disrupt the balance of local flora. This care for and worship of the natural world in the face of climate change is perhaps why witchcraft and Paganism are the perfect practices to help us reconnect with the world and survive in the 21st century. My year of witchcraft unfolded before me and I took the first steps to recover my mental health. I was shaky at first, unused to allowing myself the time to do anything other than “be productive”. I started by observing the Pagan festivals – or sabbats – commonly followed by witches, including Yule (the winter solstice), Imbolc (the first signs of spring in February) and Ostara (the spring equinox). Each of these festivals has a different tradition associated with it, and during the winter festivals, I focused on spending time outside, soaking up the pale fractions of vitamin D that the sun would allow, and sitting under the trees to feel their deep-seated power thrumming directly below me in the ground. I gave myself time to just be in nature and connect with its sounds and feelings, allowing it to trigger the healing processes in my brain. I breathed deeply; I smiled when I saw a flash of a plump, pink bullfinch in the hedgerow. Witchcraft is so intensely wrapped up in nature that the link to mental health is clear. The benefits of spending time outdoors are well-documented, with one study reporting that spending at least two hours outside every week could boost physical and mental wellbeing significantly. As spring approached, instead of the dark fingers of anxiety that had tapped on the back of my neck for the past year, I began to feel hopeful for the first time in a long time. As a teenager, I had spent so much time out in nature, spotting birds with my dad and going on long family rambles that ended with jam sandwiches and crisps in the car. I would come home shattered, but knowing the sounds of birds, replaying the call of a blackbird, wren or oystercatcher in my head while many of my friends spent their weekends in crowded shopping malls. The idea that I had become so disconnected from these flurries of feathers and muddy boots made me nervous and rattled my core. Slowing down and appreciating the magic of the cycles of life again opened up my sense of wonder for the natural world that had been lacking for so many years. Of course, we are at a point in history where we are experiencing a massive shift in working patterns and environments and it is only natural that we would look to practices that ground us – practices and rituals that were lost during the industrial revolution, when huge swathes of the population were uprooted from their rural country homes and cut off from their connection with nature. The pandemic gave some of us a few moments to sit back and reflect on our priorities. Research showed that 46% of people were looking to quit their job this year and do something different now that remote working is a possibility. People have been spending more time in nature and in their gardens, giving us the headspace to ask: w hat makes us happy? What makes us feel most like ourselves? What would we do if anything was possible? Light a vanilla-scented candle; add Himalayan salt to your bath; wrap seaweed around your face. Self-care has become yet another compulsory measure to add to our busy days to stave off the pandemic burnout. Of course, people got exhausted before the 21st century, but the past two years have brought self-love practices to the fore. We’ve seen big companies giving their staff time off to help reverse the epidemic of anxiety, and employees are being told to get out in nature, download Headspace and learn to meditate. But wouldn’t it be better if we took a pause before we got to the point of a panic attack? As we come to re-examine office structures and working life, many people are looking to find a deeper connection with the natural world and their place within it. However, birdwatching and outdoor yoga aren’t for everyone – some of us need something more charged and immersive in order to help us rediscover our true selves. Returning to my love of witchcraft that started when I was a teenager helped me to refocus my energies and see the world through a new lens – one where nature, cycles and my own wellbeing are the focal points. As we continue to reach dizzying heights in the technological age, witchcraft can help us see the magic of the everyday and bring us back down to earth where we can plant two outstretched hands in the moss. Jennifer Lane is an author and nature writer. Her book The Wheel: A Witch’s Path Back to the Ancient Self (September Publishing, £14.99) is available from guardianbookshop.com for £13.04“Dwell on the beauty of life. Watch the stars, and see yourself running with them”: words of positivity from the Roman emperor Marcus Aurelius. But how many of us really dwell on the upside of life, as opposed to its mad, bad, seamy side? It’s unsurprising that we have lost some of our joie de vivre in the past few years – finding sparkle amid the grey has become distinctly difficult. But a riffle through a historical dictionary suggests that it’s always been this way, and at heart we’ve long been a pessimistic lot. Linguistically, as in life, our glass is usually half-empty. Usually – but not always. In recent times I’ve made it a mission to highlight a category of English that linguists fondly call “orphaned negatives”. These are the words that inexplicably lost their mojo at some point in the past, becoming a sorry crew of adjectives that includes unkempt, unruly, disgruntled, unwieldy and inept. Yet previous generations had the potential to be kempt, ruly, wieldy, ept and – most recently thanks to PG Wodehouse – gruntled. Some were even full of ruth (compassion), feck (initiative) and gorm (due care and attention). Now is surely the time to reunite these long-lost couples. It may not work for everything – there is no entry (yet) for “shevelled” or “combobulated”, but Mitchell airport in Milwaukee has gloriously provided its passengers with a “recombobulation area” in which to release some of the tension of air travel. It’s not just these negatives that have been lost. The German schadenfreude – pleasure in the misfortunes of others – is now all too familiar. But how many of us know its near opposite in English, “confelicity”, which is joy in another person’s happiness? As we exchange hatred on our screens, how about sharing some “fellowfeeling”, 16th-century speak for kindness and compassion? As always, the dictionary tells its own story. It offers hundreds of words for melancholy, from the “black dog” and “blue devils” to the cuddlier but equally dispiriting “mubble-fubbles”. Much the same goes for irritability – we can be curmudgeonly, mumpish, crumpsy, nettlish, porcupinal and spleenical as well as just plain narky or tetchy. And insults abound – anyone looking to criticise covertly may well enjoy “ultracrepidarian” or “cacafuego” (one who loves to pass comment on subjects they know nothing about and a blustering braggart – literally a “fire-shitter” – respectively). Distinctly lacking are synonyms for love, happiness and kindness. But if we are pessimists at heart, it has never stopped us having a laugh. Some of our happiest words are such because they make us smile, and often involve a bit of fun at our own expense. Who can resist such nicknames as “cacklefarts” for eggs, or “bags of mystery” for sausages (because you never quite know what’s in them)? Even the prudish Victorians knew hankies as “snottingers”, and umbrellas as “bumbershoots”. Moreover, perhaps it isn’t all down to our attitude. Some linguists believe the geography of a language shapes its sounds, and those sounds in turn influence our thoughts. The soft, sibilant lilts of the Mediterranean, for example, may seem a perfect match for its sun-soaked skies. The waterfalls and crashing pines of northern climes, on the other hand, may have led to what the 19th-century sound symbolist Charles Nodier described as our “raw and clashing vocabularies”. It follows, perhaps, that our thinking is just as clashing and discordant as a result. It’s true too that other languages dish out positivity a little better than us. They have a splash of what the Italians call sprezzatura, a careless, thrown together nonchalance or indifference to life’s curveballs. As for joy, it would be hard to beat gigil from the Philippines. In a single word it conveys the “irresistible desire to squeeze something cute”. But one English word surely stands above all others from the corners of the dictionary. I mention it all the time, because I’m determined to bring it back. Or bring it anywhere in fact, for it never really enjoyed more than a day in the sun. “Respair” has just one record next to it in the Oxford English Dictionary, from 1525, but its definition is sublime. Respair is fresh hope; a recovery from despair. May 2022 finally be its moment. Susie Dent is a lexicographer and etymologist. Her latest book is Word Perfect: Etymological Entertainment for Every Day of the YearA legal battle has broken out over attempts by a Highland landowner to ban hill-walkers from a path in a major test case over Scotland’s right-to-roam legislation. Highland council and the Ramblers Association are challenging an attempt by Donald Houston, a businessman who owns a large area of the Ardnamurchan peninsula on the west coast of Scotland, to shut off a significant and scenic access route. He has gone to court to ask a sheriff to exempt part of the estate from Scotland’s wide-ranging countryside access legislation – a move Ramblers Scotland believes could encourage other landowners to erode right-to-roam rights on other private estates. Houston has been accused of using obstructive tactics to prevent local people from using the route – an allegation he denies – by padlocking gates, removing a stile and placing no-entry signs on a gate across a timber yard he recently built beside the path. The dispute escalated after he allegedly aggressively confronted David and Jenny Kime, keen hill-walkers who live in retirement in the nearby township of Glenborrodale, after they climbed a locked gate blocking the path in November 2019. David Kime said the couple had used the route without any conflict more than 100 times over the last 40 years, logging their walks in a diary, until their confrontation with Houston, when he threatened them with the police. The couple were later interviewed under caution for aggravated trespass by Police Scotland under the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994. Nearly 18 months later, the procurator fiscal said no action would be taken, although the charges would remain “on file”. Brendan Paddy, the director of Ramblers Scotland, said that as far as the charity was aware it was the first time the 1994 legislation had been used against hill-walkers anywhere in the UK. “It’s unprecedented,” Paddy said. “This [act] was rustled up to address a moral panic about outdoor raves and hunt sabs and we were promised at the time, explicitly, by government ministers, the legislation would never be used against walkers. We were genuinely surprised when this was even suggested.” Kime, 80, said the police interview had been distressing. “We couldn’t work out what we were accused of doing, apart from going on a walk we’d done a hundred times before, with no one else in sight. Jenny was very upset about the confrontation, and she was in tears during the interview,” he said. The clash with Houston is the latest in a series of disputes with private landowners since the Land Reform (Scotland) Act came into force in 2003, giving the public wide-ranging, legally enforceable rights of access to the countryside. The act states that access can only be restricted or denied in specific circumstances, such as to protect crops, personal privacy and security, or for limited periods during shooting season on grouse moors or deer culls. Houston argues that vehicle and machinery operations at the timber yard make it too dangerous to allow public access, and that under health and safety legislation he has to either prevent public access or close down the business. Highland council and the Ramblers are opposing Houston’s court application and, in a parallel move, the council is seeking a separate legal ruling that the route is a right of way under the Land Reform (Scotland) Act. It also plans to include it in its core paths strategy. A spokesman for Houston said the Kimes were confusing a different right of way with Houston’s access road, which had been built for the timber yard. It had been a farmyard for 30 years and always had a gate for safety reasons. Houston was confident he would win his case and suggested the Kimes wanted to get access to the new road because “it is a much better track than any others in the area”, his spokesman said. “They prefer to be able to walk in carpet slippers and dancing shoes rather than wear boots. They are an elderly couple so this is, in part, understandable. “If they did access [it] through the timber shed area in the years before that this does not mean that there is any absolute right to do so and they would have had to climb over walls, gates or fences to do so on many occasions.” Paddy said: “We’re very concerned that a decision in this case could significantly broaden the areas that are excluded from access rights and that would have an extremely detrimental effect. Because even if the areas concerned are small, they could block important access routes.”Ann Gloag In 2006, the Stagecoach founder Ann Gloag won the right to exclude a large area of grounds around Kinfauns castle, her home and estate in Perthshire, from Scotland’s wide-ranging right-to-roam law. In a significant test case for the Land Reform (Scotland) Act 2007, a sheriff ruled that about 12 acres was exempt as it was private garden, including four acres of woodland that had been contested by the Ramblers and Perth and Kinross council. Drumlean In 2018, a Highland estate owned by a company based in Liechtenstein, lost a five-year legal battle with Loch Lomond and the Trossachs national park over access to a popular mountain, Ben Venue, near Aberfoyle. The estate, Drumlean, had locked three gates and had erected a sign warning walkers of wild boar. A sheriff originally found in Drumlean’s favour but appeal judges ruled the estate was bound by the Land Reform (Scotland) Act 2003 and allowed public access. Glen Lyon Hill-walkers, mountaineers and kayakers have been involved in a long-running dispute with north Chesthill estate in Glen Lyon, Perthshire, over access to its four Munros (mountains over 3,000ft) and rivers. The estate, covering 6,500 acres, argues these activities interfere with its deer-stalking operations. It says it will help walkers who call in advance but has locked gates, barred camping and erected keep-out signs. Ramblers Scotland argues almost every other shooting estate manages to allow access and has urged Perth and Kinross council to take legal action to secure it. Manson/Penicuik The Mansons, a couple living on the outskirts of Penicuik, south of Edinburgh, erected an 8ft-high locked gate across a footpath near their bungalow that led to Penicuik country estate. They claimed public use and antisocial behaviour had disturbed their family and undermined their privacy in breach of their human rights. Midlothian council ordered the couple to unlock the gate and in 2018, a sheriff agreed with the council and said the gate should remain unlocked.Publishers of the Mail on Sunday have agreed to pay “financial remedies” to the Duchess of Sussex, three years after she began a protracted privacy battle over a handwritten letter to her estranged father. On Sunday, the newspaper printed a statement at the bottom of its front page telling its readers that the duchess had won her legal case for copyright infringement against Associated Newspapers for articles published in the Mail on Sunday and posted on Mail Online. On page three it ran a 64-word news story stating it had infringed copyright and that “financial remedies have been agreed.” The story was also published on the Mail Online website at 11.58pm on Christmas Day with links to judgments made by courts. The duchess sued Associated Newspapers over five articles reproducing extracts from a “personal and private” letter to Thomas Markle in August 2018. She won her case earlier this year when the high court judge Lord Justice Warby gave summary judgment in her favour without the need for a trial. Associated Newspapers appealed on the grounds that the case should have gone to trial. That appeal was dismissed earlier this month by court of appeal judges Sir Geoffrey Vos, Dame Victoria Sharp and Lord Justice Bean. They ruled that the duchess had a “reasonable expectation” of privacy regarding the contents of the letter. “Those contents were personal, private and not matters of legitimate public interest,” Vos said. Afterwards the duchess called for a reshaping of the tabloid industry and spoke of how she had been patient in the face of “deception, intimidation, and calculated attacks”. In her statement, she said: “This is a victory not just for me, but for anyone who has ever felt scared to stand up for what’s right. While this win is precedent-setting, what matters most is that we are now collectively brave enough to reshape a tabloid industry that conditions people to be cruel, and profits from the lies and pain that they create. “From day one, I have treated this lawsuit as an important measure of right versus wrong. The defendant has treated it as a game with no rules. The longer they dragged it out, the more they could twist facts and manipulate the public (even during the appeal itself), making a straightforward case extraordinarily convoluted in order to generate more headlines and sell more newspapers – a model that rewards chaos above truth. “In the nearly three years since this began, I have been patient in the face of deception, intimidation, and calculated attacks. Today, the courts ruled in my favour – again – cementing that the Mail on Sunday, owned by Lord Jonathan Rothermere, has broken the law. The courts have held the defendant to account, and my hope is that we all begin to do the same. Because as far removed as it may seem from your personal life, it’s not. “Tomorrow it could be you. These harmful practices don’t happen once in a blue moon – they are a daily fail that divide us, and we all deserve better.” Associated Newspapers said at the time that it was “very disappointed” by the ruling and an appeal to the supreme court was being considered. The duchess’s costs had been estimated at £1.5m before the appeal, but that figure will have increased with the appeal. The Mail on Sunday and Mail Online statement publication had been ordered by Lord Justice Warby earlier this year. In March he agreed that the font size could be smaller than that asked for by the duchess. Representatives of Associated Newspapers and the Duchess of Sussex have been approached for comment.There has not been much in the last decade that has given Rachel Reeves cause for optimism. Serious and careful, she has been one of Labour’s most candid critics in discussing how far the party has to go to win back trust, especially on the economy. But the shadow chancellor is more optimistic about Labour’s chances now than even during the polling heights of the Miliband years. “I think we are in the strongest position we’ve been, maybe in the last 10 years,” she says, sitting in a corner of Bramley Elderly Action in her Leeds West constituency while the hall next door hosts a group doing tai chi. “I knock on doors in my own patch every week; the response I’ve had over the last weeks has been the best I’ve ever had in my time here. I was in Darlington with [the former MP and now peer] Jenny Chapman a couple of weeks ago. She said: ‘I can’t believe I didn’t get a landslide.’” During the first 18 months of Keir Starmer’s leadership, and the pandemic, it looked as if Labour was in paralysis, unable to oppose or offer much in the way of a dynamic alternative – an “odd time in politics” that has begun to subside. Then the news of Omicron’s spread began to dominate and No 10 was consumed by scandals over lockdown-breaking Christmas parties. But even before that, Labour had begun to creep ahead in the polls, building what became a nine-point lead. Still, that would not necessarily lead to a majority. “We’ve got a huge amount of work to do to rebuild people’s trust, not least in communities in the north of England. Lots of people were very, very angry,” Reeves says. Reeves believes Labour’s biggest task is to remove the association in people’s minds with Jeremy Corbyn’s Labour of 2019. Starmer’s determination to do so has infuriated many of his party activists, who believed passionately in its visionary and ambitious manifesto. The new-look shadow cabinet, including Yvette Cooper and Wes Streeting from the party’s centrist wing, sent a particular signal of intent. Starmer and Reeves are prepared to break with policies such as nationalisation that are crucial to many party members, as well as isolate those on the left of the parliamentary party. Reeves recalls some conversations on doorsteps in recent weeks that underline that approach. “People are not saying they regret their vote; they voted Tory for a reason. And they probably would do it again if offered the same choice again. But it’s not the same choice. It’s a different choice next time. We are turning that oil tanker around after four election defeats. And Keir and I are both pretty determined people. We know what needs to be done.” Reeves’ constituency office is in Bramley shopping centre, in an area that is largely white and economically deprived, and where she warned of significant community tensions during the EU referendum of 2016. The most recent community tensions have been more benign, with local people infuriated by the shopping centre’s decision to remove its benches. Some have staged sit-in protests with deckchairs. But at her surgery on a Friday morning there are a steady stream of worries about the costs of living: “Worries around gas/electricity bills; always worries about the cost of Christmas, but I think this year particularly; then there’s all these tax increases coming down the line next year.” Reeves says this anxiety is feeding into more widespread anger about Tory cronyism, corruption and rule-breaking. “We did our best to make those political issues at the local elections. And in the end it didn’t really work. And yet now we’re making those same arguments and it is starting to resonate more.” Though Starmer now also leads Boris Johnson by 13 points on the poll question of who would make best PM, it is the economy where Labour is still struggling to make inroads with voters. The latest YouGov poll had the Tories six points ahead on economic competence. It is a daunting task for Reeves, a former Bank of England economist, but she says she can challenge that perception. “Even now, there is £1m a day [spent] on consultants within test and trace,” she said. “If that’s getting to grips with public finances, I can do a lot better than that.” Another part of Labour’s narrative is that the government has overpromised and underdelivered, especially for the north of England. “I think we feel on the east coast side we’re really missing out,” she says. “Leeds station is at 101% capacity. The government says ‘we’re going to use existing infrastructure to have faster trains between Leeds and Manchester’. Well, good luck with that.” Reeves stresses sound financial management, words that can set off alarm bells on the left. But she says it will give her spending announcements greater impact, such as the £28bn a year on climate measures that she announced at the Labour conference. “The net zero carbon stuff and the climate investment pledge is more ambitious than anything that we had during the Corbyn era and I’m really proud of that,” she says. It is a major spending pledge that the Conservatives find hard to criticise but also hard to match given the chancellor, Rishi Sunak’s fiscal rules. But would public ownership of energy companies not be a way to force clean growth, as well as showing a way through other issues such as water companies dumping sewage? “I actually don’t think you need to nationalise to stop the sewage from going into the sea,” Reeves says. “You just need much tighter regulation.” But the cost is the true issue. “The truth is, we’ve got debt as 100% of GDP. A chancellor can’t say yes to everything. You’ve got to decide what the priorities are. And for me, the climate investment pledge is absolutely fundamental to what my priorities would be as chancellor.” In contrast with the fractious relationship between Nos 10 and 11, Reeves peppers her remarks with “Keir and I” and talk of sharing speech notes with the leader. When the election comes, they will be a double act reminiscent of how David Cameron and George Osborne presented to the electorate. That was how Starmer pitched the role to Reeves: a package. “When Keir gave me the job he said people have got to be able to imagine me as prime minister, and they’ve got to be able to trust you with their money,” she says. “Those two things are essential if Labour is to get back into office.”Throughout 2021, I have accepted some important truths: I sometimes feel loneliness like an anvil on my chest; exercising really does, annoyingly, make me feel better; I am lost without a murder drama series on the go. This has been the year of the re-watch – Happy Valley, The Bridge, Unforgotten and The Killing. These shows are richly different and should not be reduced to basic tropes, but they do all share a strong-but-flawed female detective in whom you can invest emotionally. And do I. In a year stained by uncertainty, loss, health issues and boredom, spending my evenings absorbing the lives of fictional female police officers has been medicinal. That murder is a balm is perhaps something for a therapy session, but the determination and bruised souls of Sarah Lancashire’s Catherine Cawood, Nicola Walker’s Cassie Stuart , Sofia Helin’s Saga Norén and Sofie Gråbøl’s Sarah Lund have held my attention like nothing else – even the second or third time around. I watched The Killing for the third time as summer petered out and felt particularly captivated by Lund: the forensic gaze, the abruptness, the walking out of rooms when she’s had enough of someone, the lovely face that wears remorse for which she can rarely find words. Lund isn’t real, but my experience of her is; watching a woman use her brilliant brain when mine felt like mushroom soup was just right. I envied her drive, though her inability to sustain relationships broke my heart. She moved me, when not much else did. I explain all this to Gråbøl over Zoom. When she pops up, I have the feeling of seeing an old friend. “What you’re saying is very touching,” she says. “I felt so at home in this character, which is a paradox because she wasn’t a pleasant person to inhabit. She has a strong connection to what feels right, yet there was something very lonely about her.” While filming The Killing, Gråbøl was “in another world”. When they stopped, “it was like when you’re a kid and creating a world while playing, then your parent opens the door and says: ‘It’s dinner time!’ A bubble burst.” We discuss the power of art in giving us other worlds to inhabit – something many of us have needed this year. “At the root of the human experience is a need to be mirrored, to have different languages for what we go through,” she says. I tell Gråbøl that my friend and I, watching The Killing simultaneously, kept sending each other a screenshot of Lund with slightly wild hair as an investigation becomes all-consuming. Her vague unkemptness spoke to us in our less-vague detachment from personal grooming as the ennui of the pandemic rumbled on. Gråbøl laughs into her cup of tea: “I don’t know whether to take that as a compliment or an insult!” It has been “a massive year-and-a-half” for Gråbøl. She bought a house for the first time. “I’ve always been frightened of tying myself financially like that because my work life is so uncertain,” she says. “An anxiety of uncertainty is rooted in me and has been since I was a child, before I had the language for it. But I had longed for a little garden, so I just went for it.” As well as working on the film Rose with The Girl With the Dragon Tattoo’s director, Niels Arden Oplev, in which she plays a woman with schizophrenia, Gråbøl filmed The Shift, a new series directed by Lone Scherfig (An Education), playing the midwife Ella, in a maternity ward at a Danish hospital. In July, Gråbøl had a two-week break. During this time, her mother, who had been having cancer treatment, became very ill. “It has always been my big fear that someone close to me would fall ill because, in my line of work, you can’t just say: ‘I’m leaving now,’” she explains. Those two weeks were her mother’s last. “It allowed me to be there every day, and, at the end, sleep with her in the hospice. I washed her and prepared her for the funeral, following her the whole way, really. It was beautiful. I feel privileged that my mother’s death was like a masterclass in how to die.” I am struck by her elegance in describing such a significant loss. While researching her role in The Shift, Gråbøl helped to deliver a baby in a real maternity ward. “I have given birth to two children, but: wow,” she smiles, wide-eyed. “Witnessing a birth is something else. I had never seen a birth or a death, but experienced both within the same month. Birth and death are bubbles of their own; the outside world becomes almost fictional. There is nothing else.” Understandably, Gråbøl feels like the “tectonic plates” of her being have shifted. “We are cleaning out my mother’s apartment and my son is going to move in. So many huge changes have happened and the pandemic being the background to it all has felt quite appropriate,” she says. “The landscape has shifted, but now I will start learning how to move around in it. I have the sense that the collective shock we’ve gone through with the pandemic means we all have to do this, to an extent.” As the light fades in our respective homes and we say goodbye, I think: “You’re right.”Libya’s political crisis has taken on an increasingly international dimension after the UK was accused of defending corruption and interfering in internal processes by calling for the interim government to remain in power pending the rescheduling of delayed elections. The country’s first presidential elections, scheduled for 24 December, were indefinitely postponed at the last minute, largely because fierce disagreements over who should be allowed to stand had not been resolved. On the day the vote should have taken place, the UK in Libya Twitter account published a message saying it continued to recognise the interim government of national unity “as the authority tasked with leading Libya to elections and does not endorse the establishment of parallel governments or institutions”. In response the foreign affairs committee of the House of Representatives, Libya’s parliament, accused the UK ambassador, Caroline Hurndall, of violating diplomatic norms and unwarranted interference. The committee said only the House of Representatives – which has been accused of seeking to delay and even disrupt any elections – could decide on the role of the interim government. Some tribes went further, calling for Hurndall to be expelled. Fathi Bashagha, a presidential candidate and former interior minister, said: “Corruption is leading Libya to bankruptcy. We want to ask Britain a question: why does the British government apply the best anticorruption standards in its country, and want to protect corruption in Libya? Why is Britain defending the government and financial institutions in Libya?” The vote was intended to mark a fresh start for the oil-rich country, a year after a landmark ceasefire and more than a decade after its 2011 revolt that toppled and killed the dictator Muammar Gaddafi. Libya’s parliament is to meet on Monday to debate a new timeline and discuss the mandate of the current interim government, which was meant to end on Friday with the elections. Various factions and international powers are jockeying for position, amid concerns the political vacuum will lead to the resumption of fighting. The Tripoli-based unity administration is headed by Abdul Hamid Dbeibah, a tycoon who wants to run for president even though he pledged not to when he took up his current post. Analysts have suggested his rivals may wish to exploit the delay in order to put him out of the picture. Two other would-be candidates are particularly controversial: Gaddafi’s son Saif al-Islam Gaddafi, a divisive symbol of the old regime who is wanted by the international criminal court over war crimes allegations, and the warlord Khalifa Haftar, whose eastern-based forces staged a 16-month siege of Tripoli before last year’s ceasefire. The dispute over candidates’ eligibility reflects a deeper east-west disunity that has not been resolved. Haftar has been credited at various times with the support of Egypt and the United Arab Emirates and has been opposed by Turkey, which has backed militias from the west defending Tripoli with fighters and arms. It was not clear why the UK was singled out for such strong criticism given that a joint statement issued by the UK, France, Germany, Italy and the US also called for the current interim government to remain in power pending swiftly reorganised elections. In an apparent reference to Dbeibah, the statement said: “To avoid conflicts of interests and to promote a level playing field, candidates holding roles in public institutions should also continue vacating them until the announcement of the electoral results.” The western powers said they also backed the UN’s “call for disagreements on emerging political or military matters to be resolved without resorting to violence. We stand ready to hold to account those who threaten the stability or undermine the political and electoral process in Libya.” Najla El-Mangoush, the interim government’s foreign minister, appeared to slow the drive to elections by saying national unity was a precondition. “At this crucial moment in the history of Libya, we, Libyans and the international community, must realise that elections are a tool to achieve stability and not a specific goal,” she tweeted. “The elections should be based on the principle of reconciliation, a constitutional basis, and the unification of institutions.” Some observers have long doubted whether free elections are feasible in a country in which as many as 20,000 foreign forces including mercenaries are on the loose. Referencing protests over the postponement, Fadel Lamen, another presidential candidate, tweeted: “The demonstrations in Benghazi and Tripoli on Saturday are a real testimony to the will of the people and their insistence to have their voices heard and their votes counted. They voted with their feet to make sure that nobody domestic or intentional can deprive them.”I am lucky that in my life I knew Desmond Tutu, one of the greatest men of our time. This tiny giant, this impish little priest, had the dangerously insane courage of the gods. And it was through his God that he found the voice to unremittingly challenge oppressors and speak endlessly, eloquently for the beaten down, the trodden on, the innocent and poor of this world. And later, when the righteous justice of his rhetoric had come to pass, he – along with his great friend Nelson Mandela – proposed the national dignity that only forgiveness of the past and the vanquished can bestow. An archbishop knows the root spring of their moral thought and spiritual teaching, and Tutu was above everything a priest – albeit the funniest one I’ve ever known. He was inexhaustible and exhausting in conversation, challenging every one of your cherished premises with either an irritable dismissiveness or a derisive giggle – which was extremely annoying! He was brave beyond measure. His constant challenge to the ideology and agents of thuggish power put him in grave danger. Showing no fear, he railed against their iniquities and rallied his people, never allowing them to falter or doubt the legitimacy of their struggle. And yet his prayers, his speeches, while suffused with rage, preached peace. His rejection of violence as the instrument of the weak and frightened, of those who had nothing left but the club, whip and gun, was once again proved correct. He would not, he could not, be stopped or silenced. This along with the equally towering display of moral authority from Mandela, his partner in change, allowed for the extraordinary and final peaceful exchange of power in South Africa. It allowed also for the equally extraordinary, intellectually generous insight that advocated and organised the reconciliation commissions. Here, all would unburden themselves of their pains, sufferings and shameful pasts in a great national expression of forgiveness and healing that enabled Tutu’s new country to emerge with hope from its awful original sins. This “turbulent priest” was protected by his collar. Unlike Mandela, it was much more difficult to put “a man of the cloth” into prison or exile. He was a prince of the Church of England, and wore its invisible but palpable, if sometimes patchy, cloak of immunity about his tiny frame. The apartheid regime did not want to lose any more overseas friends than necessary, and so Archbishop Tutu ascended his pulpit stairs and in that sing-song voice told stories to his people that spoke of inherent rights, of human dignity, of the equality of man and the inevitable defeat of injustice, and spoke plain and simply, about the brute realities of the oppressive regime under which his congregations laboured. And then he spelled out hope and the means to achieve it. Of course he got the Nobel peace prize. He was a laugh. He was great fun to be with. He was indefatigable. Probably a total nightmare to be married to. Bob Geldof is a singer, songwriter, author and political activistSports Direct founder Mike Ashley’s retail group is reported to have tabled an offer to buy Footasylum, the trainer retailer that rival JD Sports has been instructed to sell by the competition regulator. The offer is the latest development in a running battle between Ashley’s Frasers Group and JD Sports over access to the best goods from key suppliers, such as Nike and Adidas, as well as the attention of shoppers. JD Sports was ordered to sell Footasylum’s 65 stores by the Competition and Markets Authority (CMA) in November, after the watchdog ruled that JD’s purchase of the smaller chain of trainer shops would result in a worse deal for shoppers. The regulator must approve the new purchaser to ensure it is a truly independent competitor – unless JD Sports successfully appeals against the ruling. Frasers, which owns the House of Fraser department stores and luxury streetwear retailer Flannels as well as Sports Direct, has notified the CMA of its plan to make an offer, according to a report in the Sunday Times. At the time of the CMA’s decision, JD said the regulator blocking its merger with Footasylum “defies logic”. Peter Cowgill, the executive chair of JD, has also suggested that the decision was influenced by his key competitor. Last year, in a veiled reference to Sports Direct, he said: “Incredibly, the CMA has been taken in by the self-serving testimony of one notoriously vocal competitor, who has made numerous public announcements.” He said that competitor had “blatantly participated in the process for their own commercial interests rather than for the benefit of consumers”. The Bury-based retail group agreed to buy Footasylum in March 2019 for £90m, but the deal has been caught in a tortuous process since then, with the CMA repeatedly trying to block it. JD declined to comment and Frasers did not respond to a request for comment.From the moment he resigned from his post as a schoolteacher rather than comply with the orders of the racist, repressive apartheid regime in South Africa in 1958, Desmond Tutu never deviated from his principles, fighting for tolerance, equality and justice at home and abroad. This brought him love, influence and a moral prestige equalled by few others on the African continent or beyond. But Tutu, the cleric and activist who died on Sunday in Cape Town aged 90, was not just outspoken in support of the causes he felt to be right – such as LGBT rights – but a fierce and implacable opponent of what he felt to be wrong. Criticism was often tempered with humour. On occasion, it was delivered straight. This earned him enemies, and still does. Tutu’s first and most famous enemy was the apartheid system that prevailed in his homeland from 1948. Fully engaged in the freedom struggle from the late 1970s, Tutu was a key figure in telling the rest of the world about the grievances of South Africa’s exploited majority communities. The cleric and activist, branded a “rabble-rouser” by authorities, did not pull his punches. Apartheid was as bad as “nazism”, he told the United Nations in 1988, adding that politicians in the west who failed to support sanctions campaigns against the regime in Pretoria were racists. “We don’t want to drive the white people into the sea, we don’t want to destroy white people,” said Tutu, who won the Nobel peace prize in 1984 for his nonviolent efforts to end apartheid and avoid devastating conflict in South Africa. “But is it too much to ask that in the land of our birth, we walk tall as human beings made in the image of God? … To say we want to be free?” In a letter, Tutu, then head of the South African Council of Churches, informed Margaret Thatcher in 1984 that a British invitation to the South African prime minister to visit the UK was “a slap in the face of millions of black South Africans who are the daily victims of one of the most vicious policies in the world”. But he did not spare those in power in the “rainbow nation” that emerged after South Africa’s first free election in 1994. The phrase was his own, and set up aspirations that were never fulfilled. A decade later, Tutu gave a high-profile lecture in which he listed the many achievements of his countrymen under democracy but implied that many came despite their new political rulers who sought their own advancement before that of the poor. “What is black empowerment when it seems to benefit not the vast majority but a small elite that tends to be recycled? Are we not building up much resentment that we may rue later? We are sitting on a powder keg,” Tutu said. The Nobel laureate’s criticism of the ruling African National Congress party became even harsher during the tenure of President Jacob Zuma, which ended in 2018 amid allegations of systematic corruption and maladministration. Relations between the ANC and Tutu improved slightly after Cyril Ramaphosa, a former labour activist and tycoon who has sought to bring in moderate reform and fight graft, took power. Ramaphosa’s tribute on Sunday, with its reference to the passing of “a generation of outstanding South Africans who have bequeathed us a liberated South Africa”, underlines the general sense of disillusionment with their successors and it will be the Anglican church, not the government, that will organise the former archbishop’s funeral, according to Covid restrictions as South Africa battles its fourth wave of infections. Even now, some Zuma loyalists have distanced themselves from the outpouring of grief and tributes. One reason is the memory of the cleric’s rigorous and personally harrowing leadership of South Africa’s truth and reconciliation commission, which investigated apartheid-era crimes to bring closure to victims and the nation. Tutu’s commitment and determination did not just anger supporters of the white officials constrained to disclose the depredations of the apartheid regime. The council’s investigation of Winnie Madikizela-Mandela, Nelson Mandela’s former wife, for the abduction and eventual murder of a teenager still rankles. On social media on Sunday, some called Tutu a “stooge for white people”. In reality, Tutu took aim at exploiters and autocrats anywhere he found them. Justly lauded as an icon of nonviolent activism, he enraged those who prefer less pacific means to effect change or hold on to power. Robert Mugabe, the former dictatorial leader of Zimbabwe, resorted to insults to counter Tutu’s cutting words, calling their author “an angry, evil and embittered little bishop”. Such sentiments did not bother the smiling, chuckling, charismatic cleric – though Tutu confessed to one interviewer that he “loved to be loved”. Even in the Anglican church, an institution to which he dedicated much of his life, Tutu’s liberal understanding of faith riled many. No one doubted his faith or commitment to the institution but not every cleric enjoyed hearing about a God who had a “soft spot for sinners” and fewer still on a continent riven by visceral homophobia appreciated his vocal, consistent support for LGBT rights. “I would not worship a God who is homophobic and that is how deeply I feel about this,” he said in 2013. “I would refuse to go to a homophobic heaven. No, I would say, ‘Sorry, I would much rather go to the other place.’” He also supported the right to assisted death, another controversial position within the church. Other interventions argued for urgent action against climate change and a change in US policy on Israel. Right to the end Tutu was “on the side of the angels”, as one resident of a township not far from where the archbishop lived and died said on Sunday. In one of his last public appearances, aged 89, he received a Covid vaccine, an important statement in a country that has lost up to 250,000 lives to the pandemic out of a population of 59m, according to excess mortality figures, and suffers from widespread vaccine hesitancy. Analysts predict a battle over Tutu’s legacy as South African political factions jostle to claim they are the true heirs of “the Arch”, as he was familiarly known. For the moment though, there is profound grief at the loss of the country’s “moral compass” and a genuine sense of bereavement. “South Africa and the world has lost one its greatest parents and role models. [Tutu] was abnormally imbued with a sense of pastoral duty to serve the best interests of his species – the human family – and planet,” a statement from the office of the archbishop of Cape Town said. “To do the right thing. To make people feel part. To advance justice, humanness, peace and joy … His work is not done; it is in our hands now.”That’s it for another Boxing Day ... doubt many of you managed to find the winner of the big race but hope you got a winner or two from the many meetings that took place. I’ll be back here tomorrow on Monday for the Welsh National and, at last, the return of Shishkin at Kempton. See you then! Watch Tornado Flyer finishing late and fast to pull off a surprise in the King George! A great story emerging in Ireland where Master McShee provided one-horse trainer Paddy Corkery and jockey Ian Power with the biggest success of their careers when pipping Farouk D’alene in the Grade One Faugheen Novice Chase at Limerick. Corkery said: “Rumour has it we turned down good money, but he wasn’t for sale - you can’t buy something that’s not for sale. This is my enjoyment and my wife and kids will tell you it is a passion. I get up in the morning and ride him out every day. “I started hunting at the age of 40 and I’m enjoying it and that’s the most important thing. I bought this horse from John and Morgan Sheehan and I bought another horse from them recently and would be very disappointed if he’s not as good as this fella. A glass of wine is the short-term plan, and a few pints of Guinness if I can get them!” You saw that list of winnerts of the King George earlier ... there has never been another at longer odds than Tornado Flyer! Winning King George rider Danny Mullins told ITV Racing: “I didn’t think he was totally out of it as he has always had the promise to deliver something like this. I knew he had a squeak and going away from the stands the second time he started to come alive. Down the back I was able to keep filling him up. “When he got to the last he started idling and I wouldn’t have minded Asterion getting to me as I think I had a little left - but I was happy enough to be left along in front. When you are riding for Willie you’ve always got a chance whatever their price. I was lucky enough to ride a Grade One winner for him the other week at a big price, you’ve always got a chance. “This year has been a great year for me, loads of winners at big festivals and to top it off with the King George is great. It’s one of the races of the season.” The King George provided quite a shock success for trainer Willie Mullins and rider Danny Mullins with Tornado Flyer victorious at 28-1. The full report is here ... 1 Tornado Flyer (D E Mullins) 28-1 2 Clan Des Obeaux (H Cobden) 7-2 3 Saint Calvados (G Sheehan) 25-1 9 ran And they’re off ... Frodon and Minella Indo lead at the first and Tornado Flyer makes a mistake ... Frodon and Minella Indo four lengths clear in the early stages ... Frodon now goes on ... Mister Fisher makes an error and is last but one ... Clan Des Obeaux is in third ... Saint Calvados is at the back ... Minella Indo now moves up to take a narrow lead with a circuit to go but Frodon regains front spot ... Minella Indo ridden along ... Clan Des Obeaux into second ... Chantry House under pressure ... and is pulled up ... Frodon leads with Clan Des Obeaux challenging and Saint Calvados moves into the lead with Frodon beaten ... Clan Des Obeaux is challenged by Tornado Flyer who takes the lead and Asterion Forlonge falls at the last ... Tornado Flyer is a shock winner! 7/2 Minella Indo 7/2 Clan Des Obeaux 4/1 Chantry House 11/2 Asterion Forlonge 7/1 Frodon 20/1 Lostintranslation 22/1 Saint Calvados 22/1 Tornado Flyer 28/1 Mister Fisher Full betting at Oddschecker Six of the nine runners for the King George VI Chase on Boxing Day have at least one Grade One win to their name already and five are currently trading at single-figure odds, so the 2021 running of Kempton Park’s showpiece event has fair claims to be not only the strongest renewal this century but also the most competitive. We could even have co-favourites at the off as Clan Des Obeaux, Minella Indo, Chantry House and Asterion Forlonge are all currently priced up between 4-1 and 5-1, while Frodon and Bryony Frost, who led all the way last year to win at 20-1, will go off at around 7-1 this time around, after a drift in the betting over the last couple of days. Anyone who simply wants to back the best horse in the field need look no further than Minella Indo, who is 3lb in front of Clan Des Obeaux on the official numbers and 5lb ahead according to the much-respected Timeform organisation. Finding the best (itals) bet (unital) in the race, however, is a different puzzle entirely, as Minella Indo’s best form has come at Cheltenham and he needed every yard of the extended three-and-a-quarter miles to get the better of A Plus Tard in the Gold Cup. The recent rain should be in his favour, and Rachael Blackmore, his jockey, has a rare talent for adapting her tactics to suit the situation at hand, but Minella Indo was only fourth in the Irish Gold Cup over three miles in February and was a beaten favourite too – behind Frodon - on his seasonal debut at Down Royal in October. Clan Des Obeaux, on the other hand, is ideally suited to Sunday’s track and trip, as he showed in impressive victories in this race in 2018 and 2019. He is now almost 10, however, was below his best behind Frodon 12 months ago and has not seen a racecourse since Punchestown in April. His best may no longer be quite enough. Frodon and Frost were worthy winners last season and will again be very difficult to overhaul in the straight if they can settle into their usual rhythm in front. But they are unlikely to be allowed such an easy time of it in front and this also looks like a stronger race. The juice has been squeezed out of Chantry’s House’s odds in recent days and while he is five-from-six over fences, he looks short enough at his latest odds on his first start in an open Grade One. As a result, the value bet may be the 5-1 available about Asterion Forlonge (3.05). Willie Mullins’s seven-year-old made a slow start over fences, falling in two of his first three chase starts, but his 14-length win off 152 in a handicap at Punchestown in April was backed up by an excellent time and he looked a very likely winner when he unseated Bryan Cooper three out in a strong renewal of the John Durkan at the same track earlier this month. The grey’s jumping had been sound to that point, as it was when he won in the spring, and he is also well suited to a right-handed track. His looks overpriced to give Mullins his second King George winner, 20 years on from his first win with Florida Pearl. 1 Epatante (Nico de Boinville) 4-5 Fav 2 Glory And Fortune (Stan Sheppard) 28-1 3 Soaring Glory (Jonjo O’Neill Jr.) 17-2 5 ran And they’re off ... Not So Sleepy leads from Epatante ... Soaring Glory in third ... Epatante takes it up at the third-last hurdle ... Not So Sleepy fights back ... Epatante has the lead and goes for home ... has a clear lead at the last and goes on for a comfortable enough win. Epatante Evens fav Not So Sleepy 7/2 Tritonic 4/1 Soaring Glory 9/1 Glory And Fortune 50/1 Full betting at Oddschecker Not So Sleepy and Epatante dead-heated for the Fighting Fifth at Newcastle in November and there should be little to choose between them again here. Drying ground may just tip the balance towards Nicky Henderson’s mare. 1 Good Boy Bobby 4/1 2 Lord Du Mesnil 33/1 3 Top Ville Ben 10/1 And they’re off ... Good Boy Bobby leads a packing field with only Windsor Avenue having made a mistake so far ... Takingrisks comes under pressure as well as Windsor Avenue ... Takingrisks now has pulled up ... Silver Hallmark is getting tailed off ... Lake View Lad is not going well ... Cloudy Glen going well behind Good Boy Bobby in the lead ... Empire Steel makes a challenge as Cloudy Glen weakens ... Empire Steel falls ... Lord Du Mesnil and Top Ville Ben challenge the leader ... it’s slow motion stuff ... Good Boy Bobby stays in the lead all the way to win. Silver Hallmark 11/4 Good Boy Bobby 9/2 Empire Steel 9/2 Windsor Avenue 13/2 Cloudy Glen 9/1 Lake View Lad 11/1 Top Ville Ben 14/1 Full betting at Oddschecker Debece has shown glimmers of real class at times in a stop-start career and could be worth chancing first time up after a second wind op over the summer. 1 Bravemansgame (H Cobden) 6-5 2 Ahoy Senor (D R Fox) 11-10 Fav 3 Kiltealy Briggs (Adrian Heskin) 28-1 4 ran And they’re off ... Ahoy Senor is sent into a clear early lead and is already about six lengths clear ... Bravemansgame is second ... the leader got into the roots of the third and is now about two lengths up from Bravemansgame ... Kiltealy Briggs and Tea Clipper are close behind ... no change in the order as they pass the post with a circuit to go ... the leader jumps better but then got too close to the open ditch ... Bravemansgame gets close to the leader but then Ahoy Senor gets too close to a fence again and is challenged for the lead ... Ahoy Senor gets taken by Bravemansgame who kicks clear and wins well from Ahoy Senor who simply made too many mistakes. It’s soft all over now after continued precipitation 5/6 Bravemansgame 5/4 Ahoy Senor 20/1 Tea Clipper 33/1 Kiltealy Briggs FULL BETTING AT ODDSCHECKER 1.55 A fascinating head-to-head in prospect between Ahoy Senor and Bravemansgame, the best staying novices of the season so far. At the likely odds, marginal preference is for Lucinda Russell’s six-year-old, who stormed 31 length clear of the runner-up at Newbury last time. 1 Jacamar (D E Mullins) 11-1 2 Mister Coffey (S Bowen) 7-2 Co Fav 3 Your Darling (K Brogan) 9-1 8 ran And they’re off ... Danny Kirwan leads over the first with Bothwell Bridge not clever at the first and then falls at the second with Nico de Boinville deposited on the turf ... Danny Kirwan still has the lead with Your Darling in second and Mister Coffey none too fluent over the fences so far ... the loose horse has galloped in front of the filed but appears not to be making much more of his presence ... Iconic Muddle makes a bad mistake ... Killer Kane was a little disappointing there and now Your Darling comes up to challenge Danny Kirwan ... and Your Darling is away well from the second-last with Jacamar trying to get on terms and gets up late. A great start to the TV races tipping for Greg Wood, the Guardian tipster who has been in such good form this year. Cornelius Lysaght gives us a view of the Kempton crowd from the press room 11/4 Bothwell Bridge 3/1 Danny Kirwan 4/1 Mister Coffey 8/1 Sebastopol 9/1 Killer Kane 10/1 Iconic Muddle 12/1 Jacamar 12/1 Your Darling Latest betting at Oddschecker Jacamar is still winless after three starts over fences but has shown something to work on in all three. He was clear of two previous winners at Wincanton last time, has cheekpieces applied to help his concentration and looks too big as the outsider of the field at around 14-1. Still looks pretty packed despite the smaller crowd at Kempton! Quieter than normal today at Kempton (so we won’t get those shots of people in their cars filing into the track well after racing has started!) The rain has arrived in the south east of England and Chantry House is now challenging for favouritism in the King George VI Chase following heavy support on Boxing Day morning. The Nicky Henderson-trained runner has been backed into 7-2 (from 9-2) while Clan Des Obeaux is out to 7-2 and Minella Indo now 4-1 with a BritishGambler.co.uk spokesperson stating that Chantry House “has received most of the betting attention attracting 32% of bets through the market in the last 24 hours”. Racing TV presenter Jonathan Neesom has walked the track and reports: “This is the softest I’ve ever known it ... it’s not as bog – it’s soft, good to soft in places as stated in the going description and it’s going to be a proper test.” Here’s a list of all the great winners of the King George from when I went to Kempton in the wake of the chock news of the Jockey Club announcing it was considering selling the track! I’m a big fan of the King George and it’s great to see the Gold Cup winner (Minella Indo) lining up this afternoon. Indeed, since Cheltenham hero Long Run was caught by Kauto Star in 2011, only one reigning Gold Cup winner, Native River in 2018, has lined up for the Kempton showpiece. Good morning and welcome to the Boxing Day racing live blog ... it’s damp out there unless you’re in the north where David Carr of the Racing Post set off for the races through appropriately wintry conditions ... Good morning from a somewhat damp Kempton Park, where the gates have already opened to allow for checks on the Covid status of well over 10,000 fans expected to arrive for the King George VI Chase card this afternoon. The capacity, incidentally, is around 20,000 – the biggest recent crowd for this fixture was 22,038 in 2014 – but the continuing rise of the Omicron variant may well persuade plenty of regulars that this year’s renewal is better watched from the sofa. It will make for quite the contrast with Chepstow tomorrow, when the Welsh Grand National will be run behind closed doors after a last-minute change to the Welsh government’s Covid regulations last week. And what is always one of the most boisterous crowds of the year can look forward to an exceptionally open and competitive renewal of the feature race. Around 12mm of overnight rain has changed the going to good-to-soft, soft in places having previously been good-to-soft, good in places, a development which has been accompanied by some significant moves in the big-race betting market. The money has arrived for Nicky Henderson’s Chantry House, who will be making his first start in an open Grade One over fences, and he is now hunting up Clan Des Obeaux, the winner in 2018 and 2019, at the top of the market at around 7-2. At his current rate of progress, Chantry House will be favourite by the time racing gets underway at 12.45. Minella Indo, the Gold Cup winner, is weaker in the market, which is a little surprising as the rain should in theory improve the chance that his proven stamina will come into play. He is currently trading at around 9-2, while Asterion Forlonge, who has also travelled over from Ireland, is just half a point further back having been a 7-1 shot a couple of days ago. The really big drifter, though, is Frodon, who was third-favourite behind Clan Des Obeaux and Minella Indo on Christmas Eve but is now out to 7-1 to win for the second year running. Many fans would have been hoping to give Bryony Frost the reception she was denied 12 months ago after today’s big race, but that possibility seems to be diminishing by the hour. I’m sticking with Asterion Forlonge to get the job done later and a preview of all the action on ITV later is here, along with tips for all eight of today’s Boxing Day cards. If or when Chantry House is the new clear favourite for the King George, this will be the place to hear about it first – it promises to be a race and an afternoon to remember.Typical: Christmas evening, you turn on the television and it’s another bloody repeat. Although in fairness to England, pick through the dental records of their latest Ashes capitulation and you might just be able to identify a few distinguishing features. And above all the defining quality of their Boxing Day fiasco in Melbourne was the sense of hopelessness and predestination: of a team and a generation whose narrative arc has finally run dry. There was a time when England collapses had a kind of fascinating car-crash quality. These days, by contrast, they feel strangely banal: tedious, overfamiliar, predictable, like a recurring anxiety dream. The openers disappear early. Joe Root does something pointless and defiant. All of a sudden you’re back at your old school. Someone in the middle order plays a stupid shot. You turn over the exam paper, but there’s nothing on it. The No 9 hits an insolent 25. Suddenly you realise you’re totally naked. James Anderson walks off the field, nought not out. You wake, breathless and more tired than when you went to bed. It takes some effort to make your biggest encounter of all feel like a trite inconsequence, but somehow this England have managed it. Has a live series ever felt more dead? Have two theoretically well-matched teams (just look at the world rankings; Australia and England are separated by just a single point) ever produced such a calamitous mismatch? Has an England middle order ever played three worse shots than those Ben Stokes, Jos Buttler and Jonny Bairstow produced on the first afternoon of the third Test? Perhaps. Perhaps not. Certainly there were few expectations when Root departed shortly after lunch to leave England 82 for four, a familiar quandary. Yet as Stokes and Bairstow launched a squally counterattack, other futures briefly presented themselves. Twenty-eight runs came in the seven overs before drinks, including a huge six by Stokes off Nathan Lyon. All of a sudden, an opening. The ball was ageing. England were one good, solid hour from rebalancing the game. At which point Cameron Green returned to the attack, hanging the ball outside off stump, accumulating dots, daring Stokes to play the big shot. Lyon bowled very straight with a tight leg-side field, accumulating dots, daring Bairstow to play the big shot. Six overs cost just five runs. Has a plan ever been simpler or more transparent? In a way, those next few overs were England’s last few years in microcosm. You hit a rough patch, and you either endure or you flip out and do the bad thing. And over the last four or five years England have essentially turned doing the bad thing into a sort of performance art. Stokes had already tried to upper-cut Green over the slips a few overs earlier and narrowly escaped. Hey, why not try it again? After he had steered the ball meekly to gully, Buttler arrived and immediately seemed to lose heart. His second ball jagged back and bounced over his stumps. Mitchell Starc got one to leap off a length. Pat Cummins got one to die a little. And so, in the last over before tea, with the score 128 for five and Mark Wood the next man in, Buttler hit the ejector seat. It was a terrible shot. It would have been a terrible shot even if he had nailed Lyon into the crowd for six. It was the shot you play when your conscious brain is too tired to compute the knotted logistics of staying in, and the id simply takes over. It was the shot of a man out of form and out of rhythm, who in fatigue and desperation had convinced himself that he could regain his form and rhythm with one sweet contact. Bairstow at least had the excuse of batting with the tail, but in trying to cut a ball from Starc that was on about leg stump, he too deserves his share of ignominy. There is a theory out there that these are simply bad players, who have proved it again and again over time. But talent is a dynamic thing. Success is not a straight line. Players improve and learn and founder and regress and there is nothing inevitable about any of it. On talent alone, Stokes‑Bairstow-Buttler could have been one of the all-time great England middle orders. An axis upon which an entire era could have been built. Given defined roles in a confident team, they won a World Cup final pretty much on their own. Instead, this series feels like the end of the road for them as a trio. Haunted in the field and hounded with the bat, Buttler looks in desperate need of a break, perhaps even a permanent break. Stokes looks physically and mentally undercooked. Bairstow is surely on the last of his last chances. All three are over 30 and nearer the end than the beginning. And for all they have achieved together with a white ball, with a red ball the feeling of loss is inescapable: a promise not fulfilled, three pristine talents misused, mismanaged and forsaken.As the sun beat down on the throng massed outside Kabul airport, Najia Babakarkhail willed herself into silence, her face hidden by a makeshift disguise. Taliban fighters, armed with AK-47s, clad in black, were scanning the crowd where Babakarkhail, her daughter, and twin granddaughters stood, three generations of Afghan women all desperate to flee the recently fallen capital. Babakarkhail knew one small slip would betray them. She was a high-value target and easily recognisable to the Taliban. An Afghan politician and activist, outspoken on issues of social justice, her face had been regularly splashed across television and the papers in her province of Paktika, in eastern Afghanistan. The Taliban had already killed her brother and bodyguard. They had issued warnings directly to Babakarkhail herself. “So I wore sunglasses and I wore my skirt on my head,” she told the Guardian via an interpreter. “I was covering from everyone, and even I was not talking, I was afraid someone would recognise my voice.” For a week-and-a-half after the Taliban’s sudden capture of the capital, her family of seven had hid in their Kabul home, waiting for an inevitable knock on the door. “‘They can do anything, they will kill us’, I was thinking like this,” she said. “I was not afraid of death, but I was afraid for my family, I couldn’t see my family in danger.” Babakarkhail’s lifeline came from an unlikely source. Half a world away, in Australia, members of a small, unofficial group calling itself the 21st Kabul Lancers reached out to Babakarkhail’s daughter, Walwala Sayed, after she applied for a visa in her desperation to escape Afghanistan. The Lancers, all Australian and Afghan military and government figures, began working quietly as the Taliban’s march through Afghanistan gained momentum earlier this year. They have so far helped more than 300 people, including Australian citizens and residents, flee Afghanistan and reach Australia. The message the Lancers gave Walwala and her family was clear: they had a chance to escape to Australia. But it meant braving the chaos of Hamid Karzai International Airport to reach Australian soldiers. The family were told to wear specific coloured-headscarves, which would alert the Australians to their identity. The Lancers dispatched a driver to their house to ferry them to the airport. When they arrived, the crowds and chaos were too much. Taliban fighters were everywhere, some shooting into the sky. “I was crying, that was a very difficult time,” Walwala said. “So my mother told me to tell them ‘we are not going, it is better to stay here rather than dying outside of the airport’.” The Lancers convinced them to try again. Walwala remembers her twin daughters crying desperately, their skin frying in the relentless sun. One of the girls collapsed in the heat. “I said to them ‘sorry, we can’t come, it’s too dangerous. It’s impossible’,” she said. As night descended, the Lancers tried once more. The family were given coordinates for a bus and told to look out for its lights in the early morning darkness. The army were then sent to find the bus and ask for Babakarkhail’s family. Miraculously, the plan worked. The family were whisked to the airport, flown from Afghanistan, and eventually arrived in Australia. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The story of the Lancers is remarkable, but one not told officially by the Australian government. Forming as a “private and personal humanitarian venture to assist friends and acquaintances”, the group’s work is done independently. The Lancers have helped Australian-trained Afghan soldiers, interpreters, journalists and politicians flee Afghanistan, using local contacts and maintaining communication channels with a network of officials working on the evacuation. They provided escorts to transport targets via foot or vehicle. Groups were advised to carry bright coloured scarfs or umbrellas to help security forces identify them once they arrived at the airport. The group’s work includes helping Afghans bypass Taliban checkpoints, hide in safehouses, and link up with Coalition troops at Kabul airport. “The fall of Afghanistan was an unprecedented and extraordinary situation, met with acts of bravery, courage, and heroism from the Afghan people, the ADF, and Australian government officials and our allied mission partners,” one member tells Guardian Australia on condition of anonymity. “There are many who have stories of escape from Afghanistan, but even more stories continuing of those surviving in Afghanistan and those settling across the world and Australia.” ‘That day was very difficult’ As the Taliban entered Kabul, high-ranking defence officials were in Kabul’s Ministry of Defence building, holding their usual morning meetings. No one imagined the Kabul would take the city so quickly. One official, who cannot be identified to avoid endangering his family, remembers being in the room with president Ashraf Ghani’s defence minister, Bismillah Khan, when he realised Ghani had fled the country. It soon became clear the government had collapsed. “When we realised that the president is not more there, he left Afghanistan … he was the man who was commanding everything,” he told Guardian Australia. “So when he escaped, then the leadership of the Ministry of Defence said that now everything is all up, so we should not kill the people, because inside the Kabul city, it was very difficult to fight against Taliban.” The official quickly began to fear for his own life. He fled with the defence minister, and managed to get on a flight to Uzbekistan. His family were trapped in Kabul. “That day was very difficult to move anywhere, but I was talking to my mum and brothers, and I told them to be inside the house, don’t go anywhere,” he said. “After the Taliban started searching our place, one day they were coming to take the car, one day they were coming to take the weapons. And every day they keep coming. Even still they are searching, they are coming, they are asking especially for me.” The official managed to find the Lancers through an Australian who had previously advised the Afghan Ministry of Defence. The Lancers assisted a broader government effort to get him and other senior officers to fly from Uzbekistan to Australia. “All of them they have been evacuated by [the Lancers] to their Australia,” he said. Those who have escaped are hugely thankful to the Lancers and Australia for getting them to safety. But they also fear for their friends, family, and for Afghanistan under Taliban rule. “Everything was just destroyed in one day,” Babakarkhail said. “It’s very difficult. Even now I am not feeling good. I can’t stop thinking about my country, what will happen to our people, what will happen to our government. Why all the world is silent? Why no one is talking about our country?”For Sarah Clifton-Bligh, the most useful thing to have when you’re travelling is an older brother who plays rugby. Sydney-based Clifton-Bligh is fitter than most 17-year-olds. She’s a member of the junior athletics development squad and hopes to make the national team in racing and throwing sports. She has travelled around Australia and the world with her family for holidays and athletics meets. Clifton-Bligh also has cerebral palsy and uses a wheelchair most of the time. She can do incredible manoeuvres in her chair, and with the aid of ankle-foot orthoses and forearm crutches she can take a few steps – a small thing that makes a vast amount of difference when the family goes places – but too many stairs are an issue. “The worst place I’ve been was the New York subway,” Clifton-Bligh says. “There are not a lot of lifts in that subway system. There were these metal stairs and there was a platform and then there were another two flights of stairs. It was so bad.” Clifton-Bligh’s mother, Meredith Jordan, says “we were very lucky that we had a teenage son who could just fling Sarah over his shoulder and carry her up”. “It would be pretty challenging if you were doing it on your own.” One in six people in Australia have a disability – about 4.4 million of us – including half of people aged over 65. Many of those people – at least 44% of them – travel for pleasure. But disabled people routinely struggle to have their access needs met, and trying to organise a trip away comes with significant additional burdens, including a substantial investment of time and energy into extra layers of planning, and often additional costs. The data on accessible tourism across Australia is patchy. The latest comprehensive research, conducted in 2018 for the Australian Trade and Investment Commission, focused mainly on Victoria and Queensland. It estimated that domestic travellers with access needs numbered some 3.4 million people. And it’s not just disabled people, but also their families, friends and carers who are looking for accessible accommodation, experiences and services. As a market, it could be worth up to $8bn. The commission’s research also found Australian tourism providers could being doing much more. Surveys showed 23% of non-travelling disabled people found travel “so stressful it’s not worth it” and 22% found it “just too hard”. “There is a lack of useful and accurate information in the public domain that allows disabled people to plan travel,” says Dale Reardon, the founder of the accessible travel consultancy Travel For All. Reardon is blind and usually travels with a guide dog. He has made it his business to help other companies identify and improve their accessibility features and services. “Lots of accommodation sites want the tick to say they’re ‘fully accessible’, but that’s a meaningless phrase,” Reardon says. “A property perfect for a blind person may be no good for a person in a wheelchair. It’s not all about ramps or guide dogs.” Customer service for someone who is autistic, for example, might require staff having the right training, a flexible attitude and being empowered to bend the rules or make decisions on the spot. “We’re struggling to persuade a lot of businesses that our money is just as good as anyone else’s,” Reardon says. “Businesses often see accessibility almost as a charitable thing. Whereas we say, you can make as much money out of us as you can from everyone else. And we are very loyal customers.” The challenges with accommodation can be complex. Some places represent themselves as “fully accessible” when they are only partially so. Other places do not communicate their accessibility features at all – a common issue on Airbnb, which allows hosts to list features like grab rails, step-free entrances and step-free bathrooms, but few choose to do so. Disabled people have also reported being turned away from accommodation even when their needs could be met with a few simple, inexpensive compromises. Air travel can be particularly stressful. Wheelchair users are often required to change out of their own chairs on planes, with the chairs stored as luggage, running the risk of damage to expensive equipment due to mishandling. Toilets on planes are not accessible, with cramped conditions making it difficult for carers to assist, requiring some disabled travellers to fast before flying so they don’t need to use the onboard bathrooms. On the ground, wheelchair accessible taxis can be scarce the further away from the cities you go – and many taxi and Uber drivers refuse people with assistance animals, even though it is illegal to do so. There’s also the question of cost. The national disability insurance scheme funds services it deems “reasonable and necessary” insofar as they are related to a person’s disability, but travel, accommodation, food and entertainment don’t usually meet those criteria, even though many argue holidays are a health necessity. Those who require a support worker to travel with them usually find themselves footing the bill for an extra person on their trip. There are restrictions on the disability pension for recipients travelling internationally, with payments cutting off after 28 days out of the country, with some exceptions. Serena Ovens, the chief executive of the Physical Disability Council of New South Wales, says all this can make the process of going on holiday incredibly stressful. “If you can imagine having to ask 10, 20 times a day for accessibility adjustments, to have to constantly contact places and explain what your requirements are and have them treated as extraordinary – that’s not relaxation,” Ovens says. “That’s not a holiday.” One of the most persistent issues Clifton-Bligh and her family encounter is the lack of a shower chair. “You would think that would be something that wouldn’t be such a big deal, but it is,” Jordan says. “Which is why we just cracked and bought one. It can be taken apart and we take it with us.” Clifton-Bligh says she’s mostly been lucky with how she’s treated when flying – with the exception of a patronising experience at Dubai airport during a layover some years ago, in which she says she was not allowed to use her chair and was required to stay in a designated holding area, away from the duty-free shopping she’d been looking forward to, under the eye of an ever-present attendant. Clifton-Bligh has heard other horror stories from the disability community, too. “Sometimes the chairs get damaged on planes,” she says. Jordan adds: “We know people who’ve been bumped off planes, who’ve had to crawl down the aisle to the bathrooms.” The key to getting everything to work out, Jordan says, is starting a dialogue early. “When I book things, I will always send a big email saying this is what it’s for, this is what Sarah can do, she has a wheelchair, etc. I send a whole lot of context so I can get as much information about where we’re staying before we leave. And once I find somewhere that works, we go back there. “It’s just a matter of trying to do it significantly in advance, making sure you communicate with the accommodation provider and that they know what we want, and then if it’s not quite there, making it work.” Reardon urges businesses not to be afraid of the accessible tourism market. “They really are people of all shapes, sizes and abilities. And you probably have people staying with you already that you don’t know about who could benefit from extra information or accessibility. Give travellers very detailed information about your property so they can decide for themselves whether it suits their needs.” And don’t leave accessibility considerations to the last minute: “Some things that might have been very easy to do in the beginning are very difficult later on.” Ovens argues that investing in accessibility is good business sense. “For every person with a disability who doesn’t travel because of the logistical challenges, you have a family, you have carers, you have friends who did not travel either,” she says.Just as we enter the final days of 2021, along comes another very fine homegrown production to cap off a bumper year for Australian television. The first original series from streaming platform Binge, Love Me is a classy Melbourne-set drama directed by Emma Freeman (Stateless, Glitch) and written by Alison Bell, Leon Ford, Adele Vuko and Blake Ayshford. Adapted from the Swedish series Älska mig, it’s a romantic drama with a familial twist – we don’t realise the three distinct main characters whom the show follows are related until they congregate around the dinner table. We’re first introduced to Clara (Bojana Novakovic), in her late 30s, while she’s on a date with a bloke she met on an app, who discusses “ethical non-monogamy” over breakfast before pointing out she’s underpaid her portion of the bill by 50 cents. Focus shifts to Aaron (William Lodder), a 20-something law student who misses his bus to uni due to sexy times with his girlfriend (Shalom Brune-Franklin), though we soon learn he’s not the reckless, carefree type; he takes his schooling seriously. Finally we meet the middle-aged Glenn (Hugo Weaving) while he’s booking a vacation at a travel planner for himself and his wife. After he balks at a $20,000 price tag, the lady behind the desk informs him there are “gold, silver or bronze” packages, to which Glenn returns one of those thinking-out-loud responses: “How about copper? Or tin?” The screenwriters want us to know that these characters are individuals first and foremost, and a family unit second. Glenn’s wife and the kids’ mother Christine (Sarah Peirse) is headstrong and standoffish – giving the script a prickly dimension – but also chronically ill and not long for this world. Describing the subsequent narrative as one about “finding yourself” and “learning to love again” sounds a little twee, but it’s nevertheless apt, the former applying particularly to Aaron (the youngest of the trio) and the latter to Glenn, who may be soon to experience a new romantic opportunity, or at least a new friend. All the characters are vividly detailed and well acted, with Clara the most dynamic – brought to life in an affably hard-nosed way by Novakovic, and whom we really root for: we want her to find someone decent. The ever-reliable Weaving begins in downcast mode then lightens up, playing an avuncular kind of everyman, at one point describing himself as “just like anybody”. Lodder plays the brasher and more intemperate – perhaps less likable – member of the bunch, as a man who lacks maturity and life experience but is gradually coming into his own, learning some things the hard way. Love Me is more middle class in its Melbourne-ness than, say, the scuzzier and cooler Jack Irish or The Secret Life of Us, which are more likely to visit laneways and dimly lit bars. The cinematographer Earle Dresner (who shot The Newsreader, 2067 and The Commons) filters the city through a handsome lens, making even the brown and sludgy Yarra River – hardly a beatific body of water (I can say that, as a proud Melbournian) – look crisp and almost pretty. The drama is peppered with small moments that paint larger impressions of the people involved, fleshing characters out with lightness of touch – a joke, or some badinage, or a humorously relatable circumstance offsetting the heavier moments. Freeman et al do a fine job illustrating fresh sparks of romance: those early, exciting moments when the person in front of or next to us represents a universe of potential, with all the risks, uncertainties and exhilaration that comes with getting to know somebody new. Four episodes in (with two remaining that I haven’t seen), the character arcs are broad and the various story tangents loosely defined; this is a show that greatly prioritises people over plotlines. At times I wanted a little more flair in the writing and presentation, though Love Me has an endearing level-headed quality, and a gentle way of probing characters for information. In the fourth episode, for instance, Clara mishears the question “are you hungry?” as “are you happy?”, triggering a more meaningful exchange than one about breakfast. The writers don’t dwell on that moment for long, breezing into the next scene, which typifies their approach: avoiding the signposting of “important” moments. Despite the polished aesthetic, it all comes across quite effortlessly. Buoyed by thoughtfully developed characters and relatable circumstances, the series has a knack for making conceptually ordinary or even unappealing things interesting. It even makes the Yarra look nice. • Love Me is streaming now on BingeOn a Monday afternoon, late last summer, my eight-year-old daughter and I headed to Bronte beach after school. The ocean was wild, churning with whitewater, and more riled up than I had ever seen it. We decided to play it safe and have a dip in the ocean pool instead. It was not its usual tranquil oasis. Waves crashed over the ocean side, sending out swells that spread across the water. We initially hung out in the deep end, watching mesmerised, as daredevil teenagers standing on the ledge between the pool and the sea held onto barrier ropes to see if they could withstand the force of the waves. None could. We retreated to the shallow end, near the entrance. It seemed like one of the safest spots. We stood a few meters from the steps, submerged in the water, as we overlooked the dramatic view. We didn’t notice a huge wave break over the far end. It surged through to the back of the pool before receding in a powerful rip. We were standing directly in its path. Suddenly, the wave lifted my daughter up and pulled her over the edge of the pool towards the ocean. She started shouting and tried to cling to a pole. I can still picture her suspended horizontally between pool and ocean as she held on. I was still on my feet and in that nanosecond, I miraculously managed to grab on to the back of her swimsuit. I was standing in the pool and was sure I had managed to stop her from going over, but in the next devastating instant, still clutching fast to her swimsuit, the rip dragged us both headfirst over the ledge, over the sharp rocks, and straight into the whirling ocean. In the sea I lost my hold on my daughter. We were churned among the waves and rocks. She was further out than I was. Her head came up above the surface and I prayed I could reach her before the next wave swallowed us. It was the only thought animating my whole body: I have to get to her. That, and the dank fear at the pit of my stomach. My daughter drifted even further out to sea and as I was coming up for air, I heard a swimmer – I had no idea where he came from – call out to her from the ocean: “Don’t move darling. I got you, don’t worry. I got you …” A few moments later, as I struggled to get back to the pool, a hand appeared for me. I was pushed back a few times by the waves, but I was hoisted back to the ledge by onlookers who had gathered to help us. On the walkway ahead, I heard my daughter screaming out for me. She didn’t know if I had made it. I scooped her up in my arms, holding back my tears. Lifeguards arrived, ordered everyone out and closed down the pool. Our cuts and bruises were tended and I felt a quiet, stunned gratitude for the kindness of strangers. For days afterwards, the image of my daughter and I going over the edge returned relentlessly. But I was glad I had gone over with her, because seeing her pulled into the ocean alone would have been unbearable. I had been unable to save my own child, but at least I was with her. We only realised how banged up we were after emerging from the water. In the ocean we were only concerned with survival. The whole episode lasted minutes, though I lost track of time. In the weeks and even months that followed, we could not pass the pool without feeling a tremor of terror. Any turbulence in the water and my daughter refused to approach, her body tightening as she saw the waves break on the shore. For now, each small step towards the ocean feels like a leap of faith, an embrace of the future. When I least expect it, the words I heard at one of the most vulnerable moments in our life, “I got you” return and wash over me like an unexpected gift – a promise.Raymond Illingworth, who has died aged 89, was one of England’s most successful cricket captains, leading his side to a series victory in Australia, in 1970-71, and then retaining the Ashes at home, in 1972. A tough Yorkshireman and an all-rounder who gave nothing away with either bat or ball, as a skipper Illingworth was a master of the meaningful bowling change or disconcerting field adjustment, and could often affect the course of a match just by ratcheting up the psychological pressure on the opposition. He was also a superb man-manager who could get the best out of even the most difficult characters by applying equal measures of empathy, common sense and firmhandedness. While he undoubtedly benefited from having a strong team to nurture – with players including Geoffrey Boycott, John Edrich, Basil D’Oliveira, Derek Underwood and John Snow at his disposal – he also ensured that his players displayed tremendous spirit. Success came not only with England but, in exile from Yorkshire, in county cricket with Leicestershire, where as captain in the early 70s he turned an over-relaxed, unambitious side into a trophy-winning outfit. Later he returned to Yorkshire as their cricket manager and had a spell as England manager, although in both roles he had noticeably less success than on the pitch. Born in Pudsey, West Yorkshire, Raymond was the only child of Ida and Fred Illingworth. When he was four the family moved down the road to Farsley and his father, a cabinet maker, fashioned Raymond’s first cricket bat in his workshop. Determined to be a sportsman, at 11 he refused even to sit exams for grammar school and at 14 was apprenticed to his father, allowing him days off to play cricket for Farsley in the Bradford League. Much of his national service in the RAF was spent on the cricket field, including for the Combined Services, and he made his Yorkshire debut aged 19 in 1951, scoring 56 in his first innings. The county side of the era was a collection of hard, self-serving Yorkshiremen with acid tongues and zero sympathy for any new boy – “no word of encouragement, no helpful tips, no pat on the back … and heaven help you if things went wrong,” he recalled. It toughened him up quickly, but was a dispiriting experience that informed the nature of his later captaincy, which he aimed to make more inclusive. He was especially influenced by the appointment in 1958 of a more soft-focused but strong-minded captain, Ronnie Burnet, who promoted camaraderie rather than internal strife – and as a result won Yorkshire the County Championship in 1959 for the first time in a decade. That season was one of Illingworth’s best, and in the previous year he had made a quiet England debut in the fourth Test against New Zealand at Old Trafford. He had to wait a year for his next match, against India, and was then picked for the 1959-60 tour to the West Indies. For a number of years, however, he rarely felt secure of selection, and from mid-1963 to the summer of 1967 was hardly in the team at all. Yet by 1969, in his 31st Test, he had become England captain. That first match as skipper arrived at the age of 37 after the incumbent, Colin Cowdrey, snapped an achilles tendon. Illingworth stepped in for the three-Test home series against West Indies and provided a dynamic counterpoint to Cowdrey’s diffident style. England won the first match at Old Trafford and he scored his first Test hundred in the second drawn game at Lord’s, while in victory in the third at Headingley, where every decision he made seemed to reap rewards, he had one of his finest hours as captain. As a consequence he was reappointed for a second series that summer, against New Zealand, which England won 2-0. In 1970 Illingworth was at the helm for an unofficial five-match home series against a strong Rest of the World side, which England lost 4-1. He continued as captain for the 1970-71 Ashes tour, and thanks in great part to his shrewd, combative leadership, England won the Ashes for the first time in more than a decade. Much of that exhausting seven-match series was played under intense pressure, particularly during the decisive last Test at Sydney, which England managed to win without Boycott and, for the latter half of the match, minus Snow, who had broken a finger. In Australia’s first innings Illingworth had shown his mettle by marching his players off the pitch when spectators bombarded Snow with bottles. Despite England’s tour manager, David Clark, trying to order Illingworth back on to the field, he stood firm and refused to resume until order had been restored. He completed that winter tour with a 1-0 win against New Zealand, followed with victory by the same margin at home to Pakistan in 1971 and, after a shock 1-0 defeat to India in the same summer, retained the Ashes at home the next year with a 2-2 series draw, a feat that earned him appointment as CBE. By then aged 40 and thoroughly drained by two combative Ashes series, he made himself unavailable for the 1972-73 tour to Pakistan and India, but was back in charge for two home series against New Zealand and West Indies in 1973. England won comfortably against New Zealand but found themselves in unexpected trouble against West Indies, and during the last game of the three-match series at Lord’s, Illingworth was told he would not be captain for the forthcoming winter tour to the Caribbean. His side lost that Lord’s match – and with it the series, 2-0. But as the decision had been taken before its outcome, he felt the move had been “political” a result perhaps of a feeling among the selectors that he was too much in the players’ camp and not enough in theirs. Illingworth had led his country 31 times between 1969 and 1973 and had lost just five Tests over the period, winning 12 and drawing 14. Of the nine series in which he was captain he was victorious in six, winning his first five series in a row without conceding a match against any opposition. Moreover, in 61 Tests he had made a significant contribution as an all-rounder, averaging 23.24 with the bat and 31.20 with the ball. A tight, thoughtful off-spinner, he was also a solid, orthodox batsman who could block or swing as the state of the game required, and while he could hardly be termed a “great” in any one department, he arguably deserved that tag when his complete package of bowling, batting, fielding and captaincy was taken into account. After he lost his England place with the captaincy, Illingworth returned to focus on county cricket. He had expected to see his days out with Yorkshire, but in 1968, after 17 years in which he had been a key member of seven County Championship-winning sides, his request for a three-year contract was refused and so he left for Leicestershire, who had asked him to be their skipper. His new county had never won anything when he joined them in 1969, but Illingworth engineered a dramatic transformation. Within three years they had taken their first title – the Benson &amp; Hedges Cup in 1972 – and under his captaincy they also won the John Player League in 1974, the County Championship and Benson Hedges Cup in 1975, and the John Player League again in 1977. After 10 happy years at Leicestershire, in 1979 he accepted an offer from Yorkshire to become their cricket manager, allowing him to retire as a player. But it was a backroom position dogged by internal disputes, and after a poor start to the 1982 season Illingworth felt compelled to come out of retirement to captain the side at the age of 50. The following year Yorkshire won the John Player League under his command, but they also finished bottom of the County Championship, and he resigned all his roles in 1984, having played 787 first class matches, the ninth highest tally of all time. He took 2,072 wickets at 20.27 in his first class career with a best of nine for 42, and scored 24,134 runs at 28.06 with a highest score of 162. After a decade of freelance media work, Illingworth became England’s chairman of selectors in 1994, a year later also taking on the job of manager. He inherited a weak team captained by Michael Atherton, but did not forge an easy relationship with a new generation of players, and found there was little he could do to make a difference. He left the job after three years and settled down to a modest life of quiet retirement, which included regular golf and family holidays in Spain. In 1958 he married Shirley Milnes. Following her death from cancer in March 2021, and suffering from cancer himself, he backed calls for the right to assisted dying. He is survived by their two daughters, Diane and Vicky. • Raymond Illingworth, cricketer, born 8 June 1932; died 25 December 2021British consumers have largely stayed away from the traditional Boxing Day sales amid concern over the Omicron Covid variant, with visits to high streets, shopping centres and retail parks down more than 45% on pre-pandemic levels, according to industry figures. Fears over the virus, as well as several key retailers including John Lewis, Marks &amp; Spencer and Next deciding to keep their stores closed, and the traditional bumper shopping day falling on a Sunday this year, all put a dampener on sales. By lunchtime on Sunday, numbers were only up just over a quarter on last year, when UK high streets were in lockdown, according to the latest data from shopping tracking group Springboard. “A major reason for the significantly lower footfall compared with 2019 will be due to consumers’ ongoing nervousness about the Covid infection rate,” said Diane Wehrle, insights director at Springboard, who said the figures indicated Boxing Day was unlikely to have given retailers the hoped for post-Christmas boost. “This will have been compounded by the fact that a few multiple retailers opted not to open today, which will have deterred some shoppers. In addition, Sunday generally has the lowest footfall on any day in the week, so a comparison with 2019 when Boxing Day fell on a Thursday will always have meant that footfall would be lower than two years ago.” Despite busier scenes on some high streets across the UK, including lengthy queues outside shops in central Manchester, Liverpool, and outside Selfridges on Oxford Street in London, experts said high street footfall was down on pre-pandemic levels. Covid restrictions as well as concern over Omicron put off consumers from going to physical shops, according to a poll of 2,000 shoppers on behalf of Barclaycard. The credit card operator said that as many as 40% would instead go online to avoid any queues and crowded areas. Wehrle said the mild weather and lack of a lockdown had not enticed shoppers to head out as much as businesses might have hoped. Central London was the hardest hit destination, with visitor numbers down 67% on pre-Covid levels in 2019 despite a major bounceback from last year when stores were forced to close – with numbers more than doubling. Regional cities excluding London also had a tough time, with numbers down nearly 60% on 2019 and just over 6% on last year. Market towns and outer London fared best as shoppers chose to stay close to home. The latest indicator of difficulties for retailers comes after shoppers were predicted to spend £3.9bn in stores and online on Boxing Day, as much as 10% less than before the pandemic and 1% lower than last year, according to analysis by GlobalData for the shopping deals website Vouchercodes. Spending in physical stores alone is expected to fall by 23% compared with 2019 as many shoppers avoid high streets, shopping centres and retail parks amid fears over the Omicron variant. Changing shopping habits were not expected to spell all good news for online specialists either. Over £1.4bn is expected to be spent online on Boxing Day, almost 18% less than last year, but just over a quarter up on 2019, before the pandemic, according to GlobalData. Despite the gloomy predictions, at least one shopping centre said it had been busy for the start of the post-Christmas sales. “Going shopping on Boxing Day is a yearly tradition for many with people looking to pick up some great deals from one of our many brands and enjoy a day out of the house,” a spokesperson for the Trafford Centre in Greater Manchester said. “Although Boxing Day this year falls on a Sunday we’ve had a steady stream of visitors to Trafford Centre regardless of the shorter trading hours. We expect to see plenty of interest in the sales period throughout the week ahead, with Monday 27 December being a priority for retailer promotions.” Meanwhile Barclaycard predicted spending was likely to be up on last year and even 2019. Its survey found consumers planned to spend an average of £247 in the post-Christmas sales this year, up £85 compared with 2020 and up £61 compared with 2019.Dean Smith was left bemoaning individual errors as the Norwich head coach admitted after a Boxing Day thrashing by Arsenal that standards had “dropped massively”. A brace from Bukayo Saka either side of a rare Kieran Tierney strike had Arsenal on course for three points before a late Alexandre Lacazette penalty and a goal for the substitute Emile Smith Rowe secured a comfortable 5-0 victory. The win leaves Arsenal six points clear in fourth place – albeit with Spurs having three games in hand – although they later learned Tuesday’s game against Wolves at Emirates Stadium has been postponed due to high numbers of Covid cases for the visitors. While Arsenal continued a decent run of form, Norwich remain rooted to the bottom of the table. Smith was left unhappy with the costly mistakes that saw his side fall short of the levels he has demanded since replacing Daniel Farke. “It was very difficult to be honest, I didn’t see that coming,” Smith said. “The last game [a 2-0 defeat against Aston Villa] the first half was poor but two games ago we were going toe‑to‑toe with Man United and had fans out of their seats. “This was just as flat a performance as we have had and it was littered with unforced errors. We’ve got to be better than that and we are better than that, unfortunately the standards have dropped off massively from the Manchester United game, there are reasons for that but I’m not here to make excuses.” Those reasons are likely to be a mixture of injuries and positive Covid cases, with Smith conceding he faces a “bigger job” keeping Norwich up because of the state of his squad. Mikel Arteta was in a much brighter place post-match. “I’m very happy,” the Arsenal manager said. “It is not easy to win away from home in this league, the way we performed and how dominant we were, it was really impressive. “I think in general, collectively and individually, we had some big performances and you don’t win 5-0 away from home if you don’t do that so I am happy with all the boys.” Arteta also highlighted the progression made over the course of the season, having beaten Norwich 1-0 in September when it was his side – and not the Canaries – who kicked off at the foot of the table. Asked if the belief his players were showing was a result of the different feel within the squad, he replied: “Yes, probably. The direction the team is taking, how we are growing, the understanding between the players, the unity we have been showing in general and the support we have been getting in every ground is very much linked with the way we can transmit and the way we want to play. “That is what we are here for, to create enjoyment and if they enjoy it I’m sure people will enjoy watching them play, they really like each other, they enjoy playing with each other and you can see that.” Saka set the tone early on, collecting a pass from the impressive Martin Ødegaard before slotting past Angus Gunn – the goalkeeper in for the regular first-choice, Tim Krul, one of a number of positive Covid cases in Smith’s squad. Arsenal were without Calum Chambers, Ainsley Maitland‑Niles, Cédric Soares and Takehiro Tomiyasu because of Covid but they were not missed. To their credit, Norwich battled for periods of the first half but the game slipped away. As half-time approached, another fine ball from Ødegaard allowed Tierney to break into the box and fire in low across Gunn for his fourth goal for the club. There never looked like being an inspired second-half comeback for Norwich. Saka’s second goal in the 67th minute was a fine finish as the England winger cut inside Brandon Williams before striking from the edge of the box to secure the win. Lacazette was then bundled over by Ozan Kabak six minutes from time and he tucked away the resulting penalty before Smith Rowe scored off the bench for the second league outing in succession.Ellis Genge got a foretaste of life at Ashton Gate as his Leicester side snatched a dramatic win over his future employers and made it a perfect 10 wins out 10 in the Premiership. Guy Porter went over thanks to a pass from the hooker Nic Dolly who had been fed by Freddie Steward with the clock four minutes in the red to make Tigers the first team to win their first 10 games since Harlequins in 2011. Genge was celebrating furiously on the touchlines as Porter went over after Leicester looked like they had thrown it away. The Leicester replacement back-rower Jasper Wiese was sent to the sin bin with seven minutes left after his senseless and reckless challenge on the Bristol fly-half Callum Sheedy gave the Wales international what looked like the winning shot at goal which put Bears into a 26-23 lead. Porter’s score capped an afternoon which will fill Leicester with confidence. They were nowhere their best but got home. The head coach, Steve Borthwick, said: “The spirit of the players and their fight was outstanding. We made errors in the game and weren’t perfect, but one thing that’s unquestionable about these guys is their fight. Whatever gets thrown at them, they keep finding a way to overcome it.” But Porter would never have scored his first Premiership try if Charles Piutau, the Bristol full-back, had not tried to keep the ball in play from George Ford’s late kick to touch at 26-23. He was judged to have knocked on and from the scrum Leicester did the damage. Pat Lam, the Bristol director of rugby, said: “They would have got the lineout. He had to go for that so that wasn’t an issue. I said before the game it would be like a Test match and up until the last play we were going pretty well. We had five minutes to go and we had moments there to finish the game off and cap off a very, very good performance. It wasn’t to be.” Harry Randall, the Bristol scrum-half, was outstanding in his hour on the pitch, making two tries with his quick thinking and showing why Eddie Jones capped him in the summer. Genge is moving from Leicester to Bristol, where he made his professional debut in 2013 before leaving for Welford Road in 2016, the year he graduated to the England squad. “Gengey’s Coming Home” rang out from the stands at Ashton Gate as the game went into the final quarter with Bears 23-20 ahead. But the game-winning kick came shortly after Genge had been replaced having enjoyed a good afternoon against Kyle Sinckler. The Genge transfer was given extra spice when Bristol released a welcome video of the prop arriving at their training ground and being greeted warmly by Lam. The Welford Road following were not impressed but his current boss Borthwick has since said Genge’s move west has nothing to do with rugby. It might not, with Tigers riding high at the top of the Premiership. Randall picked up a loose ball after Ford’s pass hit the floor and scooted off on a diagonal run. That ended when he fed Lloyd who kept the move going before No 8 Fitz Harding crashed over through wing Nemani Nadolo. Sheedy kept the visitors at arm’s length with two penalties before Nadolo shortened the gap with a chip and chase in the Bristol 22 to leave it 13-10 at the break. Ford and Sheedy then swapped penalties before Bears finally got a bit of purchase at a scrum and won a free-kick. Randall took it quickly, darted right and fed Radrada who skipped outside before finding Lloyd with a pass out of the back door. But Leicester then pinned Bristol into their own 22 and a driving maul, from a lineout 15m out, splintered the home defence and the hooker Julian Montoya came up smiling. Ford levelled it up at 23-23 before Sheedy thought he had won it. Then came Porter.Manchester City were ruthless, fell asleep and then woke to end a Leicester resistance that came in a sparkling second-half riposte to the champions, who were 4-0 up at the break. But what Pep Guardiola characterised as a “typical Boxing Day” encounter – a throwback to yesteryear’s high-scoring affairs – might have ended differently if Brendan Rodgers’ men were as merciless as City. When James Maddison slipped in Kelechi Iheanacho on 70 minutes, the striker was stopped by Ederson from moving the visitors to only 5-4 behind. Marc Albrighton later spurned a headed chance to do the same. If either opening had been taken, there is no knowing what the closing phase might have thrown up. Guardiola spoke of how even at the interval he did not feel at ease. “The game was open at 4-0, it was not closed,” he said. Yet the bottom line is City have 17 goals in their past three games and remain leaders after completing half their 38 Premier League matches, the victors in all of their last nine. As Guardiola said: “The important thing is that we finish the [first] leg with 47 points. It’s a lot, so we start again against Brentford in three days.” The manager left Phil Foden and Jack Grealish on the bench again, as he plotted to continue a winning run against opponents who had Jamie Vardy among their substitutes due to a tight hamstring. This made the visitors’ challenge even tougher as Vardy’s pace could snare City on the counter, exposing the hardly jet-heeled Rúben Dias and Aymeric Laporte. The problem is City’s ascendancy is predicated on their hogging of the ball. Any defensive weaknesses are nullified if the opposition cannot get hold of it. An illustration came five minutes in. Fernandinho’s chip found Kevin De Bruyne, Bernardo Silva’s run along the blindside dragged out the defenders and the Belgian’s pirouette inside was followed by a cannon of a strike that gave Kasper Schmeichel zero chance. The visitors had been overrun from the opening whistle. Further disaster arrived when Riyad Mahrez swung in a corner and Youri Tielemans grappled with Dias. VAR called Chris Kavanagh to the monitor and, as usual when this occurs, he pointed to the spot. Riyaz Mahrez blasted the kick beyond Schmeichel. With City 2-0 up inside a quarter of an hour there was a temptation to deem this contest over but the response was instant, Maddison forcing Ederson to tip a 20-yard free-kick on to the bar. The goalkeeper then palmed away the corner and saved a low Ayoze Pérez shot. This, though, was the falsest of dawns. Silva, City’s performer of the season, collected the ball and found De Bruyne. The midfielder is the master of the quick tap-on and he fed João Cancelo this way, the right-back crossed, a flailing Schmeichel pushed the ball into Ilkay Gündogan’s path, and he did not miss. Leicester’s shock became embarrassment when City scored a fourth. Raheem Sterling ran at Tielemans inside the area, the hapless No 8 fouled him to give the home side a second spot-kick. This time, despite Guardiola billing Mahrez as City’s best penalty executioner, it was Sterling who beat Schmeichel. City had scored 15 goals without reply in their previous two games plus the first 25 minutes of this one. For the resurgent Sterling it was a seventh in his last nine club appearances. Soon there was nearly a sublime eighth. Oleksandr Zinchenko’s left-footed dink was an exhibition-like pass, the ball floating in on a bewitching parabola to Silva, whose volleyed delivery across goal was equally good, and there was Sterling to take aim, but Schmeichel parried. City closed the half as they began: at Leicester’s jugular, De Bruyne’s free-kick wrong-footing Leicester, setting up a Gündogan rocket that Schmeichel beat away. Rodgers may have missed a whole first-choice rearguard because of injury but the supposed master tactician was still culpable for a passive performance from his side. However, this changed on 55 minutes as a quick break finally unlocked City. It began at the back. Albrighton pinged the ball to Maddison before, really, Dias should have cleaned the playmaker out. The reason he did not, according to Guardiola, is because “one yellow and he is suspended”. Possession went to Iheanacho, who returned it, and Maddison slid in Leicester’s first goal, under Ederson’s body. Seconds later came a near replica. Maddison pickpocketed Gündogan, left Zinchenko and Fernandinho challenging air and rolled the ball to Iheanacho, whose assist this time was for Ademola Lookman. At 4-2 this had become a thriller with fresh life. City had done what Guardiola detests: surrendered the ball. Fernandinho’s riposte was to head what looked likely to be a fifth City goal until Daniel Amartey intervened. In the next twist Iheanacho scored, the striker following up when Maddison’s shot was steered on to the bar by Ederson. Laporte quickly struck back, rising above Iheanacho and Luke Thomas to meet Mahrez’s corner perfectly and stretch City’s lead again. Lastly, after the Iheanacho and Albrighton misses, Sterling made it 6-3. Rodgers offered injury updates on some of his absent players. “Patson [Daka] is probably going to be about three weeks, Caglar Soyuncu about three weeks,” the Leicester manager said, before turning his attention to Ricardo Pereira, who was forced off in the Carabao Cup tie at Liverpool by a challenge for which Tyler Morton was shown only a yellow card. “Six to eight weeks. He has got a fractured fibula – he is lucky it is not worse, how the referee didn’t see that challenge. And then Ryan [Bertrand, a substitute] twisted his knee in the warm-up as well.”A scaled-back Boxing Day trail-hunting programme will go ahead this year despite the worsening Covid situation and growing calls to ban the practice on public land, the Countryside Alliance has said. The majority of Boxing Day hunts are due to go ahead on 27 December because this year’s holiday falls on a Sunday, traditionally a day of rest for the hunting community. Restrictions designed to slow the spread of the virus in Scotland and Wales have forced many packs to cancel public gatherings connected to their meets. Meanwhile, critics are demanding the prohibition on public land of a sport they believe is often merely a front for illegal foxhunting. The Labour party has denounced allowing hunts on public and government-owned land as “completely irresponsible”, prompting fierce criticism from the Countryside Alliance (CA), which accused the party of pursuing “anti-rural” policies. “Trail hunting and popular festive meets are an important part of rural life. Labour have consistently performed poorly in the countryside in recent elections and it is no surprise when they pursue anti-rural policies like those announced today,” a CA spokesperson said. “It is high time they drop their bizarre obsession with class warfare and focus on addressing issues which actually matter to rural people if they ever want to be taken seriously.” A Labour spokesperson pointed to a recent Farmers Weekly survey that suggested the party’s popularity among farmers had increased slightly since the last general election. “Other rural bodies recognise trail hunting for what it is – an antiquated exercise that most people believe should be consigned to the history books for animal welfare, protection of natural habitats and, unlike this Conservative government, respect for the rules.” The party said it planned to help rural communities if it formed the next government by focusing on creating jobs, tackling crime and improving public services such as bus routes and hospitals. The Countryside Alliance claims trail hunting, which involves following a scent set by a trail layer rather than a live animal, remains popular with spectators. But pressure to end the practice is growing. In November, National Trust members voted overwhelmingly to ban it on National Trust land. One of the biggest landowners in Wales, Natural Resources Wales, has also prohibited it. Activists believe more than 240 hunting days are likely to have taken place on Ministry of Defence land this year. Trail hunting’s proponents say it is a humane and legal way to carry on a centuries-old practice. Critics point to the case of a prominent huntsman who was fined in October after being found to have encouraged people to hide illegal foxhunting behind a “smokescreen” of trail hunting. The Countryside Alliance said: “Anti-hunt fanatics have spent years making ridiculous claims about hunting – which they often use to raise money – yet nearly every time it makes allegations to the police or a court, they are found to be false. “There have been hundreds of thousands of days legal trail hunting carried out by hunts since the Hunting Act came into force and only a handful of convictions relating to registered hunts. The reality is these prejudiced activists are driven by a hatred of people and not by improving animal welfare.” Chris Luffingham, the League Against Cruels Sports’ director of external affairs, said: “The Countryside Alliance is either breathtaking in its arrogance or suffering from amnesia. Just two short months ago, one of hunting’s most senior people was found guilty of telling more than 100 huntsmen and women on each of two training webinars how to use trail hunting as a ‘smokescreen’, to use his words, for what the judge then described as ‘old-fashioned illegal hunting’. “Mark Hankinson, the now former director of the Masters of Foxhounds Association, was supported in court by the Countryside Alliance. We suggest it is the Countryside Alliance’s leadership who are the fanatics, as they desperately try to defend a so-called sport that is as outdated and old-fashioned as it is cruel.”Crystal Palace did not want to play here, as they struggled to control a Covid outbreak that struck Patrick Vieira and a number of his players, and they wanted it to end from the moment Wilfried Zaha caught the collective mood of frustration and got himself sent off. There were 37 minutes on the clock, Tottenham were 2-0 up and Zaha let his team down when he grappled with Davinson Sánchez before hurling his opponent to the ground. Palace’s marquee name was already on a yellow card and the club were en route to extending a worrying run of results. It is now just one win in seven Premier League games. It was Tottenham’s day and, more specifically, it was that of Lucas Moura. The winger menaced Palace with his speed and direct running and he would finish with assists for Harry Kane and Son Heung-min that came either side of a goal he scored himself. On 82 minutes and with the contest long since over, the home crowd chorused the name of Antonio Conte, who responded with applause. The transformation that he has driven since replacing Nuno Espírito Santo as manager in early November has been nothing short of remarkable and he can reflect on four wins and two draws from six league games. His team are well-placed for a Champions League push and even have the bonus of last Wednesday’s Carabao Cup quarter-final victory over West Ham. Spurs are playing with tempo and cohesion and they had too much for a Palace team who felt that the game’s powers had conspired against them. Reports surfaced on Christmas Day that the game was in jeopardy, Palace having seen positive Covid tests and planning to request a postponement. The league’s board, however, denied them on Sunday morning, feeling that they did not meet the criteria for unavailable players. In Vieira’s absence Palace were led by his assistant manager, Osian Roberts, who put on a brave face, and the lineup showed one change from the club’s previous game – the 2-2 home draw against Southampton on 15 December. The playing absentees took in Vicente Guaita, Nathaniel Clyne, James McArthur, Luka Milivojevic, Michael Olise, Eberechi Eze and Christian Benteke. Roberts, who said Vieira communicated with a member of the backroom staff during the game, did not specify how many missed out because of Covid-related issues. The stadium was dotted with empty seats and it was a slow-burn start with passes going astray and little incision or risk-taking. Both teams wanted to counter and it was noticeable how Spurs sat deep at the outset, inviting Palace on to them. Palace were not comfortable when asked to try to prise their opponents apart, even if Roberts professed himself happy with the start they made. Lucas blew the game open. He had missed a glorious chance on 25 minutes, glancing past the far post from Sergio Reguilón’s cross, before he ignited the move for the opening goal. It was exactly what Conte had wanted: Palace’s defenders to be drawn out and his players to sprint in behind them. James Tomkins stepped up to engage Lucas, who popped the ball wide to Emerson Royal and continued his run. When he got it back, Palace were stretched, Lucas outpacing Joachim Andersen to cross low for Kane, who swept home. Lucas quickly twisted the knife. It was another impressive burst from him and, when he worked it right for Kane who played in Emerson, Lucas did not stand on ceremony, tearing into the area to provide the option. Emerson stood up the cross and Lucas got there ahead of Andersen, dominating him in the air to nod the ball down and in. Zaha had been booked for a nibble on Sánchez just before the first goal and so he had to think that raising his hands to the same opponent would have been akin to playing with fire. Zaha did not think, his passions getting the better of him as he tussled with the Spurs centre-half by the touchline and it was a rough-house move that he used to send him over. On the bench, Roberts stared into space. Palace offered next to nothing as an attacking force and, his team down to 10 men, Roberts’s priority seemed to be to limit the damage. Oliver Skipp, who lashed wide in the 11th minute from the edge of the area, put in another strong game for Spurs, snapping into challenges high up and setting the tempo in midfield, while Emerson repeatedly got into dangerous positions from right wing-back. It was a tough watch for the travelling Palace fans, who cheered ironically when Jon Moss booked Sánchez for a foul on Jordan Ayew. Conor Gallagher looked the part before Roberts withdrew him and Spurs got the goal that their second-half control merited when Lucas crossed from the right and Son touched home deftly at the near post.West Ham’s challenge for a place in the top four is in danger of falling apart. After defying expectations for so long, David Moyes’s side can barely do anything right at the moment. They have become easy to play against and their need for defensive reinforcements to arrive in January could not have been more glaring during this defeat to Southampton, who delighted in exposing West Ham’s weaknesses without Kurt Zouma and Angelo Ogbonna holding everything together at the back. The problem for Moyes is that there are no simple solutions. West Ham have not been as solid since losing Ogbonna and Zouma to injury – the absence of Aaron Cresswell at left-back has also taken a toll – and it is hard to see them keeping up with Arsenal, Tottenham and Manchester United if they fail to sign a commanding centre-back next month. “We’ve got to hang on to the teams above us,” said Moyes, who was furious with the defending for all of Southampton’s goals. West Ham’s manager did not pull his punches. Moyes had seen further evidence that a central-defensive pairing of Issa Diop and Craig Dawson is not good enough for a side hoping to qualify for the Champions League, and although West Ham twice dragged themselves level during the second half, it did not come as a major surprise when Jan Bednarek headed in Southampton’s winner with 20 minutes left. Nobody could argue that Southampton, who were winless in six games, did not deserve it. James Ward-Prowse was outstanding in midfield, Armando Broja was a handful up front and there was personal satisfaction for Ralph Hasenhüttl, who had never beaten West Ham before. “It’s fantastic we can win here,” Southampton’s manager said. “It’s an important step for the team.” Southampton, who had squandered leads in four of their previous six matches, were the better team from the start. West Ham, who are seven points below fourth-placed Arsenal after winning once in seven games, could not get going. They lacked intensity and Southampton eagerly took advantage, taking the lead when Mohamed Elyounoussi fired past Lukasz Fabianski after eight minutes of dominance from the visitors. West Ham were sleeping. Travel chaos meant that the crowd was well below capacity and the drab atmosphere affected Moyes’s players. They were slow to everything and were unable to respond to Hasenhüttl’s decision to swap his usual 4-2-2-2 system for a 4-1-4-1, a ploy that gave Southampton a way of playing around Tomas Soucek and Declan Rice in midfield. “It didn’t feel like we were getting any control,” Moyes said. Southampton’s opener was a case in point. The resistance was minimal when Elyounoussi drove forward before exchanging passes with Kyle Walker-Peters and drilling in a low shot from 20 yards. West Ham retreated after falling behind to Elyounoussi’s first league goal since August. There was no cutting edge with Michail Antonio only on the bench after returning from a period in self-isolation. Jarrod Bowen struggled to assert himself against Southampton’s centre-back, Mohammed Salisu, and there was little sign of any understanding between Nikola Vlasic, Saïd Benrahma and Pablo Fornals. The worry for Moyes is that West Ham have become predictable against teams who sit off them. They have failed to beat Burnley, Brentford Brighton, Crystal Palace and Southampton this season and they barely threatened before the break, aside from the moment when an error from Bednarek gave Vlasic a rare opening. Moyes was under no illusions as the interval approached. “I could have changed four or five at half-time,” he said, though he restricted himself to bringing on Antonio and Manuel Lanzini for Fornals and Vlasic. The changes led to an instant improvement and West Ham were level after 48 minutes. Bowen delivered a corner from the right, Dawson rose above Ward-Prowse and the ummarked Antonio nodded past Fraser Forster from close range. Suddenly, with Bowen on the right and Antonio up front, West Ham looked dangerous. They almost led when Rice, who will miss Tuesday’s game at Watford after picking up his fifth booking of the season, went close from 25 yards. Southampton were undeterred though. The visitors had identified Arthur Masuaku as a weak link at left-back and they went in front again when Diop was duped by Broja, a deceptively powerful runner who had a strong case for a penalty after falling over Dawson’s clumsy challenge. Kevin Friend checked the pitchside monitor and Ward-Prowse beat Fabianski from the spot. Now it was a proper contest. West Ham roared back and equalised again when Bowen burst clear and crossed for Benrahma, who made his one useful contribution of the afternoon by volleying past Forster. Unfortunately for Moyes, West Ham were still too open. They cracked again when Ward-Prowse’s free-kick found Bednarek. The Champions League felt rather away by the end.That’s all from me. Here’s Rob Smyth on Aston Villa v Chelsea. Bye! And finally, Jacob Steinberg was at the London Stadium: West Ham’s challenge for a place in the top four is in danger of falling apart. After defying expectations for so long, David Moyes’s side can barely do anything right at the moment. They have become too easy to play against and their need for defensive reinforcements to arrive in January could scarcely have been more glaring during this shoddy defeat to Southampton, who ruthlessly exposed their weaknesses without Kurt Zouma and Angelo Ogbonna holding everything together at the back. Those injuries to Zouma and Ogbonna have taken a heavy toll. The harsh reality is that a central-defensive pairing of Issa Diop and Craig Dawson will not be enough for West Ham to qualify for the Champions League. The balance of the team has disappeared and although Moyes’s side twice dragged themselves level in the second half here, they could have no complaints when Jan Bednarek headed Southampton into the lead for the third and final time with 20 minutes left. Much more here: Here’s a report on Arsenal’s festive canter at Carrow Road: David Hytner was at the Tottenham Hotspur Stadium: Crystal Palace did not want to play here, as they struggled to control a Covid outbreak that hit the manager, Patrick Vieira, and a number of players, and they wanted it to end from the moment Wilfried Zaha caught the collective mood of frustration and got himself sent off. There were 37 minutes on the clock, Tottenham were 2-0 up and Zaha let his team down when he grappled with Davinson Sánchez before hurling his opponent to the ground. The club’s marquee name was already on a booking and Palace were en route to extending a worrying run of results. It is now just one win in seven Premier League games. It was Tottenham’s day and, more specifically, it was that of Lucas Moura. The winger menaced Palace with his speed and direct running and he would finish with assists for Harry Kane and Son Heung-min – either side of a goal he scored himself. Much more here: Jamie Jackson has filed his match report from the Etihad Stadium: Manchester City were ruthless, fell asleep, and then awoke to end finally a Leicester resistance that came in a sparkling second-half riposte to the champions, who were 4-0 up at the break. Yet the story might have ended differently if Brendan Rodgers’ men had been as ruthless as City. When James Maddison slipped in Kelechi Iheanacho on 70 minutes, the Nigerian was stopped by a defiant Ederson from moving the visitors to only 5-4 behind and Marc Albrighton later spurned a headed chance to do the same. If either opening had been taken, who knows what the closing phase might have thrown up. Pep Guardiola, then, is bound to hate a slipshod passage from City while surely marvelling at the opening 45 minutes. The bottom line is the champions have 17 goals in their past three games and remain leaders after completing half their 38 Premier League matches, having won their last nine. Much more here: Osian Roberts, Crystal Palace’s assistant manager, has a chat: I thought we started very well and had a good foothold in the game, but those five minutes, I think 32 to 37, the two goals and the red card changes the game. It’s always a difficult place to come, we knew it was going to be a difficult game with 11 men on the field. It made it difficult for us, and even though we tried to be compact and hopefully try to get something on the break, but it was difficult for us after that. Antonio Conte is pleased, but is also already talking about Tuesday’s trip to Southampton. Three important points. I think we started a bit slow, but then we get the chances to score, then we scored, then to play against 10 men was easier for us. It’s good to create chances to score and to score three goals was positive for our strikers. A lot of positive things after this game. For us, it was an important exam. Here’s your full classified results check. Only eight teams played and failed to score, and none of them played each other. Premier League Man City 6-3 Leicester Norwich 0-5 Arsenal Tottenham Hotspur 3-0 Crystal Palace West Ham 2-3 Southampton Championship Huddersfield 3-2 Blackpool (latest score) Middlesbrough 2-0 Nottm Forest League One Accrington Stanley 1-0 Rotherham Cheltenham 0-2 Plymouth Fleetwood Town 0-3 Shrewsbury Lincoln City 2-3 Milton Keynes Dons League Two Mansfield 3-2 Hartlepool Oldham 1-3 Scunthorpe Tranmere 2-0 Barrow Scottish Premiership Aberdeen 2-1 Dundee Dundee Utd 1-3 Hibernian Hearts 2-1 Ross County Motherwell 2-1 Livingston Rangers 2-0 St Mirren St Johnstone 1-3 Celtic (12.30pm) The final whistle blows at West Ham, where Southampton have pocketed all the points! It’s all over at Boundary Park, and the game ends with Oldham three points clear at the bottom of the Football League. 90+4 mins: They’re playing six minutes of stoppage time at West Ham, where Southampton lead by one. Just the 17 goals in these three games. Boxing Day football delivers once again. A long VAR check for offside after Smith-Rowe turns in the loose ball from Pepe’s deflected shot, but the goal is eventually confirmed! 90+2 mins: Before today Manchester City had only conceded nine goals all season. Today they’ve shipped three and still won by three. Another corner, another goal for Manchester City! Ruben Dias miscues his header but it drops to Sterling, who can’t miss! 86 mins: Lucas Moura has missed two excellent volleyed chances in the last few minutes. The last one would have been much better left for Reguilon, who was coming in at the far post. Ozan Kabak trips Lacazette in the box and the Frenchman gets up and sends the keeper the wrong way before sidefooting into the bottom right corner. 82 mins: Worth noting this, I think. Stockport are 4-1 up against Altrincham in the big derby in the National League, and a 9,000 attendance in the fifth flight is remarkable. 81 mins: Sergio Reguilon has just executed a nutmeg described by my son as “Messi-like filth”. 79 mins: I have some team news for tonight’s late Premier League game: Aston Villa: Martinez, Cash, Konsa, Mings, Targett, Sanson, Douglas Luiz, Jacob Ramsey, Buendia, Watkins, Ings. Subs: Steer, Traore, Tuanzebe, Trezeguet, El Ghazi, Hause, Carney Chukwuemeka, Davis, Iroegbunam. Chelsea: Mendy, Chalobah, Thiago Silva, Rudiger, James, Kante, Jorginho, Alonso, Mount, Hudson-Odoi, Pulisic. Subs: Arrizabalaga, Christensen, Kovacic, Lukaku, Saul, Barkley, Ziyech, Azpilicueta, Sarr. Referee: Martin Atkinson. And that (probably) decides it! Loft’s second of the game sends the away fans through the roof! Iron have turned it around in the big one at Oldham! 75 mins: Only four Premier League games, but they’re scoring for eight. Moura crosses from the right, and Son touches past the keeper at the near post! 74 mins: Great chance for Spurs: Skipp chips the ball into the area and Reguilon touches it back across goal, but Son can’t make contact. “Excellent VARing at the London Stadium,” reports Gary Naylor. “Initial contact from Dawson but play on and then he falls into Broja. Ref had a look at the monitor and got it right.” That message was sent six minutes and three goals ago. This has to stop! A free-kick from the left is sent into the area by Ward-Prowse, and Bednarek scores with an excellent header! Stop it already! Mahrez, I think, takes a corner from the right, and Laporte sends a header looping inside an unguarded post! That’s nice work from Saka, who scores with a left-footed curler from the right-hand corner of the area! Unbelievable scenes! Maddison’s shot is saved by Ederson, loops onto the bar, and drops for Iheanacho to score! A swift equaliser, Bowen passing infield to Benrahma, who scores with style! 63 mins: Spurs have taken Kane off, and brought Bergwijn on. Dawson falls into Broja’s legs as both run into the penalty area and the referee points to the spot. Ward-Prowse converts, shooting low to his left and even though the keeper goes the right way, he can’t stop it! 61 mins: Martinelli has the ball in the Carrow Road net, but it’s disallowed for offside. Manchester City win a free-kick, midway through Leicester’s half. They play it backwards, knock it about a bit, and then lose it and the Foxes break, Maddison to Iheanacho to Lookman, who finishes smartly! The comeback is on! Leicester just get past the City press, and after passing between defenders for an age they suddenly spring fotward, Laporte dives in on halfway to leave the goal exposed, and Iheanacho passes for Maddison to pass in! Ryan Loft’s shot takes an apparently massive deflection on its way in, and it’s all level in the game between the Football League’s bottom two sides. Michail Antonio comes on for Nikola Vlasic at half-time, and within three minutes he equalises for West Ham! 46 mins: Back out, and back on at Tottenham. Rick Harris is not happy. “I’m watching the Spurs v Palace game and in my opinion Jon Moss has totally lost the plot,” he rages. “Seems to be whistling for fouls against Palace every time one of their players makes a challenge. Gave an incredible soft yellow card against Zaha who barely touched Davidson Sanchez who threw himself theatrically to the ground, then ignored a foul from Skipp minutes when he pulled Ayew to the ground when the latter was otherwise free. Now he’s sent Zaha off for admittedly a silly shove against you guessed it, Sanchez. How much longer is Moss going to be allowed to pollute the game?” Zaha’s first yellow card was a little harsh. If a player is tripped from behind it’s always a booking, and though the contact was a lot less significant than the Spurs player’s reaction would suggest, there must have been some or Sanchez wouldn’t have known that it was a useful moment to fling himself to the ground in mock agony. The first halves have finished, and here are the key scores in the key matches: Manchester City 4-0 Leicester City Norwich 0-2 Arsenal Tottenham 2-0 Crystal Palace West Ham 0-1 Southampton Oldham 1-0 Scunthorpe 45+2 mins: Palace’s James Tomkins gets booked, with the away side dangerously close to losing all composure. Arsenal double their lead in Norfolk. Another Odegaard assist, and a fine finish. 43 mins: Make up your own minds. I don’t think the referee had to book him for this, but it’s pretty hard to complain that he did. 38 mins: A second yellow card for Zaha. It seems an innocuous moment, out by the touchline, but for little obvious reason he shoves Davinson Sanchez in the chest. The crowd bays for blood, and the referee reacts. Jermaine Jenas thinks that wasn’t a yellow card, but in my opinion it was indefensible behaviour for an experienced player on a booking. 36 mins: Harry Kane is now level with Robbie Fowler on the list of the Premier League’s all-time Boxing Day goalscorers. He has never failed to score on Boxing Day. Royal crosses from the right and Lucas Moura attacks it, flattens Joachim Andersen on his way, and heads in from four yards! 33 mins: Mitchell just took a fateful couple of steps away from Moura and towards the ball, and that was enough to give the Brazilian acres of clear pitch to run into The breakthrough! Moura is played down the right, sprints onto the ball, plays a first-time pass infield, and Butland can’t keep out his first-time shot! In the big game in League Two, the stats aren’t making good reading for Oldham - Scunthorpe have had 58% of possession, and seven shots to the home side’s three - but the Latics’ only effort on target has gone in. It’s 1-0 there. Just over a quarter of the game played, and Leicester are four down! Sterling sends the spot-kick into the top right corner, giving Schmeichel no chance. 24 mins: Another Manchester City penalty, after Sterling is brought down in the box. Tielemans is again the player punished. 25 mins: Chance for Spurs! Reguilon’s cross is glanced wide by Moura at the near post. Leicester have actually had more shots than Manchester City, but the home side have a 100% shot-on-target-to-goal conversion rate. City are not messing about. They get down the right, and Cancelo’s low cross is pushed by Schmeichel straight to the feet of Gundogan, who sidefoots in! 18 mins: End to end stuff still at White Hart Lane, but without real moments of quality in the two penalty areas. Son has just hit a completely useless cross from the left flank. VAR spots a Tielemans infringement inside the penalty area, and Mahrez scores from the penalty! 14 mins: Moura roars towards the edge of the Palace area before shooting into the nearest defender. This game looks desperate to cough up a goal. 11 mins: At White Hart Lane Tanganga has a poor shot from a poor position, but it hits a defender and deflects to Skipp who from a much better position shoots wide. Less than 10 minutes in and every Premier League game except the one that’s on the telly has now featured a goal. Elyounoussi has put Southampton ahead from the edge of the area. Norwich are losing. So far at home this season they have spent 11 minutes in the lead, and 265 (and counting) behind. Manchester City take the lead against Leicester with a De Bruyne curler/rifled left-footer (depending on whose report you believe) 3 mins: Another 90 seconds later we have our first save, Jack Butland turning Son’s low left-footer round the post! This is all very promising indeed. 1 min: Palace take just 45 seconds to create a chance, Edouard touching Hughes’s cross back to Ayew, who blazes over. 1 min: Peeeeeep! Palace get the game started! Out come the players! Spurs are led by Hugo Lloris, who has turned 35 today. Antonio Conte talks to BT Sport. He’s asked if he ever thought today’s game would be postponed, and doesn’t really answer, saying only that they prepared professionally. It looks like 3-4-3 for his side today, with five changes: I think that this is a busy period and for this reason we need to make rotations but at the same time we have to find in every game the right balance. Today three points would be very important for us. Spurs are wearing their third kit for their warm-ups today in the hope that they can flog a few more to support the homelessness charity Shelter. Osian Roberts, Palace’s assistant manager - Patrick Vieira is one of their actual absentees - has a chat. Benteke, Olise, Eze, Clyne, Guaita and Milivojevic are not involved today, for a variety of reasons: It’s been challenging. Patrick is OK. I’ve spoken to him many times this morning. Now we’re here we’re getting on with it. There’s a combination of injuries, covid and some returning from covid and not able to participate in this game, but we’ve been preparing all week, the gameplan is the same and we’re looking forward to the game. We’re ready to play, and it’s an important game for us. Crystal Palace: We’re suffering from a terrible covid outbreak, you have to postpone our game! Also Crystal Palace: Just the one change, Andersen coming in for Guehi, and even Guehi is on the bench. Here are all the Premier League teams: Manchester City v Leicester Man City: Ederson, Joao Cancelo, Dias, Laporte, Zinchenko, Bernardo Silva, Fernandinho, Gundogan, Mahrez, De Bruyne, Sterling. Subs: Ake, Gabriel Jesus, Grealish, Steffen, Carson, Foden, Mbete-Tabu, Palmer, Kayky. Leicester: Schmeichel, Albrighton, Amartey, Vestergaard, Thomas, Dewsbury-Hall, Tielemans, Maddison, Perez, Iheanacho, Lookman. Subs: Bertrand, Vardy, Choudhury, Ndidi, Castagne, Jakupovic, Soumare, Nelson, McAteer. Referee: Chris Kavanagh. Norwich v Arsenal Norwich: Gunn, Aarons, Kabak, Gibson, Williams, Dowell, Gilmour, McLean, Placheta, Pukki, Sargent. Subs: Byram, Cantwell, Tzolis, Lees-Melou, Mumba, Giannoulis, McGovern, Idah. Arsenal: Ramsdale, White, Holding, Gabriel, Tierney, Partey, Xhaka, Saka, Odegaard, Martinelli, Lacazette. Subs: Patino, Leno, Smith Rowe, Pepe, Tavares, Pablo Mari, Sambi Lokonga, Elneny, Nketiah. Referee: Graham Scott Tottenham Hotspur v Crystal Palace Tottenham Hotspur: Lloris, Sanchez, Dier, Tanganga, Emerson, Hojbjerg, Skipp, Reguilon, Lucas Moura, Son, Kane. Subs: Doherty, Winks, Gil Salvatierra, Rodon, Alli, Gollini, Bergwijn, Ndombele, Davies. Crystal Palace: Butland, Ward, Andersen, Tomkins, Mitchell, Gallagher, Kouyate, Hughes, Ayew, Edouard, Zaha. Subs: Guehi, Mateta, Schlupp, Matthews, Kelly, Ferguson, Riedewald. Referee: Jonathan Moss West Ham v Southampton West Ham: Fabianski, Coufal, Dawson, Diop, Masuaku, Soucek, Rice, Vlasic, Fornals, Benrahma, Bowen. Subs: Yarmolenko, Antonio, Lanzini, Areola, Noble, Fredericks, Johnson, Kral, Ashby. Southampton: Forster, Livramento, Bednarek, Salisu, Walker-Peters, Elyounoussi, Ward-Prowse, Romeu, Redmond, Walcott, Broja. Subs: Long, Adam Armstrong, Adams, Caballero, Perraud, Stuart Armstrong, Diallo, Valery, Simeu. Referee: Kevin Friend. News from Scotland: Dave mackay is 40 years of age. Hello world! Merry festivities to everybody! It’s a time for giving, and many of the nation’s footballers have been given the day off as the covid crisis hits. It leaves us with four 3pm kick-offs in each of England’s top three divisions, and only three in the fourth. In the Championship Blackburn will go second if they win, and first if they beat Hull by, ahem, 18 or more goals. Nottingham Forest will vault into the top six if they avoid defeat at Middlesbrough, though they have already played a game more than Stoke and two more than QPR, neither of whom are in action (QPR are scheduled to play Bournemouth tomorrow). In League One leaders Rotherham are the only top-four team to play, and could have a five-point lead this evening if they win at Accringston Stanley. Plymouth will go second if they win by three at Cheltenham. League Two’s three surviving fixtures include the absolutely massive bottom-of-the-table six-pointer between Oldham and Scunthorpe; the Iron are bottom on goal difference, Oldham have the worse form, and no game today looks more important. Premier League Aston Villa v Chelsea (5.30pm) Brighton v Brentford (8pm) Burnley v Everton Liverpool v Leeds (12.30pm) Man City v Leicester Norwich v Arsenal Tottenham Hotspur v Crystal Palace West Ham v Southampton Wolverhampton v Watford (12.30pm) Championship Barnsley v Stoke Cardiff v Coventry Fulham v Birmingham Huddersfield v Blackpool Hull v Blackburn Luton v Bristol City Middlesbrough v Nottm Forest Millwall v Swansea Peterborough v Reading Preston North End v Sheff Utd League One AFC Wimbledon v Charlton Accrington Stanley v Rotherham Bolton v Morecambe Cheltenham v Plymouth Crewe v Wigan Fleetwood Town v Shrewsbury Gillingham v Ipswich Lincoln City v Milton Keynes Dons Portsmouth v Oxford Utd Sheff Wed v Burton Albion Wycombe v Cambridge Utd League Two Bradford v Harrogate Town Bristol Rovers v Sutton Utd Carlisle v Rochdale Colchester v Leyton Orient Exeter v Swindon Mansfield v Hartlepool Newport County v Forest Green Northampton v Walsall Oldham v Scunthorpe Port Vale v Salford City Stevenage v Crawley Town Tranmere v Barrow Scottish Premiership Aberdeen v Dundee Dundee Utd v Hibernian Hearts v Ross County Motherwell v Livingston Rangers v St Mirren St Johnstone v Celtic (12.30pm)Desmond Tutu, the South African cleric and social activist who was a giant of the struggle against apartheid, has died aged 90, prompting tributes from religious leaders, politicians and activists from around the world. Tutu, described by observers at home and abroad as the moral conscience of the nation, died in Cape Town on Boxing Day, weeks after the death of FW de Klerk, the country’s last white president. “The passing of archbishop emeritus Desmond Tutu is another chapter of bereavement in our nation’s farewell to a generation of outstanding South Africans who have bequeathed us a liberated South Africa,” said President Cyril Ramaphosa. “From the pavements of resistance in South Africa to the pulpits of the world’s great cathedrals and places of worship, and the prestigious setting of the Nobel peace prize ceremony, the Arch distinguished himself as a non-sectarian, inclusive champion of universal human rights.” Tutu was diagnosed with prostate cancer in the late 1990s and in recent years was hospitalised on several occasions because of infections associated with his treatment. He died peacefully in the early hours of Sunday morning, according to his relatives. The Queen said Tutu “tirelessly championed human rights in South Africa and across the world”, and the archbishop of Canterbury, Justin Welby, described him as a “prophet and priest, a man of words and action – one who embodied the hope and joy that were the foundations of his life”. The former US president Barack Obama said Tutu was as “a mentor, a friend and a moral compass for me and so many others”. The South African cricket team wore black armbands in his honour on the first day of the first Test against India in South Africa. A seven-day mourning period is planned in Cape Town before Tutu’s burial, including a two-day lying in state, an ecumenical service and an Anglican requiem mass at St George’s Cathedral in Cape Town, according to church officials. Cape Town’s Table Mountain will be lit in purple, the colour of the robes Tutu wore as archbishop. Tutu was born in Klerksdorp, a farming town 100 miles (160km) south-west of Johannesburg. The sickly son of a headteacher and a domestic servant, he trained first as a teacher before becoming an Anglican priest. As a cleric, he travelled widely, gaining an MA in theology from King’s College London. Though he only emerged as a key figure in the liberation struggle in the mid-1970s, he was to have a huge impact, becoming a household name across the globe. Excitable, emotional, charismatic and highly articulate, Tutu won the Nobel peace prize in 1984. A vocal supporter of sanctions against South Africa, he was detested by supporters of the apartheid regime, who saw him as an agitator and traitor. Tutu was however protected not just by his wit and combative spirit, but by his immense popularity and respect. In 1986 he was appointed archbishop of Cape Town, the effective head of the Anglican church in his homeland. Tutu always kept his distance from the African National Congress (ANC), the party that spearheaded the liberation movement and has now been in power in South Africa for more than 20 years. He refused to back its armed struggle and support unconditionally leaders such as Nelson Mandela. However, Tutu shared Mandela’s vision of a multiracial society in which all communities lived together without rancour or discrimination and is credited with coining the phrase “rainbow nation” to describe this vision. After the nation’s first free election in 1994, Mandela, who had become the president of a free South Africa, asked Tutu to become chair of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission (TRC), the controversial and emotional hearings into apartheid-era human rights abuses. The TRC was described as the “climax of Tutu’s career” and lauded across the world as a pioneering effort to heal deep historical wounds. However, Tutu found the experience deeply traumatic. He was saddened and perplexed by the ferocious criticism from the white right wing, some mainstream liberals and the ANC. The terrible testimony that he listened to day after day brought deep emotional stress too, with TV viewers watching as the tough, witty cleric put his head in his hands and wept. In the late 1990s, Tutu, suffering from prostate cancer, began to spend more time with his wife of 60 years, four children, and numerous grandchildren. He continued to criticise the ANC and was initially excluded from the state funeral of Nelson Mandela in 2013. His absence provoked a public outcry. Tutu later said he had been “very hurt”. Despite his illness, Tutu remained interested in world affairs and determined to use his enormous moral prestige to make a difference. In 2015, he launched a petition urging global leaders to create a world run on renewable energies within 35 years, which was backed by more than 300,000 people globally. It described climate change as “one of the greatest moral challenges of our time”. He also spoke out against homophobic legislation in Uganda and argued in favour of assisted dying. Mandela, who lived near Tutu’s home in Soweto and also won the Nobel prize, once described his close friend as “sometimes strident, often tender, never afraid, seldom without humour”. “Desmond Tutu’s voice will always be the voice of the voiceless,” he added. Among those paying respects at Cape Town’s St George’s Cathedral on Sunday was Miriam Mokwadi, a 67-year-old retired nurse, who said the Nobel laureate “was a hero to us, he fought for us”. “We are liberated due to him. If it was not for him, probably we would have been lost as a country. He was just good,” Mokwadi told Agence France-Presse, clutching the hand of her granddaughter. Friends remembered Tutu as a man of deep faith whose charm, warmth and intelligence few could resist, and who was happiest when active on behalf of others. “I love to be loved,” he told the BBC’s Sue Lawley when appearing on Desert Island Discs in 1994.Pramila Jayapal, a leading House progressive, has urged Joe Biden to continue focusing on his Build Back Better social spending legislation and to use executive actions as a way to work around public rejection by Senator Joe Manchin. Writing in the Washington Post, the chair of the Congressional Progressive Caucus said it would soon release a plan for actions including lowering costs, protecting family healthcare and tackling the climate crisis. “The progressive caucus will continue to work toward legislation for Build Back Better, focused on keeping it as close to the agreed-upon framework as possible,” Jayapal wrote. Manchin, a centrist Democrat from West Virginia, rejected Build Back Better last Sunday. With the Senate split 50-50, his dramatic move seemed to doom the bill. It also threatened to scuttle hundreds of billions of dollars in funding for measures to meet climate goals and prompted Goldman Sachs to lower its forecasts for US economic growth. Manchin has expressed concerns about climate proposals and extensions to monthly child tax credit payments. “Taking executive action will also make clear to those who hinder Build Back Better that the White House and Democrats will deliver for Americans,” Jayapal wrote. On Fox News Sunday, the Maryland Democratic senator Ben Cardin was asked about Republican hopes, as voiced by the Senate minority leader, Mitch McConnell, that Manchin might switch parties – a move that would hand the Senate to the GOP. Manchin has said he hopes there’s still room for him in Democratic ranks. “The Democratic party is proud of having a broad tent,” Cardin said. “We have people with different views.” Cardin also claimed that under Chuck Schumer, of New York, Democrats had “been able to keep unity among all 50 of the Democratic senators”. That claim is at least questionable in current circumstances but Cardin also said: “We were able to pass the American Rescue Plan, we were able to deal with the … debt cap in our country, we were able to get a lot of things done. “There’s absolutely room in our party for Joe Manchin, Elizabeth Warren [a progressive senator from Massachusetts] and everyone in between, with different views, [and] Bernie Sanders.” Sanders, a self-described democratic socialist from Vermont, is an independent but caucuses with the Democrats. He reacted furiously to Manchin’s move last week. “We were very proud of our caucus,” Cardin insisted, “and the fact that we had diversity in our caucus, and Joe Manchin is very much welcomed in the Democratic party.” Asked about Manchin’s move against Build Back Better, Vice-President Kamala Harris told CBS’s Face the Nation: “The stakes are too high for this to be, in any way, about any specific individual.” She also said the White House was not giving up on the legislation. Republicans are united in opposition to the bill. Schumer has said the chamber will vote on a package in early 2022. The White House has said conversations with Manchin will continue. Biden has said he and Manchin are “going to get something done”.My friend Kev Reynolds, who has died aged 78, wrote dozens of walking and trekking guides that covered all sorts of terrains and geographies, from the South Downs to the foothills of Everest. His first book was Walks and Climbs in the Pyrenees, published in 1978 and now in its seventh edition. Many others followed, providing information on trails and routes in the Swiss Alps, the Bernese Oberland, the Valais region and many other areas. He also wrote guides to walking routes in Britain, including the North Downs Way and the Cotswold Way, and was author of the fifth edition of the popular book Trekking the Tour of Month Blanc (2020). Born in Ingatestone, Essex, Kev was the middle son of Kathleen (nee Coombs) and her husband, Ronald , a painter and decorator. After leaving Moulsham secondary school in Chelmsford in 1958, he began to work in local government as a filing clerk in the local county hall, but escaped to the uplands of the Lake District, Snowdonia, and Scotland whenever he could, quickly becoming a strong, safe climber. In 1967 he married Min (Linda) Dodsworth, after which the couple worked in a hostel in St Moritz in Switzerland, where they were able to explore the mountains in the beautiful Engadine region in the east of the country. Returning to the UK in 1968, they took over the running of a youth hostel in Crockham Hill in Kent, and after contributing a few articles to magazines, Kev struck up a relationship with the writer and author Walt Unsworth, co-founder of the Cicerone Press, which publishes walking, climbing and mountaineering guide books. Kev’s breakthrough came in 1976 when Walt, famous for his slightly gruff but kindly development of authors, suggested that he expand some of the articles he had written about the Pyrenees into a full book for Cicerone. The result was the first edition of Walks and Climbs in the Pyrenees, which set off a host of other books across the next few decades. Much of Kev’s early output focused on Europe, but eventually he broadened his horizons to the Himalayas. A first trip to the region came in 1989, when he went on a trek to Kangchenjunga, the third highest mountain in the world, and over the next 30 years he made nearly 20 visits to Nepal and bordering areas in India. Min, too, became a Himalayan trekker, joining Kev on many trips , and books naturally followed – guides to Annapurna, Everest, Kangchenjunga, Langtang and Manaslu – the last of which Kev regarded as “the most beautiful walk in the world”. Kev and Cicerone had formed an unbreakable connection over the decades, so when Cicerone’s 50th anniversary approached in 2019, he gladly took on the orchestration of a book, Fifty Years of Adventure, celebrating that landmark. He supplemented the income he got from writing books by leading walking groups around the Alps for the tour operators Inghams and Thomson, and around the Himalaya with Sherpa Expeditions and Mountain Kingdoms. He was also a photojournalist for outdoor magazines and a lecturer, travelling around the country delivering talks on different mountain ranges. Full as it was, Kev’s outdoor exploration and writing was only a part of his life. As a husband, father and active member of his church and community in Crockham Hill, he touched many lives. He is survived by Min, their daughters Claudia and Ilsa, and grandchildren Charlie and Billy.Cases of Covid-19 will continue to surge worldwide due to the Omicron variant, the US chief medical adviser, Anthony Fauci, said on Sunday, warning Americans not to get complacent amid reports that the variant is less harmful than others. “If you have many, many, many more people with a less level of severity,” Fauci told ABC’s This Week, “that might kind of neutralise the positive effect of having less severity. “We’re particularly worried about those who are in that unvaccinated class ... those are the most vulnerable ones when you have a virus that is extraordinarily effective in getting to people.” Fauci also welcomed Donald Trump’s endorsement of Covid-19 vaccines and boosters, saying: “We’ll take anything we can get about getting people vaccinated.” But Trump prompted rebarbative anger among supporters and amid a huge case surge, with knock-on effects feared for the economy and schools, Fauci also admitted the US had “to do better” on providing access to testing. Speaking to Axios, Fauci said it was “conceivable that sooner or later everybody will have been infected and/or vaccinated or boosted”. “When you get to that point,” he said, “unless you have a very bizarre variant come in that evades all protection – which would be unusual – then I think you could get to that point where you have this at a steady level.” But he also suggested fourth shots might yet be needed. On ABC, he was asked why “we still don’t have affordable tests widely available to anybody who needs it”. “If you look at the beginning of the [Biden] administration,” Fauci said, “… there were essentially no rapid point-of-care home tests available. Now, there are over nine of them and more coming. Production has been rapidly upscaled. “… But the situation where you have such a high demand, a conflation of events, Omicron stirring people to get appropriately concerned and wanting to get tested as well as [a] run on tests during the holiday season – we’ve obviously got to do better. “I think things will improve greatly as we get into January, but that doesn’t help us today and tomorrow. So you’re right, [access to testing] is of concern.” Another leading public health expert said he did not think the case for possible fourth vaccine shots needed to be made right now. “If we need it I think our health system is prepared,” Ashish Jha, dean of the Brown University School of Public Health, told Fox News Sunday. “But let’s actually talk about whether we need it or not. And at this moment, based on the data I’ve seen, I’m pretty skeptical that we’re gonna need a fourth shot. “Part of the question is that we have to ask ourselves what are we trying to do? Are we trying to block every single infection? Maybe that’s our goal. If that’s our goal then yes, maybe we need a fourth shot. Or are we just trying to prevent serious illness and death? Which, of course, I think should be our primary goal. “So I’m pretty unconvinced at this moment that we need a fourth shot … let’s get a lot more data before we even really start seriously thinking about it.” Jha also said school closures – feared by many parents – should not be increasing. “We know how to keep schools open,” he said, “we know how to keep them safe. This really shouldn’t even be on the table. I’m disappointed to see this happening. “We know that for kids being in school is the right thing for them, for their mental health, for their education. And we have all sorts of tools to keep schools open so I don’t really understand why school districts are [closing schools]. “… There could be times when you have such severe short staffing shortages that it may be hard to keep schools going. That really should be the only context I think at this point.” More than 816,000 have died from Covid in the US but resistance to vaccinations and other public health measures remains strongest in states and counties that voted for Trump. On ABC, Fauci was asked if he thought the former president’s supporters would listen to his support for vaccines. “Well, I certainly hope so,” he said. “We’ll take anything we can get about getting people vaccinated.” But Fauci also said he was “dismayed” when Trump followers in Dallas booed him for supporting vaccines. “I was stunned by that,” he said. “I mean, given the fact of how popular he is with that group, that they would boo him … tells me how recalcitrant they are about being told what they should do. “I think that his continuing to say that people should get vaccinated and articulating that to them, in my mind is a good thing. I hope he keeps it up.” Trump also backed vaccines in an interview with the conservative commentator Candace Owens, saying: “The vaccines work … the ones who get very sick and go to the hospital are the ones that don’t take the vaccine … and if you take the vaccine, you’re protected.” On Instagram, Owens said Trump was backing vaccines because he was “old” and “came from a time before TV, before internet, before being able to conduct … independent research”. Last week, after Biden recognised his predecessor’s efforts to develop vaccines, Trump said he was “appreciative”. Biden also commended Trump for receiving a booster, saying it “may be one of the few things he and I agree on”. On Sunday, Vice-President Kamala Harris was asked on CBS’s Face the Nation if the unvaccinated were to blame for the Omicron surge. “I don’t think this is a moment to talk about fault,” Harris said. But she added: “It is clear that everyone has the ability to make a choice to save their lives and to prevent hospitalisation if they get vaccinated and if they get the booster. And so I urge people to do that.”Heartfelt thanks to the oft-maligned 111 service, which responded so well to a call for help, to the ambulance service, A&amp;E admissions and then the fantastic surgical, nursing and support team at Lewisham hospital, who dealt with my son’s sudden onset of appendicitis so promptly and effectively, despite him being Covid positive, and the hospital being under such pressure and so short-staffed. He was done, discharged and back home in less than 24 hours. Name and address supplied • Thank you for your list of the 50 best TV shows of 2021 (22 December). However, I managed to negotiate the year and preserve my mental health without seeing a single episode of any of them. Of far greater value were books, gardening and listening to music. I encourage readers to do the same. Pete Lavender Nottingham • I searched through your pages while I scoured the list. However, the superlative, incomparable Money Heist was nowhere to be found. An astonishing omission, which at least guaranteed that you would publish my letter. Barry Raymond Wolff Cambridge • A correspondent (Letters, 22 December) asks if his December-blooming Yorkshire rose is a good or bad thing. I would imagine that would depend on whether the flower is red or white. Steve Carden Southwick, West Sussex • At one of his parties (Letters, 21 December), my late father-in-law, on waking up from a nap, said: “Are those buggers still here?” Bill Hutty Bath • In your piece about Matt Hancock (‘He keeps coming back for more’: Matt Hancock’s rapid return to the fray, 22 December) you say that “after such a nightmarish year, Hancock could be forgiven for lying low”. Surely “low” is superfluous? Mike Pender Cardiff • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Oliver Wainwright’s otherwise well-balanced obituary for Richard Rogers (19 December) omits the key role that engineers played in his early success in realising the Pompidou Centre. In particular Peter Rice (of Arups) was responsible for researching the great strength of cast steel, used for the huge gerberette connections between columns and trusses. It was also he who devised one of the most innovative elements of the Pompidou Centre – using water-filled structural steel columns to provide fire protection. Kate Macintosh Winchester • A thread runs through Oliver Wainwright’s excellent obituary of Richard Rogers – his numerous attempts to create a better means of making domestic housing using the materials and techniques of today and the future. The best memorial to his work would be an even greater move to factory-built houses of high environmental standards, good space and potential change as their occupiers’ needs alter. David Cockayne CheshireThe Guardian keeps the readership excellently apprised of the (mis)behaviour of some of our ministers and MPs. Surely the time is right to bring politics closer to the lived experience of more voters. I suggest two changes that could contribute to this. First, rather than MPs being able to tell us proudly that they are accountable every five years at the ballot box, what if they were required to participate in an annual independent appraisal process that would be published in the spirit of transparency? This is a common way of monitoring performance and encouraging personal professional development. Among other things, any new paid positions would be declared and discussed, plus how the appraisee contributes to life in the House of Commons in terms of committee work and speeches, as well as a record of constituency activity. Second, to attempt to counter some of the misleading statements made in session or at prime minister’s questions, there should be a rapid fact-checking facility to try to make ministers and backbenchers more careful in their use of language and statistics both in the House of Commons and in interviews. Feedback would be delivered by the Speaker or in the media as soon as possible after the event, with a requirement for the person responsible to issue a correction. Gradually, it may become possible to have more confidence in our representatives, some of whom could state an aspiration to be better acquainted with the truth at their annual appraisal. Dr Andrew Bates Whitley Bay, Tyne and Wear • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.I was surprised and delighted to read your article ‘A world first’: Devon calls victory in 27-year war on termites (21 December). Surprised because I assumed the story had long since disappeared into the mists of history; delighted because it is, as Damian McBride is quoted as saying, a classic illustration of public service at its best. As the minister responsible for setting up the Termite Eradication Programme in 1998, I can vouch for the sustained commitment of the team of experts, led since 2003 by Ed Suttie, who implemented the very challenging programme of activity necessary to eradicate what could have been a seriously damaging spread of termite infestation across the country. In my book Substance Not Spin I described the early stages of the eradication programme, including the “nightmare scenario” of the particular species of termite at Saunton developing wings and escaping beyond the area in which at that time they were contained. Had this happened, it would have been almost impossible to halt the spread and consequent damage and cost. The fact that it has taken more than 20 years to get to a point where there can be confidence that the Saunton termite colony has been eradicated is a measure of just how challenging the process has been. It also provides a warning. The termites at Saunton are thought to have arrived in packing material around a plant imported from southern Europe many years before their presence was spotted. This could very easily happen again. If so, the lessons learned from Saunton will need to be applied quickly and with similar determination if Britain is to remain free of termites. Nick Raynsford London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.England’s latest batting collapse in Australia follows on from a series of below average scores from the men’s Test team in the past year. Statistics show the top order fairs poorly compared with other countries, and well adrift of their six main rivals. Here we take a look at the stats which highlight how poor England’s batters have been since Joe Root was named Test captain in February 2017. 30.32 Root has averaged 47.66 since being named captain. England’s other top six batters have averaged 30.32. 50 The total number of ducks by England batters in 2021 is 50. The next highest figure this century is 33. In total, 17.2% of England innings in 2021 have ended without scoring. There has only ever been one other year with more than 33 England ducks: 1998, when there were 54 (17.1% of all innings). 24.80 Average runs scored by England batters in 2021. 0 Previous years this century when England have averaged less than 25 runs per wicket. Over the last hundred years it happened in 1999, 1950 and 1922 (when there was only one Test). 74 Total number of Test batters over the last 10 years with a batting average above 40 2 Total number of England batters over the last 10 years with a batting average above 40 (Root and Cook). There are 11 from each of Australia and Pakistan, 10 Indians, eight Bangladeshis, seven from New Zealand and South Africa, six Sri Lankans and five from the West Indies.Rafael Behr’s verdict on the prime minister is compelling (The Tories said we could have our cake and eat it – now they are stuffed and voters are hungry, 22 December). But I wonder whether we are still in thrall to the alleged charisma of Boris Johnson, even as we reveal its function as a fig leaf. Behr claims, for example, that “Boris Johnson rose to the top by getting people to like him. His problems are the result of them subsequently getting to know him.” Though this makes sense superficially, in fact it lets too many people off the hook. There must be many hundreds of thousands of us with only an armchair acquaintance of Johnson who were thoroughly unconvinced of his alleged competence; who needed only his pre-political CV to gauge his character; who needed only a glance at the reckless, destructive, unabashed indifference with which he discharged the one ministerial position he held (and lost) as foreign secretary, to know his appeal had all the magnetism of a catastrophic black hole. Behr’s claim for the erstwhile supporters of Johnson is redolent of the frantic back-covering manoeuvres deployed by the many friends of that former would-be mayor of London and darling of the Tories, the disgraced peer Jeffrey Archer. He, too, was a proponent of monumental lies too numerous to mention. It just is not credible for anyone to claim ignorance of Johnson’s obvious flaws, however enamoured they may have been with his charms. It took a prison sentence for the party to concede that its peerless fundraiser Jeffrey Archer was a fraud. Why on earth should we entertain the idea that enduring two years of misery was necessary to discover shortcomings in Johnson that were obvious, palpable and painfully apparent from the start? Paul McGilchrist Colchester, Essex • Thank you, Rafael Behr, for such a brilliant critique of Boris Johnson. A different cakeism did for Marie Antoinette – let’s hope that it does the same for him. Linda Karlsen Whitstable, Kent • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Boxing Day swimmers braved the cold weather to take their traditional dip after parts of England and Scotland woke up to snow on Sunday. Wintry weather that was forecast to produce blizzard-like conditions across the English-Scottish border gave way to rain, and the Environment Agency put flood warnings in place in North Yorkshire and Devon. Families in Tow Law, County Durham, were among those who went sledging as the area was blanketed in snow. Across the United Kingdom snow fell overnight, with the highest parts of Scotland blanketed with a couple of centimetres and parts of the north of England seeing as much as 5cm at its peaks. On Saturday it had been a white Christmas for parts of the UK as people in Shetland and eastern Scotland woke up to snow. Swimmers at Ayr beach took part in a charity swim for Ayrshire Cancer Support on Boxing Day. And in Redcar, bathers braved the cold waters of the North Sea as they took part in their annual swim. The event attracts hundreds of people each year, some wearing fancy dress, as they help to raise money for a number of charities. Southern England experienced less dramatic weather, with people strolling along the Long Walk in Windsor Great Park on a wet and dreary Boxing Day. The Met Office forecast cloudy weather with outbreaks of rain and drizzle across northern and eastern areas of the UK towards the end of Boxing Day. It said this would ease and be followed by a “good deal of low cloud with some fog patches developing”. It said there was a risk of frost in some western parts of the UK and further rain in the south-west later. The rain in the north was likely to clear on Monday. The Environment Agency issued a flood warning for the North Sea at Scarborough Sandside on Sunday. “Overtopping waves and spray are expected as a result of strong onshore winds” on Sunday evening, it said. “Please be careful along beaches, coastal and estuary footpaths and roads in the area, as large waves and sea spray can be dangerous with debris.” In another flood warning, it said river levels remained high near Exeter after heavy rain on Christmas Day. A Met Office yellow warning was initially expanded to include an area from the Scottish borders to Derbyshire, as well as farther east over Durham and Northumberland, due to an increased chance of snow accumulating over the southern Pennines overnight. A second was in place for a smaller area north of Glasgow and across the Forth valley. These were removed later in the day.Boris Johnson is expected to examine crucial hospital data on Monday before making any new announcement on Covid measures, but has no plans to recall his cabinet, with ministers still deeply sceptical of further legal curbs. Sources said the prime minister would “take stock” after being encouraged by improving data on Friday, a sign that No 10 is leaning away from stricter curbs in England, but Downing Street sources said he would act quickly if there were new causes for concern. Instead, Johnson will receive only his regular data briefing over the bank holiday with England’s chief medical officer, Prof Chris Whitty – expected to be knighted in the new year honours – and the chief scientific adviser, Sir Patrick Vallance. Key evidence that the government will examine on Monday includes data on the length of stay in hospitals, the transition rates to ICU and new death figures. There is concern among some government figures about undeclared positive cases – including those asymptomatic but also those isolating after a lateral flow test whose results are not recorded by the NHS because they do not take a PCR. However, cabinet ministers are still highly sceptical of further legal restrictions, a week after a tense three-hour cabinet meeting in which the majority pushed back against any new curbs. One cabinet minister said the positive data on Omicron’s severity – a Health Security Agency analysis found those catching Omicron are 50% to 70% less likely to need hospital care compared with previous variants – proved they had been right to hold out. “The data so far is still struggling to be persuasive of legal changes to be required,” one cabinet minister said. Another said it was “right that we didn’t rush last time given positive, early data”. But a hospital doctors’ trade union urged ministers to implement further measures without delay to help the NHS, including limits on household mixing and table service only in hospitality venues. Dr Paul Donaldson, the general secretary of the Hospital Consultants and Specialists Association, warned Johnson that “it would be ludicrous” not to respond more decisively to Omicron, and that Christmas mingling would inevitably have spread Covid. “There is a high probability we are moving too late,” said Donaldson, a consultant microbiologist. “We will soon start to see the impact of Christmas. We are holding out hope that hospitalisations are at the lower end of projections. But given the uncertainty we face it would be ludicrous not to take additional precautions,” he added. The HCSA also wants to see social distancing measures applied in retail and hospitality settings, such as mask-wearing, table spacing, limits on capacity and queueing systems, as well as social distancing and bubbles in all schools and continued working from home. The NHS Confederation, which represents health service trusts in England, said any further steps would help the NHS, given the rising number of hospitalisations and staff off sick due to the virus. There were 1,171 people admitted to hospital across the UK in the previous 24 hours, the government disclosed on Friday. “Any new restrictions which are brought in to help ease the pressure on the NHS need to be clearly explained to the public. Confusion and complacency can make any new restrictions ineffective,” said Matthew Taylor, its chief executive. The prime minister has pledged to his restive backbenchers, a significant number of whom rebelled over the last set of restrictions, that he will recall parliament before implementing new restrictions but it is possible any vote could be retrospective, should the decision be taken later in the week. Johnson faced significant opposition from his cabinet before Christmas during a three-hour meeting where the decision was taken to delay any new curbs until after the festive weekend. The transport secretary, Grant Shapps, the foreign secretary, Liz Truss, and the business secretary, Kwasi Kwarteng, were said to be the most sceptical of restrictions, while the levelling up secretary, Michael Gove, and culture secretary, Nadine Dorries, have urged the most caution. On Friday, papers released from government scientific advisers showed modelling for the impact of implementing “step 2” restrictions from Tuesday – a date now unlikely to be practicable. That would mean an end to indoor gatherings and introducing the rule of six outdoors, with bars and restaurants only able to serve outdoors. The modelling suggested that restrictions could reduce deaths by 18% if kept in place until mid-January or 39% if retained until the end of March. Cabinet resistance to further restrictions is also likely be deepened by the collapse in Johnson’s own poll ratings over the scandal of No 10 Christmas parties and deep rifts with his own party over plan B restrictions to enforce home working, mask-wearing and new Covid passes for large venues. Speaking to the Observer on Sunday, Conservative MPs suggested that those who wished to eventually replace Johnson should resist further Covid restrictions. Johnson and the education secretary, Nadhim Zahawi, are said to be determined that schools reopen on time in January. Step 2 restrictions would allow schools to remain open, as well as non-essential shops, subject to social distancing rules. New coronavirus restrictions come into force from Monday in Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland. From Boxing Day, a maximum of six people will be allowed to meet in pubs, cinemas and restaurants in Wales, as well as other restrictions on numbers for larger events. In Scotland, up to three households can meet, with 1-metre distancing between groups at indoor and outdoor venues such as bars, restaurants, theatres, cinemas and gyms. Table service is also required at places where alcohol is served. Northern Ireland is also recommending restricting socialising to three households, while up to six people can meet in pubs, bars and restaurants. However, there are serious concerns in the NHS that the large number of frontline personnel falling sick as infections spiral because of Omicron is hampering the service’s ability to provide care. Staff absences in England due to Covid have been soaring during December, the latest official figures showed last Thursday. The number of days lost to illness caused by Covid went up by 38% to 124,855 in the week to 19 December, while the number of staff off sick rose by 54% from 12,240 to 18,829, both compared with the previous week. At some hospitals in London, which has been hit first and worst by the new variant, the number of staff off ill with Covid has trebled since the start of the month, NHS England’s figures showed. Taylor said that the service was facing a “double emergency” of sharply rising staff absences because of illness at the same time as the demand for hospital care was rising. Chris Hopson, the chief executive of NHS Providers, has said that the loss of frontline staff to sickness is “a big worry” for hospital bosses who are facing growing demand from patients, especially as the NHS in England has almost 100,000 vacancies anyway.“For I was hungry and you gave me food, I was thirsty and you gave me drink, I was a stranger and you welcomed me” – Gospel of Matthew 25:35. “One girl who had suffered fuel burns on the boat as she travelled across the Channel was neglected for two days, leaving her with scars for life, it was found” – Guardian report on the treatment of detained asylum seekers in Kent, 16 December. For Christians, the Christmas narrative offers an annual reminder of the ethical duty to offer hospitality to the stranger. The straitened circumstances of the birth of Jesus in a Bethlehem stable, and the holy family’s subsequent flight from Herod into Egypt, both identify Christ with the predicament of all who are vulnerable, exiled and in need. For non-believers – most of us these days – there is always the reference point of international law. Two thousand years after Jesus lived, the Judeo-Christian commitment to the outsider – to what the Jewish philosopher Emmanuel Levinas called the face of the other “in its nudity and defencelessness” – found legal expression in the form of the refugee convention of 1951. Sadly, in increasingly insular, inward-looking times, faith in that seems to be dwindling too. The convention became an integral part of the postwar era, originally offering rights of asylum to millions of displaced people in Europe. The horrors of totalitarianism, two world wars and the Holocaust irrevocably shaped the hearts and minds of those who lived through them and sought to learn from the experience. The right to seek and be given refuge in a safe country formed part of a new liberal architecture of universal rights. But 70 years on, proliferating barriers and fences along European borders testify to a harsher mood. As a notion of “Fortress Europe” is normalised, the inviolable right to claim asylum – to make one’s case and be properly heard – is no longer uncontested. Weakened regulation The direction of travel became starkly apparent during the recent crisis on Poland’s eastern border with Belarus, when thousands of migrants from the Middle East were repelled with water cannon and batons. Forced to freeze in a small strip of wooded no man’s land, at least 21 people died. Hundreds of others have been secretly sheltered by courageous Polish families, who risk prosecution for assisting illegal immigration. Primary responsibility for these appalling scenes naturally lies with the Belarusian president, Alexander Lukashenko, whose decision to open up a putative route into the EU played politics with desperate people’s lives. But instead of responding from the moral high ground, Europe battened down the hatches. In October, Poland’s nationalist government passed legislation authorising the “pushback” of asylum seekers, brazenly flouting the Geneva conventions. The European Commission has itself put forward proposals to allow countries to suspend protections for asylum seekers during similar emergencies. Greece and Spain, which have accused Turkey and Morocco respectively of Lukashenko-style tactics, will have taken note. From Croatia to the Greek islands, unacknowledged pushbacks of asylum seekers are commonplace; 12 EU member states have formally requested that the rules governing movement across borders (the Schengen borders code) be updated to allow the financing of physical barriers to keep migrants out. Outside the EU, Britain is also treating international norms as optional. The government’s nationality and borders bill seeks to criminalise asylum seekers crossing the Channel and remove arrivals to third-country processing centres, both measures in apparent contravention of the 1951 convention. It is scarcely surprising that Agnès Callamard, secretary general of Amnesty International, should recently warn: “We are [taking away] bit by bit all the rule-of-law system infrastructure that’s been built over the last decades.” The moral retreat is taking place only six years after Angela Merkel said “we can manage this”, as a million Syrian refugees sought sanctuary from civil war. At the time, the Hungarian prime minister, Viktor Orbán, was widely condemned over the erection of a border fence to keep the refugees out. “We have only just torn down walls in Europe; we should not be putting them up,” observed a European Commission spokesperson. But that was then. The exploitation of the 2015 crisis by the populist right now haunts the imagination of mainstream European leaders, while the ongoing failure to agree a common system of refugee quotas has further shifted the policy dial in a draconian direction. A hardening of hearts Modish concepts such as “hybrid warfare”, and the language of breaking the “business models” of people smugglers, are legitimising indifference to the plight of vulnerable people. The certain prospect of rising levels of migration, as a result of global heating, is likely to up the ante still further. During the standoff with Mr Lukashenko, Poland’s prime minister, Mateusz Morawiecki, advised a German newspaper: “It is clear that if we are not able to keep thousands of immigrants at bay now … if we do not resolutely protect and defend our borders, hundreds of millions from Africa and the Middle East will try to get to Europe.” The price of this hardening of hearts is inevitably paid by the hungry, the thirsty, the cold and the exiled. To adapt Voltaire, in Britain and across Europe, irregular migrants are being treated with performative cruelty to discourage the others. Earlier this month in Kent, the chief inspector of prisons, Peter Clarke, condemned as intolerable the conditions in which hundreds of newly arrived asylum seekers were being held. They were unfit, he commented, “even for a small number of people”. Among those detained on the south coast was a 16-year-old girl suffering from fuel burns, who was left untreated for two days. The seams of her damp jeans became embedded in the wounds, leaving permanent scars. This is, clearly, a minor episode in comparison with the drowning of 27 people during a small boat crossing in November. But it is indicative of times in which the urgent humanitarian insight that underpinned the refugee convention is being lost. Of course, work must be done to establish safe, legal routes, and solutions must be found to deal with the reality of economic migration in an unequal world. But when directly confronted with the suffering of the vulnerable stranger, the only ethical response is to offer food, drink, warmth and compassion – and to listen to their story. Having learned this lesson seven decades ago, 21st-century Europe is in danger of forgetting it all over again.One touch took Aymeric Laporte out of the game, sending him sliding into no-man’s land. A second took James Maddison past Rúben Dias, last season’s Footballer of the Year, with conspicuous ease. Then came an exchange of passes with Kelechi Iheanacho and an assured finish. Then there was the weaving run that took him past a series of defenders before Iheanacho released Ademola Lookman to score Leicester’s second goal. Then came his second long-range shot, whipped with menace, that Ederson tipped on to the bar. This one fell obligingly for Iheanacho to tap in the rebound. In 10 minutes, Maddison had conjured a comeback out of nothing. For nothing, too: Leicester’s three-goal salvo may have inspired Manchester City to score two more. But it was a virtuoso display of quality, showcasing a flair player’s full armoury: shooting from distance, mesmeric dribbling, delicate touches and incisive passes. A venue where City win so often and by such margins lends itself more to doomed heroics by goalkeepers than attacking midfielders. Perhaps not since Kevin De Bruyne’s Gerrard-esque tour de force when Tottenham controversially eliminated City from the 2019 Champions League has one done so much in vain. Until yesterday, Conor Gallagher may have produced the finest performance by a visiting player at the Etihad this season. Then Maddison proved a point while earning Leicester none. While a porous defence sieved six, he opened up the league leaders at will. As Leicester’s fortunes have got worse, his have improved. Their December has bordered on the disastrous at times. They have exited the Europa League and the Carabao Cup, entered the Europa Conference League, despite Brendan Rodgers claiming he did not know what it is, lost a host of players and all realistic chance of Champions League football. A club who spent 567 days in the top four in the last two seasons, albeit without finishing there, are now 13 points behind fourth-placed Arsenal. But in the last five weeks, Maddison has mustered six goals and five assists. From the mediocrity of a largely barren 2021, he has rediscovered magnificence. He has been the forgotten man of England’s raft of creators, rarely even mentioned in dispatches by Gareth Southgate now. His friend Jack Grealish became the £100m man. But Grealish, paying the price for a night out, went unused, a spectator as Maddison outshone even De Bruyne, Bernardo Silva and Ilkay Gündogan, terrifically as each played. Perhaps he had justified Pep Guardiola’s pre-match assessment. The City manager’s praise can be football’s deadliest weapon and, when he called Leicester “exceptional” this week, it threatened to be a savage sequel. Marcelo Bielsa, the man Guardiola has deemed the best manager in the world, lost 7-0 here. Leicester were four down after 25 minutes. Fifteen months after Leicester’s 5-2 demolition of City, four after they won the Community Shield, came perhaps Rodgers’s worst first half since Liverpool traipsed in 5-0 down to Stoke in Steven Gerrard’s final game. But Leicester had the quality and wherewithal to come back from the brink of humiliation. They nevertheless departed with a worse defensive record this season than Watford. Circumstances contribute, injuries occurred at the wrong time but perhaps the weakest rearguard Rodgers has fielded were eviscerated, confused and confounded, compounding their problems by conceding penalties. Without five sidelined defenders, including their three best centre-backs, he also deemed Wilfred Ndidi unfit to feature. Leicester’s makeshift back four consisted of a midfielder (Marc Albrighton), an odd-job man (Daniel Amartey), a bad signing (Jannik Vestergaard), and a 20-year-old (Luke Thomas). It was a recipe for goals. Guardiola bemused them by giving them no one to mark. City’s formation consisted of a back four, a holding midfielder, three attacking midfielders and two high, wide wingers. Amartey and Vestergaard stood horribly exposed, knowing the enemy was coming, but not who or when or how as a rotating cast of elusive technicians suddenly materialised. City demonstrated the depth of their talent. Fernandinho became the 14th Manchester City player to assist a goal in the this season. Often the creator in chief, De Bruyne is not on that list, but he is one of eight to have been varying types of false – or occasionally genuine – nines. A match of a solitary defensive midfielder – the pensionable Fernandinho – was made for their attacking counterparts in both teams. And then Leicester rendered Maddison’s efforts irrelevant with the most mundane of failings. They conceded twice from corners. The prospect of perhaps the greatest Premier League comeback disappeared but memories of Maddison’s brilliance should remain.Toilet Feelings is an illustrator based in Sydney. She is on Instagram @toiletfeelingsMy entire experience of Auckland changed when I got a boat. It was the perfect antidote to a professional DJ lifestyle, where getting up at 5am to be on the water become immeasurably preferable to coming home at 5am from work. On trips out I began sticking my head underwater with such vigour that I somehow turned it into a whole new profession. It didn’t happen straight away, of course. My 40-year-old, 14-foot beige fibreglass boat with a semi-reliable two-stroke engine, named Brown Thunder, only had so much range, and my real goal lay much farther offshore, tantalisingly out of reach. A place where tales of clear blue tropical water and huge fish swirled around a group of uninhabited islands, teasing me from the pages of marine magazines or the crusty lips of old salty sea-mates. I don’t mind sharing the Mokohinau Islands with you because getting to them is not an easy trip. They’re just shy of 40km out to sea, with no shelter in between, with calm weather windows fleeting. A bit of wind against tide can quickly make an uncomfortable trip turn dangerous. Of course, this only adds to the intrigue. From launch the islands aren’t visible but trusting a compass bearing the horizon gradually throws up a lump of land that splits into three on approach. It’s precisely this remoteness that makes the islands so special to me. The Auckland isthmus is lapped by different oceans. On the Pacific side, the Hauraki Gulf is described as the city’s jewel in the crown. It’s an expanse of water filled with more than 50 islands and an incredible diversity of life. More than 20% of all the world’s seabirds can be found here; five of these birds breed no where else on Earth. And out along one boundary lies the Mokohinau Islands, the location a true convergence zone where the rich gulf waters merge with a distinct eastern current. In summer this warm conveyor belt brings a stunning range of tropical visitors. I have found myself in the water here with tuna, marlin, mako sharks, bronze whalers, manta rays, sunfish, false killer whales, real killer whales, pilot whales and even a massive spine-tailed devil ray. As an active freediver I have been humbled in huge vortex clouds of blue mao mao, giant schools of trevally, acres of kahawai and, of course, New Zealand’s legendary monster yellowtail kingfish. They are an internationally renowned sportfish and New Zealand happens to hold 23 of the 24 world records relating to them. I was even lucky enough to once win the national Kingfish Cup, spearing a specimen of 34kg – all at this magical place fishers affectionately call “the Mokes” but I like to refer to as Jurassic Park. The rock formations that rise out of the water differ to the mainland so much that visitors I bring here describe it feeling more like Thailand than Aotearoa. On the right tide I can fit my boat through an archway into a lagoon in the middle of one island, half expecting Leonardo DiCaprio to leap out and stab a shark, à la The Beach. The islands weren’t always uninhabited: alongside their rich Māori history it’s still possible to go ashore and view a once-occupied lighthouse with a troubled past. One lighthouse keeper ran out of food so attached urgent notes to a model boat he made from tin and aimed for the coast. Miraculously, supplies were sent out just nine days later. Another keeper wasn’t so lucky and the extreme isolation drove him to take his own life. My journey to these islands also changed me in ways I couldn’t have imagined. I had been saving for a house deposit but when my very good friend’s breast cancer got the better of her I decided to live in the moment as she had so valiantly, and spent my savings on a bigger boat. While not a financially astute action I finally had the ability to get to the Mokes, and I honoured this impulse by naming my boat after her. The first trips were everything I had hoped for and I started to make videos of the experience because I wanted to show others the unseen magic we have on our doorstep. This led directly to me developing my own television fishing/travel series now five seasons deep and playing in more than 85 countries as a National Geographic title. It developed in me a strong belief in finding ways to connect people to the ocean, to give them a reason to care about what’s going on in and around it. I owe those islands for opening this whole new chapter and helping me discover in myself the things that are truly important in life. Clarke Gayford is the host of television series Fish of the Day and author of the book of the same name What’s your favourite wild place? If you would like to contribute to the series tell us about it in 200 words and send it to newzealand@theguardian.comPolice have formally apologised to the family of the former footballer Dalian Atkinson after an officer who kicked and fired an electric stun gun at him was convicted over his death, the Guardian has learned. In June PC Benjamin Monk, of the West Mercia force, became the first officer in more than three decades to be convicted of manslaughter during the course of his duties. The jury heard that he fired a stun gun into Atkinson for 33 seconds – six times longer than is standard – and then kicked him twice in the head, leaving a boot imprint on his forehead and blood on the officer’s laces. Police had been called in August 2016 to an early morning disturbance as Atkinson had a mental health crisis in the street outside his father’s house in Telford, Shropshire. Some, including the Atkinson family, see the case as a British version of the US police killing of George Floyd. The family say the apology after five years was overdue. A new chief constable, Pippa Mills, took over the West Mercia force in September. In her letter of apology, Mills wrote: “A police uniform does not grant officers immunity to behave unlawfully or to abuse their powers. Ben Monk’s conduct was in direct contradiction to the standards and behaviour of the policing service, and understandably undermined public confidence.” The letter accepts that Monk used unreasonable force, with the kicks to Atkinson’s head contributing to his death. It also accepts that Atkinson’s right to life, protected under the European convention on human rights, was breached. Mills acknowledged that the death was “devastating” for the family, and added: “I cannot imagine the immense pain you have felt and how the significant delays with the trial have also added to your burden of grief. You have demonstrated great strength and dignity throughout the past five years.” The letter followed negotiations between the family’s lawyers and police solicitors, with one area of contention being compensation after the guilty verdict. The chief constable pledged to learn lessons from the death, and ended by saying: “I am deeply sorry for the devastating impact the actions of a West Mercia officer has caused you and I extend my deepest condolences.” The letter makes no mention of whether Monk should have been an officer at the time. During his sentencing, it emerged that Monk had been found guilty by a police discipline tribunal of gross misconduct in 2010, but had been allowed to stay in the force. After his manslaughter conviction and eight-year jail sentence, Monk, 43, was dismissed from the force. Kate Maynard, the solicitor for Atkinson’s family, said: “Over five years after Dalian Atkinson died of horrific injuries caused by a serving police officer, this official apology to the family is welcomed and overdue. “The chief constable’s acknowledgment that a police uniform does not grant immunity is especially pertinent in a year that has seen other terrible examples of deadly police violence. It is hoped that this will serve as a deterrent, and also embolden those who seek police accountability.” West Mercia police declined to comment.Of all the indignities heaped on Bath this season, and there have been a few, this West Country humbling in English rugby’s oldest derby fixture was perhaps the most painful. Playing at home against their fiercest rivals, Stuart Hooper’s side succumbed meekly during the first half en route to a 12th defeat in succession, signalling more doom and gloom at the Rec. Bath recently appointed Brent Janse van Rensburg as defence coach for the remainder of the season, but it was clear that the South African’s influence will take time to be felt. Gloucester were up 26-6 up and in total control at the interval, much to the disgust of Bath followers and presumably their owner, Bruce Craig, who will be replaced by Ed Griffiths, the former Saracens chief executive, as chairman from the start of 2022. By the end of the first half, George Skivington’s men had the bonus point in the bag while for the notoriously ill-disciplined hosts their forwards Tom Ellis and Lewis Boyce were sent to the sin-bin. Bath, who announced this month the appointment of Johann Van Graan as head coach on a long-term contract from next season, when he will relinquish his current position in charge of Munster, continue to undermine themselves with numerous failings. “To concede 40 points against Gloucester at home is not acceptable, absolutely,” Hooper, the director of rugby, said. “Collision-wise we were poor and we didn’t stop their lineout drive and if you don’t stop that in the Premiership, particularly against these guys who are the best at it, you’re in trouble. But we have got to be better than that. We definitely made it too easy for them.” Bath were dealt an early blow when Sam Underhill departed with a head knock and did not return. As Gloucester began to probe, Bath were penalised for an infringement at the ruck and referee Matthew Carley sent Ellis to the sin-bin. The visitors soon made their numerical advantage pay as Carley awarded them a penalty try and showed Boyce a yellow card. That left Bath down to 13 men and, although Bailey booted another penalty, Harris was on hand to finish off a neat move inside the left channel. Gloucester moved through the gears and utilised their driving maul to devastating effect again. Jack Singleton was the beneficiary this time, emerging from a thicket of bodies to touch down before Harris claimed his second try in the 39th minute after some neat footwork from Louis Rees-Zammit. Adam Hastings’s conversion gave the visitors a 26-6 interval advantage and, while there was a response of sorts from Bath in the second half, it was nowhere near enough. In the 52nd minute, Ben Spencer cleverly took a quick tap-penalty and darted under the posts to give Bath a glimmer of hope. But the replacement Fraser Balmain claimed Gloucester’s fifth score from yet another driving maul and the final nail for Bath came late on when Hastings’s superb kick found Ollie Thorley in the left corner and he showed intelligence to send Kyle Moyle over. Ollie Fox claimed a last-minute consolation for Bath, but Gloucester rose to third after clinching their biggest win at the Rec in the professional era. A delighted Skivington, buoyed by an outstanding display from the Australian flanker Jordy Reid, said: “We came here last year and lost with the last kick of the game, so we wanted to put that right. “Obviously it’s a West Country derby and the big one for the supporters and everyone involved with the club. We respect that, but we’re just working really hard to get better every week. I think we’re getting there – slowly.”There is something about this time of year that demands a good, solid adaptation of a literary classic. Right on cue, here is Around the World in 80 Days (BBC One) for the entire family to enjoy. After the past two years, the prospect of watching adventurers gallivant all over the planet, on a whim, seems almost too cruel to contemplate. No pricey PCR tests, no threat of a country ending up on the red list at the last minute, no prospect of cancellation due to circumstances beyond anyone’s control? Those global circumnavigators didn’t know how good they had it in 1872. That should mean there is more pleasure in quite literally watching the world go by, even if it takes a while to get going. After hearing of a new railway while dining at his private members’ club, Phileas Fogg (David Tennant, with moustache) accepts a bet that he can be the first man to travel around the globe in 80 days. Off he goes, gathering up companions as if this is a 19th-century Doctor Who and getting himself into historical scrapes. Tennant promised a “romp” from this updated version of Jules Verne’s novel, and it certainly is lively. This is big television in the vein of His Dark Materials (and its gorgeous opening credits seem to have taken some inspiration from that series, as well as from Game of Thrones). The prolific composer Hans Zimmer has written the score, alongside Christian Lundberg. Naturally, given its source material, it zips around the planet. This is a multinational production, showing off its many locations, and a second season has been confirmed before the first has even aired. Clearly, there is great confidence in it. It is justified, largely. Fogg is a dour, troubled rich man, ambling around in the trappings of his vast and mysterious wealth. He sulks in his mansion, he sulks in his club. He has a touch of the Elon Musk or Jeff Bezos about him; the spectre of a wealthy man who needs a frivolous and history-making journey to feel alive again is familiar. His ardour for the “balloon contraption” is his equivalent of the modern enthusiasm for the space rocket. In the book, Fogg is fastidious and precise, but Tennant’s Fogg is more of a clumsy blunderer, at least to start with. Here, the charisma is shared among the three main characters, rather than hogged by Tennant alone. Detective Fix, Verne’s Scotland Yard policeman, has morphed into Abigail “Fix” Fortescue, a plucky gal reporter with a weekly column to fill and an unwilling subject – Fogg – about whom she has to write. The Crown’s Leonie Benesch (she played Prince Philip’s sister) portrays her with guts and gumption, as a woman trying to break into a man’s world and make a name for herself against the odds. And why not? The book remains as it ever was, even if purists may grumble, and the character doesn’t seem crowbarred in. The fact that she is a likable journalist may require more of an imaginative leap for some, however. Completing the trio is Ibrahim Koma as Fogg’s valet, Passepartout, whose story shares near-equal billing with Fogg’s in the first episode, via the addition of an emotional fraternal reunion and a revolutionary subplot. Koma brings a lot of charm to his Passepartout, despite setting him up as a bit of a romantic cad. Although they have not had a lot of time to establish themselves as a three-piece quite yet, it looks as if they will not have any trouble carrying the show together. Around the World in 80 Days does suffer from a touch of first-episode syndrome, though. It has to set the scene and build its world – and it takes its time to do so. It isn’t until the white cliffs of Dover begin to recede behind Fogg, Passepartout and Miss Fix that it starts to feel as if it is going somewhere worth your time and investment. By the halfway point, I was keen for the travelling to start and the adventures to begin; British television is not lacking in period dramas about posh people, so the least they could do is chuck in a bit of pleasant scenery and swashbuckling, to hurry along the wagers made in private members’ clubs over boiled beef and spotted dick. However, as I say, this is big television, an eight-part series, and it has plenty of time to unfurl and reveal its charms. I am looking forward to seeing where they go next, in every sense.Tony Williams, an old school friend of mine, who has died aged 80 after complications from Alzheimer’s disease, was a record producer, the founder of Spotlite Records and a pioneer of the appreciation of early modern jazz. Born in Enfield, north London, he was the younger son of Pip (nee Fortuna) and Ronald Williams, a teacher. Tony attended Glendale grammar school in Wood Green. He left in his mid-teens, after becoming inspired by recordings of Charlie Parker and Dizzy Gillespie, and the pursuit of bebop and modern jazz became a consuming passion. He fuelled this passion working at HMV and with kindred spirits at Dobell’s record shop in Charing Cross Road. This led to a discography of Charlie Parker that established Tony as an authority on the man and his music. In the pre-internet world of the 1950s, it would not have been easy to research the somewhat esoteric world of bebop, and it is a tribute to Tony that he did. I was impressed when I heard he had played chess with Gillespie in 1961, backstage at the Gaumont State theatre in Kilburn. In 1963 I joined Tony to meet Ben Webster at the Tally Ho pub in Kentish Town, when Webster was in London with a touring band. It was evident that Tony was at home in this rarefied world. At this time, he was living with his French wife Francine (nee Mouleux), whom he married in 1963, and their young son, Laurence, in Winchmore Hill, later moving to Harlow, Essex. Tony established a rapport with Ross Russell in California, the record producer who founded Dial Records in the 40s, under which label Parker had made some of his most important recordings. Russell offered him the rights to the Dial originals, which had almost fallen into obscurity. This was the impetus for Tony to create Spotlite Records. The name came from a New York club associated with Parker. Interest in bebop was at a low point then and this friendship with Tony encouraged Russell to complete his definitive biography of Parker, Bird Lives. When Clint Eastwood made his film Bird, his studio contacted Tony for guidance on Parker’s music. Spotlite’s launch in 1968 was based on the “Charlie Parker on Dial” recordings. After the success of the Parker reissues, Tony set out to France to find Parker’s widow, Chan, in order to give her some of the proceeds. The 70s and 80s were good years for Spotlite, with a growing catalogue of CDs and cassettes as well as LPs. Tony’s networking led to some remarkable musicians enjoying hospitality at his and Francine’s Harlow home, including Joe Albany, Cecil Payne, Al Haig, JR Monterose and Red Rodney. Tony also built on numerous other friendships, and recording sessions took place with leading British musicians including Don Rendell, Pete King, Brian Dee, Elaine Delmar and many others. After his marriage ended in divorce, Tony met Stephanie Coward, with whom he had a son, Gabriel. Stephanie died in 2019. Tony is survived by Laurence and Gabriel.By the end of the destruction, Aston Villa could just count themselves lucky that Thomas Tuchel did not deem Romelu Lukaku ready to play the entire match. The Chelsea manager said it would have been impossible for the forward to start but he still defied the advice of his medical department by introducing the striker at the interval, which Chelsea muddled through to after trailing to a Reece James own goal. Sometimes needs must and Lukaku singlehandedly propelled Chelsea to a much-needed victory, heading in 11 minutes after entering and, in stoppage time, running half the pitch, brushing off desperate challenges from despairing defenders before winning Chelsea a second penalty. Crucially, they still have Manchester City in their sights. Lukaku made a mockery of the Villa defence from the moment he arrived. He provided a welcome focal point after a half in which Christian Pulisic struggled as a No 9. Villa did not heed the early warning sign. Mason Mount sent in a teasing cross from the right, which almost shaved the forehead of the lurking Lukaku, but then Chelsea activated a different line of attack. Callum Hudson-Odoi, out on the left flank, cut on to his right foot and curled an inviting cross into the box. Lukaku was unperturbed by Tyrone Mings’ feeble attempt to make life difficult and glanced a header into the far corner. Tuchel calmly clenched his fist and Lukaku, who has struggled with injury and illness this season, wheeled away to celebrate his first league goal since September. Chelsea’s third goal came from the penalty spot via Jorginho but it stemmed from Lukaku embarking on an irresistible run from halfway. Hudson-Odoi released the striker and he proceeded to shrug off Matt Targett, who had two nibbles before crashing on to the turf on all fours, before breezing past Ezri Konsa, who resorted to hauling him down in the box. Jorginho, for the second time, effortlessly dispatched the resulting spot-kick. “Romelu will be a key player,” Tuchel said. “Last time he started for us was in October, not because of quality or we have any doubts we are better without him. He is unlucky to get injured. When he was struggling to come back in the schedule, he caught Covid. It [the 45 minutes] was more than the fitness and medical department recommended for him but we thought we could take the risk and be more offensive. I’m happy it went well.” Tuchel also said it was a risk to allow Hudson-Odoi to complete the match, while N’Golo Kanté was withdrawn with a recurrence of a knee problem and Thiago Silva was forced off with a hamstring injury. This was a vital victory but the problems continue to stack up for Chelsea, who host Brighton on Wednesday. Tuchel said: “We had a bit of a rough start, we were not sharp enough. We tried to get away with some skilful play but I felt there was some sharpness missing. We still did not allow too much. We went behind with an own goal – a very unlucky own goal – but the reaction was good. I was super happy.” For Villa, their last game of the calendar year – Tuesday’s match at Leeds was postponed hours before kick-off here – spiralled from their grasp but the only defeats under Steven Gerrard have come against the top three teams in the division. Gerrard was absent here after testing positive for coronavirus but Villa began with an intensity that has been commonplace since he took charge, Ollie Watkins haring forward at every opportunity. Villa deservedly took the lead approaching the half-hour, albeit via a player in luminous yellow. Targett sent in a flat, first-time cross from the left, James glanced the ball on and it whistled over the unsuspecting Edouard Mendy, who no doubt had flashbacks to West Ham’s winner earlier this month. Chelsea were disjointed and unconvincing, but Cash dangled a lifeline four minutes after Villa took the lead. He was caught on the wrong side of Hudson-Odoi and crudely clipped at his heels. Cash knew he had no grounds for complaint and Jorginho nonchalantly sent Emiliano Martínez the wrong way from the spot. Villa fashioned a couple more openings before the interval – Danny Ings dallied after latching on to a cute outside-of-the-boot pass by Ollie Watkins, moments after Trevoh Chalobah denied the striker a clean shot at goal – but they were overpowered following Lukaku’s half-time introduction. Villa were led by Gerrard’s assistants, Gary McAllister and Michael Beale. “I thought we started the game very well,” McAllister said. “I’ve been speaking to him [Gerrard] ever since he tested positive. He is obviously very frustrated; Boxing Day fixture against the European champions at Villa Park, in front of a full house and the television cameras. We were in constant touch.”That’s it from me. I’ll leave you with Ben Fisher’s report from Villa Park. Night! Romelu Lukaku speaks “I needed a performance like this. It’s been difficult [playing a few minutes here and there]. The manager has his reasons but I kept working hard and today… it was good for us to win and I’m happy with my performance. Now I have to push on. “[On his goal] My movement in the box has become better over the years. I’ve tried to be less static and be on the move all the time. It was a brilliant cross. [On the barnstorming run for the penalty] That’s one of my preferred actions – running into space, using my speed and power. “We are the hunters now. The last few results haven’t been the best, and now we have to chase [Manchester City and Liverpool]. Every game between now and the end of the season is a final.” This is why Lukaku is so important to Chelsea. I still wouldn’t trust him in the big games, and a brave manager might leave him out at the Etihad next month. But in the matches against the Small 14, or however many have-nots there are these days, he is often irresistible. That’s a huge victory for Chelsea, mainly because of the spectacular impact that the substitute Romelu Lukaku made in the second half. He put them ahead with an accomplished header and then won the penalty with which Jorginho sealed the game. Lukaku will feel like his season starts here; Chelsea will feel that their season re-starts here. Peep peep! Martinez went the right way this time but it made no difference. Jorginho passed the ball low into the corner, and that’s the end of that. Jorginho gets his second! That was all Romelu Lukaku’s work. Hudson-Odoi lobbed a ball behind Targett, who tried desperately to bring Lukaku down - think England v Jonah Lomu in 1995 - and ended up falling over himself. Lukaku charged all the way from the halfway line into the area before being brought down by the sliding Konsa. As clear a penalty as the first one, and sensational play from Lukaku. 90+2 min: PENALTY TO CHELSEA! 90 min Four minutes of added time. 89 min Kovacic has been tremendous since coming on. 88 min: Brilliant save from Martinez! Kovacic picks the pocket of Chukwuemeka just outside the Chelsea area and sets Lukaku off on the break. He waits for support and gets it from Kovacic, who does superbly to slip past Douglas Luiz on the edge of the area and play in Hudson-Odoi to his left. He opens his body to slide a low shot that is beautifully saved by Martinez, getting down very smartly to his left. 86 min Mount feeds the ball into Lukaku in the area. He backs into Mings and gives it back to Mount, who dances past Konsa in the area. Alonso takes it off Mount, screwing a right-footed shot that hits the recovering Konsa. I think that would have sneaked in the corner. 85 min Nothing comes of the corner. As it stands, Chelsea are level on points with Liverpool (who have a game in hand) and six behind Manchester City Six. 84 min Alonso’s inviting cross just evades Pulisic, who came on Targett’s blind side at the far post, and then Lukaku wins a corner. Chelsea have had a lot more of the ball in the last few minutes. 83 min Chelsea look very comfortable, and there are groans from the crowd when James muscles El Ghazi off the bar near the halfway line. 81 min “It’s a sobering thought for a Norwich fan that, even though Emi Buendia hasn’t done very much so far at Villa Park, he’d still be Norwich’s best player by far if he went back to Carrow Road,” says Rod Wooden. That’s true, though you could also argue that if he was playing as well for Villa as he did at Norwich, he’d be one of their most important players. Not the best by far, but one of the best. It often takes time for players to settle, and not just at Pep FC. 80 min Chelsea have barely crossed the halfway line since going ahead. I know it’s human nature, but it does feel like they are asking for trouble. 79 min El Ghazi gets the wrong side of James and forces a first-time shot from 20 yards that is comfortably saved by Mendy. That’s Villa’s first shot on target in the match. 78 min Villa appeal for a penalty when Alonso puts hands on Konsa (I think) in the area. Turns out Konsa was fractionally offside. It was very tight, though, and a risky challenge from Alonso. 77 min “It’s not quite Boxing Day 1963, but an average of five goals per game today is pretty good I reckon,” says Simon McMahon. “Especially when you consider that England’s average opening partnership during the Ashes so far is 7.60. Maybe they should give Kane and Sterling a go in Sydney?” We’re still bothering to acknowledge the Ashes, are we? 76 min Villa make their final change - Anwar El Ghazi replaces Morgan Sanson. 75 min Traore plays in the overlapping Cash, whose cross is intercepted at the near post. Moments later, Sanson wafts over from distance. This is better from Villa, though, and an equaliser would no longer be an affront to the run of play. 74 min “Rob, thank you!” weeps Matt Dony. “It means so much! I will happily read about England being a mess for hours at a time. And, a mere 26 years later, I got to understand how it felt…” After your, a-hem, mercurial performance on the MBM, I’m surprised you have any memory of that night. 73 min A double change for Villa. Bertrand Traore, once of Chelsea, and Carney Chukwuemeka replace Danny Ings and Emi Buendia. Both Ings and Buendia are yet to really settle at Villa Park. 71 min This is Villa’s best spell of the half, though all their possession is in front of Chelsea. They have looked much more dangerous on the counter-attack, though they are unlikely to have many opportunities for that now that they are 2-1 down. 70 min Alonso is booked for a cynical tug on the indefatigable Matty Cash. 68 min “Happy new Christmas to you, Rob,” says Ian Copestake. “Given the likely disruptions to teams, predictions of who comes second to City this season should only be offered by SAGE.” 66 min: Mount misses a great chance! Chelsea should be 3-1 ahead. Kocavic swept a long first-time pass down the inside-right channel to release Mount. Martinez charged from his line, unnecessarily in truth, and Mount slipped past him on the right edge of the area. Mount could have given Lukaku an open goal but took the shot with his left foot and dragged it into the side netting. I’d say it was bad miss rather than a banter VHS contender; if Villa equalise, Thomas Tuchel may disagree. 65 min Reece James blooters the free-kick over the bar. 64 min Mings is booked for throwing Lukaku to the canvas just outside the penalty area. 63 min A third and final change for Chelsea: N’Golo Kante, whose workload is being managed, is replaced by Mateo Kovacic. 62 min “Mings’ defending there was what I would do against Lukaku,” says Niall Mullen. “Do a bit of pointing, then back gently into him in the hope of putting him off a little.” Yeah, as good as Lukaku’s part was, Mings wasn’t exactly a study in awareness and heightened peripheral vision. 61 min Villa were so dangerous in transition in the first half, but since the break they have struggled to get out. Lukaku’s goal had been coming. 59 min This would be such a restorative victory for Chelsea, especially if Lukaku gets the winning goal. It would be a much-needed slate-cleaner ahead of those huge matches against Liverpool and Manchester City. That was a really good goal. Jorginho played a simple pass to Hudson-Odoi, in space on the left. He curled an inswinging cross towards the six-yard line, where Lukaku got across Mings and flicked an accomplished header past Martinez. That’s a very good goal - mainly because of Lukaku’s work, but also the cross from Hudson-Odoi and the off-the-ball run from Alonso that distracted Cash and left Hudson-Odoi in space. The big fella is back! 55 min Chelsea’s tempo has been noticeably quicker in the second half, particularly in the final third. 53 min Mount’s fierce first-time cross just evades the leaping Lukaku at the near post. Cash stoops to clear but can only head it back off Lukaku, with the ball ricocheting to safety. Chelsea have been all over Villa since the break. 52 min Lukaku holds off Mings and lobs a terrific crossfield pass to Alonso on the left side of the penalty area. He chests the ball down but then surprisingly declines the shot, instead bobbling the ball back to Hudson-Odoi. He stretches to sidefoot a tame shot that is booted clear. It was going wide anyway. 52 min: Chelsea substitution Thiago Silva, who was majestic in the first half, has pulled something. He jogs off to be replaced by Andreas Christensen. 51 min “Do you think Tuchel knows what he wants to do?” says Andrew Hurley. “I’m a fan but Chelsea are so less impressive, never open teams up, don’t seem to maximise the attacking potential in their squad and have a very stilted game.” It’s a kind of aggressive-passive approach, isn’t it? I’ve always thought they, more than City, need a No9 in the bread-and-butter games. 49 min “Your memory stopped adding new things in 2009 or lost everything before?” asks Zach Neeley. “Some days it feels like both for me.” The former. The latter is in full swing now though. On the tougher days, I can’t even name the England starting XI that drew 1-1 away to Saudi Arabia in 1988. Brian Marwood came off the bench to win his only cap, though. That little nugget is going nowhere. 47 min Martinez comes to punch a cross away and, in the process, cleans out his captain Mings. Looks like Mings is fine. 47 min In fact Chelsea are playing with Pulisic as the right wing-back, not Hudson-Odoi. Chelsea (3-4-3) Mendy; James, Thiago, Rudiger; Pulisic, Kante, Jorginho, Alonso; Mount, Lukaku, Hudson-Odoi. 46 min Peep peep! Villa begin the second half. Chelsea are making a half-time substitution. Romelu Lukaku, whose last Premier League goal was against Villa in September, is replacing Trevoh Chalobah. I suspect this will be the revised system. Chelsea (3-4-3) Mendy; James, Thiago, Rudiger; Hudson-Odoi, Kante, Jorginho, Alonso; Mount, Lukaku, Pulisic. Half-time reading (for neutrals) A late Christmas present for Matt Dony: 10,000 words on England at Italia ’90. Half-time reading (for Chelsea fans) Half-time reading (for Villa fans) Peep peep! Never mind the stats, feel the quality. The two teams had only one shot on target between them, and both goals had a whiff of Hackney Marshes, yet most of the football was impressively sophisticated. I know that makes me sound like a dangerous pseud, but it’s true. See you in 10 minutes for the second half. 43 min At the other end, Alonso’s wonderful cross is kneed behind by Targett, under all sorts of pressure from Mount. Turns out Alonso was offside, though Targett didn’t know that; he did brilliantly. 42 min Self-isolation grump or no self-isolation grump, Steven Gerrard must be thrilled with this first half, as Villa have been the equals of the European champions. Ings almost releases Buendia with a clever backheel that is intercepted by the last man Chalobah. 40 min Excellent sweeper-keeping from Mendy, who legs it from his penalty area and just beat Watkins to a through ball. Moments later, Ings’ first-time shot is crucially blocked by Chalobah. And moments after that, Cash’s shot from the edge of the area is blocked by Thiago Silva. 38 min “Is it me or do a lot of keepers get beaten on the near post/inside these days?” says Gary Naylor. “I wonder if the data shows that most goals are scored across the keeper, so their weight is set to move that way? Makes for an easy finish if the shortest route to the net is open.” Ole Gunnar Solskjaer was very good at that, back in the day. Robbie Fowler famously (and deliberately) did it to Peter Schmeichel at Old Trafford. As for whether it’s more prevalent nowadays, I’m afraid I have no idea as my memory stops in around 2009. 37 min Ezri Konsa is the latest association footballer to go down holding his face after physical interaction with Antonio Rudiger. There was a slight elbow but nothing much, and Konsa was soon back on his feet. 36 min Good game, this. Villa look really well coached. (So do Chelsea, but that’s not really news any more.) Martinez was booked before the penalty was taken, I think for hacking at the penalty spot. Jorginho was entirely unperturbed. He strolled up, waited for Martinez to dive to the left and then passed the ball to the other side. Jorginho scores. Of course he does, he’s playing for Chelsea, not Italy. 32 min: PENALTY TO CHELSEA! Reece James scored an own goal and now the other right wing-back, Matty Cash, has given away a penalty with a stupid tackle on Hudson-Odoi. No arguments from anyone. Hudson-Odoi got the wrong side of Cash, who brought him down with a desperate challenge. 32 min Cash makes an excellent block from Hudson-Odoi, who tried to slide a shot into the far corner. 29 min At first it looked like Mendy had no chance, though a slow-motion replay is less flattering. It went through his hands, pretty much, as he leapt backwards. In his defence the ball changed directly sharply, and unexpectedly, when James headed it towards his own goal. Villa worked the ball patiently on the left, with Watkins eventually playing the ball back to Targett. He curled a fast, flat cross that brushed the head of James at the near post and whistled past the leaping Mendy. When it rains... 25 min Mount’s booming, inswinging cross (I think) from the left hits the top of the crossbar. Martinez had it covered, though, and was unhappy when Martin Atkinson gave a corner. Atkinson then changed his mind, which was a bit odd, even if it was probably the correct decision. At first I thought Mount’s cross might have nicked off the outstretched boot of Cash, though I haven’t seen a replay. Martinez certainly didn’t touch it. 22 min Mount fouls Ramsey 30 yards from goal, but the referee can’t be bothered to lift his whistle to his open face. 20 min Chelsea have had 81 per cent of the possession in the last 10 minutes, yet Villa have been the more dangerous team in that time. It’s a really interesting game. 19 min Another dangerous Villa break. Douglas Luiz booms a 70-yard pass over Chalobah to release Watkins in the inside-left channel. Chalobah shows tremendous pace to get back, usher Watkins inside and then block his shot. 18 min Alonso’s very deep cross finds Mount, whose crisp volley is blocked by Targett. That was lovely technique from Mount, not entirely dissimilar to his goal at West Ham the other wek. 17 min A Villa player, Ramsey I think, marauds into the area before being gently relieved of possession by Thiago Silva. “So far it’s been a masterclass from Thiago,” says Sky’s co-commentator Andy Hinchliffe. 15 min Villa look ever so dangerous in transition. Cash wins the ball just inside his own half, moseys infield and flicks a fine pass towards Ings with the outside of his right foot. Ings scurries into the area in the inside-left channel, cuts back inside and hits a shot that is blocked by Thiago Silva. More expert defending from Thiago, who is strutting around the field like a man who has seen it all before, largely because he has. 14 min “Evening Rob and Merry etc,” says Stephen Carr. “If these two formations were a film, they would definitely be ‘Being John Malkovich’.” Did you have to put that song in my head? On today of all days? 11 min Buendia slides a lovely pass inside Chalobah for Watkins, whose low cross towards Ings is put behind by Thiago Silva. Excellent positioning from Thiago. 10 min Mount’s corner is headed away by Mings. 10 min Chelsea are starting to settle into their pass and move groove (©Liverpool FC and the Boot Room Boyz), with Alonso and James heavily involved as per. Alonso’s dangerous cross is put behind by Cash, which gives Chelsea their first corner. 6 min The battle of the wing-backs, Cash and Targett v Alonso and James, should be fascinating. I know Villa play a back four but Cash and Targett are wing-backs in all but name. And if you judgeformations through average position rather than starting position, Villa essentially play a 2-5-3. 4 min Villa have made a really positive start, with most of the early action in Chelsea’s half. Buendia tries to put Ings through with a first-time pass but gets too much on it. 2 min Villa have started as expected, with Ings up front and Watkins playing from the left. The formation is pretty similar to the Christmas tree that Terry Venables used at times when he was England manager. 1 min Peep peep! Chelsea, in their mid-80stastic away strip, kick off from right to left. The thoughts of Villa’s assistant manager Gary McAllister “Steven will be in constant touch with us guys on the sideline. As you can imagine, he’s really, really frustrated – he’s at home, he has to isolate for seven days, he’s got no symptoms. This sort of fixture – Boxing Day, under the lights, live on TV – it’s a great game to be involved in. “John McGinn is a big loss for us. We need to be brave in possession and really organised out of possession. They’ve got some brilliant players, and we need to stop them.” Here’s the updated Premier League table, which appears to suggest that Arsenal are three points behind Chelsea. It’s not all doom and gloom, though. After today, two of Chelsea’s next three league games are against Liverpool and Manchester City. There’s no better way to get back into a title race than by beating those above you, said the man who has never had to endure 90 minutes against teams managed by Jurgen Klopp or Pep Guardiola. Premier League latest The four 3pm games have just finished. If you don’t want to know the scores, it’s too late. Manchester City 6-3 Leicester Norwich 0-5 Arsenal Tottenham 3-0 Crystal Palace West Ham 2-3 Southampton This is kind of a big deal, as Gerrard is clearly an inspirational presence. In Villa’s last home game, the 2-1 win over Leicester, his half-time teamtalk turned the game on its head. Villa make two changes, both enforced, from their impressive win at Norwich 12 days ago. Ashley Young and John McGinn are unavailable; Morgan Sanson and Danny Ings replace them. That probably means the selfless Ollie Watkins will move to the left wing. Chelsea also make two changes from their 0-0 draw at Wolves last weekend. Jorginho and Callum Hudson-Odoi come in for Cesar Azpilicueta and Hakim Ziyech, who are both among the substitutes. Trevor Chalobath, who started in midfield at Molineux, moves back into the defence. Aston Villa (4-3-3) Martinez; Cash, Konsa, Mings, Targett; Sanson, Douglas Luiz, Ramsey; Buendia, Ings, Watkins. Substitutes: Steer, Tuanzebe, Hause, Trezeguet, El Ghazi, Iroegbunam, Carney Chukwuemeka, Traore, Davis. Chelsea (3-4-3) Mendy; Chalobah, Thiago, Rudiger; James, Kante, Jorginho, Alonso; Mount, Pulisic, Hudson-Odoi. Substitutes: Kepa, Sarr, Christensen, Azpilicueta, Barkley, Kovacic, Saul, Ziyech, Lukaku. Hello and welcome to live coverage of Aston Villa v Chelsea at Villa Park. This, realistically, is it for Chelsea: if they don’t win today, they can forget about winning the Premier League this season. And if that happens, it will be their longest spell without a title since Roman Abramovich bought the club in 2003. Conte, Sarri, Lampard and Tuchel out! (Apologies for the poverty of this preamble. I’ve been distracted by a frankly bonkers afternoon of Premier League football. This game has plenty to live up to - but in the circumstances, Chelsea would be happy with the dullest 1-0 win in the history of football. Team news anon.) Kick off 5.30pm.Crystal Palace’s preparations for the Boxing Day trip to Tottenham descended into chaos with their manager, Patrick Vieira, testing positive for Covid-19 while they were denied a last-minute request to postpone the fixture. Osian Roberts, the assistant manager, took the team for the 3-0 defeat and, despite his efforts to play down the disruption, it was plain that the situation was far from ideal. Vieira is the second Premier League manager to test positive for the virus in the past few days with Aston Villa’s Steven Gerrard also now in isolation. Palace did not specify how many players were affected by Covid but they were worried that, as Vieira was positive, there was the potential for him to have infected many of the squad as a close contact. As such, they felt the outbreak was still unfolding and after ordering the players to stay at home on Saturday night, rather than meet at the team hotel as usual, they became the latest club to demand a postponement. The Premier League board denied the request after meeting on Sunday morning, feeling the club had sufficient numbers to fulfil the fixture. Although Palace only named seven substitutes, rather than the permitted nine, it appeared they were missing only seven senior players. There was confusion among fans after reports that the game was set to be postponed and Palace only confirmed in a tweet at 11.34am on Sunday that it would go ahead as scheduled at 3pm. “We met this morning at the hotel to prepare,” Roberts said. “Most of the time we would do that the previous evening but it’s difficult to do that these days with the situation as it is and so much uncertainty. “I don’t know how many we had with Covid – some were returning from Covid, close contacts, injuries, but ultimately you saw that we were short of options on the bench. We’re professional. We have to adapt and adjust, sometimes at short notice. It’s something that we have to live with. I’m sure that there’ll be other rollercoaster weeks in the future.” The Palace confusion emerged on the day that the Premier League agreed to postpone Leeds’s game against Aston Villa on Tuesday along with Arsenal’s match against Wolves because of rising Covid cases. “Following a request from Leeds United, the Premier League board met today and regrettably agreed to postpone the club’s home fixture against Aston Villa,” the league said in a statement. “The board accepted the postponement application as the club does not have the required number of players available for the match (13 outfield players and one goalkeeper).” Leeds explained: “Whilst there have been no new Covid cases in the playing squad, the majority of those who tested positive prior to the Liverpool game are not yet out of isolation.” On the Arsenal postponement, the Premier League said: “The board was able to make its decision in advance of the fixture to give clarity to the affected clubs and their fans. We apologise for the inconvenience and disruption caused to supporters’ festive plans. “The League is aware that the decisions this week to postpone matches will disappoint supporters, and understands their frustrations at a special time of year when fans look forward to attending and watching football games. “The League aims to provide as much clarity as possible, but unfortunately postponements sometimes have to be made at short notice, as safety is our priority. Where possible, the League will endeavour to keep supporters updated if games become at risk on a matchday.” Following Chelsea’s 3-1 win against Aston Villa on Sunday evening, Thomas Tuchel sounded a cautious note. “It’s a big win but I’m always concerned for the health and safety of the players and that’s why you don’t see me fully excited,” the Chelsea manager said. “Normally you could catch huge momentum and push them but the only thing we are doing is checking on a daily basis who can be pushed. It’s pretty challenging and it is not over because the names are back on the match [team] sheet.”One in four Britons do not believe that the NHS can care for them properly, new research into the public’s attitude to the health service reveals. When asked “how confident are you, if at all, in the NHS’s ability to give you the care you need?”, a quarter (26%) said they were not confident. While only 15% thought the NHS was not coping well with treating coronavirus patients, many more – 41% – believed that it was not coping well with providing other services. Experts said that increasingly long delays for operations and GP appointments, Covid’s disruption to normal NHS services and longstanding staff shortages were likely to blame for the widespread lack of confidence in the health service’s ability to provide timely and effective medical treatment. Sally Warren, the director of policy at the King’s Fund health thinktank, said that the pandemic had added to the pressure already being felt in the NHS and forced it to prioritise who received care. “The impact of this reprioritisation has been clear for all to see through regular reports of NHS services struggling to cope. Once again this is at the forefront of many people’s minds as the Omicron variant brings back the threat of services being overwhelmed,” said Warren. “But it’s not just media reports that change people’s perceptions of the health service, and many people have personal experience of struggling to access their GP or being stuck on a hospital waiting list,” she added. The findings by the pollsters Ipsos Mori are based on questions it asked 1,032 adults aged 18 to 75 across Britain between 16 and 18 December. When the 41% who thought the NHS was not coping well with providing non-Covid care were asked who they held responsible, 48% said the government, 18% blamed patients and 8% identified the general public as the culprits. The survey also found that people who were on a waiting list for routine hospital care themselves or who have had a relative on one were more likely to be “not confident” in the NHS’s ability to provide care. Labour said the findings showed the effects of persistent and unaddressed staff shortages. “The pandemic has put enormous pressures on the NHS. But the health service went into the pandemic hugely understaffed with patients already waiting too long for care. With record waiting lists, 100,000 NHS staff shortages and 112,000 vacancies in social care in 2019, the Tories left our health service criminally ill-equipped for Covid,” said Wes Streeting, the shadow health secretary. “None of this is the fault of our heroic health and social care workers, who are getting Britain through this pandemic. For our NHS to be able to provide the care patients expect the workforce needs to be properly valued, strengthened and provided with modern equipment and technology to ensure patients receive quality care quicker,” he added. The pandemic – which led to the widespread suspension of normal NHS care and has seen England’s waiting list soar from 4.4 million to 5.8 million – appears to have undermined the public’s faith in its ability to give them the care they need. In the research, 37% of those questioned said they had less confidence that the NHS could give them the care they need since the pandemic while just 21% said they had more confidence. Chris Hopson, the chief executive of NHS Providers, which represents hospitals in England, said the huge pressures the service was under were being felt by patients. “The NHS has just been through the toughest two years in its history, and is being severely tested on multiple fronts. “The public know the health service is pulling out all the stops to provide the care people need. A large majority are confident in the NHS’s ability to deliver that care. It’s understandable, given the scale of the pressures, that some will be worried,” Hopson said. He cited the Omicron variant, the record backlog of those waiting for surgery – which NHS leaders admit will take years to clear – and huge demand for A&amp;E as examples of the growing strain. Kate Duxbury, Ipsos Mori’s joint research director, said: “Overall, the public still think the NHS has the ability to give them the care they need, though this has been impacted by the pandemic and there are signs it will come under increasing pressure as more people find themselves waiting for NHS care.” A Department of Health and Social care spokesperson declined to respond directly to the findings. But a spokesperson said: “While the pandemic has put enormous pressures on the NHS and caused waiting lists to grow, the NHS is delivering the biggest vaccination rollout in history and more than 32 million people have been given their vital booster jab. “Our record investment in the NHS includes an extra £2bn this year and £8bn over the next three years to cut waiting times and deliver an extra 9m checks, scans and operations ensuring patients get the treatment they need sooner. “The NHS is also deploying more efficient, innovative ways of working, including opening new surgical hubs and at least 100 community diagnostic centres by 2025 to make getting checked quicker and more convenient.”Labour has claimed ministers are risking the emergence of other Covid variants like Omicron by thwarting a bid by poorer countries to manufacture their own vaccines. The British government has “actively blocked countries in Africa and across the developing world from making their own vaccines” by opposing a waiver on intellectual property rights for Covid vaccines, the party says. Rich countries are divided over the proposal for a temporary waiver, first floated last year by India and South Africa. While the US, Australia and New Zealand have backed the idea, the UK, European Union and Switzerland are opposed. Gareth Thomas, the shadow trade minister, has written to Penny Mordaunt accusing Boris Johnson’s administration of helping to prevent a move that would increase vaccination in deprived nations and reduce the risk of further mutations. “I’m writing to ask why the government is continuing to block solutions to the Covid pandemic, given the severity of the crisis affecting the NHS and the economy caused by rapidly escalating levels of Omicron cases?”, he wrote to Mordaunt, the trade policy minister. “The people of our country will not be safe from new variants of Covid until global solutions are in place, levels of vaccination worldwide are significantly higher and levels of infections across the developing world are lower. An [intellectual property rights] waiver is important to achieving this.” More than 100 countries, Pope Francis, UN experts, global civil society organisations such as Medecins Sans Frontières and human rights lawyers have backed India and South Africa’s plea for a temporary waiver from key elements of the Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (Trips) Agreement, which helps pharmaceutical companies to exploit new drugs they produce. Negotiations, overseen by the World Trade Organization (WTO), have made little progress. Earlier this month the government reiterated its opposition to the plan. It told the Trips council that it was one of the countries that are “convinced … that a Trips waiver proposal would not increase the number of vaccines reaching peoples arms” and, if implemented, would pose “risks … for this and future pandemics” by stifling pharmaceutical innovation. A UK government spokesperson confirmed that it did not support a waiver. “The UK has engaged in discussions on intellectual property (IP) and a possible Trips waiver at the WTO, and we will continue to do so constructively. A fit for purpose IP system has been crucial in supporting the rapid development of new vaccines, and a waiver would risk undermining the framework’s ability to do this and could disincentivise future research and development investment,” they said. “The UK has been a world leader in ensuring developing countries can access vaccines through our investment in Oxford/AstraZeneca, early support to the Covax scheme [to provide vaccines to poorer countries] and commitment to donating vaccines,” they added.There was a routine. Kate Sewell would watch the New South Wales premier’s daily Covid press conference at 11am. During the work day, she kept a browser tab running with a pandemic news live blog. She’d pick up her phone and scroll through posts about masks and lockdowns on social media. And then, on her drive home from her healthcare job in Sydney, maybe listen to a podcast or news radio. She never felt exactly good when she turned off the TV or put down her phone, but maybe there was comfort in the noise. “It was the numbers game,” she says. “Are things going up? Are things going down? Chasing that hope that if the numbers are going down, OK, things are getting better.” The announcement in September that Gladys Berejiklian’s daily press conferences were coming to an end was “a hallelujah moment”, Sewell says. Information-seeking has become a complex habit to manage during recent years of plague and unrest. For some, both relief and anxiety are found on platforms where work, play and social connection are increasingly blurred. It feels necessary to be informed and prepared, but it’s also easy to fall into the numbing embrace of case rates and vaccination statistics – as if comfort can be found at the bottom of the feed. These habits may be about reducing uncertainty, but Covid-19 has been a rather slow-moving crisis. What we must do to stay safe – wear a mask, stay home, vaccinate – has stayed fairly consistent for months. Yet almost every situation prompts us to “check to see if there’s any more information”, according to Art Markman, a professor of psychology at the University of Texas, who suggests “doom scrolling” during the pandemic has kept us unhelpfully focused on a threat “out there”. The stress provoked by this state can lead to self-medicating behaviours, he says. It may also heighten our attention not only to the threat of the virus, but to every other threat in our environment. It makes sense to have contradictory feelings about news consumption in this climate; to feel swamped on the one hand, and reliant on the other. Sora Park, a professor of communication at the University of Canberra, says her research shows Australians consumed more news during the pandemic, but also avoided news more than before. “They also find it overwhelming … really disturbing and negative and emotional,” Park says. Of course, the media itself plays a part in this – because it delivers the news in constant rolling bulletins, and it has an innate preference for novelty and uncertainty over plodding change. And social media thrives on tension. But even allowing for that, how can we wrestle back some agency? Check your sources of stress To change a habit you must first pay attention to it. Markman suggests keeping a diary about your media and social media consumption for a week or so, noting all the times you pull up a social media app or open a news website. When are you doing it? How often are you doing it? And how are you feeling when you do it? Of course, it’s difficult to stop doing something habitual. Instead, Markman suggests creating an alternative pattern. Take compulsively checking Twitter. If you feel the need to check the feed, do something else instead. Walk around the room, call a friend – something desirable. “You want to begin to associate that feeling of ‘I need to check the news’ with an action that actually creates some amount of joy,” he says. Some days are always going to be better than others. Mike Caulfield, a researcher into misinformation at the University of Washington’s Center for an Informed Public, suggests reassessing the way we consume information when our attention is continuously being hijacked. One method he’s devised is known as SIFT, which aims to help us resist the temptation to get to the bottom of everything we see. SIFT stands for “Stop, Investigate, Find better coverage, and Trace claims”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Imagine someone emails you an article that makes a distressing claim about Covid-19 vaccines. First stop and think about what you’re looking at and how you’re feeling. If something provokes a strong emotion, that is often a good reason to be cautious. If you don’t recognise the source of the article, have a quick (really quick) look to see what kind of outlet it is. If you don’t recognise it or something seems off, Caulfield suggests waiting to see if the same information turns up elsewhere – if it’s important, other outlets will almost certainly pick up the story. “People have got themselves into this mode that we can’t disregard anything unless we prove it to be untrue, but that’s entirely backwards,” he says. If small things are off about a claim or a source, it can be enough for us to say, “not today”. Finally, if your interest is sparked, trace claims, quotes and media to the original context to ensure you’re not being misled by the way the information is being framed in the email or on social media. Your feed can be a beast Stevie Zhang is a research reporter for First Draft, an organisation that tracks online misinformation. That means almost all their work is focused on social media platforms, which makes it especially hard to turn away from the deluge. “That’s where you go for your information, where you go to do work,” they say. “The personal, the professional, all the research that we do. There’s not that many boundaries.” Even when your job is to investigate how attention can be manipulated, it can be hard to stop endless information-seeking. Zhang says in the past they were “terminally online”, and would continue to browse online after work hours. But now, once the work day is done, they log off and do not log back on. Zhang has found benefit in more purposeful engagement: email newsletters that serve content on a specific theme, for example – although it’s hard not to subscribe to too many. They also have a Twitter account that’s just for fun, which provides some delineation between work and pleasure. But being more choosy is not the same as being actively uninformed. Some may feel their media habits are a necessary and protective way to move through the world, and others may struggle to find information in the formats and languages they need. Nevertheless, it helps to be intentional about what you take in. Caulfield advocates “tuning” your feed on social media: muting, unsubscribing from or unfollowing people who seem to be pushing dubious information. He acknowledges people can react badly to this idea – as if unsubscribing from someone who repeatedly posts inflammatory things is akin to censorship. But unless it’s your job or you have some greater purpose for understanding them, that argument doesn’t hold much water. “When people speak a lot of nonsense or are careless with the truth, you’ve got to stop dealing with them, or they’ll exhaust you,” he says. “You don’t owe people your attention and you’ve got to take action to reclaim it.” For Sewell, the end of the daily press conferences allowed her to reassess her Covid-19 information consumption. She has closed the live blogs, and instead looks only for what she needs to have informed conversations with family and friends. She is also an advocate of the “unfollow” button – especially since consuming other people’s opinions on every little thing to do with Covid began to feel like work. “When people started coming out of the woodwork with some questionable thoughts on vaccination, that was when it was a good time to say ‘no thank you’.” Ariel Bogle is a researcher and journalist with a focus on technology and extremism.Well NOW it’s Christmas. Sarah Phelps has delivered. Not an Agatha Christie adaptation this time but an original drama, A Very British Scandal (BBC One), about the notorious case of Argyll v Argyll – the only one any erstwhile law student ever remembers (and I speak from experience). This is thanks to the fact that it was a vicious divorce case between the Duke and Duchess of Argyll involving multiple allegations of infidelity, one of which was attested to by a photo of the Duchess fellating a man whose face was not visible in the picture but who was not her husband. The duke had various measurements taken so this could be proved in court. The duchess was identified by her pearl necklace. No, really. It’s surprising that no one has brought the story to the screen before now. Here it is a companion piece – or perhaps furtherance of what seems set to become an anthology series about historical media frenzies, national prurience and social hypocrisy – to 2018’s A Very English Scandal, about the Jeremy Thorpe affair. The Argyll case (or the ‘Headless Man affair’ as it was also known, thanks to the photo that quickly became infamous) of course provoked a media storm. A Very British Scandal opens in 1963 with the Duchess (Claire Foy, most recently seen on the small screen as the Queen in The Crown and here bringing the same masterful skills to another aristocratic but wholly different character) facing the screaming abuse of a crowd (“Scum!” “Slut!”) as she enters Edinburgh’s court of session to open divorce proceedings. Inside, the Duke of Argyll (Paul Bettany) offers her one last chance to end things quietly “Because I’m an honourable man. You’ve played a spirited game but we both know you haven’t the stomach for this.” The look on the duchess’s face suggests we should all buckle up to enjoy the coming ride. We flash back to 16 years earlier, when committed socialite Margaret Sweeny (nee Whigham, the spoilt only daughter of a fabulously wealthy industrialist) who is rumoured to have had affairs with everyone from David Niven to Prince Aly Khan and is about to divorce her first husband, meets the dashing Captain Ian Campbell, holder of the Argyll title and lands. They find their interests align quite nicely and – once he’s divorced from Louise (his second wife and mother of his two sons) – get hitched. At first it seems a good match, if only in the sense that they are as monstrous and self-involved as each other. They become the Duke and Duchess, move to the family pile in Inveraray and she pays for everything from the restoration of the castle to the final bills for Louise’s fur coats. Fairly soon, though, the duke reveals himself to be a violent, vicious drunk. Margaret’s own essential viciousness serves her well. She remains uncowed by her situation and by the end of the episode we see her forging letters from Louise claiming that Ian’s sons aren’t his, to secure her place at Inverary which would otherwise pass to them. A Very British Scandal has been billed – I suspect because anything involving a woman and sex in The Past must – as a feminist retelling of the Argyll marriage divorce, but in fact Phelps doesn’t lean too hard into that. Yes, there are moments when the likes of shit-stirring frenemy Maureen (Julia Davis, simultaneously lightly and deeply malevolent, as is her special gift) tries to shame her for her sexual appetite. And it is clear all along that hypocrisy abounded and life in the 60s wasn’t nearly as liberated for women as the men then, or history since, would like us to believe. But there is, thankfully – because it would do both Margaret and feminism no favours – no attempt to make us view her through a new, heroic lens. We are invited to admire her fortitude with the social odds stacked against her, which is a different thing. The duchess was never a champion of women – she was a champion of Margaret Campbell and Margaret Campbell alone. Not inviting pity, refusing to kowtow to others’ opinions – these are admirable qualities and Phelps and Foy showcase them magnificently, but they are not specifically feminist. The very public divorce came about because the equally stubborn duke and duchess had their teeth buried in each other’s necks equally firmly and wouldn’t let go. A Very British Scandal, with its lean, mean script and its refusal to reinvent the duchess as an icon of the movement, is the very best and fairest tribute that could be given her. • This article was amended on 27 December 202. Ian Campbell became the Duke of Argyll on the death of his cousin, not father as an earlier version implied; he had inherited the title before his marriage to Margaret Sweeny; also, misspellings of Inveraray and Prince Aly Khan were corrected.After a testing few weeks, this was exactly the kind of performance that Graham Potter required. Brighton’s first victory in 12 Premier League matches, courtesy of two spectacular goals from Leandro Trossard and Neal Maupay in the space of eight minutes, lifted them back into the top half of the table. While Brentford – who had begun the game level on points with their opponents – put in a typically committed display that occasionally threatened to spoil Brighton’s party, they could have no complaints about the quality of the strikes that did for them here. Both goals were the culmination of a dazzling 10-minute spell from Potter’s side just before half-time which hinted that there could be plenty more to come from this team when he has a full squad to choose from. “It felt like a result that was very important for us,” said the Brighton manager. “We’ve been on a frustrating run but goals change everything.” The hosts had made four changes to the side that started their last match on 15 December, with Adam Webster back from injury to replace captain Lewis Dunk. Brighton’s search for a first league victory since the 2-1 triumph over Leicester on 19 September had included eight draws, while their previous five matches yielded only two goals. Perhaps that and the late kick-off time were both contributing factors to the number of empty seats there were on an unseasonably mild evening on the south coast. Brentford had gone more than two weeks since their last league fixture after a Covid outbreak in the squad and were delighted to welcome back top scorer Ivan Toney as one of five changes, with former Arsenal academy player Dominic Thompson handed his full league debut. Seven points from their previous four league matches have ensured that Thomas Frank’s side are well on course to achieve their objective for this season and they started here like a team full of confidence. A tight offside call against Bryan Mbeumo in the fourth minute after Thompson’s clipped pass forward was a symbol of their attacking intent, with Shandon Baptiste then seeing his goalbound shot wide via a deflection. Brighton’s lack of cutting edge has been a growing concern for Potter after their excellent start to the season and the closest they came to testing Álvaro Fernández in the opening half hour was a Dan Burn header that looped off the crossbar. Enock Mwepu should have done better with his effort from inside the penalty area but it missed by some distance. However with the imposing Mwepu proving an able deputy for the suspended Yves Bissouma, Brighton began to dominate possession in midfield and almost found a way through on a couple of occasions thanks to some intricate passing moves. It was via a more direct approach that the home crowd was finally brought to life as Mwepu’s ball forward meant Trossard did not have to break stride before dinking the ball over the onrushing Fernández and into the empty net. Trossard also came close shortly afterwards when his free-kick flew just over the crossbar, with Brentford then forced into a change as Mbeumo limped off. Things then got even better for Potter before half-time when Trossard found Jakub Moder on the left and his driving run infield gave Maupay time and space to curl home his seventh goal of the season. Suddenly Brighton were rampant. Trossard failed to emerge for the second half as a precaution after Potter said he felt tightness in his hamstring. He was replaced by Danny Welbeck, returning from a thigh injury for his first appearance since the draw with Crystal Palace in September. Brentford also made a change at the break as they tried to find a way back into the contest, with Frank Onyeka brought on in an attempt to provide some support for the isolated Toney. Mwepu’s brilliant through ball almost created another opening for Maupay but Brighton’s momentum had stalled and Brentford sensed an opportunity. It took two excellent saves within a minute from goalkeeper Robert Sánchez to maintain their two-goal cushion, with the first denying Baptiste after his shot had taken a wicked deflection. The second was just as good as Sánchez dived to his right and pushed Ethan Pinnock’s header on to the post. Not to be outdone, his Spanish compatriot Marc Cucurella somehow managed to avoid the crossbar as he leapt to clear another header from Pinnock that had looped over Sánchez. “We tried to put pressure on them at the end but when they scored their goals made it difficult for us to recover,” said Frank.Eddie Howe hopes to channel the spirit of Kevin Keegan and Sir Bobby Robson when Manchester United visit Tyneside on Monday night. Newcastle’s manager would relish the sight of his side reprising the swashbuckling performances which became commonplace during the tenures of Keegan and Robson in the 1990s and early 2000s. Back then beating Manchester United was not regarded as an exceptional feat by Newcastle fans but Howe’s class of 2021-22 face Ralf Rangnick’s team having won only once all season and in acute peril of relegation. “There’s a lot of memories that spring to mind of those games in the 1990s and just after,” said Howe. “Newcastle tended, at that period of time, to have memorable games against most teams. There are standout moments you think back to; I can still picture some of the goals and the scenes in my mind. “It’s up to us to try to recreate those times – the attacking verve, the swagger that Kevin Keegan’s 1990s Newcastle had, the flair the individual players possessed and the team identity. It’s something we’re desperate to do. But we’re going to need a little bit of time to see that in full creation. At the moment, we’re still progressing and we have to obviously get the defensive side of our game right before we transition into the team we all want to be.” Given that Howe’s side have conceded 11 goals – and scored one – in their past three games, adjusting that calibration correctly is imperative. Steve Bruce’s successor must somehow add stability to a vulnerable defence while bringing the best out of talented forwards including Allan Saint-Maximin, Callum Wilson and Miguel Almirón who have yet to gel as a unit on his watch. For many years Newcastle have functioned best as a counterattacking unit, playing very much on the break, but their latest manager hopes to oversee a change into a much more front-foot, possession-heavy style. Possibly Howe’s biggest immediate worry is that Saint-Maximin, his most gifted and improvisational attacker, appears to have regressed in recent weeks and looks to be playing on a different wavelength to Wilson, the team’s most reliable goalscorer. “One of the ways we work is that we attack with relationships,” Howe said. “The only way you build those relationships is by repetition in training, by attacking with everyone together as a team so you know what you’re going to do. We’ve started that work, it’s going on every day. I’ve seen some good things in training, probably not seen as much as we’d want in the matches, but that could be down to the teams we’ve faced lately. “In recent matches we’ve not had a lot of the ball so you’re mainly counterattacking. And you can’t attack as individuals. It’s not as effective as when you attack together. That isn’t aimed at Maxi [Saint-Maximin] but Maxi is part of that.” Despite adverse results, Howe’s desire to ultimately return Newcastle to a brand of football more akin to that enjoyed under Keegan and Robson dictates he continues to enjoy considerable goodwill from the fans. Even so the former Bournemouth manager knows that, for this to continue and for the players to keep buying into his ideas, results must improve. “You always need to win,” he acknowledged. “I’m in the kind of job when only winning is acceptable really because you can highlight positives but ultimately only winning silences any outside noise. And even within the squad, the players need to win; we have to have stability in our thought process.” Howe suggested a sense of perspective is also required; an appreciation of why victories have been in such short supply since his installation in November. “We’ve had some very tough fixtures and the team’s stretched at the moment by injuries and illness,” he said. “We have to understand the moment we’re in and have calmness in our thoughts. “I think our work on the training ground is good work and we will see the fruits of that labour. It may take a bit of time but, while I’m well aware we’re in a results business, I’m really pleased with the progress we’re making.”Ralf Rangnick says Manchester United have a “higher ratio” of double vaccinated players than the Premier League average, and the club would hesitate before signing any player not vaccinated against Covid. United’s past two games – against Brentford and Brighton – were postponed after an outbreak of the virus among Rangnick’s squad that left only eight outfield players available. But with 25 players now in training before Monday’s trip to Newcastle, the German claimed that United’s number of double vaccinated footballers is among the highest in the division. “I don’t know which of our players have had two or three [the booster] vaccinations. This is a question that only our medical department could answer but I know from our medical department that our ratio of vaccinated players is above the average of the Premier League,” said Rangnick. “As far as I know we have a high record of vaccination of players in our club, but still in the last two weeks we have been shown that even if you are vaccinated two or three times, you can still catch the virus, especially the new virus. So you are not being protected [fully] but at least you are being protected from severe symptoms – most of our players who tested positive at least had very weak symptoms and didn’t suffer.” Being double vaccinated is a consideration for United when considering any potential new signings and Rangnick understands the stance of his Liverpool counterpart, Jürgen Klopp. Klopp said it would be “influential, definitely” for his club, saying any unvaccinated footballer would be a “constant threat for all of us”. “Yes, it could be a consideration and I fully understand what Jürgen said,” Rangnick said. “But it also depends if you want to sign a player and risk him not being available. This is an issue the clubs seriously have to think about. If you sign a player knowing from the very first day that he has not been vaccinated, you have to be aware that he might not be available – not only for 10 days, but this could happen regularly in Covid times.” Rangnick confirmed Anthony Martial has spoken to him about leaving United. “He explained to me he’s been at Manchester United for the last seven years and he feels it’s the right time for a change,” he said. “I could follow his thoughts but it’s also important to see the situation of the club. As far as I know, there has been no offer from any other club and as long as this is the case he will stay.”