Dominic Raab is to outline a sweeping overhaul of human rights law that he claims will counter “wokery and political correctness” and expedite the deportation of foreign criminals. The highly controversial reforms, to be announced on Tuesday – which will create a new bill of rights – will introduce a permission stage to “deter spurious human rights claims” and change the balance between freedom of expression and privacy. But lawyers described the proposed changes to the Human Rights Act as dangerous and fuelled by political rhetoric rather than necessity. They pointed out that the government has signalled its intentions before the independent review of the Human Rights Act, which is due to be published later on Tuesday. The Ministry of Justice (MoJ) said the intended reforms would allow judges to override rulings from the European court of human rights, rather than following them “blindly”. It claimed that as many as seven out of 10 successful human rights challenges were brought by foreign national offenders who cited a right to family life in the first instance when appealing against deportation orders – a practice it wants to end. A senior MoJ source said the government felt strongly that free speech and democratic debate had been whittled away “whether by wokery or political correctness”. After the Mail on Sunday’s failed appeal over its publication of a letter written by Meghan, the Duchess of Sussex, to her estranged father, the source said common-law privacy laws had “come in by the back door” and that freedom of speech needed to be given “extra weight”. But Stephanie Boyce, president of the Law Society, said any changes to the Human Rights Act should be led by evidence and not driven by political rhetoric. She said: “British judges deliver British justice based on British laws, looking closely at how judgments fit into the national context, and disapplying them if there is good reason to do so. UK courts do not, as government suggests, ‘blindly’ follow case law from the European court of human rights. “Equally, foreign criminals already can be deported in the public interest even where there are arguments against this from the right to family life. Every case is different, making it necessary to weigh each on its own particulars. Talk of restricting rights is dangerous and does not reflect the nuanced job the courts have to do.” The MoJ has highlighted the fight over prisoners’ voting rights, and the requirement for police to issue “threat to life” notices – known as Osman warnings – to gang members as examples of unwelcome interference from Strasbourg. Without explaining how, the MoJ said its plans would also reduce pull factors to the UK being exploited by people-smugglers facilitating dangerous small boat crossings. But it confirmed that the UK would remain a party to the European convention on human rights. Martha Spurrier, director at Liberty, highlighted instances of the Human Rights Act helping people achieve justice, including LGBT military veterans getting their medals back after they were stripped of them because of their sexuality, and unmarried women receiving their widow’s pension after the death of their partners. She described the plans as “a blatant, unashamed power grab,” adding: “Today’s announcement is being cast as strengthening our rights when in fact, if this plan goes through, they will be fatally weakened. This government is systematically shutting down all avenues of accountability through a succession of rushed and oppressive bills. We must ensure the government changes course as a matter of urgency, before we very quickly find ourselves wondering where our fundamental human rights have gone.” Sacha Deshmukh, the chief executive of Amnesty International, said human rights are not “sweets” ministers can “pick and choose from” and the “aggressive” attempt to “roll-back” the laws needs to be stopped. He added: “If ministers move ahead with plans to water down the Human Rights Act and override judgments with which they disagree, they risk aligning themselves with authoritarian regimes around the world.” Prof Philippe Sands QC, who sat on the 2013 commission on a bill of rights, said: “The concern is that this will mark a further step in the government’s eager embrace of lawlessness, undermining the rights of all individuals, the effective role of British judges and the European court, and the devolution settlement into which the Human Rights Act is embedded.” Adam Wagner, a leading human rights barrister with Doughty Street chambers, said: “If this is to be a true bill of rights, instead of a party political rights wishlist, as this appears to be, the government should obtain cross-party support.”Britain’s online safety bill needs a sweeping overhaul to prevent children from accessing pornography, vulnerable people from being encouraged to commit self-harm and negligent tech chiefs from failing to protect users, according to a committee of MPs and peers. A wide-ranging series of proposals to amend the pioneering legislation also includes creating a new criminal offence for cyberflashing, punishing tech platforms for hosting fraudulent adverts, and exempting news organisations from content takedowns. The recommendations by the joint committee on the draft online safety bill will tackle an industry that has become the “land of the lawless”, according to committee’s Conservative chair, Damian Collins MP. “A lack of regulation online has left too many people vulnerable to abuse, fraud, violence and in some cases even loss of life,” he said. Other changes urged by the report include: Creating a digital ombudsman to deal with complaints by individuals against platforms Introducing codes of conduct that tackle “rabbit hole” algorithms Requiring tech companies to implement mechanisms to deal with harmful anonymous accounts Social media companies having to reveal how many underage users are on their platforms. The online safety bill covers websites and apps that offer user-generated content, such as Facebook, Instagram, Twitter, TikTok and YouTube, as well as search engines such as Google. It imposes a duty of care on these companies to protect users from harmful content, or face substantial fines levied by Ofcom, the communications regulator charged with overseeing the legislation once it becomes law. However, the draft legislation has been criticised by campaigners for leaving too many loopholes on a range of issues from preventing children from accessing pornography to tackling anonymous abuse. The committee’s recommendations include introducing new criminal offences for: cyberflashing; encouragement of serious self-harm; deliberately sending flashing images to people with epilepsy with the intention of inducing a fit; and sending false communications – such as deep-fake videos – which intentionally cause “non-trivial” emotional, psychological or physical harm. The committee warns that cyber-flashing has become a serious and prevalent problem online, with more than three-quarters of girls aged 12-18 and four out of 10 of all women reporting having been sent unsolicited images of penises. “Regardless of the intention(s) behind it, cyberflashing can violate, humiliate and frighten victims, and limit women’s participation in online spaces,” said the report. Although the criminal charge for encouraging serious self-harm would apply to individuals, the report also makes clear that platforms must be held to account legally as well and urges the government to make it easier for users and their families to sue platforms for failing to adhere to the act. The father of Molly Russell, a 14-year-old schoolgirl who killed herself after viewing graphic images of self-harm and suicide online, welcomed the report. “I am glad the era of a self-regulated internet is coming to an end. The platforms must now stop monetising misery and instead be compelled to prioritise safety,” said Ian Russell. The report also steps up the threat of criminal sanctions for tech executives, who have been warned by Boris Johnson and the culture secretary overseeing the legislation, Nadine Dorries, that they will be in the firing line under an amended bill. The report calls for tech companies to appoint a boardroom-level executive who will be designated the firm’s “safety controller” and will be liable for a new criminal offence: failing to deal with “repeated and systemic failings that result in a significant risk of serious harm to users”. Tech firms have warned that such a move will stymie investment in the UK and could be copied by non-democratic regimes. The report proposed a series of measures to protect children, including imposing a legal duty on pornography sites to prevent children from accessing them, which is likely to require age-assurance procedures called for by children’s safety campaigners. The committee also calls for social media and video sharing platforms, which bar under-13-year-olds from their apps, to reveal how many underage users they have. The inclusion of advertising in the report will be seen as another victory for campaigners, who have warned of the devastation caused by fraudulent ads online. Under the committee’s recommendation, Ofcom would be charged with acting against platforms that consistently allow the publication of harmful adverts. The government is expected to respond to the report early next year, followed by the publication of a revised bill, a second reading in parliament by April and then the bill becoming law in late 2022 or early 2023. The committee’s report is expected to be influential, with Dorries having pledged in November to look at the recommendations “very seriously”. In a statement, Dorries said: “Our groundbreaking bill will require tech firms and social media companies to take long-overdue responsibility to protect their users – especially children – from a full range of illegal and harmful content. Crucially, the new comprehensive legislation will hold big tech to account if they fail to act.”It may bear the unassuming title of a “consultation paper”. But critics believe that the document released by Dominic Raab’s department on Tuesday is the culmination of a steady 12-year campaign by the justice secretary to rip up the Human Rights Act. Footage of Raab from 2009 shows the then backbench MP looking into the camera and saying: “I don’t support the Human Rights Act and I don’t believe in economic and social rights.” A few months after the footage was recorded, he released a book entitled The Assault on Liberty: What Went Wrong With Rights in which he argued that the law had opened the door to a slew of new court claims. “The spread of rights has become contagious and, since the Human Rights Act, opened the door to vast new categories of claims, which can be judicially enforced against the government through the courts,” he wrote. The book also articulated a theme that has become a rallying cry for many in the post-Brexit Conservative party: that the UK can never truly leave the EU while the nation’s laws are trumped by European courts. “The very enactment of the Human Rights Act has served as a trigger for the formulation of claims by lawyers and judicial reasoning by courts, using human rights arguments that would never have been dared before,” he said. Conservative critics of Boris Johnson say Raab was demoted from foreign secretary in September’s reshuffle in part because his predecessor Robert Buckland would not take on the legal establishment with the gusto required. One ally of Buckland said: “They wanted a wrecking ball, and Raab fits the bill.” Johnson remains keen to further curb the power of the judiciary over parliament. He is still said to be furious after his 2019 decision to delay the opening of parliament, which many saw as an attempt to prevent MPs scrutinising the government’s Brexit plans, was reversed by the supreme court as a result of a successful judicial review. But Tuesday’s plans have attracted criticisms from unusual sources, who may yet force some changes. MI5, MI6 and GHCQ have told ministers that changes to the Human Rights Act could make it harder for them to defend cases in courts. In evidence to the independent Human Rights Act review committee, which could recommend changes, the security services said it would be unhelpful if the government went too far. They warned that unless the government was careful, terrorist suspects could take their cases directly to the European court of human rights in Strasbourg, where such evidence could not be submitted in secret. Buckland and other senior Conservatives, including several government officials, are expected to resist changes and could well gain support in the House of Lords. Labour have pledged to oppose any move to radically change the act. Steve Reed MP, the shadow justice secretary, said Raab was tinkering with human rights laws as a distraction from the “avalanche of corruption” that had overwhelmed the government. He said: “Our criminal justice system is in crisis, with record backlogs in the crown courts, huge delays in prosecuting criminals, and shamefully low conviction rates for rape and sexual offences. Ministers should be focusing on sorting out the failures in our courts, prisons and probation services that are stoking, rather than stopping, crime.”The carefully crafted sense of stability around English football began to crumble on Monday night after a record number of positive Covid-19 tests, with Manchester United’s Tuesday game at Brentford called off and the possibility of more postponements to come. Forty-two Premier League players and officials tested positive for the virus in the seven days that ended on Sunday, a record for a single week since testing began and more than three times the 12 of the previous week. Manchester United are among the teams affected, with the club announcing on Monday evening that their away game at Brentford had been called off. “Our Premier League fixture at Brentford on Tuesday 14 December has been postponed and will be rescheduled in due course,” a club statement said. “Following PCR confirmation of positive LFT Covid-19 tests among the first-team staff and players, the outbreak requires ongoing surveillance. A decision was taken to close first-team operations at Carrington for 24 hours to help minimise risk of further infection, and individuals who tested positive are isolating in line with Premier League protocols.” “Given cancellation of training and disruption to the squad, and with the health of players and staff the priority, the club requested the match to be rearranged,” the statement continued. “The Premier League board took the decision to postpone based on guidance from medical advisors.” The postponement has also been confirmed by the Premier League. Elsewhere, Aston Villa and Brighton reported positive tests on Monday, and Tottenham have yet to confirm their fixture against Leicester on Thursday will go ahead after two Spurs matches were called off last week. An outbreak at QPR caused their Championship fixture against Sheffield United on Monday to be postponed. There is no automatic point at which a Premier League match is suspended, with each case considered by the board, a process queried by a number of Premier League managers including Arsenal’s Mikel Arteta. The Athletic reported on Monday that Arsenal are ramping up protocols after a small number of training-ground staff tested positive for Covid. The Premier League’s Covid results were compiled from a sample of 3,805, the largest total of the season. An increase in testing is one of a series of emergency measures designed to stop the spread of Covid, reintroduced at clubs last week. The measures require a return to social distancing at training grounds and limit time in treatment rooms. At a meeting last Friday, clubs were also told they should attempt to limit social contacts among players and staff, effectively paving the way for the reintroduction of the working bubbles that characterised Project Restart. The league remains hopeful its emergency measures will cut case numbers and allow play to continue. It points to a similar process having the desired effect during the Covid Beta wave of last December and January. There is uncertainty, however, over whether the protocols will work as effectively against the Omicron variant, which is many times more transmissible. The uncertainty came as the government confirmed the guidance on new measures for fans attending sporting events from Wednesday. Last week Boris Johnson announced: “We will make the NHS Covid pass mandatory for entrance into … spaces where large crowds gather.” But the guidance confirms that not every fan will be checked on entry, with organisers able to agree a target achievable without causing crowds to build up outside grounds. Some Premier League clubs say they already require all supporters to show passes. Others are working on bespoke systems, which will require supporters to register their Covid status with the club before travelling. Areas of the ground that do not register will be subject to more rigorous spot checks.As a desperate Morrison government recklessly spruiks what it insists are the prospects of armed conflict with China, now is exactly the right time to introduce a legal curb on the federal executive’s unilateral capacity to commit Australian troops to war. Since the recent emergence as defence minister of prime ministerial wannabe Peter Dutton, the federal government has dangerously amped-up the prospect of Australian war with China over Taiwan, for what some consider cynical political purposes ahead of an election. Dutton repeatedly reaches into his inflammatory, scare-‘em-all-the-way-to-the-ballot-box rhetorical kit bag, with questionable claims including that it would be “inconceivable” for Australia not to follow America if there was a war with China. He has also invoked the rise of nazism in the 1930s (yes, there was considerable appeasement, though the world didn’t fail to notice or act against the rise of toxic German nationalism and aggression). But the parallel point he makes in relation to China, while the world watches cautiously, is illegitimate. “It has come at great human cost and any repeat of the mistakes of the 1930s would again exact a great cost on our country and many more,” Dutton said. There is no copyright on cheap foreign policy frighteners, of course. It was only six or so months back that Dutton’s rhetorically fearsome comrade-in-arms Mike Pezzullo (head of the minister’s old department home affairs but with a hawk-eye on defence) also invoked the Nazis, in an Anzac day speech which, while encouraging the search for peace, referred ominously to unspecified beating “drums of war”. Cue a collective eyeroll among the harder heads in defence who adhere to the dictum of speaking cautiously when you have such a very small stick in your hand. Neither has there been any shortage of overhyped war talk from other hatchlings in the hawk’s nest. But here is an idea: if Dutton and his like want to play war games to enhance their pre-election prospects, perhaps go get down and dirty with a few rounds of paintball. Too strenuous? Well, it is usually the armchair generals like Dutton and his supporters who carry on the most obstreperously but who won’t actually be required to charge over the parapet when the whistle sounds. The real dirty work of war, of course, is done by those in uniform – not the politicians who send them, too often for all the wrong reasons. It’s little wonder then that veterans and their families are now petitioning federal MPs to change the law to ensure the decision to commit to war be debated in – and voted on by – parliament. Presently the prime minister alone can commit to war. When leading federal government figures continually politicise the prospects of Australian conflict with China over the Taiwan Strait (while planning greater military interoperability with American and British forces through the recent Aukus deal) the veterans’ initiative, No War Without Parliament, makes sense. “We urge you, our parliamentarians, to demand that any proposal for Australian involvement in overseas wars receives scrutiny in parliament followed by your vote, to ensure that ADF [Australian Defence Force] actions have the widespread support of the Australian people as expressed through parliament,” reads the petition circulated by Australians for War Powers Reform. “We ask you to change Australian law so that our armed forces cannot be sent to an overseas conflict without the approval of our parliament. There are no impediments to this legislation that cannot be resolved.” Signatories include former defence force chief Chris Barrie and veterans of all recent conflicts – including Afghanistan and Iraq – to which Australian personnel have been deployed. “I commend this appeal to all ADF veterans, so that those who participate in any future wars will have the explicit support of the Parliament and the Australian people,” Barrie says. Cameron Leckie, a veteran and former army officer, says that as a young soldier he never questioned how or why Australia committed to conflict and simply “took it on faith … the reasons were justified, legal and democratic”. “Currently the most important decision that any country can make – to go to war – can be made by one person alone, the Prime Minister,” Leckie says. “As a veteran, I think this situation shows a disturbing, if not disgraceful, disregard for Australian defence personnel. Especially a disregard for the mostly young Australians who enlist. While they have done so willingly, and know that they may be required to kill, or risk being killed, injured or otherwise damaged in the service of their country, they are entitled to know that their lives will not be put at risk for political purposes in wars that should have been avoided.” Importantly, if federal parliament were to debate future deployments of military personnel, voters would have greater confidence that questions of national security – and war-fighting and the possibility of it – were not being used as political smokescreen. Australia’s real “fog of war” happens behind the closed prime ministerial door as well as on the battlefield. Scarcely has a federal government been less transparent than this incumbent when it comes to the moral and strategic integrity of its hawkish motivations.The House select committee investigating the Capitol attack on Monday voted to recommend criminal prosecution for former Trump White House chief of staff Mark Meadows, punishing Donald Trump’s most senior aide for refusing to testify about the 6 January insurrection. The select committee advanced the contempt of Congress report for Meadows unanimously, sending the matter to a vote before the full House of Representatives, which is expected to approve the citation as soon as Tuesday. Bennie Thompson, the chair of the select committee, said in an opening statement before the panel recommended Meadows’ referral to the justice department that Trump’s former White House chief of staff displayed willful noncompliance in his defiance of his subpoena. “It comes down to this,” Thompson said. “Mr Meadows started by doing the right thing: cooperating. He handed over records that he didn’t try to shield behind some excuse. But in an investigation like ours, that’s just a first step. “When the records raise questions – as these most certainly do – you have to come in and answer those questions. And when it was time for him to follow the law, come in, and testify on those questions, he changed his mind and told us to pound sand. He didn’t even show up.” The select committee said in the contempt report they were seeking charges against Meadows after he attempted to obstruct the investigation in myriad ways, from refusing to testify to frustrating their efforts to locate and discover documents relevant to the Capitol attack. The select committee also said Meadows should be prosecuted since he refused to testify even about information he voluntarily provided to the panel through his own document production and conceded were not covered by claims of executive privilege advanced by Trump. Over the course of a near-hour-long meeting, the select committee outlined in detail the materials Meadows had turned over to the panel – and how Meadows then promptly refused to testify about those very records. Meadows turned over about 9,000 documents as part of a cooperation deal, the select committee said, in his effort to engage with the inquiry to a degree in order to avoid an immediate criminal referral that befell other Trump administration aides who defied subpoenas. Among the materials Meadows turned over to the select committee was a PowerPoint presentation titled “Election Fraud, Foreign Interference and Options for 6 JAN”, which recommended Trump declare a national security emergency to unilaterally return himself to office. He also turned over text messages – read out loud by the select committee’s vice chair, Liz Cheney – that he received as the 6 January riot unfolded, including from Trump’s eldest son, Don Jr, who implored “we need an Oval Office address” to stop the Capitol attack. Meadows received more texts, the select committee said, from an unnamed lawmaker, who messaged him the day after the Capitol attack: “Yesterday was a terrible day. We tried everything we could in our objection to the 6 states. I’m sorry nothing worked.” But his cooperation with the select committee ended with the document production and Meadows informed the panel last week that he would not answer questions because he had learned that House investigators had subpoenaed call detail records for his personal phone. The select committee said Meadows’ refusal to testify constituted noncompliance with his subpoena, which was first issued in September, and initiated proceedings to recommend that the House hold him in contempt of Congress. The move by the select committee poses damaging consequences for Trump’s most senior aide: if it is approved by the House, the justice department is required to take the matter before a grand jury, which previously indicted Trump strategist Steve Bannon for subpoena defiance. A successful contempt prosecution could result in up to a year in federal prison, $100,000 in fines, or both – although the misdemeanor charge may not ultimately lead to his cooperation, and pursuing the offense could still take years. The select committee targeted Meadows from the outset of the investigation as it sought to uncover the extent of his role in Trump’s scheme to subvert the results of the 2020 election and stop the certification of Joe Biden’s election win from taking place on 6 January. The Guardian previously reported, for instance, that hours before the Capitol attack, Trump made a call from the White House to operatives working from the Willard hotel in Washington DC and pressed them about stopping Biden from being named president. But House investigators said in a 51-page contempt report for Meadows that they had also wanted to question him about a range of issues about the 6 January insurrection, including an email he sent that said the national guard would be there to “protect pro Trump people”. The select committee said they wanted to ask about text messages and emails about having state legislatures send Trump slates of electors to Congress – a plan that one congressman told him was “highly controversial”, to which Meadows responded: “I love it.” House investigators said in the contempt report that they wanted to depose Meadows about texts he sent in December 2020 about installing the Trump justice department official Jeffrey Clark as acting attorney general, as well as texts to organizers of the 6 January rally. The select committee said it also had questions about why Meadows used a personal cellphone, an encrypted Signal messaging app and two personal Gmail accounts for official business – and whether their contents had been turned over to the National Archives. Counsel for the select committee noted additionally that it was untenable for Meadows to claim executive privilege protection as a way to dodge testifying before the panel after he wrote about potentially privileged conversations with Trump in his new book. “Mr Meadows has shown his willingness to talk about issues related to the select committee’s investigation across a variety of media platforms – anywhere, it seems, except to the select committee,” the panel said in the contempt report. During the contempt vote, the select committee beamed screenshots of texts he had received on his personal cellphone from lawmakers on 6 January and, crucially, a passage from his book that described a private conversation he had with Trump as rioters breached the Capitol. The select committee showed Meadows wrote in his book: “When he got offstage, President Trump let me know that he had been speaking metaphorically about the walk to the Capitol. He knew as well as anyone that we couldn’t organize a trip like that on such short notice.” The move to recommend Meadows’ criminal prosecution marks the third such instance by the select committee, after it first approved a contempt of Congress citation against Bannon in October, and then against Clark last month, for defying subpoenas.The House select committee investigating the Capitol attack voted on Monday to recommend criminal prosecution for former Trump White House chief of staff Mark Meadows, punishing Donald Trump’s most senior aide for refusing to testify about the 6 January insurrection. The select committee advanced the contempt of Congress report for Meadows unanimously, sending the matter to a vote before the full House of Representatives, which is expected to approve the citation as soon as Tuesday. Bennie Thompson, the chair of the select committee, said in an opening statement before the panel recommended Meadows’ referral to the justice department that Trump’s former White House chief of staff displayed willful noncompliance in his defiance of his subpoena. “It comes down to this,” Thompson said. “Mr Meadows started by doing the right thing: cooperating. He handed over records that he didn’t try to shield behind some excuse. But in an investigation like ours, that’s just a first step. “When the records raise questions – as these most certainly do – you have to come in and answer those questions. And when it was time for him to follow the law, come in and testify on those questions, he changed his mind and told us to pound sand. He didn’t even show up.” The select committee said in the contempt report they were seeking charges against Meadows after he attempted to obstruct the investigation in myriad ways, from refusing to testify to frustrating their efforts to locate and discover documents relevant to the Capitol attack. The select committee also said Meadows should be prosecuted since he refused to testify even about information he voluntarily provided to the panel through his own document production and conceded were not covered by claims of executive privilege advanced by Trump. And over the course of a near-hour-long business meeting, the select committee outlined in chilling detail the materials Meadows had turned over to the panel – and how Meadows then promptly refused to testify about those very records. Meadows turned over about 9,000 documents as part of a cooperation deal, the select committee said, in his effort to engage with the inquiry to a degree in order to avoid an immediate criminal referral that befell other Trump administration aides who defied subpoenas. That’s it from us today. Check the Guardian home page for more on the congressional committee’s decision to recommend contempt charges against Mark Meadows. Here’s what else happened today: Democratic governors are voicing serious concerns about the threat to American democracy, as Republican-led legislatures approve voting restrictions and Donald Trump continues to spread the “big lie” of widespread fraud in the 2020 presidential election. Governor Jay Inslee of Washington told CNN over the weekend, “I don’t think you can be overly concerned about this. The American psyche has not recognized we were one vice-president away from a coup.” Joe Biden and Joe Manchin are meeting today to discuss the Build Back Better Act, as Democrats race to pass the legislation before the end of the year. Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer needs all 50 of his caucus members to support the bill in order to get the proposal approved via the reconciliation process. At least 64 people are dead in Kentucky after tornadoes swept through the state on Friday. The state’s governor, Andy Beshear, said the final death toll may exceed 80, as search and rescue efforts continue. Biden is visiting the state on Wednesday to survey damage from the storms. The House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection voted to recommend contempt charges against Mark Meadows, Trump’s former chief of staff. The meeting started with a readout of text messages Meadows received from Trump officials, Don Trump Jr and Fox News hosts who pleaded with Meadows to ask the president to tell his supporters to go home. The insurrection organizers also sued to stop Verizon from sharing their cell phone records with the select committee investigating the riots. On the Coronavirus front, the supreme court declines to block New York state vaccine mandates. Health and hospital workers will still be required to be vaccinated against Coronavirus despite emergency requests to include religious exemptions in the statewide rules. States across the country are tightening their mask and vaccine mandates in the face of a surge of Coronavirus cases. -- Joan Greve and Johana Bhuiyan The organizers of the Capitol rally-turned-riot have filed a lawsuit against Verizon to block the company from providing their phone records to the congressional committee investigating the riots. The committee’s subpoena to Verizon seeks call, text and location information from the cell phone records of the organizers. In their lawsuit, the organizers argue the order “lacks a lawful purpose and seeks to invade the plaintiffs’ constitutional rights to privacy and to confidential political communications”. Law enforcement has increasingly relied on the use of subpoenas and warrants to obtain cell phone and other digital records from companies like Verizon, Google, Twitter and Facebook over the last few years. The committee investigating the 6 January insurrection is meeting now to discuss whether Donald Trump’s former chief of staff Mark Meadows should be referred to the Department of Justice on criminal contempt of congress. Congresswoman Liz Cheney started the meeting reading out texts Meadows received from Trump officials, Fox News hosts as well as Trump’s son, Donald Trump Jr. Coronavirus cases are rising again in states across the country, prompting local officials to reinstate mask and other mandates. California will require masks indoors across the state starting on Wednesday and until at least 15 January, after statewide case rates increased 47% since Thanksgiving. Unvaccinated people attending “mega events” also have to show proof of a negative test from within the day. Last week, New York reinstated a statewide indoor mask mandate in all indoor public places that don’t require proof of vaccination, that will also be in effect until at least 15 January. The city of Philadelphia will also now require proof of vaccination to eat or drink indoors starting on 3 January in the face of rapidly rising Coronavirus cases. A rioter who participated in the Capitol insurrection on 6 January said he now realizes he and other supporters of Donald Trump were lied to by the sitting president in a new letter to the judge. In the letter, which can be read in full here, Robert Scott Palmer said Trump and those acting on his behalf “kept spitting out the false narrative about a stolen election and how it was ‘our duty’ to stand up to tyranny. Little did I realize that they were the tyrannical ones”. The supreme court upheld the New York state vaccine mandates for hospital and health workers after turning away two emergency requests. One request was filed by a group called We the Patriots USA, which argued the rule currently allows for medical exemptions but not religious exemptions. Justices Samuel Alito, Neil Gorsuch and Clarence Thomas dissented. Gorsuch said the religious beliefs of the objectors should be respected. Some of the nurses said they objected to the vaccine because of the “distant relation to fetal cell lines developed from abortions in the 1970s and 1980s”, according to CNN. Despite a note approved by Pope Francis and written by the Vatican’s Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith last year that said receiving the shot was morally permitted, the nurses said they “object to deriving any benefit - no matter how remote - from a process involving abortion”. After five years of legal battles, the survivors of former gymnastics doctor Larry Nassar have reached a $380m settlement with USA Gymnastics, the US Olympic &amp; Paralympic Committee and their insurers. Here’s more from the Guardian report: “This settlement is the result of the bravery of hundreds of survivors who, despite legal obstacles, long odds and the best corporate legal talent money can buy, refused to be silent. The power of their story eventually won the day,” John Manly, an attorney for the plaintiffs, said on Monday. The settlement will cover claims brought by hundreds of women. They include Olympic gold medalists Simone Biles, Aly Raisman and McKayla Maroney, all of whom are among the most high-profile survivors of Nassar’s sexual abuse. All three women testified about the abuse they suffered during a Senate hearing this year. At the hearing, they attacked USA Gymnastics and Olympic officials for failing to stop Nassar and they took the FBI to task over its botched investigation into Nassar’s actions. Rachael Denhollander, the first woman to publicly accuse Nassar of abuse, said she was relieved to have reached a conclusion to the battle for compensation. “This chapter is finally closed. Now the hard work of reform and rebuilding can begin. Whether or not justice comes, and change is made, depends on what happens next,” Denhollander tweeted on Monday. Read more Joe Biden signed an executive order today intending to make it easier for Americans to access government benefits including social security, student loan relief and disaster aid. The order would cut down the “time tax” or the friction and time filling out forms and waiting in lines adds to the process to access benefits. The order targets 36 federal services across agencies and departments but will likely have the biggest effect on Americans over the age of 65. “In addition to a new online tool designed to make claiming social security benefits easier, the government will also develop a portal for Medicare recipients to identify ways to save money on drugs and health care,” a Bloomberg report read. Biden told reporters the order will “ensure that the federal government puts you, the American people, at the front of the line and are first in anything we do”. Former US Senate candidate from Maine Max Linn has died at age 62. Linn, who ran for Senate in 2020 as an independent, was found dead in his hot tub from an apparent heart attack, Linn’s lawyer told the Bangor Daily News. Linn, billed as one of the more “colorful” characters in Maine politics by the Sun Journal, became notorious for his stunts on televised debates during his campaign including cutting up a mask and responding “request denied” when asked a question. A retired financial planner, Linn also ran for congress when he lived in Florida in 2018. He was also recently accused of pulling a gun on a former assistant in an argument over a cryptocurrency investment. The assistant, Matt McDonald sought and was granted an order of protection against Linn. From the Associated Press: “McDonald alleged in court documents that Linn gave him money to invest in cryptocurrency earlier this year but that Linn reversed course upon return from an overseas trip and sought to buy drugs falsely touted as COVID-19 cures. Linn pointed a gun in McDonald’s direction when the two met to try to resolve the dispute, McDonald said in the court filing.” A new Guardian report from environment reporter Oliver Milman reveals the Biden administration was not legally obligated to auction drilling rights in the Gulf of Mexico when it offered up more than 80m acres of the gulf’s seabed for fossil fuel extraction last month. More from Oliver: The enormous sale, which took place just four days after crucial UN climate talks in Scotland, represented a spectacular about-turn from Joe Biden’s previous promise to halt offshore drilling and was denounced by outraged environmental groups as a “huge carbon bomb”. The president’s administration insisted it was obliged to hold the lease sale due to a court ruling in favor of a dozen states that sued to lift a blanket pause placed on new drilling permits by Biden. But a memo filed by the US Department of Justice before the lease sale acknowledges that this judgement does not force the government to auction off drilling rights to the gulf. “While the order enjoins and restrains (the department of) interior from implementing the pause, it does not compel interior to take the actions specified by plaintiffs, let alone on the urgent timeline specified in plaintiffs’ contempt motion,” wrote government lawyers to the federal court in Louisiana in August. The issuance of new drilling permits would require further steps under federal laws, the memo states, adding that “the court’s order does not compel the agency to act in contravention of these other authorities”. The memo’s language was first referenced by The Daily Poster. Just a month after arguing that it was not required to hold the sale, however, the department of interior’s bureau of ocean energy management (BOEM) announced it would auction off an area of the gulf that is two times the size of Florida to oil and gas companies. The expanse of the gulf put up for auction contains around 1.12bn barrels of oil and 4.2tn cubic ft of gas, with the leases locking in years – and potentially decades – of planet-heating emissions. It comes at a time when the International Energy Agency has said no new fossil fuel projects can be established after this year if the world is to avoid catastrophic heatwaves, flooding and other disastrous impacts from runaway climate change. “The administration has been misleading on this, to put it mildly. It’s very disappointing,” said Thomas Meyer, national organizing manager of Food and Water Watch. “They didn’t have to hold this sale and they didn’t have to hold it on this timeline. Read more: Johana Bhuiyan here taking over from Joan. In Minneapolis, the AP is reporting Derek Chauvin – the police officer who was convicted of murdering George Floyd – is expected to change his plea from not guilty to guilty. The AP is basing its report on a new federal docket entry. More from the AP: “The federal docket entry shows a hearing has been scheduled for Wednesday for Chauvin to change his current not guilty plea in the case. These types of notices indicate a defendant is planning to plead guilty. The court system also sent out instructions for media to attend the hearing.” It’s unclear if the other three former officers involved will plead guilty as well. Chauvin has already been sentenced to 22 and a half years in prison after being convicted of state murder and manslaughter. However, in this case he would be pleading guilty to violating Floyd’s civil rights. “All four officers were charged broadly in federal court with depriving Floyd of his rights while acting under government authority, but the federal indictment broke down the counts even further,” the AP reported. “A count against Chauvin alleged he violated Floyd’s right to be free from unreasonable seizure and from unreasonable force by a police officer.” That’s it from me today. My west coast colleague, Johana Bhuiyan, will take over the blog for the next few hours. Here’s where the day stands so far: Democratic governors are voicing serious concerns about the threat to American democracy, as Republican-led legislatures approve voting restrictions and Donald Trump continues to spread the “big lie” of widespread fraud in the 2020 presidential election. Governor Jay Inslee of Washington told CNN over the weekend, “I don’t think you can be overly concerned about this. The American psyche has not recognized we were one vice-president away from a coup.” Joe Biden and Joe Manchin are meeting today to discuss the Build Back Better Act, as Democrats race to pass the legislation before the end of the year. Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer needs all 50 of his caucus members to support the bill in order to get the proposal approved via the reconciliation process. At least 64 people are dead in Kentucky after tornadoes swept through the state on Friday. The state’s governor, Andy Beshear, said the final death toll may exceed 80, as search and rescue efforts continue. Biden is visiting the state on Wednesday to survey damage from the storms. The House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection will meet this evening to discuss recommending contempt charges against Mark Meadows, Trump’s former chief of staff. The meeting comes a week after Meadows ended his cooperation with the committee, citing the former president’s claims of executive privilege over certain records. Johana will have more coming up, so stay tuned. Joe Biden spoke with Finnish President Sauli Niinistö today, as the US and its allies continue to express concern about the Russian troop build-up along the country’s border with Ukraine. “They discussed their shared concerns about Russia’s destabilizing military buildup along Ukraine’s border and the importance of transatlantic efforts to de-escalate the situation,” the White House said in its readout of the call. The White House added, “President Biden welcomed Finland’s selection of the F-35 for its next fighter jet, noting this procurement would provide a strong foundation for even closer bilateral defense ties for years to come.” Senate minority leader Mitch McConnell reflected on the losses sustained in Kentucky after tornadoes swept through his home state on Friday. “Kentucky has been devastated, but we have not been defeated,” the Republican leader said in a floor speech moments ago. McConnell added, “Kentuckians are resilient people. We will stay strong and united through the crisis.” Earlier today, McConnell thanked Joe Biden for quickly approving Kentucky’s major disaster declaration, giving the state access to federal funds to help residents find temporary housing and start home repairs. Joe Manchin is expected to participate in a meeting tomorrow to discuss how Senate Democrats may be able to alter the filibuster to advance national voting rights legislation. Punchbowl News reports: Manchin will also meet Tuesday with a group of moderate Democrats on voting rights. Voting-rights advocates want to see if Manchin would be open to a ‘carve-out’ to the Senate’s filibuster rule for voting rights legislation. The idea gained more urgency for voting rights advocates after the chamber approved a ‘one-time exception’ to its rules to approve a debt-limit increase by a simple majority vote. As Democratic governors sound the alarm over the threat to American democracy, civil rights leaders are once again urging the Senate to pass national voting rights legislation. NAACP President Derrick Johnson argued the Senate needs to approve the Build Back Better Act as quickly as possible to shift lawmakers’ attention to voting rights. “Pass Build Back Better so we can move on to other legislative priorities, most urgently voting rights,” Johnson said in a statement. “Our democracy isn’t waiting around on a couple senators, and neither are the states slashing our constitutional rights.” However, it’s still unclear whether centrist Democrat Joe Manchin will support the Build Back Better Act, and Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer needs all 50 of his caucus members to back the bill in order to get it passed. And Schumer will also need Manchin’s support to alter the filibuster and allow voting rights legislation to advance. As of now, Republicans have the votes to block any voting rights bills from moving forward, and they have repeatedly done so. Democratic governors are seriously concerned about the future of American democracy, but they fear they cannot get voters to care enough about the issue to prevent widespread Republican gains in next year’s midterm elections. As of now, with the midterms a little less than a year away, Republicans are heavily favored to flip control of the US House. Joe Biden’s sinking approval rating could also give Republicans a significant advantage in state legislative and gubernatorial races. Republican victories could help the party implement more voting restrictions, as Donald Trump continues to spread the “Big Lie” of widespread fraud in the 2020 presidential election. Already this year, at least 19 states have enacted 33 laws that restrict access to the ballot box, according to the Brennan Center for Justice. A dozen governors gathered for the Democratic Governors Association’s annual conference over the weekend, and they voiced concern that Americans will not wake up to the threat to their democracy until it is too late. “We have to be Paul Revere every chance we get to let people know what is at risk and why it is at risk. We live it. Every time we eat breakfast we think about these things,” Governor Jay Inslee of Washington told CNN. “I don’t think you can be overly concerned about this. The American psyche has not recognized we were one vice-president away from a coup.” Read CNN’s full report on the Democratic governors’ conference here. The tornadoes that whirled through eight states on Friday night hit Kentucky hardest but also ripped up an Amazon.com warehouse in Illinois, killing six people. Now the federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) is launching an investigation into the company in relation to the building’s fatal collapse, an official at the Department of Labor said a little earlier. Reuters further reports: OSHA has six months to complete its investigation, issue citations and propose monetary penalties if violations of workplace safety and or health regulations are found, Scott Allen, a US Department of Labor regional director for public affairs, said via email. He added that compliance officers have been on site since Saturday. Six workers were killed when the Amazon warehouse in Edwardsville, Illinois, buckled under the force of the devastating storm, police said. A barrage of tornadoes ripped through six U.S. states, leaving a trail of death and destruction at homes and businesses stretching more than 200 miles (322 km). An Amazon spokeswoman did not immediately respond to a request for comment. The National Weather Service said a tornado hit the area between 8:28 p.m. and 8:32 p.m. local time on Friday, intensifying rapidly as it struck the Amazon warehouse. With estimated peak winds of 150 miles per hour (241 kph), the force was so severe that the roof was ripped off and 11-inch (28-cm) thick concrete walls longer than football fields fell in on themselves. At least 45 Amazon employees made it out safely. Authorities had given up hope of finding more survivors as they shifted from rescue to recovery efforts that were expected to last days. The company has three facilities in Edwardsville: the delivery station hit by the storm as well as a fulfillment center and a sorting station. The delivery station opened in July 2020 to prepare orders for last-mile delivery to customers. Joe Biden will visit Kentucky on Wednesday to see for himself the devastation wrought by unseasonal, powerful tornadoes and said a little earlier that he was concerned about the state of mind of victims there. The US president noted at the weekend that he wasn’t rushing immediately to the disaster-hit area because he didn’t want to be in the way as every resource there was needed to help survivors, search for the dead and missing and work to get people shelter, warmth and water - vital resources missing for many, amid temperatures below freezing. Today he said he’s concerned about the mental health of the hundreds of thousands of people affected. “That’s what worries me most, the uncertainty. You can see it in people’s faces,” he said. The official death toll is currently 64 in Kentucky alone, but is projected to rise. Recovery efforts are being hampered by the sheer scale of the wreckage. Several people have been killed in other states. Read all our coverage here. The White House press briefing has now concluded. Here’s where the day stands so far: Joe Biden and Joe Manchin are meeting today to discuss the Build Back Better Act, as Democrats race to pass the legislation before the end of the year. Senate Democrats need all 50 of their caucus members to support the bill in order to get the proposal approved via the reconciliation process. At least 64 people are dead in Kentucky after tornadoes swept through the state on Friday. The state’s governor, Andy Beshear, said the final death toll may exceed 80, as search and rescue efforts continue. Biden is visiting the state on Wednesday to survey damage from the storms. The House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection will meet this evening to discuss recommending contempt charges against Mark Meadows, the former chief of staff to Donald Trump. The meeting comes a week after Meadows ended his cooperation with the committee, citing the former president’s claims of executive privilege over certain records. The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned. One reporter asked Jen Psaki to respond to multiple reports raising speculation about the potential Democratic presidential field in 2024 if Joe Biden does not run for reelection. “The president has every intention of running for reelection,” the White House press secretary said in response. Biden’s sinking approval ratings have intensified questions over whether he will seek a second term, although the president and his team insist he intends to do so. The White House press secretary, Jen Psaki, is now holding her daily press briefing, and she provided a couple more details on Joe Biden’s meeting today with centrist Senator Joe Manchin. Psaki said the president looked forward to “communicating directly” with Manchin about the Build Back Better Act, adding that the senator has been acting “in good faith” throughout the negotiations. The press secretary said the meeting represented a “continuation of that conversation,” but she would not outline what sticking points remain for Manchin before he will support the bill. Joe Biden will travel to Kentucky on Wednesday to survey the damage from the deadly tornadoes that swept through the state on Friday. “On Wednesday, December 15, the President will travel to Ft. Campbell, Kentucky for a storm briefing, and to Mayfield and Dawson Springs, Kentucky to survey storm damage following the devastating tornadoes and extreme weather,” the White House said in a new advisory. The president confirmed his travel plans after meeting with several senior advisers to discuss the federal government’s response to the storms, which killed at least 64 people in Kentucky. “We’re going to get this done. We’re going to be there as long as it takes to help,” Biden said in the Oval Office moments ago. The president also promised to provide states with “whatever they need when they need it” to help residents affected by the storms. Biden has already approved a major disaster declaration in Kentucky, making federal funds available to help residents find temporary housing and start home repairs. If the House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection recommends contempt charges against Mark Meadows, the full chamber will need to vote on the matter. Assuming the House also approves the contempt resolution, which seems highly likely, the justice department will need to determine whether to prosecute Meadows. The justice department is already prosecuting Steve Bannon for refusing to cooperate with the select committee. A federal grand jury indicted the former Trump adviser last month on two counts of contempt of Congress. The House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection will convene this evening to consider whether Mark Meadows, the former chief of staff to Donald Trump, should be held in criminal contempt. The meeting comes after Meadows ended his cooperation with the committee, claiming investigators were not respecting the former president’s claims of executive privilege over certain records. However, the Democratic chair of the committee, Bennie Thompson, said in a letter to Meadows’ attorney last week that his client is also refusing to discuss his own personal records, which are not subject to executive privilege claims. “There is no legitimate legal basis for Mr. Meadows to refuse to cooperate with the Select Committee and answer questions about the documents he produced, the personal devices and accounts he used, the events he wrote about in his newly released book, and, among other things, his other public statements,” Thompson said in his letter. “The Select Committee is left with no choice but to advance contempt proceedings and recommend that the body in which Mr. Meadows once served refer him for criminal prosecution.” Centrist Senator Joe Manchin confirmed he will be meeting with Joe Biden today to discuss the Build Back Better Act, per NBC News. Speaking to reporters on Capitol Hill, Manchin said he is concerned about some of the bill’s programs expiring after a year or a few years while the costs of the legislation extend over 10 years. However, if Democrats attempt to alter the bill to better reflect Manchin’s concerns, that time-consuming process will likely stretch well into 2022. And Democratic leaders are still hoping they can pass the bill before the end of the year, in order to allow checks from the expanded child tax credit program to be mailed out next month. The Guardian’s Edward Helmore, Nikhita Chulani, Harvey Symons and Arnel Hecimovic report: Powerful tornadoes barrelled through five US states on Friday, levelling houses and factories and bringing down power lines. In Kentucky, the worst-hit state, one tornado alone followed an extraordinarily long and destructive path of more than 200 miles. Authorities are still tallying the devastation, and the death toll has not been confirmed, but Kentucky’s governor, Andy Beshear, estimated on Monday that at least 64 people had died there with dozens more unaccounted for. At least six people have been killed in Illinois, four in Tennessee, two in Arkansas and two in Missouri. One of the hardest hit towns was Mayfield in west Kentucky, where a candle factory was levelled, killing at least eight people. Police and fire stations in Mayfield were destroyed, homes were flattened or lost roofs, giant trees were uprooted and street signs mangled. Senate minority leader Mitch McConnell of Kentucky thanked Joe Biden for quickly approving his governor’s request to declare a major disaster in the state following the deadly tornadoes on Friday. “Thank you @POTUS for your rapid approval of Kentucky’s Major Disaster Declaration,” the Republican leader said on Twitter. “Our entire congressional delegation came together to support @GovAndyBeshear’s request. I appreciate the Administration’s quick work to speed resources to help deal with this crisis.” Biden approved the request last night, allowing Kentucky to access federal resources to help provide residents affected by the tornadoes with temporary housing and money for home repairs, among other services. Kentucky Governor Andy Beshear said officials now expect the state’s final death toll from the tornadoes to exceed 70 and potentially 80. “With this amount of damage and rubble, it may be a week or even more before we have a final count on the number of lost lives,” Beshear said. Officials believe there are currently at least 105 state residents who are unaccounted for, and search teams are working to find them. The Democratic governor of Kentucky, Andy Beshear, acknowledged he is struggling to reckon with the staggering losses from the tornadoes that swept through his state on Friday. “I know, like the folks in western Kentucky, I’m not doing so well today, and I’m not sure how many of us are,” Beshear said. The governor said he was taking notes on the confirmed deaths this morning, and he realized that he was writing on the back of one of his children’s school assignments. The assignment was about inertia, the scientific principle that objects in motion will stay in motion. “So we’re going to keep putting one foot in front of the other and push through this,” Beshear said. “To the people of western Kentucky, we’re not going anywhere. We’re going to be with you today. We’re going to be with you tomorrow. And we’re going to be there with you to rebuild.” At least 64 people are now confirmed to have been killed in the tornadoes that swept through Kentucky on Friday, governor Andy Beshear said. Speaking at a press conference this morning, the Democratic governor noted that 18 of the known victims are still unidentified. “Of the ones that we know, the age – the age range is five months to 86 years, and six are younger than 18,” Beshear said, his voice breaking with emotion as he updated the death toll. The governor had previously said that officials feared the death toll would exceed 100, but those estimations have decreased as more potential victims have been found alive. Joe Biden will soon receive a briefing from senior advisers on the federal government’s response to the deadly tornadoes that swept through Kentucky on Friday. The president will be briefed by Secretary of Homeland Security Alejandro Mayorkas, Fema administrator Deanne Criswell and Homeland security adviser Liz Sherwood-Randall in about 45 minutes. Biden has already declared a federal emergency in Kentucky, as rescue efforts continue across the state. The Democratic governor of Kentucky, Andy Beshear, had initially said officials feared the death toll would exceed 100, but that number is now expected to be closer to 50. “We are praying that maybe original estimates of those we have lost were wrong. If so, it’s going to be pretty wonderful,” the governor said yesterday. Read more of the Guardian’s coverage on the tornadoes: The US government’s leading infectious diseases official, Anthony Fauci, has stepped up calls for Americans to get a Covid-19 booster shot, as the US is approaching 800,000 lives lost to coronavirus since the start of the pandemic. Fauci warned that the Omicron variant appeared to be able to “evade” the protection of two initial doses of the mRNA-type Covid vaccines – Pfizer/BioNTech’s and Moderna’s – as well as post-infection therapies such as monoclonal antibodies and convalescent plasma. Omicron is spurring new fears as US infections begin to surge again, with infections currently still led by the highly-transmissable Delta variant that has dominated since the summer. Fauci said an extra vaccine shot provides “optimal” protection against Omicron, even though the government’s official designation of “fully vaccinated” remained at two doses of Pfizer or Moderna, or one of Johnson &amp; Johnson’s vaccine, which was developed by another method. Although Joe Manchin currently seems to be Democrats’ largest obstacle in passing the Build Back Better Act, he is far from the only hurdle in the way. Democrats are trying to pass the legislation using a process known as reconciliation, meaning they only need 51 votes to get it approved rather than the 60 votes that are usually necessary when Republicans filibuster a bill. The Washington Post reports: As they prepare to release more legislative text this week, Democrats also must work out the finer points of their proposal with the Senate parliamentarian. The reconciliation process carries strict rules in the Senate, requiring lawmakers to ensure every element of their plan has direct effects on the federal budget. If it does not, Republicans then can try to strike entire sections from the bill once it reaches the Senate floor. For now, the two parties are set to battle it out in another round of private meetings in front of the Senate’s chief rule-keeper. The process already has imperiled some of Democrats’ initial policy ambitions, including their hopes to proffer reforms to the country’s immigration laws as part of the social spending bill. One potential concern for Joe Manchin when it comes to the Build Back Better Act may be how the legislation will impact inflation in the US. The Bureau of Labor Statistics reported Friday that US prices rose by 6.8% over the past 12 months, marking the largest year-over-year increase since 1982. Over the summer, Manchin called for a “strategic pause” in the negotiations over the $1.75tn spending package until lawmakers had a clearer picture of how inflation was faring. However, since Manchin published that September op-ed, a number of economists and market analysts have said they do not believe the bill will significantly worsen inflation, which may have somewhat alleviated the West Virginia senator’s concerns. For more information on the latest inflation news, read the Guardian’s report from Friday: Greetings from Washington, live blog readers. Centrist Senator Joe Manchin will reportedly meet with Joe Biden in the next couple of days, as Democrats race to pass the president’s Build Back Better Act before the end of the year. Punchbowl News reports: Biden and Manchin will speak about the BBB as early as today, a discussion that will go a long way toward deciding whether the $1.7 trillion package -- the president’s top legislative priority -- can be finished before Christmas or will slide into 2022. ... With so much at stake, the lobbying of Manchin from both sides is getting frantic. [Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer] met with Manchin last Thursday on BBB, and other Democrats have been seeking private one-on-ones with him as well. In the past, Manchin and Schumer had a close relationship, although it has clearly frayed during the last year under the enormous strain of the 50-50 Senate. If Democrats cannot pass their bill before the end of the year, it will jeopardize the extension of the expanded child tax credits, which have become a life-saving benefit for many American families over the past year. If the bill does not pass, the party will likely have a much harder time convincing voters to reelect them next year, and Biden could face the same dilemma in 2024. So the stakes could not be higher, and once again, all eyes are on Manchin to see whether he will allow Democrats to move forward. Stay tuned.Thanks for joining us. We will now be closing this Covid blog. However, you can catch up with all the latest developments on our new blog here. Here is a snapshot of all the key Covid developments: Omicron has killed at least one person in Britain, prime minister Boris Johnson revealed. Boris Johnson issued an appeal to members of the public to step forward to assist the Covid booster jab programme. Norway tightens Covid measures and bans serving of alcohol in bid to halt Omicron outbreak. Protests in Latvia turned violent after a police officer was injured and four demonstrators arrested as several thousand people in the capital Riga protested anti-Covid restrictions. Peru says it is battling a “resurgence” of the pandemic, with infections and deaths rising. The country has the world’s highest coronavirus death rate. China has recorded its first case of the Omicron variant, state media report authorities in the northeastern city of Tianjin as saying. In Denmark, health authorities say a third dose of the Covid-19 vaccine will be offered sooner to everyone over 40 to curb the spread of the Omicron variant. The US Air Force has discharged 27 people for refusing to get the Covid-19 vaccine, making them what officials believe are the first service members to be removed for disobeying the mandate to get the shots. California will impose a statewide mask mandate in all indoor public spaces. Covid-19 cases in Canada may rapidly rise in the coming days due to community spread of the Omicron variant. Nigeria will destroy around one million expired Covid-19 vaccines, Faisal Shuaib, head of the National Primary Health Care Development Agency (NPHCDA), said. At least 200,000 Covid-19 vaccines have expired in Senegal without being used in the past two months and another 200,000 are set to expire at the end of December because demand is too slow, the head of its immunisation programme said. Thailand will halve to three months the time between administering a second Covid-19 vaccine shot and a booster, health officials said. The Omicron variant likely accounts for 11% of new Covid-19 cases in Ireland, its Chief Medical Officer said on Monday, while predicting a very rapid increase in the proportion of Omicron infections in the coming days amid probable widespread community transmission. Ireland has so far confirmed 18 cases of the variant through whole-genome sequencing out of an average 4,000 Covid-19 cases it has been reporting each day. A trait distinguishing Omicron from the dominant Delta variant suggests a much higher total, said the National Public Health Emergency Team. Ireland’s Chief Medical Officer Tony Holohan said in a statement: Using this methodology, we estimate that 11% of cases are now due to the Omicron variant, an increase from less than 1% only one week ago.” Just over 90% of Ireland’s eligible 3.9 million people over the age of 12 have been fully vaccinated - one of the highest rates of protection in Europe - and it has administered a further 1.2 million booster doses. Coronavirus passports could lead to increased uptake of vaccines, especially among young people, a study suggests. Research by the University of Oxford found Covid-19 certification led to increased jab uptake 20 days before and 40 days after introduction in countries with lower-than-average vaccination coverage. Increase in vaccine uptake was most pronounced in people under 30. The modelling analysis was published in The Lancet Public Health. Coronavirus passports require people to have proof of either complete vaccination, a negative test or a Covid-19 recovery certificate to access public venues and events, such as restaurants or concerts. As well as helping to prevent the spread of coronavirus in public venues, it has been suggested they may encourage more unvaccinated people to get vaccinated, particularly those who perceive their own risk of hospitalisation or death from Covid-19 as low. Read the full story from our reporter Andrew Gregory here. Hello it’s Samantha Lock back with you on the blog as my colleague Jedidajah Otte takes a well-deserved break. First up, some Covid numbers out of Australia. The country’s most populous state of NSW has recorded 804 new Covid-19 cases and one death, a significant jump from previous days. Victoria recorded 1,189 new cases a six deaths. Prime minister Scott Morrison called on states and territories to ease their last remaining Covid-19 restrictions, as Western Australia announced plans to reopen its hard border to the rest of the nation. The US Air Force has discharged 27 people for refusing to get the Covid-19 vaccine, making them what officials believe are the first service members to be removed for disobeying the mandate to get the shots. The Associated Press reports: The Air Force gave its forces until 2 November to get the vaccine, and thousands have either refused or sought an exemption. Air Force spokeswoman Ann Stefanek said Monday that these are the first airmen to be administratively discharged for reasons involving the vaccine. She said all of them were in their first term of enlistment, so they were younger, lower-ranking personnel. And while the Air Force does not disclose what type of discharge a service member gets, legislation working its way through Congress limits the military to giving troops in vaccine refusal cases an honorable discharge or general discharge under honorable conditions. The Pentagon earlier this year required the vaccine for all members of the military, including active duty, National Guard and the Reserves. Each of the services set its own deadlines and procedures for the mandate, and the Air Force set the earliest deadline. Defense Secretary Lloyd Austin has said the vaccine is critical to maintaining the health of the force and its ability to respond to an national security crisis. None of the 27 airmen sought any type of exemption, medical, administrative or religious, Stefanek said. Several officials from the other services said they believe that so far only the Air Force has gotten this far along in the process and discharged people over the vaccine refusal. As a result, they were formally removed from service for failure to obey an order. Stefanek said it is also possible that some had other infractions on their records, but all had the vaccine refusal as one of the elements of their discharge. It is not unusual for members of the military to be thrown out of the service for disobeying an order — discipline is a key tenet of the armed services. As a comparison, Stefanek said that in the first three quarters of 2021, about 1,800 airmen were discharged for failure to follow orders. According to the latest Air Force data, more than 1,000 airmen have refused the shot and more than 4,700 are seeking a religious exemption. As of last week, a bit more than 97% of the active duty Air Force had gotten at least one shot. UK prime minister Boris Johnson has issued an appeal to members of the public to step forward to assist the Covid booster jab programme in a race to counter the new Omicron variant. Johnson, who announced the new mass booster programme on Sunday, said “tens of thousands” of volunteers were needed in order to ramp up delivery of booster jabs to an unprecedented pace. Roles needing to be filled by volunteers range from stewards to organise and manage the queues to trained vaccinators to administer the jabs. On Sunday, Johnson announced that every eligible adult in England is to be offered a booster shot by the end of December, a month earlier than previously planned, while resources are being made available to the devolved nations to speed up delivery. Johnson has acknowledged that it will require an “extraordinary effort” by the NHS, with hundreds more vaccination sites, mobile units and pop-ups due to open over the coming week. In a direct appeal to the public, Johnson said: As part of our Get Boosted Now vaccination drive we need to increase our jabbing capacity to unprecedented levels. But to achieve something on this scale, we need your help. So today I’m issuing a call for volunteers to join our national mission to get jabs in arms. We need tens of thousands of people to help out, everyone from trained vaccinators to stewards. Many thousands have already given their time but we need you to come forward again, to work alongside our brilliant GPs, doctors, nurses and pharmacists, to deliver jabs and save lives. So please come forward if you can. There are currently almost 3,000 vaccine sites across the country, staffed by over 90,000 volunteers, PA reports. After the NHS last week announced a recruitment drive for 10,000 paid vaccinators, 4,500 people have registered their interest while 13,000 have come forward as volunteer stewards. Brazil logged 2,082 fresh infections and 48 new deaths from Covid-19 on Monday as infections are still decreasing in the country, with 7,133 new infections reported on average each day. That’s 9% of the peak, which was reached on 23 June, according to the Reuters Covid-19 Tracker. Overall, 22,188,179 infections and 616,744 coronavirus-related deaths have been reported in the country since the pandemic began. California will impose a statewide mask mandate in all indoor public spaces as Covid-19 case rates soar with the spread of the new Omicron variant, the state secretary of health and human services, Mark Ghaly, said on Monday. As of Saturday, 7.4 million of California’s population of around 40 million had received their booster jab, according to the office of governor Gavin Newsom. My colleague Dan Sabbagh has written up a piece on how the NHS will gear up for the “huge challenge” of delivering prime minister Boris Johnson’s new booster jab target: Doctors, nurses and NHS executives will have to find a way of trebling the rate of booster vaccinations to more than 1.2m a day if they are to offer all eligible adults in the UK a jab by the end of December. The target came as a surprise to the health service, which will now have to find staff to work through the holiday season, alongside the 750 military personnel drafted in to assist them. Full story here: Covid-19 cases in Canada may rapidly rise in the coming days due to community spread of the Omicron variant, mirroring the situation in the country’s most populous province of Ontario, Canada’s top health official said on Monday. Ontario, which accounts for almost 40% of Canada’s population of 39 million people, reported 1,536 cases of Covid-19 on Monday, a more-than 70% increase from a week ago, including 80 cases of the Omicron variant. The surge has prompted the provincial government to suspend easing of restrictions that were planned to be lifted ahead of the holiday season, Reuters reports. The World Health Organization has said that the Omicron coronavirus variant poses a “very high” global risk, having reached over 60 countries, while it remains unclear for the moment how much vaccines can protect against it. Ontario has directed government staff, who started gradually returning to their offices in November, to go back to working from home at least until early-February, CTV news reported Monday. The University of Victoria in the provimce of British Columbia announced on Sunday that it will be moving its in-person exams online from Monday after a rise in Covid-19 cases on Vancouver Island. Schools in England should not be closing early for Christmas unless they have been told it is “necessary” on public health grounds, the British government has said. The prime minister’s official spokesman indicated that schools would be kept open unless there is an “absolute public health emergency”, PA reports. Asked whether schools might close early for Christmas, the Prime Minister’s official spokesman said: Certainly we do not think anyone should be closing schools early unless they have received advice from the local director of public health that it’s necessary on public health grounds. We wouldn’t want to see that happening routinely, just as a precaution, because as I’ve said, education is vital. And we’ve seen, sadly, because of the public health crisis, children have to miss face-to-face education. And so it’s very important that we maintain schooling as much as possible. The NASUWT teaching union however is calling on education secretary Nadhim Zahawi to urgently announce additional measures for schools and colleges before the Christmas break to avoid a repeat of the “chaos” last year. The Government should advise schools to cancel or postpone non-essential activities and events immediately, as well as move to online staff and parental meetings, the union says. A staggered return of pupils in January should be considered and extra on-site testing facilities should be provided until the February half-term, the union says. Health secretary Sajid Javid said on Monday he could not guarantee schools would not close again due to the pandemic. Zahawi said on Sunday he could not guarantee that all schools would be open everywhere in January. Northern Ireland is set to be overwhelmed by the Covid-19 variant Omicron “very, very soon”, the deputy first minister warned on Monday. Michelle O’Neill said there were 10 confirmed cases of the new Covid-19 variant in Northern Ireland on Monday. PA reports: Earlier first minister Paul Givan urged take-up of the Covid vaccination booster, warning that a “storm coming our way”. However his party [the DUP] has opposed Covid certification for entering some hospitality venues. On Monday evening, MLAs debated the regulations in the Assembly chamber where health minister Robin Swann urged united support for the scheme. “A united front is what we need, with joined up policies and united messaging. That has been sadly lacking at critical stages to date,” he told MLAs. “It is my fervent hope that today marks a turning point, that, given the seriousness of our situation, that this House can debate this measure rationally and respectfully.” However, DUP MLA Pam Cameron said her party will not back the Covid certification scheme. There was a protest at Stormont earlier by those opposed to the scheme. Former DUP economy minister Paul Frew, a vocal critic of mandatory certification, was among a number of party members who met with the protesters outside Parliament Buildings. He suggested the scheme could be halted by way of legal challenge. “There are going to be legal challenges, there is no doubt about that and that’s where it might be stopped,” he told demonstrators. “I hear you 100%, and I’m with you, but this will only be tested legally.” Speaking inside the Assembly chamber, Ms O’Neill called for parties to unite. “If ever there was a time for a united front on the public health message, it’s today because we’re facing into a very, very difficult period in the weeks ahead where we see this new variant now coming on stream, we’re probably about two weeks behind what’s happening in England and Scotland and they are getting into very difficult territory,” she told MLAs during Executive Office questions. “We are going to be overwhelmed with this new variant very, very soon. “My priority is to keep businesses open and safe. I want to keep every door opened but to make sure it’s a safe space for people to enter.” Ms O’Neill also said she had spent the weekend speaking to the Treasury, making the case “very strongly” for financial support for businesses. “That’s where we would want to be if we could have the resource to be able to do that,” she added. The vaccine booster programme in Northern Ireland is being accelerated in response to the threat posed by Omicron and has opened up to all over-30s. [...] On Monday morning there were 309 Covid positive patients in hospital, of whom 32 were in intensive care. The US Supreme Court on Monday rejected a challenge to New York’s refusal to allow religious exemptions to its mandate that certain healthcare workers in the state be vaccinated against Covid-19. Acting in two cases, the justices denied emergency requests for an injunction requiring the state to allow religious exemptions while litigation over the mandate’s legality continues in lower courts. Conservative Justices Clarence Thomas, Samuel Alito and Neil Gorsuch said they would have granted the injunction, Reuters reports. Norway will ban the serving of alcohol in bars and restaurants, impose stricter rules in schools and speed up vaccination as part of new efforts to curb the outbreak of the Omicron variant of the coronavirus, the government said on Monday. Remote working will be compulsory where possible, mask mandates will be extended and access to public swimming pools and gyms restricted. The measures will come into force overnight from Tuesday to Wednesday and are expected to last four weeks. “For many this will feel like a lockdown, if not of society then of their lives and of their livelihoods,” prime minister Jonas Gahr Stoere told a news conference. The move comes after the Norwegian Institute of Public Health (FHI) warned on Monday that restrictions must be tightened to avoid up to 300,000 people contracting Covid every day. The institute added that there could be up to 200 hospital admissions daily unless stricter measures were put in place. On Monday, Norway logged 358 hospitalisations with Covid, a new daily record. Night clubs in England will have to ask revellers who prefer using their Covid pass to gain entry instead of doing a lateral flow test to show proof that they have had a booster jab as part of future plans, the British health secretary has said. Sajid Javid told parliament on Monday that it is the government’s intention to include proof of a booster jab, once all adults have had a chance to get theirs. He said: From Wednesday - subject to this House’s approval - you’ll need to show a negative lateral flow test to get into nightclubs and large events, with an exemption for the double vaccinated. Once all adults have had a reasonable chance to get their booster jab, we intend to change this exemption to require a booster dose. MPs are due to vote on Tuesday on the requirement for NHS Covid passes showing a person’s vaccine details or test results in England, which would come into effect from Wednesday. But Javid said it was “misleading” to say MPs are being asked to vote on “vaccine passports”. He said: The government has been absolutely clear about when it talks about access to nightclubs or to very large gatherings [...] that the requirement is to take a free lateral flow test and make sure it’s negative. And if you don’t want to do that then you can prove your vaccine status. It’s up to that individual. That’s not a vaccine passport and the sooner we get rid of this misleading description of what the government is proposing, the better. The NHS in England was put onto a crisis footing on Monday night as hospitals were told to discharge as many patients as possible ahead of a potential Omicron-driven surge in Covid cases. Anyone possible should be discharged to care homes, hospices, their own homes and hotels before Christmas in order to free up beds, amid warnings that January could see hospitals caring for even greater numbers of patients than they did at the worst point of the pandemic back in January. Hospitals and GPs have also been told to scale back the normal services they provide, and limit care to those needing urgent attention, so NHS staff can be freed up to deliver boosters, in a letter from NHS England chief executive Amanda Pritchard and medical director Prof Stephen Powis, who said the service is now facing a major threat classes as a Level 4 “national incident”. Hospitals will undertake fewer non-urgent operations but “highest clinical priority patients”, including people with cancer and those who have been waiting a long time, will be given priority. They have also been told to take ambulance-borne patients into A&amp;E quicker so that paramedics can get back on the road to answer more 999 calls, speed up efforts to bring in nurses from overseas to help tackle the NHS’s lack of staff and send as many patients as possible for surgery at private hospitals. It is understood that 386,000 people in England booked booster jabs – almost 50,000 an hour – during the course of Monday, the first day after Boris Johnson’s appeal to the public to get fully vaccinated as a matter of urgency. However, sources concede that health service bosses do not know when they will be able to hit the 1m jabs a day the prime minister has said are needed. Travel restrictions imposed on people coming to the UK should be removed given how widespread the Omicron variant is in the country, the British health secretary suggested on Monday. PA reports: Sajid Javid told MPs the justification for having the rules is “minimised” by the new coronavirus variant “spreading rapidly” throughout the country. He added he has raised the matter with transport ministers and he hopes the government “can act quickly”. His remarks came after Labour former minister Ben Bradshaw repeated his call for the “very draconian, costly and complex” travel rules introduced only recently to try and stop Omicron arriving in the UK to be dropped. The UK’s largest airlines and travel companies have also expressed their concerns about the “haphazard and disproportionate” restrictions imposed by the government. Tougher rules introduced due to Omicron mean everyone entering the UK must have evidence of a negative pre-departure test, and self-isolate until they receive a negative result from a post-arrival test. People arriving in the UK from the 11 African countries currently on the red list must spend 11 nights in a quarantine hotel at a cost of 2,285 for solo travellers. Mr Javid told the House of Commons: “I think [Mr Bradshaw] makes a very good point, given that we already know that the Omicron variant is fast becoming the dominant variant in our capital city, spreading rapidly throughout the country, the justification for having those rules is minimised. “It’s something that I’ve already raised with my colleagues in the Department for Transport and I do hope that we can act quickly.” [...] It comes as ministers are set to consider whether to replace hotel quarantine with self-isolation at home for fully vaccinated travellers. Sir Keir Starmer, the leader of the UK Labour party, has backed the government’s moves to ramp up the Covid booster jab programme as he warned the NHS is in danger of being “overwhelmed” by the emergence of the new Omicron variant. Starmer said that it was essential to put the national interest first as he urged people to “stick to the rules” and get their top-up injections. Prime minister Boris Johnson announced on Sunday that every eligible adult in England was to be offered a third dose of the vaccine by the end of December. In a televised address in response, Starmer said ministers should have acted sooner in the face of the threat from the fast-spreading Omicron strain. He said: We may not be certain how dangerous it is but we do know that lives are at risk and again our NHS is at risk of being overwhelmed. If that happens more people will die. So we must do everything that we can to protect the NHS. Sir Keir said delivering the accelerated booster jab programme would be a “big challenge” but that he was confident the public would rise to meet it. Time and time again the British people have risen to the challenge so let’s pull together now and do the right thing once more,” he said. At times like this, we must all put the national interest first and play by the rules. Of course I understand that sticking to the rules can be inconvenient but stick to the rules we must. It would be easy to let the festivities we’ve all been looking forward to, divert us from our national duty. Getting jabbed, wearing masks and working from home if we can really will help prevent infections and help prevent the NHS being overwhelmed. Hello, I’m Jedidajah Otte and I’ll be taking over now. Feel free to get in touch if you would like to flag anything you think is relevant to our coverage, I’m on Twitter @JedySays or you can email me. Nigeria will destroy around 1 million expired Covid-19 vaccines, the head of its primary care agency has said. It’s been a quieter day today as Omicron continues its spread around the world, but the blog has still posted about lots of important developments. Cyprus introduced new measures to curb a Covid surge, including vaccinations for 11-15 year olds, isolation for cases and close contacts, and bringing forward boosters. China reported its first Omicron case in the northern city of Tianjin from an overseas returnee. The UK reported its first patient to have died from Omicron, as the government issued a warning to the public not to assume the variant is less dangerous than other strains. Citizens are rushing to get their booster jabs to protect themselves against the new variant, which is poised to replace Delta as the dominant strain in the UK, with queues round the block for vaccination centres and the NHS website crashing under the demand for appointments. Norway announced plans to introduce new restrictions, which will be unveiled at a press conference tonight. Rachel Hall here signing out for the rest of the day. Thanks for following and for sharing your tips and insights with me. The global Covid blog will continue this evening, in Jedidajah Otte’s capable hands. Italy reported 98 coronavirus-related deaths on Monday against 66 the day before, the health ministry said, while the daily tally of new infections fell to 12,712 from 19,215. Reuters reports: Italy has registered 134,929 deaths linked to Covid-19 since its outbreak emerged in February last year, the second-highest toll in Europe after Britain and the ninth-highest in the world. The country has reported 5.24 million cases to date. Patients in hospital with Covid-19 - not including those in intensive care - stood at 6,951 on Monday, up from 6,697 a day earlier. There were 60 new admissions to intensive care units, up from 54 on Sunday. The total number of intensive care patients increased to 856 from a previous 829. Some 313,536 tests for COVID-19 were carried out in the past day, compared with a previous 501,815, the health ministry said. Reuters have published a handy summary of key developments today in the spread of Omicron. Europe Britain reported at least one death from the Omicron variant, the first publicly confirmed death globally, and urged people to get booster shots. Britain’s health secretary said the Omicron variant will become the dominant variant in the capital in the next 48 hours, while Denmark expects it to become dominant this week. Norway will further tighten restrictions in a bid to limit an expected surge of Omicron, its prime minister said. Middle east and Africa The president of the Democratic Republic of Congo, which has the world’s lowest vaccination rate at roughly 0.1%, urged people to get inoculated after the Omicron variant was detected there and as cases increase exponentially. Around 400,000 Covid-19 vaccines are set to expire in Senegal by end-December, the head of its immunisation programme said, as the country faces logistical problems, short shelf life and vaccine hesitancy. Ghana’s main international airport operator said it will fine airlines $3,500 for every passenger they bring in that is not vaccinated or that tests positive on arrival. South African President Cyril Ramaphosa, who tested positive on Sunday, is still showing mild symptoms, his office said. Emma Raducanu, the 19-year-old British champion of the U.S. Open, tested positive and will miss this week’s exhibition event in Abu Dhabi. Asia-Pacific Major Chinese manufacturing province Zhejiang is fighting its first cluster this year, with hundreds of thousands of citizens in quarantine and virus-hit areas suspending business operations, cutting flights and cancelling events. Health authorities in Tianjin have detected mainland China’s first Omicron case, state media reported. Eight Hong Kong pro-democracy activists were sentenced to up to 14 months in prison for a Tiananmen vigil last year, which the police had banned citing coronavirus restrictions. New Caledonia’s pro-independence movement rejected Sunday’s “no” vote, in which over half of voters abstained after France declined to delay the ballot to allow for a mourning period following a surge in infections. Americas The United States crossed 50 million cases on Sunday, according to Reuters tally. Catholic pilgrims estimated at over 1.5 million people gathered in Mexico City on Sunday for the annual Virgin of Guadalupe gathering after festivities were cancelled last year. A Brazilian Supreme Court justice ruled on Saturday the country must demand proof of vaccination for visitors seeking entry, a day after hackers hit the health ministry website targeting vaccination data. Australia may manufacture mRNA vaccines for Covid-19 and other diseases by 2024 under an in-principle agreement struck with pharmaceutical giant Moderna, Sarah Martin reports. The Omicron variant of the coronavirus is spreading rapidly and will become the dominant variant in the British capital in the next 48 hours. The UK’s Health Secretary Sajid Javid told parliament: “No variant of COVID-19 has spread this fast.” “While Omicron represents over 20 percent of cases in England, we’ve already seen it rise to over 44% in London and we expect it to become the dominant Covid-19 variant in the capital in the next 48 hours.” Denmark has said that Omicron is expected to become the dominant coronavirus variant this week, with new daily cases reaching around 10,000. The country’s Serum Institute has detected 3,437 Omicron cases since it was first detected in Denmark on 22 November. In the UK, 54,661 people tested positive for coronavirus on Monday, while there were 38 deaths within 28 days of a positive death, and 926 people were admitted to hospital, official figures show. The weekly case tally was 9.2% higher than the preceding week, at 363,682. Cyprus will start vaccinating children between the ages of 5 to 11 as part of a package of new measures to curb a Covid surge following the first confirmed cases of the omicron variant on the island. Health Minister Michalis Hadjipantela unveiled the additional measures, which included cutting the mandatory six-week waiting period for booster shots by two weeks, and tighter restrictions for infected individuals and close contacts. Associated Press reports: Hadjipantela said anyone diagnosed with the omicron variant or any other new mutation will have to undergo compulsory isolation at their usual residence. Close contacts will be required to undergo a rapid antigen test within 72 hours and a PCR test a week later. Booster shot recipients are exempted. Meanwhile, the country’s SafePass — or proof of vaccination — will be revoked as of Wednesday for anyone not receiving a booster shot within seven months of completing their inoculation. Also as of this week, unvaccinated people will be barred from attending christenings, weddings and hotel receptions on top of an earlier decision to exclude them from stadiums, cinemas, theaters and nightclubs. There are calls in Germany for its vaccine advisory panel to overhaul the way it evaluates Covid-19 shots in a bid to tame soaring infections. Reuters reports: The panel of 18 appointees known as STIKO last week recommended vaccinations for limited numbers of children, including those at risk of developing severe Covid-19, but stopped short of a blanket recommendation for 5-11 year olds. That limited approval, combined with STIKO taking weeks to fall into line with Germany’s regional health ministers widening the eligibility for booster shots from September, has stoked a debate on whether the expert panel needs to be reorganised to speed up decisions to keep up with the of pace of the coronavirus. In recent weeks, Germany has been among the worst-hit countries in western Europe, with infection rates among school-age children twice as high as the all-age rate. At least 200,000 Covid-19 vaccines have expired in Senegal without being used in the past two months and another 200,000 will expire at the end of December due to slow demand. Reuters reports: African governments have been calling for more Covid-19 vaccines to help catch up with richer regions, where vaccine rollouts have been humming along for more than a year. Yet, as the pace of supply has picked up in recent weeks some countries have struggled to keep pace. Logistical problems, the short shelf life of vaccines that arrive from donors, and vaccine hesitancy have all kept doses from reaching arms. Up to 1 million Cpvid-19 vaccines expired in Nigeria last month, Reuters revealed. “The main problem is vaccine hesitation,” said Ousseynou Badiane, who is in charge of Senegal’s vaccine rollout. “The number of cases is decreasing. They ask: ‘why is it important to get vaccinated if the illness is not there now’?” Senegal is currently vaccinating between 1,000 and 2,000 people per day, Badiane told Reuters, down from 15,000 during the summer. At this pace, it cannot use all the vaccines it has. Part of the problem is the short shelf life of vaccines that arrive from donors that include the United States and China. Our science correspondent Linda Geddes has written about whether lateral flow Covid tests can be trusted in the face of the Omicron variant. She writes that the emergence of Omicron has thrown a spanner in the works: According to the latest data, just one month after your second Pfizer or AstraZeneca jab, the ability of antibodies to neutralise Omicron is 30 times lower than if you were infected with the Delta variant – reinforcing the message that double-vaccination is no guarantee against infection. So, if you’re relying on a LFT to guide whether or not it is safe for you to leave the house, the odds of it being wrong just got higher. You can read her full analysis here: An update from the Guardian’s China correspondent, Vincent Ni, on the situation in the country. Mainland China has reported its first Omicron case in the northern city of Tianjin, as the country’s eastern province of Zhejiang has been battling a rise in new infections of Delta variant in recent weeks. The Chinese authorities reported that the Omicron case was detected from an overseas returnee, who showed no symptoms upon arrival on 9 December. The patient is now being quarantined and treated in a designated hospital. The first Omicron case in Tianjin came as its nearby Beijing is gearing up for the Winter Olympics, which is to be held in February. The Guardian understands the patient is not related to the Games. The arrival of Omicron – thought to be a more transmissible variant than Delta - comes as the eastern Zhejiang province – a province with 65 million population – is battling against its first domestic cluster outbreak this year. Among the 80 new locally transmitted cases with symptoms in mainland China on 12 December, 74 were identified in Zhejiang. In October, the province reported just one local case. The outbreak in Zhejiang – home to the e-commerce giant Alibaba - has led more than a dozen publicly listed companies to halt production on Monday. Their shares fell sharply as a result. The companies said that they would comply with the anti-virus control measures imposed by the local government, which will decide when production can be resumed. Among the worst-affected cities in Zhejiang province is Shaoxing. Since 5 December, 123 of the 192 cases detected in the province were from the city of 5 million. A mass testing programme is under way. Early this month, the Chinese region of Hong Kong – which runs a separate health system from the Mainland - reported it first cases of Omicron. On Monday, the territory reported two additional cases of the variant, bringing the total to seven. Hong Kong’s health authorities said that both cases were imported from the UK, where Health Secretary Sajid Javid told MPs on Monday that Omicron now represents 20% of Covid cases in England. Reuters has published some facts and figures on the Covax programme, which is backed by the World Health Organization and the Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunization (Gavi), and aims to deliver vaccines to poorer countries. The programme has delivered more than 610m Covid-19 vaccine doses to 144 countries, Gavi data shows. But in September, the 2021 delivery target was cut by nearly 30% to 1.425bn doses. China has detected its first Omicron case, in a traveller arriving from overseas in the northern port city of Tianjin, state-run Tianjin Daily reports. The traveller arrived in the city on 9 December and is being treated in isolation in hospital. Hungary has detected its first two cases of Omicron, according to state television. Denmark is pushing forward its vaccine programme to enable everyone over 40 to receive a third booster dose of the Covid-19 vaccine to curb the spread of the Omicron variant. This would mean that everyone aged 40 and above can get the vaccine four and a half months after the second jab, the country’s health authority said. Reuters reports: A third dose is “safe and effective” as soon as three months after the initial vaccine course, the European Medicines Agency (EMA) said last week. Denmark is second worldwide only to the UK in confirmed cases of Omicron, with both countries having extensive sequencing of samples to detect variants quickly. Russia’s parliament is abandoning a draft bill that would have required people travelling by plane or train to present QR codes showing proof of immunity to Covid-19. Reuters reported that the U-turn came in response to strong public opposition to the proposal, which would effectively have forced people to get vaccinated - or show that they had caught the disease and recovered - in order to travel around the country. Russia has the third highest death toll from Covid-19 after the United States and Brazil, and the Kremlin has expressed frequent frustration at the slow public uptake of the Russian-made Sputnik V vaccine. British prime minister Boris Johnson said on Monday the first patient had died after contracting the Omicron variant of the coronavirus, Sky News reports. The Guardian’s full report is here: Norway will further tighten its coronavirus restrictions this week in order to limit the spread of the virus, Reuters reports. Prime minister Jonas Gahr Støre told Norwegian news agency NTB on Monday. “The situation is serious. The spread of infection is too high and we have to take action to limit this development.” Norway is setting record highs both in terms of new Covid-19 infections and hospitalisations, partly due to the spread of the Omicron variant of the coronavirus. A news conference will be held at 8pm CET tonight to outline the measures. UK vaccination centres have been overwhelmed with demand for the booster vaccination, which is a key tool in the country’s bid to stem a “tidal wave” of Omicron. The NHS website has crashed under the scale of demand, while long queues have been reported outside vaccinations centres around the country. On Sunday night, the prime minister Boris Johnson unveiled plans to vaccinate 1 million people per day – higher than any time so far in the campaign – to limit the variant’s rapid spread and avoid reintroducing restrictions that would have onerous implications for society and the economy. Rachel Hall here taking over from Martin Belam for the rest of the day. Please do get in touch if there’s anything we’ve missed, or if you have any ideas for coverage. You can reach me at rachel.hall@theguardian.com. The focus on this blog is the biggest global coronavirus stories, but there’s more UK-specific news on our UK Covid blog. Thailand will halve to three months the time between administering a second Covid-19 vaccine shot and a booster, health officials have said, to try to strengthen immunity in anticipation of a local spread of the Omicron variant. South Africa’s president Cyril Ramaphosa, 69, tested positive for Covid-19 on Sunday, though is showing only mild symptoms, the presidency said. Indonesia will start administering Covid-19 vaccinations for children aged six to 11 on Tuesday. Australia’s most isolated state – Western Australia – will fully reopen its borders on 5 February after almost two years sealed off from Covid and the world. The Western Australian premier, Mark McGowan, announced on Monday plans to allow interstate and international travellers to enter the state without quarantine from midnight on 5 February, when the state was expected to hit its 90% fully vaccinated target. Russia says it has detected Omicron in 16 people who returned from South Africa. The Interfax news agency cited deputy prime minister Tatiana Golikova giving the figures. Pakistan has also detected its first confirmed Omicron case. New work from home guidance takes effect in England today, following recently tightened coronavirus guidance. British prime minister Boris Johnson is gambling on an unprecedented ramping up of vaccinations, rolling out 1m booster jabs a day to stem an incoming “tidal wave of Omicron” and avoid imposing further restrictions. New Zealand health authorities are investigating claims that a man received up to 10 Covid-19 vaccination doses in one day on behalf of other people, believed to be skirting tough restrictions on the unvaccinated. That is it from me, Martin Belam, today. You can look forward to the company of Rachel Hall to take you through the rest of the day’s global Covid news. Andrew Sparrow has our combined UK Covid and politics live blog. I will see you tomorrow. Amid the Covid-19 pandemic the president of one of the largest Native American–run non-profits has warned that health and economic disparities are still seriously affecting Indigenous communities, despite some progress achieved by the Biden administration. Josh Arce, president of the Partnerships with Native Americans (PWNA), told the Guardian in an interview that challenges affecting Indigenous groups ranged from health inequities such as high rates of diabetes, heart disease and other illnesses to inadequate infrastructure such as running water and reliable electricity. Nearly all of these problems were worsened by the pandemic. “The issues are, by and large, some of the same issues that we’ve been confronted with but they’ve been really highlighted and exacerbated by Covid-19 throughout the past two and a half years,” said Arce, who added that such challenges “really permeate all aspects of Native life and communities”. For centuries, Indigenous communities in the US have faced challenges in public health, education, infrastructure and other areas, an aftershock of violent colonization and widespread racism. While the Biden administration has marked some progress, such as the appointment of Native American Deb Haaland as secretary of the interior, an achievement that Arce noted was critical and brought hope to Native communities, Arce warned that more action is needed to ensure more progress for Indigenous communities in the US. Read more of Gloria Oladipo’s report here: Native American communities lashed by Covid, worsening chronic inequities India has reported its lowest tally of active Covid-19 cases in 18 months, but a sharp drop in the use of protective face masks is causing concern after a rise in the number of infections with the Omicron variant. Many people have been standing or sitting close to each other without masks, or covering only their chins, at big rallies held by political parties in several states before elections. Something similar happened before the Delta variant ravaged India from April. Cases have come down sharply since then, with an active Covid-19 total of 91,456 as of early Monday, the lowest in 561 days, according to the health ministry. Krishna N Das and Chandini Monnappa report for Reuters that cases of the Omicron variant though have risen to at least 36 in India, and accounted for 3% of the virus sequences analysed in the country in the past two weeks, with Delta accounting for the rest. Health authorities have been urging people to cover their mouths in public. “The falling graph of mask use could cost us,” top Indian health official Vinod Kumar Paul told a recent news briefing. “Mask is a universal vaccine, works on every variant.” France will be hit by a sixth Covid-19 wave next month due to the emergence of the new, more contagious, Omicron variant of the disease while the country is still in the midst of the current, Delta-fuelled, fifth wave of the pandemic, according to a leading French hospital executive. “We haven’t said a word on the sixth wave, which is Omicron, which will come later, in January,” Martin Hirsch, head of Paris’s AP-HP hospitals group, Europe’s largest hospital system, told RTL radio according to Reuters. Pakistan has confirmed its first case of the Omicron variant, in the country’s most populous city of Karachi, the country’s National Institute of Health (NIH) said on Monday. “The NIH has been able to confirm … that a recently suspected sample from Karachi is indeed the ‘Omicron variant’,” the NIH said in a Tweet. “This is the first confirmed case but continued surveillance of suspected samples is in place to identify the trends.” Authorities in the south Asian nation had begun investigating a first suspected case of the Omicron variant of coronavirus last week, a health ministry official told Reuters on Thursday. After a provincial official in southern Sindh province initially said the variant had been identified in a private hospital patient, the NIH had then said they were still carrying out sequencing to confirm the case was that of Omicron. Pakistan this month placed travel restrictions on several countries in southern Africa in the wake of the discovery of the variant. Andrew Sparrow has launched our UK Covid and politics live blog here, so he will be picking up further UK developments there. I’ll be continuing here with the latest coronavirus news from around the globe. Stephen Reicher, professor of psychology at the University of St Andrews, urged people to “think carefully” about their social contacts in the run-up to Christmas. PA Media quotes the member of government advisory body the Scientific Pandemic Insights Group on Behaviours (Spi-B) told ITV’s Good Morning Britain saying: At the moment, we’re in a situation where the new variant in effect is coming at us like an express train. We’ve got to do something or else we’re in real danger of overwhelming our society and overwhelming the NHS. And there’s so many things you can do. The first thing, and the most obvious thing, is that if you reduce the number of social contacts you have you limit the spread of the infection. Now, nobody wants to give up their Christmas parties, and nobody wants to miss out on meeting up with people. It’s a little bit like Christmas dinner – if you have too big a Christmas breakfast, then you spoil your appetite for your Christmas dinner, which is what really counts. And I think, in the same way, we need to think really seriously about our contacts. How important are they? Do we really need them and is it more important to act carefully now so that the contacts we really want and we really need are still happening? We won’t get any official figures on the impact of England’s new “work from home if possible” directive on transport for a few hours yet, but ITV’s London political correspondent Simon Harris has just posted a picture of his very empty commute this morning. Some follow-up on the latest Omicron concerns in Wales, where Cathy Owen reports for WalesOnline that health minister Eluned Morgan has warned new restrictions might be needed. Owen writes: Speaking on BBC Politics Wales, Ms Morgan said she expected the numbers in Wales to “change very quickly in a very short space of time”. Asked whether that advice might change, Ms Morgan said: “I think there will come a point where that may be likely to happen. The last thing we want to do is to impose the kind of restrictions that we saw last Christmas unless we absolutely have to. We know that last Christmas was really disappointing for so many people. That’s not where we want to be. But we will always act in the best interests of the people of Wales.” Wales’ coronavirus rules are now being reviewed weekly instead of every three weeks in response to the new variant. In response to Boris Johnson’s televised statement yesterday, first minister of Wales Mark Drakeford said: This is a fast-moving form of coronavirus, which has the potential to cause a large wave of infections in Wales. This could lead to large numbers of people needing hospital treatment at a time when our NHS is under significant pressure. Our best defence continues to be vaccination. Emerging evidence shows the booster dose is vital. We are doing everything we can to accelerate our vaccination programme to increase the number of people who will receive their booster in the coming days and weeks. Older people and those at greatest risk are being prioritised at the moment. Scotland’s health secretary Humza Yousaf has been on the BBC’s Good Morning Scotland radio programme today, and said that it was “inevitable” that first minister Nicola Sturgeon would announce further anti-Covid measures when she addresses the Scottish parliament tomorrow. Sturgeon has said that following yesterday’s television address by the UK’s prime minister, Scotland would also be expanding its booster programme. The BBC quote her saying: I can confirm that urgent work is under way to further accelerate roll out of the booster vaccination programme in Scotland. Scotland already has the highest proportion of the over-12 population protected with booster or third doses of all the UK nations. Now, however, urgent efforts are being made to step up the pace even further with the aim of offering a booster jag appointment to all eligible adults by the end of this year if possible. Thailand will halve to three months the time between administering a second Covid-19 vaccine shot and a booster, a health official said on Monday, to try to strengthen immunity in anticipation of a local spread of the Omicron variant. Reuters report that Thailand has so far detected eight imported cases of the Omicron variant but has yet to see community transmission, according to its health ministry. Omicron has been reported in dozens of countries. “Because Omicron is now widespread, the booster third shot would help lessen the severity of symptoms and reduce the death rate,” said Taweesin Wisanuyothin, spokesperson for the government’s Covid taskforce. Taweesin said recipients of a second shot in August or September could get boosters right away at any vaccine centre nationwide. More than 43 million people – or 60% of people in Thailand – have received two doses of a vaccine so far. The UK’s health secretary Sajid Javid has been across the airwaves this morning. Another couple of key points to emerge over his appearances. Firstly he has not been willing to rule out any further measures to attempt to curb the predicted spread of the Omicron variant, including closing schools. He also suggested that non-clinically trained civil servants could be drafted in to helping with the administration at vaccination centres as the government attempts to roll-out booster jabs at an unprecedented rate. Javid has also defended the planned introduction of vaccine passports, which will be voted on in parliament this week and is due to come into force in England from Wednesday, describing them as a “perfectly reasonable ask”: The Spectator, meanwhile, is suggesting the the current count of Conservative MPs set to vote against further Covid restrictions is up to 71. Here’s a reminder of the latest numbers in the UK: The chief executive of an acute hospital NHS trust in England talks anonymously to us today about the pressures the service is facing: The strain on hospitals is very visible and quite visceral – you can see ambulances queueing outside and people sleeping on chairs because you can’t get them into cubicles to be seen because too many sick people are waiting for beds. But what we can’t necessarily see is what’s happening to all the people who are at home getting sicker. That’s a very large, invisible problem. Many of the people in our hospital are very old and very frail. They don’t necessarily need to be in an acute hospital but they need to be in a bed somewhere, with someone looking after them round the clock. Social care is a massive, massive concern; not being able to get these people who are medically fit to be discharged out and home is what blocks up the “front door”, our A&amp;E. We’re going great guns at treating people on the waiting list. And this winter we’re doing more than ever to protect that, as well as dealing with all the other pressures we have. We are holding beds for people on the waiting list who are having surgery. But that raises really difficult ethical dilemmas. Do you hold an intensive care bed for someone with an aneurysm that could kill them at any minute, or bring in someone who’s just arrived through A&amp;E and needs surgery? Is there a bed for someone who comes in and needs a thrombectomy, a potentially life-saving operation after a stroke? You can imagine how some of our staff feel about unvaccinated people with Covid eating into our supply of ICU beds when you’re making these decisions, about whether someone with stage 4 cancer or an aneurysm can have an operation. Read more here: The secret NHS trust boss – the strain on hospitals is visible and visceral Australia’s most isolated state will fully reopen its borders on 5 February after almost two years sealed off from Covid and the world. The Western Australian premier, Mark McGowan, announced on Monday plans to allow interstate and international travellers to enter the state without quarantine from midnight on 5 February, when the state was expected to hit its 90% fully vaccinated target. But the premier warned that once the state’s hard border was eased, unvaccinated or “high-risk” arrivals will still be required to quarantine for 14 days – unless they are under 12 or exempt on medical grounds. “I’m confident that this is the right time and the right way to take this important step,” McGowan said. “West Australians have lived a normal life inside our Covid-free bubble and nearly 2 million people have done the right thing and gotten vaccinated. The announcement comes on the same day Scott Morrison said that visa-holding skilled workers and students will be allowed into Australia from Wednesday. Read more of Narelle Towie’s report here: Western Australia to reopen border on 5 February after almost two years sealed off from the world The boss of the organisation which represents NHS trusts said pressure on health services is “not sustainable”. Chris Hopson, chief executive of NHS Providers, told Sky News a combination of record highs in 999 calls, the second-highest ever number of emergency department admissions, elective procedure backlogs, the extension of the booster campaign, and social care pressure mean the NHS is “busier than its ever been before.” He said: “That’s obviously a worry because it’s before the traditional winter peak in January and it’s before any cases really coming into hospitals and we are now starting to do in terms of Omicron cases, so we’re already at beyond full stretch, in our view, before either of those things occur so it’s a worrying time, but as you’d expect everybody on the NHS frontline is doing absolutely the best they can to provide the best possible care.” He added yesterday’s request from the prime minister for “extraordinary effort” comes as staff are “very, very tired”. PA Media quote Hopson saying: “I think staff are worried, to be frank, that this level of pressure is going to become normalised and it’s not sustainable.” He also told Sky News a social care staff shortage and the removal of some beds to control coronavirus infections meant hospitals were trying to operate with 30-35% fewer beds. He said 11% of beds were occupied by patients who were fit to leave hospital but could not be discharged due to a lack of social care staff, meanwhile hospitals were operating at between 94% and 96% capacity. He explained how the social care sector could not deliver 1.5m hours of at-home care for patients because workers had left to take jobs in retail, logistics, and hospitality because of better pay and sign-on bonuses, revealing a lack of a “sustainable workforce model” in the NHS and social care. One line of questioning for UK health secretary Sajid Javid this morning has been the effectveness of the AstraZeneca vaccine. PA Media quote him saying it would be “completely unfair” to suggest the AstraZeneca vaccine was not as good as once thought. Javid was asked on Sky News: “Is it because AstraZeneca wasn’t as good as we initially thought and actually the booster, either Pfizer or Moderna, is what’s helping?” He replied: “No, I think that would be completely unfair. AstraZeneca has played a phenomenal role in protecting our country.” He added: “The difference now is... this variant, and different types of vaccines will react in different ways. But whether it’s AstraZeneca you had for your first two doses or its Pfizer or Moderna, you still need a booster shot to be protected against this new variant.” There’s been some advice from Ami Jones, an intensive care doctor from Wales on BBC television this morning in the UK to avoid sitting in unventilated rooms with people you don’t know. Associated Press writer Justin Spike has an interesting piece this morning looking at the difficulty of reporting on Covid in Hungary, and how some people argue that a paucity of official information is playing into low vaccination rates. Although Hungary has secured vaccine doses from China and Russia in addition to those provided by the European Union, nearly a third of its adults still have not received a single shot. That hesitancy is something immunologist Andras Falus said can be partly attributed to official communications about the pandemic being “extremely poor, inconsistent and totally incapable of maintaining trust.” “A significant proportion of the population no longer believes when they receive real data, or resign themselves to not paying attention to the data because they feel almost viscerally that it is inconsistent and unreliable,” said Falus, professor emeritus at Semmelweis University in Budapest. Illes Szurovecz of the Hungarian news website 444.hu says the information released by the conservative government of Viktor Orbán does not provide a clear picture of how the outbreak is developing and that it is opaque and difficult to follow. “There’s a lot we don’t know,” Szurovecz said. “If there was more detailed data, people would be better able to judge how severe the pandemic is and how dangerous the virus is. ... Doctors from different parts of the country would be better able to compare their results and care could be improved.” In lieu of more comprehensive data from official channels, Szurovecz and his colleagues track what few numbers the government releases and create detailed data visualizations on trends in the pandemic. Without that, he said, “it would be virtually impossible to look back in Hungary today and see how the pandemic has gone.” Lacking official information on how hospitals are faring, many journalists have tried to report from inside Covid wards to get a clearer picture. But Hungary’s government has barred journalists from entering medical facilities to report on the pandemic, and prohibited medical staff from giving interviews, something journalists say has made it impossible to report on worsening conditions, creating a false picture of the situation’s severity. Russia says it has detected Omicron in 16 people who returned from South Africa. The Interfax news agency cited deputy prime minister Tatiana Golikova giving the figures this morning. We know that Russia reported its first two Omicron cases on 6 December. Reuters say that it was not immediately clear if the 16 cases announced this morning included the two reported earlier this month. The UK government health minister Sajid Javid has defended the government’s work from home if possible advice in England, which comes into effect from today. He said on Sky News: At the end of the day, as ministers you have to take all this into account, and understand the trade-off. Because when you do take action like here – we’ve asked people to work from home from today – you know, this has a big impact on people’s lives. It’s not just a distraction, it can be really difficult for people to be away from the office, not to have that social interaction, it can impact their life chances, so we wouldn’t take this action lightly at all. So, based on the advice that we’re getting, but now also on the observed data, we do have two weeks of data where we are seeing this phenomenal growth in infections. It’s already, we estimate, around 40% of infections in London. And so because of this growth rate, and what we now know on the vaccines, that’s why we’ve announced this national mission on the booster programme. UK health secretary Sajid Javid has said “we’ve got to act early” over the Omicron variant because of the threat of exponential growth, despite a low-level of hospitalisations and no reported deaths in the UK yet involving the new variant. On Sky News, interviewer Kay Burley put several Covid-sceptic points to him, suggesting that reports so far show that people infected with the Omicron variant only suffer from a mild illness. Javid said: Omicron has only taken hold in the UK in the last three weeks. It’s already growing at a rate of doubling two to three times two every two to three days. It’s doubling and at that rate you will have a million infections by the end of the month. If I can explain it this way. With Delta, let’s assume that of all the infections around 2% of those people end up in hospital. Omicron, let’s assume it’s half the severity. That’s just half it. If it’s 1% of a much larger number, you still end up in a lot of hospitalisations. To put those figures into a bit more context, what Javid is saying is that if you have 1m infections with Omicron, and that leads to 1% of people being hospitalised, you would have 10,000 hospital admissions. Then the number of infections would double again within three days, and you would have another 20,000 people requiring hospitalisation. The peak level of daily hospitalisations in the UK at the previous height of the pandemic in January 2021 was around 4,500. Javid went on to say: If the government just sort of stuck its head in the sand and said, ‘Let’s just wait and see what happens. Let’s wait for the deaths to happen’, by then it would be too late. The infection growth rate for the next couple of weeks would have been baked in. The next three or four doubling times would have been baked in, and then you’d have me here rightly saying ‘Why didn’t you act earlier? Have you not learned any of the lessons about this virus? Have you not learned about how to try to protect people from it and take action in advance?’ And you would rightly have been able to ask me this question. The first salvo of UK health secretary Sajid Javid’s interview on Sky News has been a restating of the government’s case to expand the booster programme as set out by the prime minister on TV last night. Javid said: What we now know about Omicron, first of all, is that it is spreading at a phenomenal rate, something that we’ve never seen before. It’s doubling every two to three days in infections. And that means we’re facing a tidal wave. We are once again in a race between the vaccine and the virus. The second thing that we now know for sure is that the vaccines two doses are not enough, but three doses still provide excellent protection against symptomatic infection. And that’s why the booster programme has become more important than ever. He also made a direct appeal to viewers We are throwing everything at it, and can I just please say this to your viewers, please play your part. This could not be more important. We need to win this race against this virus. We’ve never seen this kind of growth before. So please do come forward. Protect yourselves, your loved ones, and your community. Here is a reminder of the latest situation in the UK. Over the last seven days there have been 360,480 new coronavirus cases recorded in the UK. Cases have increased by 11.9% week-on-week. There have been 834 deaths recorded with 28 days of a positive Covid test in the last week. Deaths have increased by 0.5% week-on-week. Hospital admissions have increased by 3.7% week-on-week. At the latest count on the UK government’s own dashboard, there were 7,413 people in hospital in total with coronavirus, of whom 900 are in ventilation beds. Hello, it’s Martin Belam here in London taking over from Samantha Lock in Sydney. The UK media round is being done by the health secretary, Sajid Javid, this morning. He is up on Sky News first, so I’ll have the key lines from that shortly. New work from home guidance takes effect in England today, following recently tightened coronavirus guidance. British prime minister Boris Johnson made the announcement at a Downing Street press conference last week, saying people must work from home where possible from Monday. Although the government instruction that people in England should work from home where possible from Monday is advice and not legally mandatory, organisations across the country are switching to home working where possible. However, some companies have told workers they can continue to come to the office if required for their mental health. Ukraine has just released its daily Covid count. Another 4,073 confirmed cases of Covid-19 were recorded for Sunday, 12 December. The country also reported 188 deaths. If you’ve just joined us, here is a quick run-down of all the latest Covid developments. British prime minister Boris Johnson is gambling on an unprecedented ramping up of vaccinations, rolling out 1m booster jabs a day to stem an incoming “tidal wave of Omicron” and avoid imposing further restrictions. Announcing the booster offensive, Johnson said two doses of vaccine were not enough, but scientists were confident that three would make a huge difference. The US is approaching the grim milestone of 50m coronavirus cases with a total of 49,921,405 reported since the pandemic began, according to figures from Johns Hopkins University. The number of deaths stand at 797,346. Although infections appeared to be in decline, daily increases have been reported for the past two weeks, with the number of hospitalised Covid patients also rising and up 20%. States in colder parts of the country are seeing the biggest surge in new infections on a per capita basis, including Vermont, New Hampshire and Michigan. Britain faces a “tidal wave” of the Omicron variant and two vaccine doses will not be enough to contain it, prime minister Boris Johnson warned, as he accelerated the nation’s booster rollout programme. Russia has recorded a cumulative total number of Covid cases that now exceeds 10 million. The European Central Bank’s vice-president Luis de Guindos has tested positive for Covid-19 and is self-isolating, the ECB said. The US is set to reach 800,000 deaths, according to data from Johns Hopkins University. Three doses of a Covid-19 vaccine is the “optimal care” but two doses of the Pfizer/BioNTech or Moderna vaccines or one of the Johnson &amp; Johnson vaccine remains the US government’s official definition of fully vaccinated, infectious disease expert Anthony Fauci said. Australia will shorten the wait time for people to receive a Covid-19 booster following a rise in Omicron cases. More than a dozen Chinese-listed companies have suspended production in coronavirus-hit parts of China’s eastern Zhejiang province. Australians are preparing for quarantine-free travel across most of the country during the Christmas period as the state of Queensland opened its domestic borders to all vaccinated people for the first time in nearly five months. South Korea will test artificial intelligence-powered facial recognition to track Covid-19 cases. South Africa’s president Cyril Ramaphosa, 69, tested positive for Covid-19 on Sunday, though is showing only mild symptoms, the presidency said. Indonesia will start administering Covid-19 vaccinations for children aged six to 11 on Tuesday, a health ministry official said. New Zealand health authorities are investigating claims that a man received up to 10 Covid-19 vaccination doses in one day on behalf of other people, believed to be skirting tough restrictions on the unvaccinated. More than a dozen Chinese-listed companies said they had suspended production in coronavirus-hit parts of China’s eastern Zhejiang province in response to local government’s tightened Covid-19 curbs, Reuters reports. Share prices have also reportedly plunged. Zhejiang reported a total of 173 locally transmitted cases with confirmed symptoms during the 6-12 December period, official numbers showed on Monday, marking the province’s first domestic cluster outbreak this year. In October, the province reported just one local case. A slew of companies, including Ningbo Homelink Eco-Itech Co Ltd (301193.SZ), Zhejiang Zhongxin Fluoride Materials Co Ltd (002915.SZ), Zhejiang Jingsheng Mechanical &amp; Electrical Co Ltd (300316.SZ) and Zhejiang Fenglong Electric Co Ltd (002931.SZ), announced the production suspension through exchange filings over the weekend. Their shares fell sharply in early trading on Monday with some falling more than 7%. India has just released its daily Covid report. The country reported 7,350 new cases in the last 24 hours with an active caseload of 91,456; the lowest in 561 days. Another 202 deaths were also reported. Super-spreader events in NSW and reinfections in Victoria have health authorities worried as Covid-19 infections continue to grow. Victoria reported 1,290 new cases and two deaths, while New South Wales recorded 536 new cases, amid increasing numbers of the Omicron variant. Health authorities in NSW are battling to contain several large transmission events, including cases of the rapidly spreading Omicron variant – with 64 cases of the new strain now recorded in the state. Of the 536 new cases announced in the state on Monday, nine were confirmed to have the Omicron variant, with NSW Health saying “more are expected as results of genomic testing are confirmed”. Read the full story here. Germany is reporting an additional 21,743 new daily Covid cases and 116 deaths, according to recently published figures from the Robert Koch Institute. The numbers are a significant drop from previous days, with 39,585 cases reported on 10 December 45,460 cases on 9 December. Covid infections have been steadily decreasing in the European nation since new lockdowns were introduced. South Africa has reported an additional 37,875 new coronavirus cases, which includes 19,840 retrospective cases and 18,035 new cases, according to the National Institute for Communicable Diseases (NICD). In the past 24 hours a total of 18,035 positive Covid-19 cases and 21 Covid-related deaths were reported. The total number of fatalities in the country currently stands at 90,137. President Cyril Ramaphosa, who tested positive for Covid-19 on Sunday, is currently in self-isolation in Cape Town and has delegated all responsibilities to deputy president David Mabuza for the next week. Experts have warned that the next variant of Covid-19 to sweep the world could emerge on Australia’s doorstep, due to incredibly low rates of vaccination rates in Papua New Guinea. Papua New Guinea is Australia’s closest neighbour, and at its nearest point is just 4km from Australian territory in the Torres Strait. At various points in the pandemic there have been fears that travellers from PNG could bring the virus to Australia. Adrian Prouse, head of international humanitarian programs at the Australian Red Cross, said: I’m worried that PNG is the next place where a new variant emerges.” “In PNG less than 5% [of the adult population is vaccinated], in Indonesia, just under one-third. Two countries right on our doorstep with significant challenges in getting vaccines into arms.” Stefanie Vaccher, an epidemiologist with the Burnet Institute who has been based in PNG since last year, echoed this concern. “In populations that have low rates of vaccination coverage, there are more opportunities for the virus to spread and mutate. In PNG, where less than 4% of the population are vaccinated, there are a lot of opportunities for the virus to mutate and spread.” Read the full story here. Canada will start recognising molecular Covid-19 tests conducted at an accredited lab in South Africa for residents returning home, dropping travel restrictions previously introduced to prevent the spread of the Omicron variant. Ottawa faced pressure from doctors, stranded passengers and the World Health Organization to reverse requirements that travellers from 10 southern African countries get molecular PCR (polymerase chain reaction) tests in a third country before returning to Canada. Canada has now dropped the need to obtain a pre-departure negative Covid-19 PCR test from a third country, according to a travel advisory issued on Saturday. The exemption will be in place until 7 January 2022 and will apply to all indirect flights departing from South Africa to Canada, the advisory added. There is no change to Canada’s ban on all foreign travellers from 10 African countries. Here’s a quick snapshot of the latest Omicron report from the World Health Organization (WHO). Based on current limited evidence Omicron appears to have a growth advantage over Delta. It is spreading faster than Delta in South Africa where Delta circulation was low, but also appears to spread more quickly than Delta in other countries where the incidence of Delta is high. Given the current available data, it is likely that Omicron will outpace the Delta variant where community transmission occurs. While preliminary findings from South Africa suggest it may be less severe than Delta and all cases reported in the EU/EEA to date have been mild or asymptomatic, it remains unclear to what extent Omicron may be inherently less virulent. More data are needed. There are limited available data, and no peer-reviewed evidence, on vaccine efficacy or effectiveness to date for Omicron. Preliminary evidence suggests a reduction in vaccine efficacy against infection and transmission associated with Omicron.” Here’s an interesting story out of New Zealand today. Health authorities are investigating claims that a man received up to 10 Covid-19 vaccination doses in one day on behalf of other people, believed to be skirting tough restrictions on the unvaccinated. The Ministry of Health said it was taking the matter seriously. “We are very concerned about this situation and are working with the appropriate agencies,” its Covid-19 vaccination and immunisation spokesperson, Astrid Koornneef, said. Local news outlets report the man is believed to have visited several immunisation centres and was paid to get the doses. In New Zealand vaccines can either be booked through a website, via a doctor, or people can turn up to walk-in centres. To be administered a vaccine, a person must provide the health care worker with their name, date of birth and physical address, but no further identification is required. Read the full story from our reporter, Eva Corlett, on the ground in New Zealand. The United States surpassed 50 million coronavirus cases on Sunday, according to a Reuters tally. After about two months of declining infections, the United States has reported daily increases for the past two weeks, driven by the more easily transmitted Delta variant. States in colder parts of the country are seeing the biggest surge in new infections on a per capita basis, including Vermont, New Hampshire and Michigan. The number of hospitalised Covid patients is rising as well, up 20% since the Thanksgiving holiday at the end of November. Over the past month, deaths have increased by 4.6%, with the country’s death toll surpassed 800,000. Nearly half of US states have detected cases of the Omicron variant, but the Delta variant still accounts for 99% of current Covid cases, CDC Director Dr Rochelle Walensky said. Speaking of South Korea, the south Asian country has just released their daily Covid numbers. A further 5,817 coronavirus cases were recorded over the past 24 hours, with 40 confirmed deaths. A total of 83.7 % of the eligible population has at least one Covid vaccine and 81.2 % are fully vaccinated, according to ministry of health data. South Korea will soon roll out a pilot project to use artificial intelligence, facial recognition and thousands of CCTV cameras to track the movement of people infected with the coronavirus, Reuters reports. The nationally funded project in Bucheon, one of the country’s most densely populated cities on the outskirts of Seoul, is due to become operational in January, a city official told the news agency. The system uses an AI algorithms and facial recognition technology to analyse footage gathered by more than 10,820 CCTV cameras and track an infected person’s movements, anyone they had close contact with, and whether they were wearing a mask, according to a 110-page business plan from the city submitted to the Ministry of Science and ICT (Information and Communications Technology), and provided to Reuters by a parliamentary lawmaker critical of the project. The Bucheon official said the system should reduce the strain on overworked tracing teams in a city with a population of more than 800,000 people, and help use the teams more efficiently and accurately. The system can reportedly track up to ten people in five to ten minutes, cutting the time spent on manual work that takes around half an hour to one hour to trace one person. South Korea already has a high-tech contact tracing system that harvests credit card records, cellphone location data and CCTV footage, among other personal information. Bucheon mayor Jang Deog-cheon argued that the system would make tracing faster. “It sometimes takes hours to analyse a single CCTV footage. Using visual recognition technology will enable that analysis in an instant,” he said on Twitter. The Ministry of Science and ICT said it has no current plans to expand the project to the national level. It said the purpose of the system was to digitise some of the manual labour that contact tracers currently have to carry out. South African president Cyril Ramaphosa tested positive for Covid-19 on Sunday, but was showing mild symptoms, the presidency said. “The President started feeling unwell after leaving the State Memorial Service in honour of former Deputy President FW de Klerk in Cape Town earlier today,” the statement said. “The President, who is fully vaccinated, is in self-isolation in Cape Town and has delegated all responsibilities to Deputy President David Mabuza for the next week,” it added. Hello it’s Samantha Lock with you as we go through all the latest coronavirus developments. The Omicron variant has now spread to 63 countries with faster transmission noted in South Africa and the UK, the World Health Organization has said. Britain faces a “tidal wave” of the Omicron variant of coronavirus and two vaccine doses will not be enough to contain it, prime minister Boris Johnson has warned, as he accelerated the booster rollout programme, bringing forward a target to give over-18s a booster jab by one month to the end of December. “No one should be in any doubt: there is a tidal wave of Omicron coming,” he said in a televised address, after the country’s medical advisers raised the Covid Alert Level due to a “rapid increase” in infection from the variant. “I’m afraid it is now clear that two doses of vaccine are simply not enough to give the level of protection we all need,” Johnson added. South African president Cyril Ramaphosa tested positive for Covid-19 on Sunday and is receiving treatment for mild symptoms, the presidency said. “The President started feeling unwell after leaving the State Memorial Service in honour of former Deputy President FW de Klerk in Cape Town earlier today,” the statement said. “The President, who is fully vaccinated, is in self-isolation in Cape Town and has delegated all responsibilities to Deputy President David Mabuza for the next week,” it added. Here is a snapshot of the latest Covid developments: The WHO says the Omicron variant is more transmissible than the Delta strain and reduces vaccine efficacy but causes less severe symptoms according to early data. British prime minister Boris Johnson launched an “Omicron emergency booster national mission” to protect the NHS and patients, ramping up vaccinations and rolling out 1m booster jabs a day. The UK recorded 48,854 new Covid cases and 52 additional deaths, raising the Covid alert level from 3 to 4. The UK also confirmed an additional 1,239 Omicron cases, marking the biggest daily rise to date with the total number of confirmed cases 3,137. America’s top infectious disease expert, Dr Anthony Fauci, said that Omicron “clearly has a transmission advantage” over previous Covid strains and stepped up calls for Americans to get booster shots as the new variant spread to at least 25 states. Austria has ended lockdown restrictions for vaccinated people across most of the country, three weeks after it was imposed. However, more than 25,000 demonstrators turned out in several cities to protest against the country’s compulsory vaccination plan, forcing citizens to be jabbed or face fines from February. Vaccinated people who are identified as a contact of somebody who has tested positive for Covid-19 should take an NHS rapid lateral flow test every day for a week, the UK government announced. Russia’s registered Covid cases passed the 10 million mark today, after nearly 30,000 cases were reported in the last 24 hours. Scotland aims to offer booster jabs to all eligible adults by the end of the year.A trove of nearly 800 letters recording the lockdown experiences of older New Zealanders has been collected in a University of Auckland research project called Have Our Say. Researchers appealed for written accounts of lockdown to understand how older people coped with enforced isolation, and to amplify elders’ voices. The letter writers were all over 70. Many described the importance of daily routines, their experiences during historical crises and how they stayed involved in their community. The letters will be held by the Auckland War Memorial Museum. Here are some excerpts from the collection: ‘A forgotten group’ “It was a strange time for over 70-year-olds. Isolation to a people-person is an unusual time to say the least, no more sharing smiles, ‘and one smile does make two’ so there was a shortage of smiles, not only flour and toilet paper! Hugs and conversations were also missing from everyday life …. This time did bring back significant memories of my time as a young child in Auckland hospital for many weeks with a kidney disease in 1950. I was confined to a single room to begin with and then a large ward where I could talk to other children from our beds. Visitors were limited, only my mother and grandmother. I didn’t see my father, brother and sister for many weeks until I went home. No going outside but we could look out window and see male patients in the TB ward enjoying the sunshine on a huge deck. ‘It’s not fair, why can’t I go outside?’ Jeff, who has vascular dementia, found isolation difficult to begin with especially from level 2 onwards as his routines were all gone! What day is it? Shouldn’t we be going walking today? A blackboard displaying day and date did help answer some of his questions. Being over seventy, we felt we were a forgotten group, locked away out of sight and out of mind of government and society. Make them stay home and we won’t have to deal with a mountain of issues … More focus seemed to be on young families and those now not able to work.” Doreen &amp; Jeff Attwood, July 2020 ‘I had to adapt’ “In the last 5 months I have learned another meaning for many words. Bubble, physical and social distancing, a-symptomatic, level 4 to 1 lockdowns, Click and collect, Novel coronavirus shortened to Covid or the virus became topics of many conversations and are still continuing as we negotiate through a global pandemic. To me the government outlined, based on the best information possible, that the older generations are vulnerable. This has proved true and the effect of the virus on those in aged care homes, families and staff has been very sad. In 2019 I travelled alone for 2 months in Europe but 5 months later I fell into the vulnerable category as announced by the government and Covid guidelines advised that I stay home and ask someone else to buy my groceries. With the world now a different place I had to adapt to find my new daily life. Many times during the night I thought of my family who have passed on. What would they have done in a lockdown pandemic? They volunteered to go overseas and fight in World War two leaving sweethearts in New Zealand and learnt more than they ever wished to tell me. I just needed to sleep in my own bed and cook what I needed. From one of the team of 5 million. We all have a different story.” Beverley, August 2020 ‘My time for critical transformation’ “I am getting older. There’s still much I love to do. To mow the lawn and keep fit and healthy. To pick garden-fresh vegetables for all to enjoy. To clear the forest of pest weeds and feral creatures. To protect the Manawa forests on the mudflats along the shore. To write thoughts in words that educe. To have a say in how people rule the Tangata Whenua (Māori). Possibly, for the first time in my life, I am not doing things to suit others in the family and the whanau (family). I like it, finally, I do things that I like to do without having to think about whom I could upset; therefore, lose out on an invitation, a publication, a funded application, a promotion; perhaps, even a new job! This is my time for critical transformative action; full-time. For me, it’s been a demanding few months through the Covid-19 infection and emergency. I want to say this to you: If this pandemic has taught this Tangata Whenua woman anything, it’s that the health, justice, economic, and conservation systems are racist — and that 70-plus-years-old women and men will never have a better prospect for transformational change than right now.” Mere Kepa, June 2020 ‘My ‘family tank’ was empty’ “I am a 73-year-old who lives alone in a townhouse. I am a retired teacher who still takes 11 children for literacy each week. I don’t have family living nearby, and had to rely on the goodwill and kindness of friends who cared for my immediate needs. A heart health issue surfaced unexpectedly, at this time. The doctor detected an irregular heartbeat, so scans were required. Atrial fibrillation was diagnosed, and 2 medications were prescribed. After 6 weeks of this routine, I hit the wall. I began to feel my ‘family tank’ was empty. I am not good at talking about my inner feelings but realised I had to tell a family member that the isolation from family was getting too hard. They responded and we began Zoom games meetings, bringing three families together. During this time, I knew of a friend who lived in a flat nearby. She lives on her own and had no family here. When we got to level 3, I put two plastic chairs in the garden and carefully placed 2 metres apart, so that she could come by on her way to the New World. She would call by at least twice a week to pick up means and baking. As a result, we are now close friends who help each other out in many ways.” Helen Campbell, undatedThe prime minister, Scott Morrison, says the emergent Omicron variant will not “take us back” to more Covid-19 restrictions, and Australia is now prepared to open up and live with the virus. Announcing a deal with Moderna and the Victorian government that will see a new manufacturing facility built in Melbourne by as early as 2024, Morrison said the country’s high vaccination rate meant Australia could “continue to move forward”. “We’re not letting Omicron take us back,” Morrison said. “We’ve decided as a country to live with this virus and Australians have worked so hard for that. “Australia can now open up. This Christmas we’re about to have is a gift Australians have given to themselves by the way they’ve worked together with the settings that we’ve put in place.” Morrison also conceded the Coalition had made mistakes during the pandemic, including in the early phases of the vaccination rollout, but said these had been overcome. “When you’re in a crisis, it’s not unusual to have setbacks, [but] the proof of managing a crisis is being able to overcome them, and we did overcome.” Morrison and the acting Victorian premier, James Merlino, announced the in-principle agreement with Moderna for the new mRNA facility in Melbourne on Tuesday morning, with the aim of production by 2024. The long-term “strategic partnership” between the federal government, Victorian government and Moderna will allow 100m mRNA vaccines to be produced in Australia each year in a pandemic, starting in 2024 “pending regulatory and planning approval”. The new mRNA manufacturing facility will produce respiratory vaccines for potential future pandemics and seasonal health issues such as the common flu. The government is refusing to say how much it is paying the pharmaceutical giant, saying the details are commercial in confidence. Labor frontbencher Ed Husic criticised the government for taking so long to announce the new mRNA facility, while Queensland treasurer Cameron Dick said it should have been done earlier and it was “a shame Queensland wasn’t considered”. Pre-empting the criticism, Morrison said the government had “spent the time to get it right”. “This is not an arrangement that you just rush into and do a deal in a coffee shop somewhere. This is something you do the meticulous work on.” Merlino said Victoria was the “logical place to do it”, pointing to the state’s large biotech industry which comprises 40% of the nation’s medical tech and biotech companies and accounts for 60% of the nation’s pharmaceutical exports. “And you think about what this means – national security in terms of vaccine supply, and when you think about mRNA, this is a huge announcement because this is the first time in the southern hemisphere we’ll have mRNA manufacturing based in this nation.” The move to establish a sovereign manufacturing capability comes almost a year after experts urged the Australian government to establish such a facility in Australia to reduce the country’s reliance on overseas producers, and follows sustained criticism of the Coalition’s vaccine procurement strategy that caused initial delays to the rollout. Australia became heavily reliant on overseas produced mRNA vaccines from Pfizer and Moderna after the government accepted advice from the Australian technical advisory group on immunisation (Atagi) in April that the Australian-produced AstraZeneca jab should be avoided for those under the age of 50. It did so because of the extremely low risk of a rare blood clotting complication. After the federal government engaged business consultants McKinsey to develop a business case on local mRNA manufacturing last year, the government sought expressions of interest from potential bidders for end-to-end production of mRNA vaccines in May this year. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The health minister, Greg Hunt, said the government was “looking forward to finalising the agreements with Moderna as soon as possible”. “Ensuring Moderna has a manufacturing presence here will deliver Australia priority access to products manufactured here in Australia, by Australians, for Australians, using the most cutting edge vaccination science available in the world today,” he said. The announcement comes after the government cut the time for Covid-19 vaccine booster shots from six months to five in a bid to keep people protected against the virus as the Omicron variant spreads, and approved Moderna as a booster shot. Moderna’s mRNA vaccine was first approved by the Australian government in August for all adults, with a total of 10m doses ordered for 2021, and a further 15m booster doses ordered for the first half of 2022. This year’s budget allocated an unspecified amount of funding to help create large-scale manufacturing of mRNA vaccines in Australia, with details kept secret because of commercial in-confidence negotiations. The total budget allocation for the distribution and administration of Covid-19 vaccines over the next five years is $1.9bn. In order to promote the development of an mRNA sector in Australia, the Australian government will also invest up to $25m from next year for what it has called an “mRNA Clinical Trials Enabling Infrastructure Grant Opportunity”. This funding will support Australian medical research and medical innovation projects that “leverage and enhance emerging technologies, platforms, equipment and infrastructure to conduct clinical trials of mRNA-based vaccines and therapeutics”. Labor, which has long been arguing that Australia needs a sovereign mRNA manufacturing capability, announced in April that it would prioritise such a facility under its proposed National Reconstruction Fund if it formed government. Both the NSW and Victorian governments have also announced plans to progress mRNA vaccine development in their states, with the NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, announcing last month the state would commit $96m to a pilot facility. The Victorian government announced $50m for the development and manufacture of mRNA vaccines in April.Covid restrictions in New South Wales are set to ease, including those for unvaccinated people, despite epidemiologists urging caution amid rising case numbers and the Omicron variant. NSW health minister, Brad Hazzard, said the government would “look at all options”, but the emergence of the Omicron strain and rising case numbers wouldn’t affect the relaxing of restrictions. “At the moment, our government here … is very keen to get us all back to normality, to our previous life,” he said. “We’re not going to start backflipping on issues we promised the community we’ll do.” From Wednesday, 15 December, masks will only be required on public transport and in airports, or for indoors front-of-house hospitality staff who aren’t fully vaccinated. QR code check-ins will be dropped except for high risk venues including hospitals, aged and disability care facilities, gyms, places of worship, funerals, personal services, pubs and clubs and outdoor music festivals with over 1,000 people. Density limits will be dropped for all settings, and restrictions will be uniform across the state regardless of a person’s vaccination status. But epidemiology chair at University of South Australia, Adrian Esterman, said until we know how severe the Omicron strain is, more caution was needed. “Although there are anecdotal reports that Omicron is milder than Delta, we simply do not yet have hard data to show that this is the case,” he said. “Until we do, for me it simply makes no sense to relax public health measures, especially things like face mask mandates in stores.” He also said there was “ample evidence” around the world that vaccination alone wasn’t sufficient to prevent outbreaks. “In NSW and Victoria, we have seen that high rates of vaccination plus some public health measures has been able to keep case numbers and hospitalisations stable,” he said. “By relaxing the public health measures, case numbers will go up, and we are already seeing this in NSW.” NSW cases jumped to a 10-week high on Tuesday. There were 804 new cases recorded in the state and one death, up from 536 cases reported on Monday. Health authorities have expressed concern over the spread of the new strain of the virus emerging from a super-spreading event in Newcastle and over a growing cluster in Byron Bay. Eighty-four people who attended The Argyle House nightclub in Newcastle on 8 December have tested positive for the virus. Authorities said it was likely a number of the cases were the Omicron variant, with genomic testing results still to come. Hazzard said rising cases in the Hunter were a “very telling” reminder of the continued presence of the virus as the state opened to the unvaccinated. “My message to the unvaccinated, you might be out and about now but you are very vulnerable to what is a rapidly increasing number of Covid cases here in NSW,” he said. “I would not be hanging out with too many unvaccinated when the numbers have quadrupled in the last few weeks … once the unvaccinated are mixing with the vaccinated the numbers will increase even further. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “That’s worrying because that puts pressure on our doctors and nurses and frontline health system.” Abrar Chughtai, a senior epidemiologist UNSW Sydney said masks and some other measures should continue in high risk areas due to the emergence of Omicron. “I fully support easing of restrictions, however at this stage we are not sure how much vaccines will work against new Omicron variant,” Chughtai said. “We should keep using masks in certain indoor settings where social distancing can’t be avoided to avoid large epidemics, as we are seeing in UK and some other European countries. “Even though Omicron may cause less severe illness, a large number of cases may overwhelm health system. If research shows high efficacy of current vaccines against Omicron, then mask use may be discontinued as planned. “We also need to understand that the pandemic is not yet over and new strains may keep emerging due to inequitable distribution of vaccine globally.” There were 168 people being treated in hospital on Tuesday, including 21 requiring intensive care – the lowest number of Covid patients in ICU since 18 July. 94.8% of people over 16 had received their first dose of a vaccine in NSW, while 93.2% were fully vaccinated.On a picturesque stretch of Tasmania’s east coast, Kate Bradley’s berry farm and cafe has struggled since Covid drastically cut the number of hungry tourists pulling up for her “desserts with a view”. But as Tasmanians prepare for the border with the rest of the nation to open fully on Wednesday, Bradley shares mixed feelings of anxiety and relief with many in the island state. “I’m a little bit apprehensive about opening up. One part of me says bring it on as quickly as possible, the other says, how are we going to go?” Bradley says. “But we need the business and I’m optimistic. “All my staff are vaccinated and most of our family are too. I’ve got all the cleaning and sanitation gear here and I’m also going to buy for all my staff these rapid antigen tests. I’m as prepared as I can be.” Tasmanians have enjoyed a relatively restriction-free lifestyle throughout 2021, with no community cases of Covid. Apart from a three-day lockdown when a traveller fled hotel quarantine, there have been no orders to wear masks except in hospitals, airports and at large events. The island has the nation’s oldest population and one of the poorest health systems, so many Tasmanians have welcomed the government’s hardline stance on borders. Locals have also been free to travel around the state, enjoying the novelty of visiting Wineglass Bay and Cradle Mountain free from the usual busloads of interstate and overseas tourists. If South Australia’s experience is anything to go by, Tasmania’s Covid-free status will end in a matter of days once the state opens to Victoria and New South Wales on Wednesday. There is a sense of anticipation in central Hobart as Christmas shoppers and lunchtime diners make the most of, as one business owner puts it, the “last days without Covid”. “I’m actually terrified,” grandmother Judy says over a bowl of leek and potato soup at Mathers House, a community space run by Hobart city council that offers positive ageing workshops and three-course roast lunches. “I have a brother in New Zealand, a sister in WA and a sister in Canberra and they’re jealous that we’ve done so well here and they can’t believe we’re opening up. “We don’t have the capacity in the hospitals and it doesn’t take much for one person to come in and infect everyone.” Another patron, Leon Glover, is more ambivalent. “It’s a real double-edged sword,” he says. “Businesses need the people from Melbourne and Sydney, but locals have been spending locally, and if there’s a shutdown they won’t be spending anything. That’s the conundrum.” Concerns for health system Emily Shepherd from the nurses’ union says hospitals are already under strain and not in a position to cope with a large Covid outbreak. “Our members are working extremely long hours – overtime, double shifts – just to meet the healthcare demands of Tasmanians without Covid-19,” Shepherd told the ABC. The premier, Peter Gutwein, has attempted to allay concerns, saying the state will have access to 367 ventilators and up to 114 intensive care beds if needed, as well as extra health staff and a home care program for low-risk Covid patients. “I know this will concern people. I have a family, I live in the state as well,” Gutwein told state parliament. “We have had the rare opportunity over the last 18 months of having one of the best runs of Covid-19 out of any jurisdiction in the world. We have to rejoin the world.” More than 90% of Tasmanians over the age of 16 have been double vaccinated, but children under 12 will not have access to vaccines until 10 January. The Hobart-based federal independent MP Andrew Wilkie predicts Gutwein’s popularity will suffer as Tasmanians adjust to life with Covid. “To be fair to Peter Gutwein, I think he’s trying to find a balance between the competing demands of the hospitality and tourism sector and the fair number of Tasmanians who want to keep the border shut indefinitely,” Wilkie says. For parents like Mark Thomas, whose Tasmanian-born children are either working or studying in Melbourne, the open border will allow for a much-anticipated family reunion at Christmas. “I know many Tasmanians are feeling nervous about the borders reopening, but the reality is that we must open, for the overall Tasmanian economy, which relies so strongly on the tourism and hospitality sectors,” Thomas says. But Madi Peattie, the organiser of Hobart’s popular Franko night market, has found herself uncharacteristically pessimistic ahead of the border opening. After this Friday she is shelving the event, which usually runs weekly throughout summer and into autumn in a leafy inner-city park. “Franko will sit it out until December 2022. I think everybody is going to hibernate for six months and then we’ll spend six months learning to live with it, like they are in Victoria and New South Wales. I think it’s going to be a real shock to the system,” Peattie says. At Franko’s season launch, patrons had to wear masks in line with government guidelines around events, which Peattie says are unfairly onerous compared with rules for pubs and clubs. “For every one person who came in, two people left. And they were angry too, because we didn’t have disposable masks, because we’re waste-free. “This is what worries me about the shock that our community will face. If you haven’t been carrying a mask with you for the last six months, then you’re not really understanding what’s coming.”Kentucky’s governor, Andy Beshear, broke down in tears on Monday as he announced the deaths of at least 74 people from Friday’s deadly tornadoes that swept across multiple midwest and southern states, and warned that the death toll is expected to grow. The ages of those killed ranged from a few months to 86 years, six of them younger than 18, Beshear said at an emotional press conference in Frankfort, the state capital. He said that 109 Kentuckians were still unaccounted for and that the eventual number of confirmed deaths might not be known for weeks. “I know, like the folks of western Kentucky, I’m not doing so well today. And I’m not sure how many of us are,” he said, his voice faltering. Crews continued to sift the devastated ruins of towns across multiple states on Monday as many grieved and survivors shared harrowing tales of their escape. Kentucky was the worst hit of eight states where dozens of tornadoes whirled through in massive nighttime storms that leveled whole communities. Across the state, about 26,000 homes and businesses were without electricity, according to poweroutage.us, including nearly all of those in Mayfield. More than 10,000 homes and businesses have no water and another 17,000 are under boil-water advisories, Kentucky Emergency Management Director Michael Dossett told reporters. Joe Biden declared a major federal disaster in Kentucky, where representatives of a candle factory in the small city of Mayfield reduced to eight the number they said were still unaccounted for. Another eight of 110 shift workers are known to have died after an unseasonal, record-breaking tornado with whirling winds up to 200mph razed the building. The US president plans to visit Kentucky on Wednesday. Federal agencies, Biden said, were “working like the devil” to get affected states the help and resources they needed. “We have the entire federal team, not just the folks going in and making sure people are still around [or] breathing under the debris,” Biden said. “That’s the immediate, urgent thing, just to get food and water to people who don’t have it.” But he added he was worried about the mental health of survivors, too, many of whom he said were on fixed or lower incomes. “What do you do? Where do you go? It’s not like if you’re making $16,000 a year you get on the plane and head to your relatives in Washington,” he said. “That’s what worries me most, the uncertainty. You can see it in people’s faces.” As rescuers continued to search the wreckage in Mayfield and across the state, thousands remained without power and water, or homeless. Bob Ferguson, spokesperson for Mayfield Consumer Products that owns the candle manufacturer, said: “There were some early reports that as many as 70 could be dead in the factory. One is too many, but we thank God that the number is turning out to be far, far fewer.” Kentucky was hit by five tornadoes, authorities said. “One stayed on the ground in Kentucky for at least 200 miles, devastating anything in its path. Thousands of homes are damaged, if not entirely destroyed,” Democrat Beshear said. In addition to the deaths in Kentucky, the tornadoes also killed at least six people in Illinois, where an Amazon distribution center in Edwardsville was hit; four in Tennessee; two in Arkansas, where a nursing home was destroyed and the governor said workers shielded residents with their own bodies; and two in Missouri. The federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration announced Monday that it has opened an investigation into the collapse of the Amazon warehouse in Illinois. Amazon’s Kelly Nantel said the Illinois warehouse was “constructed consistent with code”. Illinois governor JB Pritzker said there would be an investigation into updating code “given serious change in climate that we are seeing across the country” that appears to factor into stronger tornadoes. A warehouse worker, David Kosiak, 26, said: “It sounded like a train came through the building. The ceiling tiles came flying down. It was very loud … We were in the bathrooms. It was at least two and a half hours in there.” Outside a wrecked apartment complex in Mayfield, Kentucky, residents spoke of being trapped in the debris for hours and crying for help as they tried to escape. Johnny Shreve watched from his window as an office structure across the street disintegrated, then dived onto his kitchen floor as the tornado hit his building and chunks of concrete pelted his body. “It felt like everything in the world came down on me,” he said. He posted on Facebook that he and his dog were alive, and added: “Y’all pray for Mayfield.” “It blew my mind when the sun came up,” Shreve said, when he and others returned to salvage what they could and trade stories of survival. A local pastor, Joel Cauley, described the scene at the candle factory. “It was almost like you were in a twilight zone. You could smell the aroma of candles, and you could hear the cries of people for help,” he said. “Candle smells and all the sirens is not something I ever expected to experience at the same time.” The factory was reduced to 15-ft deep wreckage of twisted metal, with corrosive chemicals spilled everywhere and smashed cars on top, where the roof had been. Wanda Johnson, 90, a resident of an apartment block in the nearby town of Wingo, spoke of her windows “bursting” and how she clung to a door frame in an effort to avoid being blown away. “Dear God, help me, please help me get out of here,” she recalled saying. Speaking from a shelter beside her son and granddaughter, Johnson said: “They tell me we don’t have a town. Everything’s gone. It’s just wiped away. It just flipped over our city. “We don’t know where we’re going to go. We don’t know what’s left to go to.” More than 100 others were in the shelter with Johnson. Aid agencies have set up similar facilities in churches, school gymnasiums and community halls across Kentucky and elsewhere to provide warmth, food and clothing. Michael Dossett, director of Kentucky’s division of emergency management, said national guard troops and other agencies were bringing in generators. Power restoration in some areas “will be weeks to months,” he said, amid nighttime temperatures below freezing. “This will go on for years to come,” he said. “This is a massive event, the largest and most devastating in Kentucky’s history.” Weather experts were analyzing the unprecedented nature and severity of the unseasonal tornadoes. More than 80 tornadoes were reported in eight states, prompting Biden to ask the US environmental protection agency to investigate what role the climate crisis might have played.Low voter turnout at New Caledonia’s independence referendum “weighs heavily” on the French territory’s self-determination process, election observers from the Pacific Islands Forum have said. In Sunday’s referendum, more than 96% of voters were opposed to independence from France, compared with 57% in 2018 and 53% in 2020. However, there was only a 43.9% turnout of eligible voters after a boycott was called by Kanak leaders. They had called, unsuccessfully, for France to delay polling until 2022 to allow for a traditional mourning period for Covid-19 deaths. The archipelago’s indigenous people – who make up 40% of the population and are more likely to vote for independence – have been disproportionately affected by Covid-19. More than 60% of the territory’s roughly 280 Covid deaths have been among Kanak and other Pasifika communities. Pro-independence groups said they did not recognise the legitimacy of Sunday’s vote, the third and final referendum to be held under the 1998 Noumea Accord, a peace deal struck to end a decade of violence. Election observers from the Pacific Islands Forum, the region’s main inter-governmental group, said a significant proportion of voters, mainly independence supporters, had not voted, a stance made known before the referendum. “The spirit in which the referendum was conducted weighs heavily on the Noumea Accord and New Caledonia’s self-determination process,” the group said in a statement. “Civic participation is an integral component of any democracy and critical to the interpretation and implications of Sunday’s poll.” The observers, who are preparing a report on the election, were led by Fiji’s foreign minister Ratu Inoke Kubuabola, with the forum’s secretary general Henry Puna also travelling to New Caledonia. The group met with New Caledonia’s Congress president, Roch Wamytan, before he travelled to New York to raise concerns about the referendum at the United Nations on Thursday, and then to France. The result was also called into question by the Melanesian Spearhead Group – an intergovernmental organisation made up of Fiji, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands, Vanuatu, as well as the Kanak and Socialist National Liberation Front (FLNKS) of New Caledonia. The MSG tweeted: “We firmly support the call by FLNKS for the UN to declare the results of the 3rd Referendum null and void due to the ‘non-participation’ of the people of Kanaky. Voter turnout was below 50% of registered voters hence cannot be taken as the legitimate wish of the silent majority!” One of five island territories of France in the Indo-Pacific, New Caledonia is the centrepiece of President Emmanuel Macron’s plan to increase French influence in the Pacific. The nickel-rich territory is 20,000km from France, with a population including 41% Melanesian (mostly Kanak) and 24% of European origin (mostly French).Questions over worker safety at Amazon are intensifying once again after a tornado struck an Amazon warehouse in Edwardsville, Illinois, on Friday, leaving six people dead and another hospitalized. On Monday, the federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration (Osha) said it had opened a workplace safety investigation into the warehouse collapse. Amazon said it was “supporting Osha” and that Osha opens investigations into all workplace fatality incidents. Meanwhile, workers and activists are calling for more action. Concerns over labor rights at the e-commerce giant have been mounting, exacerbated by allegations the company failed to “adequately notify” workers and health officials of Covid-19 cases. “This incident calls into question so much of Amazon’s practices in their warehouses,” said Marcos Ceniceros, an organizer at Warehouse Workers for Justice. “This is not the first time we’ve seen workers suffer at Amazon and we want to make sure that they’re not continuing to cut corners and putting workers at risk.” Warehouse Workers for Justice has called for a hearing in the Illinois state legislature examining what led to the deaths at Amazon’s warehouse. They are also calling on the company to ensure it has safety and training protocols in place for extreme weather events and other risks, like Covid-19, in the future. Speaking to the Intercept on Monday, 12 Amazon workers described concerns over workplace safety. Some said they had never experienced a tornado or fire drill on the job, and several said they would be uncertain of what to do in an emergency. An Amazon spokeswoman told the Guardian the company does require training in its facilities. “Emergency response training is provided to new employees and that training is reinforced throughout the year,” she said. John Gasper, associate professor of economics at Carnegie Mellon University’s Tepper School of Business, cautioned that he didn’t know the particulars of what happened at Amazon. But he said for companies like Amazon that have high turnover in labor, it likely is harder to conduct regular emergency training schedules, particularly during the busy holiday season when there are many seasonal workers. “The cost of the time to do the drills is also time they are not [moving] the packages,” he said. “They have to think about these tradeoffs. But I don’t think any company wants to harm its employees.” Amazon said workers at the warehouse had little time to prepare when the National Weather Service declared a tornado warning on Friday night. The tornado arrived soon after, collapsing both sides of the warehouse and caving in its roof. “There was a tremendous effort that happened that night to keep everybody safe,” said John Felton, Amazon’s senior vice-president of global delivery services, speaking alongside the Illinois governor, JB Pritzker, in Edwardsville on Monday and pledging a review of all the events that took place Friday. An Amazon spokesperson, Kelly Nantel, said the warehouse received tornado warnings between 8.06pm and 8.16pm on Friday and site leaders directed workers to immediately take shelter. At 8.27pm, the tornado struck the building. Felton said most of the 46 people in the warehouse known as a “delivery station” headed to a shelter on the north side, which ended up “nearly undamaged” and a smaller group to the harder-hit south end. The company said those are not separate safe rooms, but generally places away from windows considered safer than other parts of the plant. Amazon has pledged to assist workers and their families affected by the tragedy, including donating $1m to the Edwardsville Community Foundation. The company declined to answer questions on Monday about its disaster plans at the plant, including whether employees were required to perform drills. The tornado that hit Amazon’s facility was part of a swarm of twisters across the midwest and south that leveled entire communities. Another tornado destroyed a candle factory in Mayfield, Kentucky, killing multiple workers on an overnight shift. Osha, which is part of the US Department of Labor, said federal investigators were not investigating the Kentucky factory collapse because the state has its own workplace safety agency. Ceniceros said as extreme weather intensifies due to the climate crisis, workers are investigating how to protect themselves and hold corporations accountable. The Edwardsville warehouse is part of a vast patchwork of concrete-and-steel structures that have popped up in the St Louis region over the past decade, drawn by its confluence of major highways and railroads, cheap costs and Americans’ expectations for getting packages delivered soon after they click a link to order them. A researcher who studies the warehouse industry and the pressure put on Amazon workers to meet strict productivity quotas said even if Amazon’s team did everything right in responding to a devastating tornado, it raises the question about the structure of enormous warehouses popping up across the midwest as some climate experts warn of more frequent and severe storms. “We don’t think of warehousing as one of the industries that’s going to be severely impacted by climate change but then you have a case like this,” said Beth Gutelius, research director at the Center for Urban Economic Development at the University of Illinois-Chicago. At the governor’s press conference Monday, Nantel emphasized that the 1.1m sq ft building was “constructed consistent with code”. But Pritzker raised the possibility that current codes aren’t enough to meet the dangers of increasingly devastating storms. He said there will be an investigation into updating code ,“given serious change in climate that we are seeing across the country”. Marc Wulfraat, a supply chain consultant who has studied Amazon’s warehouses and distribution centers, says the one in Edwardsville appeared standard for the industry with 40ft concrete walls, not unlike many others popping up around the country as consumers shift from stores to online buying. “It was basically a warehouse, with nothing particularly distinctive to Amazon,” said Wulfratt, president of MWPVL International, a consultancy in Montreal. “They abide by code when they put these buildings up. There is no way around it.” Gutelius said she couldn’t help but view the tragedy as a spillover effect of American consumer demand for getting packages shipped quickly. “Yes, it was a freak accident, but the facts are still that these workers were making sure my dog gets a frisbee – tomorrow – and gave their life for it,” she said. “It seems really kind of ridiculous when you think about what the stakes are.” The Associated Press contributed to this reportHalf of all young people held in detention facilities in Australia are Indigenous and almost two-thirds have yet to be sentenced for a crime, new data shows. It comes after a commitment by Australian governments to raise the age of criminal responsibility from 10 to 12, a move advocates and lawyers say does not go far enough to protect the most vulnerable children from the trauma of being incarcerated. A report by the Australian Institute of Health and Welfare (AIHW), released on Tuesday, found that 72% of the more than 800 children and young people held in detention on an average night in the June quarter this year were unsentenced – meaning they were either remanded in custody while awaiting the outcome of a court case or held in custody by police. It also found 50% of those in youth detention were Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children, despite Indigenous children making up just 6% of the 10-17 age cohort in the broader population. Indigenous children were jailed at 20 times the rate of non-Indigenous children as of June 2021 and were also more likely to be jailed without being sentenced and more likely to be under the age of 18 when incarcerated, the report showed. Advocates have been campaigning to raise the criminal age of responsibility in Australia to 14, a move which would see almost 500 fewer children detained in youth detention facilities each year. So far only the Australian Capital Territory has committed to raise the age to 14. Sophie Trevitt from the Change the Record coalition said the data was “an indictment on every state and territory”. “Children do not belong behind bars,” she said. “Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children represent less than 6% of the total population, yet make up half of all children behind bars. This is a direct result of well-documented discrimination that First Nations children face from over policing right through to sentencing. “The fact that almost three-quarters of children behind bars have not even been found guilty of a crime, and are simply waiting for their day in court, shows how incapable the criminal legal system is to administer justice in a humane and timely way.” The AIHW data tracks trends in youth detention in the four years from June 2017 to June 2021. It found that 83% of those in a youth detention facility on an average night in the June quarter of this year were aged 10 to 17, while the rest were older – either as a result of the dual track system in Victoria or because they were incarcerated in connection to a crime they allegedly committed as a child. Despite a dip in unsentenced children being jailed in the middle of 2020, in response to different court procedures put in place at the start of the Covid-19 pandemic, the number of children jailed on remand bounced back by the middle of 2021. Executive director of the National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Legal Service (NATSILS), Jamie McConachie, said the figures were “absolutely staggering”. “It is time for evidence-based and community-led solutions to create pathways away from jail to support our young people to succeed,” McConnnachie said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “First and foremost, Australian governments must commit to raising the age of legal responsibility to end the over-incarceration of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children.” Indigenous children were consistently jailed at a higher rate than non-Indigenous children, the report showed, but the rate of over-incarceration varied from 16 times more likely to be jailed up to 25 times. The rate of children held in detention without being sentenced also bounced around, averaging out at a rate of two children per 10,000. The overall number of children and young people in detention on an average night fell from 958 in the June quarter of 2017 to 819 in the June quarter of 2021.The Downs are fading behind a curtain of rain in the distance. I battle through the mud to take a closer look at the pools of water. The golden brown reeds sway in the breeze and it begins to rain. Ducks are swimming and upending, raising their tails as they reach below the surface for food. Among the mallards, teals, wigeons and shovelers are three handsome male pintail ducks, with chocolate-brown faces, grey flanks, black-and-white backs and the pointed black tails that give them their name. Behind them, on the other side of the pool, is a tall, gleaming white heron with a long, snake-like neck – a great white egret. Slightly smaller than a grey heron, it stands upright with legs splayed and large, pale bill pointing up, but its eyes are looking down at the dark water. The egret moves in sudden, balletic sweeps, first one way, then another, as it watches the fish darting back and forth. It wades towards me, slowly moving its thin legs with long strides, as if walking on stilts. Still rare – the first record of a great white egret in Sussex was in 1985 – they are becoming more frequent visitors throughout the year, but especially in the autumn and winter. Numbers of sightings may be helped by the remarkable growth in the British breeding population. They first bred in the UK in 2012 in Somerset, in 2017 in Norfolk, and in 2019 in Cheshire. This summer, at least 50 birds fledged on the Somerset Levels alone. As the young disperse in the autumn, sightings are bound to become more common. The egret continues to walk slowly, dangling long black toes out of the water. It stops and turns. Again, it sways to one side, then the other, opening its bill slightly and bobbing its tail. It plunges its head in the water with a splash and pulls up with a large fish, wriggling between its mandibles. It swallows the fish in one movement, then dips its beak in the water, shakes its head and pauses, before moving on, feathers buffeted by the strengthening wind. I watch the egret fish until the rain becomes too heavy and I head for home. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryOne of Australia’s largest national disability insurance scheme providers has apologised to the residents of two troubled group homes after allegations of violence, abuse and neglect were aired at an inquiry. The commission also heard on Tuesday that Life Without Barriers charged residents at a Victoria home a substantial proportion of their disability pension for “rent” despite the property being leased on a peppercorn deal of $1 a month. During hearings in the past week, the disability royal commission has heard violence between residents at the Victoria group home run by the provider was so bad it had become “normal”, while there were also allegations of violence, sexual abuse, and neglect at another home in New South Wales. In one case aired at the commission last week, a resident in the NSW home was hospitalised with a bowel condition and “nearly died” after staff allegedly did not follow care protocol. The provider did not report the incident to the NDIS watchdog. In another incident, the commission heard a Life Without Barriers investigation found there was not enough evidence to substantiate claims a support worker pushed a client at the NSW home to the ground, even though the employee admitted doing so. Fronting the royal commission on Tuesday, Claire Robbs, the chief executive of Life Without Barriers, apologised to residents and families on behalf of the company. “The views and experiences of people and their families have highlighted several areas where harm has been caused to people and we acknowledge and offer our deepest regret,” she said. Robbs also apologised to each of the victims individually, using the pseudonyms used by the royal commission. “I do not condone the violence towards Sophie, and I offer Sophie and her family our sincere apology for the harm caused to her, including for the manner in which our investigations into the matter was undertaken,” she said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning She also apologised to a woman known by the pseudonym Natalie for alleged “sexual misconduct by a staff member”, which was “completely unacceptable”. The staff member was later charged and found not guilty by a court, the inquiry heard last week. Asked by the chair of the royal commission, Ronald Sackville, if Life Without Barriers had “committed a serious breach of a duty that it owed to Natalie”, Robbs replied “yes”. Robbs also agreed the normal course in such a case would be to offer compensation. Life Without Barriers has not offered Natalie or her family compensation. It was also Natalie who was later hospitalised and, according to evidence from her mother, nearly died, after a bowel obstruction that followed the failure of staff to adhere to care protocols. Under questioning from counsel assisting Patrick Griffin, Robbs conceded the provider only paid $1 a month to lease the Victoria group home, but still charged residents a proportion of their fortnightly pension on “rent”. Robbs suggested the “rent” also covered maintenance and other services, though she could not say if this was pointed out to the residents or families. Griffin put to Robbs that most people would consider “rent” to refer to money paid to a landlord for the right to live in a property. “I think if someone asked me that question I would think that the rent also covered the maintenance that would be required to be done to the premises, that would be something I would expect that would be part of the rental payment,” she said. The inquiry has previously heard Sophie, who lives with cerebral palsy and an intellectual disability, was sexually assaulted by a date in a public park. Sophie last week told the royal commission they met in a park because Life Without Barriers banned her from having guests in the house after 6pm. Hobbs was asked why such a serious incident was not reported to the Life Without Barriers board. She responded it was because the incident did not occur “while Sophie was in our care”. “I’m troubled by your answer,” Griffin said, noting the “imposition of those rules in effect made [Life Without Barriers] in part responsible for what subsequently happened”. That was “because Sophie was denied the opportunity to have someone in her home, and consequently was put in a more vulnerable position”. Under questioning, Robbs agreed that was the case, but maintained it was proper not to report the incident to the board. The inquiry continues.During a crucial week for Joe Biden’s agenda that will likely feature a political showdown on his Build Back Better legislation in the Senate, voting rights activists are turning up the pressure in Washington. As the US president met with a centrist Democrat who has acted as a roadblock to his plans – West Virginia Senator Joe Manchin - more than 60 demonstrators were arrested as they protested, singing songs and blocking traffic near the US Capitol. The diverse group of activists came to Washington from around the country and were focused primarily on issues around voting rights and poverty. When the focus turned to voting rights, the talk became more focused on Manchin and the White House’s apparent inability to apply its power to pass federal legislation to protect the vote. “I think we’re moving the ball but we have to get it across the finish line – we’re going to have to keep pushing. They don’t need to be going home for Christmas. We need to get voting rights taken care of,” said Melanie Campbell, president of the National Coalition on Black Civic Participation, as she waited to speak to the assembled crowd of more than 500 people. As news spread that Manchin was signaling he wants more changes to Biden’s already stripped back Build Back Better legislation because of his concerns over inflation, activists at the rally were not impressed. “That’s his whole game. Slow it down, block it, get things get done for the billionaires, his corporate donors – then to undermine voting rights let all the voting suppression bills get passed that wouldn’t get passed if we had the Voting Rights Act restored and we had federal protection,” said the Rev William Barber, president of Repairers of the Breach. “He’s a trickster. The president needs to go to West Virginia. Stop meeting with him in his office. Go to his state,” Barber added shortly before leading activists in a street protest. With talk of direct actions and in-office protests directed at Manchin and others, Barber and other activists promised to apply more pressure on lawmakers this week. Barber and several other voting rights activists have been frustrated by what they view as a lack of focus and from the Biden administration regarding voting rights. Many have warned the White House that Biden’s 7m vote victory, buttressed by strong turnout in predominately Black cities such as Atlanta, Detroit, Philadelphia and Milwaukee, will be difficult to repeat without cementing the support of those same voters. With 2022 midterm elections on the horizon, the urgency about which agenda items Biden will focus is a hot topic in the activist community. “We go to the streets for nonviolent direct action. This is just the precursor,” Barber told the crowd of activists. “If you think this is an action, you watch how we mobilize when we don’t have to be so Covid safe,” said Barber. “There is only one answer to 19 states that have passed voter suppression laws. There’s only one answer to all this election subversion. There’s only one answer to all this work that they’re doing to purge people from election boards. There’s only one answer to gerrymandering. That is, ‘Pass the acts now!’” said Barbara Arwine, who leads the Transformative Justice Coalition to the crowd. Arnwine was referring to the John Lewis Voting Rights Advancement Act. The bill would restore provisions in the Voting Rights Act of 1965 that were removed by the supreme court’s Shelby v Holder decision in 2013.The vultures are circling again, just two years after the Conservative party tore apart its last leader. Here is yet another “worst week” for the beleaguered prime minister, after his planned week announcing new crime policies switched to probes into possible Downing Street law-breaking. When getting “rat-arsed” at Tory parties becomes this year’s topical panto joke, things have turned serious. He faces a major rebellion on Tuesday, his Covid regulations likely to be saved only by Labour’s public health seriousness. The following day he faces another pasting at prime minister’s questions and on Thursday a byelection. With Labour nine points ahead nationally, North Shropshire may be held and yet still signal such a Tory collapse that statistically it endangers Boris Johnson’s own seat. Voters knowingly elected a liar, but they rarely forgive chaotic incompetence. Johnson’s fate rests with those who elevated him, the nexus of parties-within-a-party that hold the real Tory power. This week Steve Baker MP relaunches Conservative Way Forward, founded to guard Margaret Thatcher’s flame. These idolaters ask themselves “What would Maggie do?” with as little historical sense as those who claim to know the answer to “What would Jesus do?” A prime saboteur, Baker is an agent in all the rightwing caucuses that riddle the Tory party. He chairs the Covid Recovery Group, which is stirring the plan B rebellion; he is a core member of the European Research Group (ERG); a member of the Global Warming Policy Foundation, a group of deniers blocking climate-saving action; and founder of the Cobden Centre, promoting hardline free-market economics. As a sky-diving, born-again Christian who was baptised in the sea, Baker also belongs to the Cornerstone group for family, faith and flag, and voted against same-sex marriage. All revolutionary insurgents need new causes. Baker’s airy manifesto for the Way Forward in the Sunday Telegraph declares “the Conservative party is in the wrong place”, accusing it of “carrying on with centre-left policies”. In a litany of objections to Covid regulations, he protests: “Conservatives don’t create societies where people must live and work in fear a minister might, without notice, impose restrictions on them.” As Omicron arrives in over-filled hospitals, he says Johnson’s plan B is “creating a miserable dystopia”. Yet for all his low-tax yearning, Baker has just enough political sense never to say what public spending he would axe. Prof Tim Bale, a political party analyst, points to the reason: two-fifths of Tory members are over 65, cleaving to state-financed social care and the NHS. Johnson’s enemies, the remainer greybeards he threw out, such as Ken Clarke, Michael Heseltine and Dominic Grieve, may smile at the irony of seeing him now threatened by turbulent disrupters. This new cadre model themselves on the Trumpian Republicans of the Christian right. “I believe God means us to live in liberty,” Baker told the Financial Times. Does that stuff fly in North Shropshire? Johnson would be in less trouble if his government was charging full-speed ahead in any direction. Instead, he dithers between levelling-up and small state austerity, zigzagging between slogans without policies, while laced into an eye-watering budgetary corset. Without fast-forward propulsion, governments topple. With gracious condescension, Baker says he’s not seeking Johnson’s head on a plate, yet: “I want Boris Johnson to rescue his position,” he says. “Things are not good.” If they tire of Johnson, Liz Truss is the obvious candidate to be his successor. Her brazen zealotry frightens many: Dominic Cummings calls her a “human hand grenade”. A founder of the Free Enterprise Group and co-author of the notorious new Tory right manual Britannia Unchained, her photo-ops mimic Thatcher imagery – in a tank, hugging a calf – yet she lacks her idol’s political filters. Who else would try solving the childcare crisis by deregulating childminders to let them each take in six two-year-olds? Conservative Way Forward is founded in a belief that the party is no longer recognisably conservative: if so, they are the entryists who subverted it over decades. Where Neil Kinnock rooted out the Militant tendency tearing at Labour’s grassroots, the Tory party has always appeased its rebels. When Baker was chair of the ERG, Theresa May made him a minister. When Suella Braverman took over as ERG chair, she was similarly rewarded. Even her ERG successor, the outlandish Jacob Rees-Mogg, was swept up into government. The deputy ERG chair, Andrea Jenkyns, has been elevated to the whips’ office, a bizarre appointment given the ERG’s own hostile whipping operation. Through failing to stand up for the conservatism of Harold Macmillan and Edward Heath, the Tory party has plunged further right than most of its voters. Just 200,000 largely rightist party members have for several decades selected none but Brexiters, libertarians and obsessive state-shrinkers. The result, according to Bale, is that the MPs they picked are now even further right than those party members. About 100 Tory MPs may vote against plan B, well beyond the usual suspects, including relative moderates such as Tom Tugendhat and Tobias Ellwood. Some MPs feel pressure from local parties, while others are simply venting fury at Johnson’s catalogue of failings. But remember this: those who vote against measures to tackle Omicron are irrationalists defying the best scientific opinion. Sir Graham Brady, the head of the 1922 Committee, calls these modest restrictions “Soviet-style”: reaching for Stalin really is the end of rational debate. Here is a party falling apart, eaten from within by failure to extirpate extremists. This is not primarily about Johnson’s unfitness for office. It’s about the bizarre and dangerous nature of the extreme party that put him in power and will replace him, as the whim takes it. This is about a party that has become unfit to govern. Polly Toynbee is a Guardian columnistIt’s that time of year when you wake up sweating and can’t figure out why. Did you accidentally wear your thermals in bed? Do you have tuberculosis? No, dummy, it’s just that it’s almost Christmas, it’s your turn to play host, and the list of things that can go wrong on the 25th is long and wearying. Can I recommend, before we drill into this list, a quick wisdom stocktake? Last year was the worst Christmas imaginable: every plan was kiboshed at the very last minute; non-essential shops closed before we’d done our shopping; people who thought they were going back to their families ended up at home and hadn’t bought Baileys and crackers and whatnot; people who’d battled solitude for a year were stuck alone; people living on top of each other couldn’t catch a break; people expecting guests were buried under surplus pigs in blankets, and beyond our under-or over-decorated front doors, the outside world was fraught with risk and sorrow, as coronavirus declined to mark the birth of the Christ child with any respite from its march of terror. I’m not saying it couldn’t be as bad as that again – just that it couldn’t possibly be as surprisingly bad again. There are some bridges you can’t cross until you come to them; but others, you can get a head start on. The turkey’s too big for the oven! How did you let this happen? It’s not as though this meal is a surprise. You’re right, I am using a harsh, judgmental tone for a reason. There is a tendency when we’re around our families to default to a mean, buzzing internal monologue of: “You’re useless / hopeless / incompetent”, a discordant medley of everyone who ever made you feel bad, a proportion of whom, inevitably, are currently in your living room, expecting to be fed. Try not to do this to yourself. (Sure, easier said than done.) Now, on to your oven/turkey dilemma: it seems counterintuitive to consult the Guardian’s Felicity Cloake, creator of How to Cook the Perfect … and author of many books, from Perfect to Completely Perfect, on a matter of such complete imperfection. Yet Cloake is ideal, with so many solutions that even to count them will calm you like a breathing exercise. “Cut the legs off!” she advises. “They’re usually the thing that gets wedged in the oven element and send my temperature soaring. They should be relatively easy to yank off, but as with everything, there’s a YouTube video to help. If it’s still too big, take the wings off, too. If you’ve discovered far enough in advance, and it’s just that you don’t have room for the turkey and side dishes together, then roast the turkey first, cover it with foil, then carve it and cover it in hot gravy before serving.” The turkey does fit in the oven – but you put it in too late and now everyone’s starving and it’s still half raw! Cloake to the rescue again. “My first reaction would be: put it back in the oven and give them a few more crisps,” she says. But if they’ve already started drinking, you’re in a danger zone. They might sail past appetite on a sea of sherry, straight into Who’s Afraid of Virginia Woolf? “If you need to eat now,” Cloake continues, “I’d advise starting with the breast, which will cook first and which may well be ready even if the legs are still raw. It’s always worth double checking the temperature with a meat thermometer as turkey brown meat is quite dark and might look uncooked when it’s not.” If it’s not cooked at all, take it out, “joint it and roast the constituent parts separately. If you’re really desperate, bring a large pan of chicken or vegetable stock to a simmer, then take the meat off the bone and poach it in that. It should only take a few minutes.” Your pesky niece was a vegetarian last week and now, suddenly, she’s a vegan, but nobody told you. All those failsafe store cupboard solutions for the emergency veggie – the cheese toastie, the omelette – are out of the window. In a carnivore’s kitchen, you will most likely be lacking what a vegan would consider the basics of special-occasion cooking: some kind of meat substitute, such as a burger made of pea protein; or fake cheese. Always have a dairy-free supermarket puff pastry sheet in – they last a long time in the freezer, lend themselves to festive presentation and can be filled with anything – any mashed vegetable plus something like a tapenade. If there’s no space in your oven, firm tofu in cubes, dusted in cornflour, deep fried, will make a random but delicious turkey substitute for your incredibly thoughtless, but presumably dearly loved, relative. One of your guests doesn’t believe in vaccinations. When we think of anti-vaxxers, especially in an intimate, family setting, we’re often most comfortable channelling our indignation into the territory of health: that anti-science idiot is endangering my health, or grandma’s, ergo they are selfish. Undoubtedly, they are much more likely to have caught Covid, and substantially more likely to pass it on, but if this is a deal-breaker, check ahead that everyone’s vaxxed and disinvite anyone who isn’t. Otherwise, try this thought experiment: if they couldn’t get vaccinated – say they had an insurmountable needle-phobia – you might be much more worried about them as a Covid victim than as a carrier. So what you could be reacting to might not be the vector transmission but character traits – obduracy, narcissism, callousness. You almost need to take yourself out of it, in order to get the temperature down. They’re not doing this to you. It’s just a thing they’re doing. We tend to think about this as a question of etiquette – how can I be kind while making sure my boundaries are respected? But the world of political discourse has much more practical research on how we talk to each other across ideological divides. Ellie Mae O’Hagan runs the Centre for Labour and Social Studies (Class) thinktank, and works on public attitudes related to the economy and culture wars. “The person whose methodology I like best is Anat Shenker-Osorio,” she says, “who divides people into base, persuadable and opposition.” “Base” tends to mean broadly progressive, humane, reasonable. “Opposition” doesn’t mean right or left, but rather, “you’re the small segment of the population who cannot be moved, whatever the issue is. You’re ideologically hardline, you’ll probably read a lot of news and take the information that supports your existing view.” First, figure out who you’re dealing with. A persuadable person is “more likely to express uncertainty, more likely to contradict themselves, more likely to draw from their own experience.” An opposition mindset will be characterised by a long list of dodgy or diversionary facts and a great deal more certainty. With a persuadable person, O’Hagan says: “Don’t tell them facts. That doesn’t work. Don’t myth-bust. What that tends to do is strengthen the myth in people’s minds. Start with a shared value and be clear that you see the good in them. ‘I can see that you really care about making sure that people are safe. I also care about that.’” The advice on the opposition mindset is not to persuade them, but – in a political context – to alienate them. “If you don’t, usually you end up saying something so bland that you’re not really saying anything.” In an interpersonal context, this really means, just move on: don’t deliberately alienate them – realistically, you’re probably already not that close – but don’t get involved. Interestingly, a (nameless by choice) spokesperson for the NHS said something similar – they divide vaccine attitudes into four: accepting; hesitant; resistant; hostile. They only communicate with the first three, and don’t engage with the fourth. Your uncle is drunk and itching to tell some home truths. There’s an argument that one person will always be spoiling for a fight, and that it’s their Christmas, too. They’ve come all this way, so let them say whatever it is and shrug it off. Often, someone who wants to kick off will do it with a big, unsayable thing – that Donald Trump wasn’t all bad, or Covid is a hoax, or some other conspiracy theory. O’Hagan says: “The one thing that’s not discussed enough is that a lot of people who become Covid conspiracy theorists are people who really suffered during lockdown. They’re seeking explanations for what was going on, because they were frightened and suffering.” Try to respond to the hurt rather than the words. Equally, some people just get eggy when they drink too fast, on which, my core suggestions are: make your first offer not champagne or any fizzy wine, which people always drink too fast because they’re thirsty and excited, a lethal combination. Instead, make some really weak gin and tonics, which they’ll also drink too fast but it won’t matter. Then, when they move on to their next drink, they’ll still be excited but at least they won’t be thirsty. You bought your brother something amazing and he got you something from Poundland I had a friend who gave her brother a kidney and that Christmas, he gave her some tights from TK Maxx, and she weathered that. True story. So just have a word with yourself, eh? Your wifi is acting up – and you’ve forgotten how to get away from one another without screens. The reason Christmas is so fraught and occupies such a central place in our hosting anxieties is – parking your unique family dynamics – twofold. First, catering at scale is unfamiliar to many people. Second, spending hours in company doesn’t suit a lot of temperaments. Introverts need downtime; extroverts feel offended. The core family of parents plus adult kids will usually have its own strategies to deal with all this, but add in some in-laws, neighbours, new girlfriends or boyfriends, and you’re back to square one. My family always used to have this enforced walk across a vast and dreary common, which went on for two hours, and when I describe it it sounds awful, but it wasn’t, because it enabled us to split into twos and threes and have real conversations, rather than the stilted performances that whole-family groups scare up round a table. The main thing is to make everything optional and have a few options. Charades / snooze / wash up. Poker / TV / walk the dog. Create legitimate escape routes for people who need them, otherwise they’re really going to give you a pain in your butt by about 6pm. One of your guests is allergic to cats – and you’ve got six. In the old days, you probably wouldn’t have got a cat if it meant your brother or best friend’s boyfriend could no longer visit, but now, sheesh, 18 months with nobody ever visiting you and acres of home time – why not have four? Hoover like a fiend ahead of time; the hair lying about might have much more of an effect than the animal itself padding in and out. Ventilate well, which you should be doing anyway. Make sure you have antihistamines, but also consider asking your guest to take one before they arrive, although not in a tone of voice that makes them feel like a nuisance. It’s way beyond your bedtime and your guests won’t leave! On this of all days, it’s a conversation you can have ahead of time: who needs to stay over, how those who don’t stay will get home, who’s driving and will need elderflower cordial. All these practical details will give you a good idea of what your entertainment window will look like. However, our social muscles have atrophied somewhat; we’ve become less good at reading cues and have simply forgotten what time things are supposed to end. Or maybe some of us are overexcited and want to spend more time together than ever. The first time my sister came over after the last lockdown, she left at 3am. Others are taking time to reacclimatise. We all just need radical openness: don’t bother with all the Martha Stewart-ey tips, letting the wine run out and turning the lights up. Just say: “I’m tired, and I’m going to bed, and I know this isn’t how we used to do things, but it doesn’t mean I love you any less.” The couple you’ve invited can’t stand each other any more. This is one of the weirdest things about the pandemic. Not seeing enough of people outside our household, all couples, I mean all of us, have got into quite idiosyncratic registers. I know couples who have become very saccharine in the way they talk to each other, couples who overshare to a degree that would put hairs on your chest, couples whose tone has become very rough and sarcastic, and none of it is immediately legible, so don’t overreact. However, these are your guests – you know them pretty well or you wouldn’t have invited them. And if they really can’t stand each other, one or both parties will probably have told you. I’m afraid this is just awks and your only strategy is to keep it off the table. They’ll split up when they’re ready, and Christmas Day at your house is nobody’s idea of ready. You realise your kids have crossed over into cynicism and will never experience the magic of Christmas again. Indeed, last year was probably their final true childhood Christmas, but you were too preoccupied to notice. I would normally quote Marge Simpson – “Take all your bad feelings and push them down, all the way down, past your knees, until you’re almost walking on them” – but her children stayed the same age her entire life, so what does she know? The passing of time is just inherently sad. Boris Johnson has just cancelled Christmas again! A personal view: after everything that’s happened, including but in no way limited to the prime minister’s own bogus “childcare bubble” last Christmas, I find it extremely unlikely that anyone will be asked or expected to celebrate on their own in 2021. However, we may be asked to scale our plans right back, and find ourselves in our nuclear families with excess food mountains, or without any of the right food. If this comes to pass, look back over the things you’ve been worrying about, and you may find some silver linings.Pubs and restaurants predict that Christmas cancellations made following the introduction of measures to limit the spread of the Omicron variant of Covid-19 in England will cut their festive takings by 40%. While hospitality venues have not yet been forced to reimpose measures such as social distancing or mandatory mask-wearing, industry leaders said tougher restrictions had already caused irreparable damage to trade, especially in city centres. Trade body UK Hospitality has forecast that takings will be down by as much as 40% for December, usually the most lucrative month for venues by far, after hard data from last week revealed early signs that customers were staying away. Data from the trade body for Monday to Sunday of last week showed a 13% drop in trade and a 15% increase in cancellations, compared with pre-pandemic levels. In central London, which is particularly affected by office workers following government guidance to stay at home, takings were down 40%, while there was a 25% surge in Christmas bookings being cancelled. The figures cover a week that followed the identification of the Omicron variant and included the announcement of tougher Covid-19 restrictions, known as “plan B”. With the evaporation of consumer confidence thought to have accelerated since then, bosses called for more assistance from the government to help them survive the effects of a second successive nightmare Christmas. “The damage has been done,” said Phil Urban, the chief executive of Mitchells &amp; Butlers, which owns 1,700 pubs and restaurants, including the O’Neill’s and Harvester chains. He said customers had begun calling off events last week after the government announced measures including guidance to work from home if possible. “We immediately saw cancellations. Anybody who was at all nervous, or any company that was planning a do was likely to cancel,” Urban said. “We saw the impact on Friday and Saturday but we’ll really start to see the damage this week, particularly in city centres where historically we’d have lots of corporate events. That’s gone now and there’s nothing anyone can do to put it back.” He called on the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, to extend a temporary reduction in the VAT levied on hospitality businesses. The tax break is due to end in April 2022, when the Treasury raises the rate from 12.5% back to its pre-pandemic level of 20%. Investors responded to the gloom around the sector by selling shares in major hospitality companies on Monday. Premier Inn’s owner, Whitbread, and InterContinental Hotels Group were among the biggest fallers on the FTSE 100, losing 3.5% and 3.3% respectively. On the FTSE 250, JD Wetherspoon shed 5.4%, while the Wagamama owner, Restaurant Group, declined by 3.9%. The Wetherspoons founder, Tim Martin, called the government’s latest restrictions “arbitrary”, as the 861-strong pub chain warned investors that first-half profits could be wiped out by what Martin called “lockdown by stealth”. With the industry facing yet more financial pain, the ale enthusiasts’ group Camra called for “extreme caution” from ministers before doing or saying anything that might further escalate the wave of cancellations. The head of UK Hospitality, Kate Nicholls, said venues were the safest place to socialise at Christmas because of hygiene and ventilation measures, insisting people should not cancel events. “The government’s official advice since the arrival of Omicron and the introduction of plan B has been very clear: go ahead with Christmas and new year parties as long as you are not showing any symptoms of Covid,” she said. “Hospitality operators have invested heavily to ensure the safety of staff and customers, focusing on better ventilation, hygiene and sanitation … As a result, pubs, bars, restaurants, hotels and nightclubs are safer places in which to socialise with family and friends than at home this Christmas.” Boris Johnson is facing a key vote this week over plans to introduce Covid passports to access certain venues, with up to 100 rebels in the Conservative party expected to vote against such measures. The Night Time Industries Association, which includes nightclubs that would be among the businesses told to check vaccine status or test results, said the industry was facing “12 days of Christmas misery”. The association’s chief executive, Michael Kill, said losing festive takings would be “a threat to the very survival of thousands of businesses and jobs. “It is vital that the government and in particular the chancellor recognise the impact of the government’s public health messaging and swiftly implement proportionate financial support to ensure businesses and jobs are protected during this extremely challenging period. “The chancellor may be wary of stumping up the cash but this will be better for the economy in the long run than putting businesses at risk of failing.”“Have you ever suffered from depression?” “Well, there was this time when I was younger, and …” “Yes or no?” Welcome to prison induction: a warning of things to come; a process where niceties about mental health are observed not for the purposes of care but for the sake of resource allocation. For former teacher Mark Cobden (Sean Bean), it’s the first time. And it’s rough. Initially we see this terrifying world through Cobden’s out-of-his-depth, middle-class eyes. The barely restrained violence. The barely contained mental illness. The barely tolerable boredom and ennui. Time’s creator Jimmy McGovern spares us nothing. Everyone is turned inward by the misery of their situation, and Time is horribly convincing in its depiction of both visceral fear and the sense of existential wheelspin as life passes without anything happening. On Bean’s face in repose, we see the torment of guilt and regret, the restless nights in an uncomfortable single bed. Bean’s performance is supremely understated and all the more emotionally resonant for it. Its brilliance often lies in his body language; his demeanour when he does nothing other than shuffle around, keeping his head down. Either through guilt or terror, he struggles to meet anyone’s gaze. He tries to turn himself into a ghost – to dissolve into his sentence in the hope of making it to the other side. But when you’re in such close proximity to so many other damaged, angry, frightened people, that isn’t possible. Even if you aren’t looking at them, they’re looking at you, with predatory or contemptuous or eagerly opportunistic eyes. Cobden’s first cellmate, Bernard (Aneurin Barnard), is a suicidal self-harmer. His second, Daniel (Jack McMullan), is a sneak and a liar. Cobden is routinely humiliated by the pitiless bully Johnno (the excellent James Nelson-Joyce). There are bleak truths he must learn the hard way – not least that in prison, aggression is the most meaningful currency and he’s dangerously short of it. Still, there’s nothing Johnno can do to Cobden that is worse than the pain he inflicts on himself. Unwatchably bleak then? Thankfully, it’s not that simple. Cobden’s supervising officer Eric McNally is a good man, albeit under impossible duress himself due to an errant son who is struggling elsewhere in the overstretched and compromised prison system. McNally is played by Stephen Graham – a model of intense restraint, expressing an infinity of inner turmoil with a puff of his cheeks. McNally is as kind as he can afford to be in the circumstances. As jeopardy surrounds his son, he too is pushed to his limits. McGovern is known for polemics but the brilliance of Time is that it manages to show, not tell. There is very little grandstanding here – we are simply presented with the grim realities of our dysfunctional penal system and asked, implicitly, how we would cope. This is television that hands an audacious amount of agency to the viewer: Time is either as brutal or as compassionate as we are willing to make it. Will we ponder both the crime and the punishment? The claustrophobia and horror render the moments of kindness – Cobden teaching fellow inmate Kavanagh (Terence Maynard) to read and write, the emotional succour offered by prison chaplain Marie-Louise (Siobhan Finneran) – almost unbearably poignant. These are tiny pinpricks of light at the end of the tunnel: people doing their best with what they’ve got. The real redemption is to be found in forgiveness. We’re encouraged to put ourselves in Cobden’s shoes but he is a convicted drink-driver, responsible for a man’s death. His pain is palpable, but so is that of his victim’s family. “You’re in here as punishment, son” says Cobden’s mother June (Sue Johnston) while visiting. “Not for it.” Does Cobden believe that himself? In some ways, this is the heart of McGovern’s polemic. Cobden is already punishing himself. His life sentence will be endured long after his release. His own family is shattered, his initial attempts to reach out to his victim’s family are rebuffed. Do we want offenders to suffer indignities beyond the loss of their liberty? Are we willing to consider broken people as mendable, or do we just want to throw them away? If it’s the latter, the current system is doing a pretty good job. But might there be another way? Redemption is a long, hard road. Time suggests it’s one worth walking all the same.Ministers’ focus may be a “national mission” to roll out booster vaccines to counter the dramatic rise of the Omicron variant, but the government has not ruled out new restrictions for England. Here we look at options on the table, how effective they could be at reducing the spread of coronavirus and the level of political risk for Boris Johnson. Mandatory isolation for all close Covid contacts Effectiveness: 4/5 From Tuesday, fully vaccinated contacts of people with confirmed Covid are asked to take a lateral flow test (LFT) every day for a week but do not have to self-isolate. So one half of a couple can keeping going to the pub even if the partner they live with has Covid. And, while a positive LFT is a good indication that an individual is infected, a negative result does not mean they are not. With two Covid jabs offering little protection against infection with Omicron, and households a key arena for transmission, requiring all contacts to isolate for seven or 10 days could have a strong impact – if adhered to. But not all infections or contacts are identified, so the approach has limitations. Political risk: 3/5 Ministers will be very wary about opening the door to the return of the “pingdemic”. In July, when cases were rising rapidly, the government was forced to offer special exemptions from quarantine, and set up mass testing centres at workplaces, to prevent interruptions in key public services. If Omicron creates a “tidal wave” of cases, stricter isolation rules could bring significant disruption. For that reason, Conservative MPs would hate it. 3/5 Social distancing imposed in shops, hospitality venues and workplaces Effectiveness: 2/5 Keeping a distance helps, but with a large body of evidence showing Covid undergoes airborne transmission, ventilation is also crucial. According to a study by researchers at the University of Cambridge and Imperial College London, in poorly ventilated spaces the coronavirus can spread further than 2m in seconds. Social distancing is also not possible in all workplaces, and those who can work from home have already been advised to. Political risk: 3/5 Reintroducing social distancing would not only be unpopular with Tory libertarians, it would spark immediate calls for financial aid from the Treasury. Pubs, restaurants and theatres had to slash the number of customers they could serve when a distance rule in place, as well as investing in signage and other equipment. Returning to the 1m-plus or the 2m rule could feel like a dramatic step backwards for the fatigued public. Covid passports – including boosters – for all public venues in the new year Effectiveness: 2/5 Omicron’s ability to evade vaccines to a greater degree than the Delta variant means vaccinated people could still pass on infections despite having a Covid certificate, albeit with boosters offering greater protection. There are also concerns that vaccine passports could lead to discrimination or exacerbate inequalities. Experts have found that vaccine passports work best where jab uptake is low (it is high across the UK) and they are unlikely to convince anti-vaxxers to get jabbed. Their impact on transmission is likely greatest when the levels of Covid circulating are low. Political risk: 4/5 Many Conservative MPs vehemently object to the idea of having to show an identity document (though they appear to apply the principle selectively: many recently voted in favour of voter ID). Any widening of the Covid certificates policy would be even more unpopular with backbenchers than this week’s plan B package, and the government would almost certainly need Labour backing to pass it. It is less clear how voters would respond, though many have already been contentedly using the NHS Covid pass to attend large events. Hospitality closures or an outdoors-only rule Effectiveness: 3/5 Previous waves of Covid have seen outbreaks linked to settings such as bars and restaurants while experts have noted that alcohol can make people less cautious in their interactions with others. Making service outdoors-only may reduce transmission but back-to-back gatherings over Christmas may blunt the impact of this measure. Political risk: 4/5 Again, this would lead to calls for urgent financial backup for affected businesses, particularly if it came before Christmas. After weeks of Christmas advertising campaigns premised on 2021 making up for last year, voters would also be likely to react with despondency. It is unclear whether they would blame Johnson personally but the revelations about lockdown-busting parties in No 10 appear unlikely to have helped. School closures for all but the children of key workers Effectiveness: 3/5 Covid infections have raced through schools and data has shown that when classrooms are closed, for example over half-term, Covid cases fall – possibly in part because of less testing, but likely also because of reduced mixing. But school closures are based on the assumption that infections move from children to older groups. If infection levels are already high in other age groups, or two jabs are – as data suggests – less protective against Omicron infection, closing schools may have less of an impact than for previous waves. More work is needed on the chance of children being infected or developing severe disease with Omicron but there are also mental health considerations when it comes to school closures. Political risk: 5/5 The government has repeatedly said school closures are a last resort in the pandemic. Robert Halfon, Conservative chair of the education select committee, said on Monday that they “have already had a devastating impact on young people’s education and mental health – we must not allow this to happen again”. No vote in parliament is needed, so backbench rebels can’t scupper any plan – but they could heap blame on Boris Johnson. As may exhausted teachers, and parents whose ability to work would be hit. Lockdown: limiting gatherings and placing restrictions on leaving home Effectiveness: 5/5 If contacts are reduced, the spread of the virus will slow – giving more time for people to get boosters and reducing the chance of a large number of people needing medical care at once. But how heavy handed such measures would need to be to have a sufficient effect is unclear. And there are downsides, including the mental health impact of such restrictions. Political risk: 5/5 Even before a series of deeply damaging lockdown-busting Christmas party allegations engulfed the government, Downing Street was desperate to avoid restrictions on socialising this winter. The public were largely stoical and compliant in winter 2020, when the Alpha variant led to last-minute limits on Christmas contact. But many Conservative MPs believe voters would not be so accepting again.It is impossible to know, in December 2021, how we will look back in five or 20 years’ time at the period during which social media companies such as Meta (owner of Facebook) and Google were allowed to become some of the most powerful businesses in the world, with minimal regulation. But the online safety bill now working its way through the UK parliament should be a line in the sand. Evidence of the damage inflicted by these companies, which make vast amounts of money from advertising (the source of 99% of Facebook’s income), is not new. But with the onslaught of anti-vaxx content during the pandemic, and shocking evidence from whistleblower Frances Haugen, who told legislators in the US and UK that Facebook’s algorithms “[make] hate worse”, the warnings have become harder to ignore. The bill would create a new regulatory framework, and the prospect of named safety officers at the big digital businesses facing criminal prosecution if their employers break the law. The overall aim is to bring democratic accountability and oversight to a sphere of life that has to a shocking extent been allowed to operate without them. No longer will giants including Facebook, TikTok and Google (owner of YouTube) be allowed to regard themselves as neutral “platforms”. Instead, they will be compelled to take far greater responsibility for the content that appears on their sites and feeds, and also – if the joint committee tasked with suggesting improvements to the bill has its way – for associated activity such as messaging. Children are a key focus. Until now they have been scandalously unprotected, with compulsory age verification for commercial pornography sites promised in 2017 but never enacted. Rightly, the MPs and lords on the committee propose a broader age assurance framework, which would protect children’s privacy and ensure that service providers treat them appropriately and differently from adults. A new offence of cyberflashing would protect adults (mostly women) as well. Transparency is another theme. Researchers and regulators must be granted more access to information, including about the operation of the algorithms that guide so many of our online “choices”. Business models that prioritise engagement above all else carry dangers, since they gain from users’ addictive or obsessive behaviours. More openness is also needed about the micro-targeting of advertisements. There is a role for the information commissioner in relation to the use of personal data by advertisers (including characteristics such as religious or political beliefs). A dedicated digital media ombudsman is expected. The powers of the secretary of state for culture, Nadine Dorries, will be increased. But the lion’s share of the new regulatory function will fall to Ofcom, which must cooperate with other regulators in order to do the job effectively, and will need qualified staff, sufficient resources and safeguards against regulatory capture. This bill will not solve all the problems created by social media. But it could, if properly enforced, improve lives in the UK – and set a useful example internationally. These companies and their services have become an important part of billions of lives. The case for increased oversight is overwhelming.Storm Arwen will be chiefly remembered for the time it took electricity companies to restore power. But for the crew of the Tynemouth lifeboat, who reached a stricken fishing vessel drifting 70 miles off the coast, 26 November will be forever etched on their minds. Answering the fishers’ distress call that their engine had failed, the lifeboat launched at 8.45pm in the teeth of 90mph winds. In total darkness, with swells 6 metres high breaking on the deck, it took four and a half hours to reach the drifting vessel. It was not safe to try to lift the six crew off the fishing boat because of the rise and fall of the sea. There was also a danger to other shipping vessels that might collide with an unmanned 100-tonne boat. With difficulty a towrope was secured and eventually the fishing boat was hauled back to Tynemouth. The lifeboat coxswain, Michael Nugent, with 36 years’ RNLI service said, with classic understatement: “I knew we were in for a rough night.” He conceded that “among the worst conditions he had known” it was an uncomfortable journey home, but at 2.45 pm, 18 hours after the lifeboat launched, the fishing boat was towed into Tynemouth. Both crews were exhausted but safe.I didn’t think I could sympathise more with young people, or be more acutely aware of how much they have been affected by the pandemic. Then I read about the surge in virginity anxiety. Message boards and counselling services are heaving with gen-Zers who missed all those Rubicon events – the festivals, the freshers’ weeks, the parties where someone’s parents actually went out – that might have been the night. It wasn’t that the moment passed; the moment simply never happened. With so much joyless practicality, so much caution, even something as mundane as the weather could derail things. It was meant to be everyone’s hot girl/boy summer, but how are you meant to show the world your midriff when not even the sun will come out? The anxieties are so poignant – would they be heading into their 20s without having had sex? Was it possible to miss the boat altogether? Could a lack of experience become such a millstone that you would be stuck with it for ever? The trend was already towards having sex later in life – one in eight millennials had not had sex before the age of 26, according to a survey in 2018. Compare that with their parents’ generation, in which the figure was one in 20. But there is a major difference between being part of a long-term deferral and feeling as if you have been lassoed by circumstance, stuck at the basecamp, halfway up your mountain of awakening. This absolutely sucks. I won’t say it’s worse than getting your A-level grades unfairly deflated by an algorithm, but I can imagine the world in which it feels worse. The anodyne thing would be to say: cheer up, gen Z, it’s bound to happen for you. Instead, I am going to share everything I have learned this year, through a combination of interviewing, earwigging and reading, about life on the other side – people who have already had sex and how much of it they have had in the pandemic. In the statement-of-the-bleeding obvious column, it has been much easier to be in a couple than to be single, and much easier to be cohabiting than to be living apart. However, even if you were living that dream – hey, let’s go the whole hog and call you married! – things were complicated. The National Survey of Sexual Attitudes and Lifestyles, which normally runs every 10 years, did a mini Covid study that found that three-quarters of cohabitants reported a change in their sex lives, which was more likely to be for the worse. For some, it was the collapsing walls of their multiple identities. We all have different selves – worker, parent, carer, lover, comrade, pain-in-the-arse – and we switch between them via our daily rituals – the school run, the office, bathtime, cocktail hour, etc. When our rituals were obliterated, we couldn’t find a way to toggle, which is a long and euphemistic way of saying we didn’t feel horny. Those who were anxious lost their libido, but so did those who weren’t. Maybe they were kidding themselves and weren’t as relaxed as they thought. Meanwhile, on the singles circuit, everything was 10 times worse – even once it was legal again. A background fear of disease ruined spontaneity and made us forget how to initiate anything. One STI doctor told me she had seen patients overreact to minor diagnoses because they had a generalised, irrational fear of contamination. Some people got used to solitude and couldn’t drag themselves back out of it; others became overwhelmed by the sheer brutality of dating sites. Long Covid sucked the life out of a lot of people, while a lot of others were simply overexposed to one another. None of which is to say that reluctant virgins don’t deserve the lion’s share of our sympathy. Rather, if you think you have missed the boat, you ought to know that the boat you missed is dangerously underpowered and going round in circles. There will be another – better – one around the corner and you will be glad you missed the low-pleasure cruise. • Zoe Williams is a Guardian columnistOn 2 November, the Chinese tennis star Peng Shuai posted a long message on the social media site Weibo, accusing China’s former vice-premier, Zhang Gaoli, of sexual assault. As soon as the post went live, it became the highest-profile #MeToo case in China, and one of the ruling Chinese Communist party’s largest public relations crises in recent history. Within about 20 minutes, the post had been removed. All mentions of the post were then scrubbed from the Chinese internet. No references to the story appeared in the Chinese media. In the days that followed, Peng made no further statements and did not appear in public. Outside China, however, as other tennis stars publicly expressed concerns for her safety, Peng’s apparent disappearance became one of the biggest news stories in the world. It wasn’t long before Hu Xijin stepped into the story. Hu is the editor of the Global Times, a chest-thumpingly nationalistic tabloid sometimes described as “China’s Fox News”. In recent years, he has become the most influential Chinese propagandist in the west – a constant presence on Twitter and in the international media, always on hand to defend the Communist party line, no matter the topic. On 19 November, he tweeted to his 450,000 followers that he had confirmed through his own sources – he didn’t say who they were – that Peng was alive and well. Over the next two days, he posted videos of Peng at a restaurant and signing autographs in Beijing. To many observers, this seemingly stage-managed footage, disseminated by organs of the Chinese state, was not reassuring. On 21 November, the International Olympic Committee spoke with Peng on a video call and declared that she was “doing fine”. When this intervention still failed to convince many that Peng was safe, Hu took the opportunity to hammer home one of the central themes of his three-decade career in journalism: when it comes to China, the western media sees only what it wants to see. “They only believe the story about China that they imagine,” he tweeted. “I’m surprised that they didn’t say the lady who showed up these two days is a fake Peng Shuai, a double.” Those who continued to question Peng’s safety, Hu wrote, were trying to “demonize China’s system”. Hu’s eagerness to reframe a story about sexual assault and censorship as a story about clashing political ideologies and anti-China prejudice is part of a significant change in the way China presents itself to the world. From the late 1970s onwards, as China was opening up but had yet to assume a major role in international affairs, it struggled to handle criticism from abroad. The official response was usually some form of wounded denial, or a stilted demand that other countries stay out of its business. But over the past decade, as China’s global power has grown, President Xi Jinping has pushed the country into a more confident, aggressive posture, and Hu, more than any other Chinese journalist, has become the voice of this pugnacious nationalism. On China’s most popular social media platform, WeChat, the Global Times is reportedly the most read outlet. “My English is almost all self-taught,” Hu once said in a video on Weibo, “and in English, I’m most skilful at picking a fight.” He has hyped up the prospects of military confrontation between the US and China over Taiwan. He has warned that if Britain infringes Chinese sovereignty in the South China Sea then it will be treated like “a bitch” who is “asking for a beating”. He has compared India to a “bandit” that has “barbarically robbed” Chinese companies. He has referred to Australia as nothing more than “gum stuck to the bottom of China’s shoe”. He recently concluded an article with the question: “In the face of such an irrational Australia, shouldn’t China be prepared with an iron fist and to punch it hard when needed, teaching it a thorough lesson?” When he picks a fight with foreign officials on Twitter, Hu likes to take screenshots of the tweets and post them on Weibo, just to show his 24 million followers – most of whom are blocked from Twitter by the great firewall – that he’s out there, defending China’s honour. “The most important thing about Hu is that he has constructed a whole style of authoritarian, nationalistic rhetoric,” Xiao Qiang, an expert in Chinese media at Berkeley’s School of Information, told me. “His readers go around repeating the same things and spreading the same sentiments.” Hu’s combative approach has been taken up by a number of Chinese diplomats and spokespeople – often called “Wolf Warriors”, in reference to a jingoistic Chinese blockbuster movie – who promote a “China first” philosophy and use social media to trash anyone they see as opposing Chinese interests. But where the Wolf Warrior diplomats are a recent phenomenon, people like Hu “have been propagating this idea for 10 years,” says Xiang Lanxin, a professor of international politics at Geneva’s Graduate Institute. Hu’s endless stream of quotable insults and invective stands out amid a sea of bland official statements, calls to “occupy new platforms for party discourse”, and so on. Once you know his name, you see him quoted everywhere – the BBC, NPR, the Financial Times, the Washington Post, the Times, Reuters. In the past two years, the New York Times has mentioned him 46 times. “He’s willing to be quoted in the Xi Jinping era, when huge numbers of others – especially liberal commentators – have grown too nervous to go on-the-record with foreign journalists,” says Evan Osnos, who has written about China for the New Yorker since 2008. Hu has even become the subject of headlines in his own right. “Editor of Chinese state newspaper which routinely mocks Australia enjoyed LUNCH at our embassy”, reported Daily Mail Australia last year. One reason for Hu’s ubiquity is that he has unparalleled licence to speak bluntly about politics. Hu’s domestic critics have described him as “the only person with freedom of speech” in mainland China, though that freedom is partly a reflection of his adherence to the CCP line. Hu’s insistence on thrusting himself into every passing controversy has earned him the nickname diaopan, or “Frisbee catcher” – like a loyal pet, he tries to bring every argument home for the government he serves. Over the years, Hu has encouraged a kind of mystique around his connection with party leadership. “To be honest, I myself don’t know for sure to what degree I reflect the authority’s voice,” Hu told me when we spoke on the phone late last year. He likes to say that the Global Times’ success is a product of the market. But when I asked him if the paper is financially independent from the government, he eventually told me, after some back and forth, that the English edition receives government funding for providing overseas propaganda. Where Hu once spoke for a hardline fringe of the Communist party, his newspaper’s aggressive China-first ideology is now ascendant. As one American author who stopped writing for the Global Times in 2011 put it: “With all those Wolf Warrior diplomats, it’s like the government has been Global Times-ified.” * * * In 2016, President Xi visited the Beijing headquarters of the People’s Daily, the largest newspaper group in China, which is run by the Communist party and publishes Hu’s Global Times. On his tour of the offices, as he passed through the exhibition hall, Xi pointed approvingly to a display copy of the Global Times and declared himself a reader. Hu, it seemed, was successfully pursuing the propaganda strategy that Xi had laid out early in his presidency. Hu’s rise is hard to grasp without understanding the broader story of free speech in 21st century China. In the 00s, hundreds of millions of Chinese citizens came online and their voices became more audible. Starting in 2008, the People’s Daily set up a dedicated team to monitor public opinion online. Its first few annual reports presented new digital platforms in a positive light, as a way to bring the government and its people closer. Weibo and other online communities were “a good tool for citizens to participate in and discuss politics,” the 2010 report stated. During this period, journalists in China were afforded a little more freedom to do reporting that touched upon politically sensitive issues, though certain topics – such as the 1989 Tiananmen Square massacre, and the lives and conduct of top leadership – remained off-limits. Starting in the early 2010s, and particularly from 2012, with the rise of Xi, this more liberal approach to public discourse was gradually reversed. “When Xi Jinping became president [in 2013], he was not interested in the voices on the internet,” Xiao, the UC Berkeley professor, told me. “Instead, he perceived such voices as a threat to his power, and recognised that it was time for a complete crackdown.” Posts on social media, such as Weibo, became increasingly monitored and censored. It became more common for web users to receive an “invitation to tea”, a euphemism for a phone call instructing you to visit your local police station to answer questions about your online activities. From 2013, a growing number of citizens were suspended or banned from online platforms, detained or sentenced to prison. Drawing on media reports and court documents, an online database recorded more than 2,000 cases in which people had been punished or prosecuted for their online speech since 2013. The total number is almost certainly much higher. In 2013, at the same time the party was tightening its grip on public discourse, Xi called a conference with propaganda officials from across the country, urging them to “tell the China story well”. That meant covering China in a way that was positive, engaging and harnessed new digital platforms. It meant proudly celebrating China’s achievements, rather than focusing on its imperfections. Hu adapted fluidly to China’s new media environment, which was at once very online, obedient to the party line and international-facing. In his articles, social media interventions and interviews, he played the role of both dutiful defence attorney – there to deliver the party’s side of the story, no matter how implausible it might seem – and aggrieved relative of the accused, yelling out to the court that the prosecution and the judge were prejudiced or corrupt or stupid, or all of the above. It was a style that suited the tenor of Chinese social media, as well as the new self-image of the Communist party. Other party media outlets started to mimic Hu’s style, writing in a more colloquial manner. Even People’s Daily, famously stolid and voiceless throughout most of its history, encourages its commentators to be more “fun” and to grow personal brands. In 2019, Xi visited the People Daily’s office again. He asked the country’s media workers to embrace new technology to “maximise and optimise propaganda impact” and “to promote the voice of the party directly into various apps and occupy new platforms for party discourse”. As Xi cruised through the office, the People’s Daily editorial team lined up and applauded. Among them was Hu in a dark grey jacket, smiling ear to ear. * * * No event seems to distil Hu’s remarkable place in Chinese journalism like the Tiananmen Square massacre. Journalists are always proud to tell their readers that they were there when something significant happened. Hu does the same when it comes to Tiananmen, except that he inserts himself into this history in order to discredit it. References to the Tiananmen massacre are prohibited in China. Perhaps the only exception to this rule is the Global Times. When Hu writes about the subject, he paints it as a dangerous folly. “If the incident 32 years ago has any positive effect,” Hu wrote this June, “it has inoculated the Chinese people with a political vaccine, helping us acquire immunity from being seriously misled.” Hu was 29 when the pro-democracy protests began. He had been born into a poor, Christian, but otherwise traditional family. His father was an accountant at a factory that manufactured rockets, and his mother, who was illiterate, made embroidery with a sewing machine to bring in some extra income. At 18, Hu joined the People’s Liberation Army and enrolled in its foreign-language college in Nanjing, where he majored in Russian. In 1986, still a military officer, he started a masters programme in Russian at Beijing Foreign Studies University. In the spring of 1989, when protests erupted across the country, Hu was months away from graduation. “I went to Tiananmen Square every day, chanting slogans like everybody else,” Hu told a Chinese reporter in 2011. (Xiao, the UC Berkeley professor, who was a student at Notre Dame in 1989 and flew back to Beijing upon seeing the news on TV, laughed at the idea that Hu could have been there as a protester. He noted that the military college Hu attended is sometimes known as “China’s cradle of 007s”. “If he truly participated in the protest, god knows what his role was,” Xiao said.) Shortly after the violent suppression of the Tiananmen protests, Hu joined the People’s Daily newspaper, where he spent two years as a researcher and another two years as an editor on the night shift. At the time, China was more than a decade into Deng Xiaoping’s push to develop a market economy. Hu was part of a group of journalists at the People’s Daily who sought to create new revenue streams by launching a weekly newspaper called Global News Digest. On 3 January 1993, 20,000 copies of the first issue, which included a story on Diana, Princess of Wales’s split from Prince Charles, appeared on newsstands. The front page featured a grandiose message from the editors, which proclaimed that after 500 years of falling behind the west, and 14 years of economic reform, China was “saying goodbye to poverty and backwardness, like a giant dragon about to take off, standing tall in the east of the world, its head held high”. Despite this lofty rhetoric, Hu claims there wasn’t a clear vision at first. “We published whatever ordinary people liked to read,” he told me. The publication was filled with exotic stories about spies, royal romances, historical assassinations and children raised alongside wild animals. Most mainstream publications were so propaganda-heavy, so filled with party lingo and news of top leaders’ endless meetings, that the arrival of the plain-talking, eye-catching Global Times must have felt like an episode of Sex and the City beamed into the middle of a long sermon. Articles from the 90s included The Dark World of the Russian Mafia, From Female Slave to Fashion Model, and The Unexpected Madness of Monks: Korean Buddhists’ Rivalry Doused Monastery with Blood. A few months into his stint at Global News Digest, Hu’s career was transformed when he was dispatched abroad to cover the Bosnian war for the People’s Daily. In his memoir about the experience, published in 1997, he recalled thinking that the fact of a Chinese journalist reporting on a foreign war “was likely more newsworthy than whatever articles he has to file”. To Hu, the conflict in Bosnia became the backdrop for a private battlefield in his mind, as he began measuring himself against the western journalists around him, whom he both admired and resented. “To be a soldier in a modern news war, I couldn’t defeat the western reporters, but I congratulate myself for being able to even join them for a fight,” Hu wrote in his memoir. (Almost a quarter of a century later, his Twitter avatar is a photo of him in Sarajevo, sitting on the curb taking notes.) The book is sprinkled with a mixture of pride and vulnerability, as Hu struggles with his own inferiority complex: “Why can’t I be the one who creates a sensation? Why can’t a Chinese reporter be in the limelight?” he writes at one point. He admits that he spent his time obsessing over how to “look more like a real reporter”, rather than focusing on reporting. “I couldn’t stand being looked down upon, not only on a personal level, but also on the account of being Chinese – a fact that brings with it a kind of unbearable pressure for me.” He carried this chip on his shoulder everywhere he went. On one occasion, he turned up to a news briefing that was in Albanian. He didn’t understand a word, but that didn’t stop him from asking a question in English – not to seek an answer, just to assert his presence. Hu returned to Beijing in 1996 and soon became Global News Digest’s deputy editor. “I was a war and international affairs reporter, and my personal interest was fused into our coverage,” he told me. In 1997, the paper changed its name to the Global Times, and in the next two years, circulation tripled. “China was becoming integrated with the world,” Hu said. “In the past, international news were merely pieces of knowledge or information from remote corners of the world. Gradually, international news became more and more related to China, and the Chinese audience developed a keen interest in what’s happening outside the country.” One international incident from this period symbolised that new reality. On 7 May 1999, a Nato bomb hit the Chinese embassy in Belgrade, killing three Chinese journalists. Officials from the US claimed that it was an accident and that the real target had been a Yugoslavian defence agency a few hundred metres down the road. But many people in China believed it was a deliberate attack, and anti-American protests erupted across the country. Two days after the bombing, the Global Times published a special issue, featuring a report by a Global Times journalist who had been speaking with the ambassador in the building just minutes before the explosion. According to Han Rongbin, a professor of international affairs at the University of Georgia, events such as the embassy bombing strengthened a collective sense of aggrieved national identity. “That’s why some nationalists like to say that it was America who made them so nationalistic,” he said. As the Global Times grew, China’s most powerful politicians watched with admiration. In 2004, when the paper published a column that criticised Chinese journalists for unthinkingly accepting American media narratives about the “war on terror”, the foreign minister, Li Zhaoxing, said that he’d long been waiting to read such an article. “Journalism might be without borders, but journalists do have motherlands,” wrote Li – in the Global Times – shortly after. Later that year, the president of the People’s Daily publishing group, Wang Chen, spoke at a seminar to discuss the “Global Times phenomenon”. Wang said that the minister of foreign affairs and the head of the overseas propaganda office had repeatedly told him how much they loved the paper, and that the Global Times exemplified how to make propaganda readable. In presentations to advertisers during this period, the publication would tout its close ties with top leadership, claiming that its readers included “nearly 200 key leaders of the country at the party central, the state council, the central military commission and the National People’s Congress”. As soon as each issue was published, the presentation claimed, special messengers would deliver the paper to Zhongnanhai, the walled compound where much of the Communist party elite live and work. * * * Since 2005, when he took over the paper as editor-in-chief, Hu has expanded the Global Times to an operation of 800 staff, publishing six days a week in Chinese and in English. “We needed to expand our influence, and we couldn’t do that without using English,” Hu told me, explaining the decision to launch the English edition in 2009. Looking back, the first few years of the English-language Global Times can seem like a strange interlude in the paper’s history. Located in a rented office building outside the People’s Daily compound, the English operation was largely separated from the Chinese one. Rather than rigidly following the nationalistic line, it afforded journalists some space to report on more sensitive topics. Around the time of the English edition’s launch, the Global Times hired a dozen foreign editors. Their job was to ensure that stories in English read smoothly, but they had little say on editorial decisions. The English-language content was written mostly by Chinese journalists. James Palmer, who worked at the Global Times for seven years and is now a deputy editor of the American magazine Foreign Policy, told me that in the early days, the newspaper’s English content was about 60% “banal”, 20% “mad nationalistic stuff” and 20% “genuinely interesting”. Hu differentiated his paper from the other English-language party outlet, China Daily, by running stories on subjects such as dissidents and LGBTQ rights. “The Global Times was trying to make waves,” Jemimah Steinfeld, a British former editor, told me. Staffers from this period remembered that Hu liked to paint himself as a force for progress. All reforms begin with rule-breaking, Hu told a Chinese magazine in 2013. If your type of rule-breaking helps the country, eventually the government will give it approval. This, he said, is how progress in China works. According to Wen Tao, a Chinese reporter who worked for the English edition, Hu told staff to avoid self-censorship and to pursue whatever they considered newsworthy. Wen’s pieces captured the everyday struggles of life in Beijing a decade ago: a poet criticising his local government’s plan to cut down 20,000 trees in order to extend a road; a father trying to advocate for food safety, after his children got ill from adulterated milk formula, only to be put on trial himself. In February 2010, he broke a story about the dissident artist Ai Weiwei and other local artists protesting in downtown Beijing against the demolition of a residential complex. Afterwards, Ai visited the newsroom of the English edition, and was warmly welcomed. The divergence between the English Global Times and the Chinese Global Times was striking. “Their reports depicted two different Chinas,” wrote Wen on his personal blog in 2016. Where the Chinese edition demonised international voices, the English edition reported “some realities” in an attempt to show the outside world that the Chinese, too, enjoyed a free press. “If you didn’t look at the byline or the name of the paper, it could have very well been a story from the Wall Street Journal,” Wen told me. It did not last. Not long after his Ai Weiwei story, Wen was asked to submit his resignation. “The paper was looking to push boundaries, but I probably overdid it a little bit,” Wen told me. Around that time, he ran into Hu in the elevator. Wen recalled the older journalist expressing frustration: sometimes you write your stories, hoping to make room for more reporting like this – only to find yourself being told to take a big step back. (Palmer told me that the Global Times “had a culture of two ‘serious mistakes’ every six months” and that Hu was “very regularly” told off by the propaganda authorities and other ministries.) It is hard to tell to what extent, if any, Hu’s English-language Global Times reflected his own journalistic ideals, or whether, as Wen suggested, the licence given to its reporters was itself a kind of propaganda exercise, intended to give foreigners the impression that the Chinese press enjoyed greater freedom than it really did and that he, too, was a real reporter. At the very least, it seems that during this period, at the English edition, Hu was fairly committed to performing the role of a liberal-leaning editor. Palmer recalled that in their first meeting, Hu told him, unprompted, that he wanted democracy and freedom of speech in China, but that reform had to be gradual. In Wen’s view, Hu is a deeply conflicted figure. “On the one hand, he wanted to do journalism professionally, but on the other hand, he couldn’t change his position as a party man,” he said. By 2011, as the government line on freedom of speech hardened, so did the editorial line of the Global Times. That year, the authorities detained Ai Weiwei for 81 days, and the Global Times denounced him in a series of Chinese and English op-eds, including one headlined “Ai Weiweis will be washed away by history”. “It was a very sudden pivot,” Palmer remembered. “And after that it just became worse and worse.” The American author who no longer contributes to the Global Times told me: “Their business model seems to have switched to being completely provocative and just to piss people off.” Sometimes, one former editor told me, when an article seemed particularly inflammatory or outrageous, “we sent up a red flag, and they would be like, ‘No, that’s exactly what we want to say.’” * * * There are many ways to be an editor in chief, Hu told me as his mobile phones rang in the background. “Some people might use their energy on managing, but I devote more of my energy to content.” On the phone, Hu was polite and warm, in contrast to his aggressive online persona. He took long pauses before answering most questions, as if to compose mini-essays in his mind. Every day, he told me, his team “monitors” the internet in search of popular subjects, and once they land on an idea, they prepare a summary of the issue and brief Hu on it. Then Hu gets to work, turning it into a column. For each piece, his staff typically interview two or three experts, mostly government thinktankers and professors from top universities. According to Hu, this means that his columns “don’t only reflect my own opinion, but absorb the opinions of many people in our society. We represent a somewhat mainstream take in China.” As the space permitted to alternative views has shrunk, it has become increasingly difficult to judge what proportion of China’s 1.4 billion people share the Global Times’ worldview. Scholars, journalists, writers, lawyers and activists have found their social media accounts suspended or erased because of their unspecified violation of the platform’s rules. These cases are so common and seemingly minor that they attract little international attention, but their collective effect is suffocating. In mainland China today, censorship and self-censorship are like the weather – you can complain about it, but you have to adapt to it. To rebel is to submit to the possibility of having your life ruined. Early last year, a 36-year-old woman, Zhang Zhan, decided to report from Wuhan as a citizen journalist. She was soon arrested and sentenced to four years in prison, and now, several months into a hunger strike, she is on her deathbed. Most people in China don’t know about Zhang Zhan, and those who do tend not to think about what she represents – to do so would only lead to trouble. That doesn’t mean that party-approved figures such as Hu are beyond criticism in mainland China. Hu’s critics include former contributors to the Global Times, who feel that since 2010, he has grown into an increasingly absurd, even dangerous, caricature of himself. “You might have noticed that I rarely write for them any more,” Shen Dingli, a professor of international relations at Fudan University, who is on the Global Times’s go-to list of experts, told me in an email. “The reason is their inclination towards extreme nationalism.” Xiang Lanxin, who is based outside China, told me something similar, having been put off by Hu’s increasingly crude politics. He used to be a frequent contributor to the Global Times, but he stopped in the early 2010s when he sensed that Hu was “no longer interested in meaningful debates”. Hu’s critics are particularly alarmed by enthusiasm for military solutions to problems. After a recent border scuffle in the Himalayas with India, Hu argued that the Chinese army should “ready themselves to launch into battle at any moment”. In another column, Hu suggested that China should build up an arsenal of 1,000 nuclear warheads. In September, the Global Times published an op-ed headlined “People’s Liberation Army jets will eventually patrol over Taiwan”. When I asked Hu about critics who accuse him of warmongering, he became agitated and denied suggesting that China should start a war. “What I said is that if Taiwan started to assault us, then we must fight back with overwhelming force,” he told me. (One wonders what kind of action would constitute an “assault” in his view.) To Xiang, Hu’s influence is far more important than that of the headline-grabbing Wolf Warrior diplomats. Where diplomats can be silenced with one word from the top, the feelings of Chinese superiority that the Global Times stokes every day are far harder to control. “This newspaper has been leading popular mood in a nationalist direction for a long time, and the consequences of this are not to be taken lightly,” Xiang told an interviewer last year. Occasionally, it can seem as if Hu is becoming a stranger in a sphere he helped build. In May, the Weibo account of the Central Political and Legal Affairs Commission posted an image titled China Ignition vs India Ignition, contrasting a recent Chinese rocket launch with Indian cremation – a reference to the country’s surging Covid death toll. When Hu criticised the post and expressed sympathy for India’s plight, he was attacked by nationalists for being too soft on one of China’s principal rivals. A decade ago, on social media, Hu had seemed to be the No 1 flag bearer for Chinese nationalism. Now his status is not so certain. On Weibo, while Hu was being criticised for insufficient national pride, one Global Times journalist asked: “Has Hu Xijin changed? Or, have the times changed?” The answer seemed clear. Hu is 61, and rumours about his imminent retirement surface periodically. Yet he remains as zealous and full of fight as he was three decades ago. “He really is the soul of the paper,” Wen told me. “It’s very hard to imagine a de-Huxijinised Global Times.” The audience he once dreamed of as a young reporter in Bosnia – readers who don’t unquestioningly admire western journalism and instead cheer on their Chinese counterparts – has materialised. Each of his Weibo posts are followed by thousands of comments and tens of thousands of likes. Hu likes to call himself a shubianzhe, an antiquated term for a guard stationed on the nation’s frontiers, keeping it safe. In just the past week, fulfilling this duty has involved insulting Taiwanese President Tsai Ing-wen, comparing Hong Kong activist Nathan Law to a 6 January Capitol rioter, taunting the Australian prime minister, bickering with a Florida senator and posting numerous cartoons highlighting American hypocrisy. It is a ceaseless task. For now, Hu fights on. • Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread, listen to our podcasts here and sign up to the long read weekly email here.Yesterday, like much of the rest of the world, I watched the finale of the third season of Succession. And, like much of the rest of the world, I found myself buffeted by one astonishing twist after another – and a gasp-inducing climax that outdid even those of series one and two. Unlike my fellow viewers, however, pretty much the first thing I see after the end credits roll is the face of Jesse Armstrong, the show’s creator, popping up over Zoom and politely attempting to dissuade me from discussing the episode. Unlike other big TV showrunners – who will happily explain, and sometimes over-explain, every single second – Armstrong prefers to remain hands off. He tries not to read the acres of theorising that Succession inspires. Such post-match analyses, he says, can often feel like a tightrope walk. “There’s a bit of me that just wants to find out what the fuck everyone is saying about the show,” he says from his book-lined study in London. “But you can’t. It wouldn’t be good for me psychologically – and it wouldn’t be good for the creative process of doing the show.” This reluctance to engage is partly down to his desire to preserve the reality of the show, which tells the story of billionaire Logan Roy, his media company WayStar RoyCo and his four children, all of them vying for dominance in the most dysfunctionally abhorrent ways. Once the creator starts explaining the background to all the decisions that go into making the show, he believes, the mystery that propels it starts to diminish. “I don’t want to say, ‘We had this for lunch on that day’ or ‘Kieran was wearing a hat, but we decided to give him another one because it made him look more military.’” He pulls himself to a halt, already imagining the thousands of “Roman Roy joins the army” theories that could be triggered by such a statement about the repellent, but very funny, character played by Kieran Culkin. “I’ve just made that up,” Armstrong quickly clarifies. For weeks now, Succession has been stuffed with foreboding symbols of death. There have been crucifixes, health scares and – in a cliffhanger that obsessed the world last week – a dreadful accident. Worse still, the final episode opened with Logan reading the children’s book Goodbye Mog to his grandson. The book, about a cartoon cat, is explicitly about the death of a beloved character. You don’t put Goodbye Mog in a TV programme, I say, unless you’re planning to off someone. “Or do you?” counters Armstrong. “As you know, there are multiple readings of Goodbye Mog. You could probably list them. But this was probably more of a Marxist reading than a Freudian one.” Kendall, the middle brother, did seem like he might take his life this season. Has he ever considered killing him off? “The writers’ room is an open forum where anything mad or weird that aggressively shakes up the show can be suggested and considered,” he replies. “But we never went down that road. We know Ken got to a low point, then an event happened. I wouldn’t disagree with anyone else’s interpretation of it – but in my mind, it was just a grey area of someone who has stopped looking after themselves.” To hear Armstrong talk about it, all the real fun of Succession happens inside the writers’ room. That’s where all the plots are hashed out, all the themes debated until something like a roadmap to each season begins to form. It sounds like a world of total possibility and, whenever I even begin to approach something approximating a grand unified theory on Succession, the writers’ room is where he bats it back to. Maybe, I say, it would be a good idea for Logan to just sell out and cut his kids loose, let the entitled brats stand on their own two feet. If they can make a success of themselves outside of WayStar, then they don’t need it. If they can’t, it’s proof Logan was only keeping them around out of vanity. I check Armstrong’s face for something – anything – that might validate my theory. “Um,” he eventually replies. “I’m gonna give you a, ‘That’s a good idea.’ I buy the notion, but it’s not good for me to talk about. If I said, ‘Yes, that’s right’, it would be bullshit. I haven’t got a conceptual framework of what happens. I don’t mean to be a dick about it, but I don’t have any good answers, or maybe they’re only appropriate to discuss in the writers’ room.” I retreat to safer ground. A recent New Yorker interview with Jeremy Strong, who plays Kendall Roy, laid out his sometimes extreme ways of getting into whatever character he is playing. In The Trial of the Chicago 7, while shooting a protest scene, Strong asked a stunt coördinator to rough him up and also requested to be sprayed with real tear gas. “I don’t like saying no to Jeremy,” the film’s writer and director Aaron Sorkin is quoted as saying. “But there were 200 people in that scene and another 70 on the crew, so I declined to spray them with poison gas.” The profile attracted such fascination (and mockery) that the likes of Sorkin, Jessica Chastain and Anne Hathaway felt compelled to leap to his defence. Has Armstrong spoken to Strong during this firestorm? Is he dealing with it OK? “He’s fine,” says the writer. “He’s fine. I’m in touch with all the actors. He’s good.” With Strong so willing to go to similar extremes to reach the emotions needed to play someone like Kendall, I wonder if Armstrong ever goes through something similar. Does he, in the process of creating a show with so many peaks and troughs, find himself being chucked about by the emotion of it all? “Oh shit, I do, I do,” he says, suddenly much more animated, recalling a scene between Kendall and his sister Shiv. “I remember doing a rewrite where Shiv gives Kendall a hug. I found it very touching.” This isn’t always the case, he’s keen to point out. “Sometimes I can be a bit more of a scientist in a lab about it. You don’t want to get high on your own supply and start overestimating yourself, but I really am emotionally engaged.” He goes on to describe the season three finale’s most pivotal scene, which takes place in an Italian car park underneath the beating sun. It is a make-or-break moment for the siblings in their battle with their father – a delicate scene they had to get right. Nevertheless, as Armstrong explains: “I was very present watching that scene being filmed. I was like a fan of Succession watching it.” After Christmas, Armstrong will reassemble the Succession writers’ room and begin to piece together season four. It may or may not be the show’s last. He won’t say for sure, but he does seem overly concerned with the notion of outstaying his welcome. Speaking of the season two finale, the one that ended with Kendall publicly accusing his father of wrongdoing, he recalls thinking: “I hope I can write another as good as that. And I don’t know if I can. That might be as good as I’ve got.” It wasn’t. This last season has seen Succession ascend to even greater heights – but Armstrong remains cautious. “You’ve only got so much plot, character and psychological capital,” he says. “One day it will be gone and you don’t know when that day is. The fear is that it’ll sneak up on you when you’re not looking.” I have time to pitch one last Succession theory. Given all the plot swings with Kendall, and his very specific obsessions, is he Jesus? “This is part of the reason why I do and don’t like talking about the show,” Armstrong replies patiently. “That theory works, but it isn’t the key to the show because it’s not that kind of show. But you’d be very welcome to come into the writers’ room and say that, because we’d have a really good time talking about it.” You’ve really made me want to visit the writers’ room, I say. He grins. “I find the period when the show’s going out really complicated, because there’s all this stuff I do want to know but I don’t want to know. But the writers’ room is almost pure pleasure. I always look forward to that.” • Succession is available to watch on demand on Sky and NOW.Ignorance was not an album that came out of nowhere. Former child actor Tamara Lindeman has been making great albums as the Weather Station for more than a decade, developing her sound from down-home acoustic guitar and banjo to atmospheric folky alt-rock and earning comparisons to Joni Mitchell from some critics in the process. While the latter seemed to have more to do with her vocal phrasing than her actual songwriting, it gives you an idea of the regard in which she was held. Nevertheless, her fifth album under the name had a perfectly of-the-moment, lightning-in-a-bottle quality that none of her previous work could quite prepare you for. At the end of 2018, she said, she was driven “insane” by reading a New Yorker article by environmentalist Bill McKibben, written as California burned during the most destructive wildfire season in history. She subsequently poured her anger and grief into the 10 songs on Ignorance. The lyrics occasionally slipped into something approaching straightforward protest songs (as on opener The Robber, whose titular villain had “permission by laws, permission of banks / White table cloth dinners, convention centres – it was all done real carefully”) but, for the most part, they entwine “climate grief” with what sound like words about a failing relationship to startling effect. “I’ll feel as useless as a tree in a city park,” ran a characteristically powerful line from Tried to Tell You, “standing as a symbol of what we have blown apart”. Occasionally, you couldn’t tell what she was singing about – romantic heartbreak or paralysing despair at the thought of impending ecological catastrophe – or rather, you could take Ignorance’s songs either way. On Parking Lot, the everyday sight of a bird landing on a rooftop, singing “the same song over and over again, over the traffic and the noise” leads to floods of tears: “I know you are tired of seeing tears in my eyes, but are there not good reasons to cry?” asks the chorus, ambiguously. Separated could be about a couple falling apart, or it could just as easily be a depiction of frustration at an endlessly combative era of sharply divided opinions: “If you wanted to understand me you could / If you wanted to hold my hand you would.” Lindeman also shifted her musical focus, bringing in a new expansiveness and gloss – synths, disco beats, strings, sax and flute that carry a distinct hint of jazz about them. The phrase “soft rock” and inevitable comparisons to Fleetwood Mac were bandied about in relation to Ignorance, although its combination of emotive words and luxurious widescreen music more obviously recalled the Blue Nile. But what you liken the album, there’s something incredibly powerful about the cocktail it offers. In purely melodic terms, these are Lindeman’s strongest songs to date, filled with nagging hooks and gracefully unforced tunes; the sound is smoothly, warmly appealing: you could imagine singing along to them if the lyrics didn’t keep belting you in the gut. As Lindeman has pointed out, she is “a writer of the small event”. Her songs feel all the more effective for the way they focus in on detail rather than painting in broad brushstrokes, and for the way she avoids sloganeering in favour of something more complex and believable: frequently admitting to feeling overwhelmed, or expressing a desire just to forget or ignore what’s happening, at least for a bit. Its loveliest track might be Atlantic, which finds Lindeman first looking out, bedazzled, at a sunset over the ocean, then desperate to switch off from current events. “I should really know better than to read the headlines,” she sings. “Does it matter if I see it? / No, really, can I not just cover my eyes?” That feels like a perfect, witty, succinct fixing of the last couple of years: has anyone not felt like that at least once or twice? A product of our times that’s built to last, Ignorance is a fantastic album that marks the full flowering of a great songwriter.MPs are calling for a moratorium on the expansion of new waste incineration plants just days before councils in London vote on awarding a contract to build a huge new plant in Edmonton. A report by the all-party parliamentary group on air pollution says expansions should be halted immediately to protect human health and cut carbon emissions. The report concludes that ultrafine particles released by incineration at scale constitute a significant health hazard. Geraint Davies, Labour MP and chair of the group, said the expansion of the Edmonton incinerator and others should be stopped. “Air pollution already kills 64,000 people across the UK each year, so government planning that will double incineration capacity by allowing the construction of 50 new waste incinerators by 2030 … should be immediately halted as it will give rise to a significant growth in ultrafine particulates, which are the most dangerous to human health,” he said. “Of critical importance is that it is the number of particulates, as opposed to their combined mass, that is the key determinant for human ill health. The smallest particulates act like a gas and penetrate seamlessly into the blood stream and organs, creating damage to the hearts, brains, and lungs of victims.” There are at least 90 incinerators in the UK and 50 more proposed or in development, according to government data and data collected by the anti incineration group United Kingdom Without Incineration Network. The group of MPs heard evidence from Ruggero Ridolfi, an oncologist with more than 40 years of clinical experience, who found heavy metals in the toenails of children living near incinerators and highlighted the link with acute childhood leukemia. Research by Kirsten Bouman, of ToxicoWatch, an independent non-profit organisation dedicated to raising awareness of toxic hazards, found dioxins in chicken eggs up to 10km from incinerators that emit them. The report was published days before seven councils in north London will be asked to vote for a contract to be awarded to rebuild and expand the capacity of the Edmonton incinerator, run by the North London Waste Authority (NLWA), by 200,000 tonnes. Protests against the Edmonton incinerator include demonstrations by doctors in the area who are calling on council leaders to support cleaner, alternative ways of dealing with local waste. Recycling rates in north London are just 30% and more than half of the incinerated waste is readily recyclable, according to Defra. Dr Ed Tranah, medical registrar at North Middlesex hospital, said: “If this goes ahead you are looking at 35-50 years of continued incineration of waste, much of which does not need to be incinerated and is recyclable. “We are burning all sorts of materials and we don’t even have a study into how the fumes are affecting people working and living in the area.” Haringey council recently called for the expansion to be paused citing concerns over air pollution. A recent report from the National Infrastructure committee warned rising greenhouse gas emissions from waste incineration would prevent the UK meeting its net zero targets by 2050. Highlighting the carbon impact of waste incineration, the APPG report called for tax measures to be introduced to restrict incinerator expansion. Dr Dominic Hogg, who founded the environmental consultancy Eunomia, told the MPs a 700,000-tonne incinerator pumps out about 700 tonnes of NOx (nitrogen oxides) a year. He said incineration – like landfill – should be taxed in relation to the carbon content of the feedstock and the emissions of NOx, SOx (sulfur oxides), particulate matter and other pollutants. They should also be part of the emissions trading scheme. Davies said poorer communities already suffered worse health outcomes from disproportionately higher levels of air pollution and inequality. Recent research by Greenpeace showed poorer communities were three times more likely to have an incinerator in their area than more affluent areas. He said: “Plans to increase incineration in London and elsewhere should be put on hold to prevent excess capacity driving the burning of recyclable waste. “The protection and improvement of air quality must become a central strategy to combat climate change and to improve human health nationally and globally. “We must apply the precautionary principle to new waste incineration in urban locations so that the cumulative health risks of ultrafine particulates to dense populations do not materialise.” Clyde Loakes, chair of NLWA, said: “We’re absolutely clear that our facility will be the safest and cleanest in the country, using state-of-the-art technology to protect residents’ health and eliminate pollution to effectively zero. “An incineration tax and inclusion within an Emissions Trading Scheme, this would just hit cash-strapped local councils and not tackle the root cause of the problem. “The key target has to be all the rubbish that’s produced in the first place. That’s why we’re investing in state of the art of recycling infrastructure, the biggest investment into such infrastructure in London for decades. But what we really need is systemic change: for businesses to stop churning out single-use plastics, and for [the] government to stop years of dithering and get on with urgent reforms we’ve been calling on for years. This means compulsory recycling now and a deposit return scheme now.”In the year we got a ninth Fast and Furious movie, Japanese director Ryûsuke Hamaguchi gave us something at the very opposite end of the petrolhead scale with Drive My Car. You could call it Slow and Circuitous, but that would be doing his monumental, highly moving meditation on how life, art and desire intertwine a huge disservice. Vast in philosophical scope but intimate; beautifully controlled but pulsing with erotic undercurrents, it marks Hamaguchi’s emergence as a new cinematic master. Liberally adapted from Haruki Murakami’s short story, it sees avant garde theatre director Kafuku (Hidetoshi Nishijima) mourning the death of his wife Oto (Reika Kirishima) – whose infidelity he had just discovered. Accepting an assignment to direct a new multilingual production of Uncle Vanya in Hiroshima, he reluctantly consents to being chauffeured around by the taciturn Misaki (Tôko Miura). Every morning on the way to the theatre, he listens to a cassette recording of Oto’s voice running his lines. In taxing rehearsals, he encourages the actors to surrender themselves to Chekhov’s text – including Oto’s bad-boy former lover Koji, whom Kafuku has cast in some form of punishment as the self-doubting Vanya. Willingly or unwillingly, everyone is a passenger on a journey here. Hamaguchi has been circling these themes for years – since his graduation feature Passion and on into the acclaimed Asako I &amp; II: the ebb and flow of art and life, the revelatory effects of role-playing, how desire sculpts our identity from within. But in Drive My Car they all flow powerfully into each other: grieving for Oto, who used sex to unleash her creativity, Kafuku begins to confide in Misaki, and their new intimacy starts to dislodge her secrets. Using driving as a brilliantly concise metaphor for how storytelling, acting and loving all draw us towards unknown destinations certain to change us, Hamaguchi orchestrates his ideas with a cool and elegant insistency. Drive My Car’s red Saab 900 – weaving quietly through Hiroshima, and the expressways and byways of the human heart – deserves to be up there in the iconic movie symbol stakes with Rosebud the sledge.Naughty &amp; Nice: Sex Toy Britain 10pm, Channel 4 Sexy times for Channel 4 this year: after its explorations of threesomes and homemade porn, it sees out the year with a look at the Christmas market in sex toys. Business is booming – possibly as a way of passing time in lockdown, the nation has become more adventurous. This documentary hears from lingerie designers, content creators and, most intriguing of all, sex toy developers who will hopefully walk us through their R&amp;D processes. Phil Harrison The Yorkshire Vet at Christmas: It’s a Wonderful Life 8pm, Channel 5 It just isn’t Christmas unless some celestial being convinces you to lighten up a bit. And it’s no exception tonight as Peter meets his own “Clarence”, who persuades him to, among other things, come to the aid of a stricken sheep and a poorly pet turkey. Cockle-warming stuff. Ali Catterall Impeachment: American Crime Story 9pm, BBC Two A nuanced and impressive performance from Beanie Feldstein underpins this drama about the impeachment of President Bill Clinton. The endgame is fast approaching and, in tonight’s penultimate episode, Monica Lewinsky (Feldstein) faces the grand jury. Elsewhere, Linda Tripp is facing intrusion into her past. PH 24 Hours in A&amp;E 9pm, Channel 4 Expect the usual heroism, tragedy and heartwarming human interest on this visit to St George’s hospital, south London, which has one of the busiest A&amp;E departments in Britain. A broken back, a mangled arm and a bleeding throat are tonight’s ailments but, as ever, they won’t be the main story. That belongs to the brilliant humans who staff the NHS. Alexi Duggins Insecure 9pm, Sky Comedy As Issa Rae’s perfect storm of a fifth and final season edges towards its conclusion, she offers another episode to treasure. Is Issa really a dog person? Has she made the right decisions in her love life? Where’s her career going? There are plenty of choices to be made before the end of the season and it’s all beautifully played. Hannah Verdier What We Do in the Shadows 10pm, BBC Two One of the bloodthirstier episodes of the third season as Colin (Mark Proksch) and Laszlo (Matt Berry) savage a boatload of people. However, the series is becoming increasingly sweet, too, as the hefty backstories of these immortal beings are gradually fleshed out. PH Live sport Premier League football: Man City v Leeds United 7.30pm, BT Sport 2. Star midfielder Raphinha and co visit the Etihad.An Indigenous prisoner in NSW has been taken to hospital after concerns were raised that the prison was not adequately managing his care for an infection in his hip. The 37-year-old’s lawyer, Lisa De Luca, said the man had been sent to hospital after pressure from her and other advocates for authorities to treat his illness as serious. De Luca said the man, an inmate at Junee correctional centre, 450km west of Sydney, was in a lot of pain, could not walk and had only been offered paracetamol for the infection, she said. “He’s in a bad way, he rang me yesterday,” De Luca said. “(The prison) are saying he saw a doctor. The GP said ‘yes you have an infection it’s in your hip replacement’. The client was in distress.” The lawyer contacted the prison multiple times, which she alleges played down the seriousness of the infection. De Luca said she was concerned the infection would spread without adequate medical care and she was worried it could become life-threatening. Sometime before 1.30pm on Tuesday the man was sent to hospital. “He said ‘I’m in agony and it’s getting worse’,” she said. The prison, which is privately operated by the GEO Group, released a statement later on Tuesday disputing reports that that the man was not being properly cared for, saying the claims were “inaccurate”. “GEO can confirm a 37-year-old Aboriginal man underwent a thorough medical examination at the on-site health centre yesterday (Monday 13 December) in relation to an existing, non-life-threatening medical condition,” the statement said. “A treatment plan was established for the man, including a referral to a specialist at Wagga Wagga Base Hospital for further assessment and treatment as required. “Junee correctional centre’s Aboriginal liaison officer has also met with the man this morning to check on his welfare and to discuss with him the plan for his ongoing health care.” The case had prompted Greens MP David Shoebridge to write to the minister for corrections, Anthony Roberts, and the office of the inspector of custodial services to request the inmate be transferred to a public hospital for an independent review of his medical needs and emergency treatment if needed. “I am advised this person has blood poisoning and is in need of surgery to remove his hip replacement,” the letter read. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “He is in severe pain and has a very high temperature however is being refused appropriate treatment. To date he has been offered only analgesics.” Shoebridge said there was “an urgent need for the inspector of custodial services to use her powers and intervene so that this man gets the level of medical care he so clearly needs”.There’s a curse of sorts that’s become attached to “the third Spider-Man movie”, one that’s brought us something very bad, something very cancelled and now something very delayed. The poppy thrill of Sam Raimi’s first two instalments sputtered out in catastrophic fashion with 2007’s much-ridiculed Spider-Man 3, a lucrative yet strangely inept franchise-killer which yanked the director away from the series, unhappy with the finished product and uninterested in trying to course-correct. The next round of reboots then found itself on similar skids after a ho-hum second film led to the creatives involved also disassembling, The Amazing Spider-Man 3 fading into the ether. Now after a Covid-afflicted shoot and the postponed release that comes with that, we have Spider-Man: No Way Home, a big-budget tentpole tasked with not only proving that a Spidey threequel can work but that, after a rough year, so can a Marvel film, a company suffering from the rare critical and commercial misfire that was Eternals. Is Tom Holland’s web-slinger up to the task? The answer is: mostly yes. After the last film (a zippy Eurotrip with a fun turn from Jake Gyllenhaal) ended with a big reveal – that Peter himself was revealed to be Spider-Man to the entire world – the secret life of the high school student was never to be the same. In No Way Home, JK Simmons’s J Jonah Jameson (previously seen in the Raimi universe as the Daily Bugle editor) is now an Alex Jones type happily spreading the fake news that Peter Parker is a reckless killer to be feared and lambasted. It affects not only him but also his friends (a returning Zendaya and Jacob Batalon) and so he asks Doctor Strange (Benedict Cumberbatch) for a favour, to return to a world where no one knows his secret identity. Yet somehow the spell goes awry and universes start to open up, leading to a grand battle between Parker and some familiar villains … It was an inevitable shift; the mostly contained, relatively small-scale adventure of the first had already expanded with the second more ambitious, MCU-inclusive chapter with slightly diminishing but still immensely satisfying returns. Bringing Spidey even further from home and even closer to the centre of all things Marvel was always going to happen but the question remained over how director Jon Watts would be able to juggle that many more plates without any or all of them crashing to the floor. He does a pretty solid job here, tasked with a considerable upping of the ante while bringing back numerous baddies from the previous Spider-Man universes, delivering a propulsive, slickly choreographed adventure that will appease a broad fanbase this Christmas. But the sacrifice that comes with a grander stage is a loss of the breezy teen movie vibe of the first two offerings, giving way to mostly unearned Marvel gravitas, as Serious Decisions have to be made and Serious Losses are then felt. It’s a shame, as the lightness and genuine humour that had separated the Spider-Man movies from some of their more po-faced peers only comes in fits and starts, and even then, the quips too often fall flat. The script, from sitcom writers Erik Sommers and Chris McKenna, lacks the expected fizz, that sense of shaggy fun struggling to break through a more robotic plot. The somewhat grounded world of Peter and his friends makes for an uneasy bedfellow next to the heightened fantasy of Doctor Strange, and some self-aware jabs don’t really do enough to distract from how jarring the two franchises feel when smashed together. To reach a point where the film can at least somewhat justify its many, many cameos (some of which it would be cruel to spoil but the trailers have already revealed that Alfred Molina, Jamie Foxx and Willem Dafoe are back), Sommers and McKenna have to do some serious pretzeling, forcing Strange to act in ways that make little sense (he’s set straight or outsmarted by teenagers on far too many occasions) and us to care for some mediocre villains we barely remember. The bellow of applause that met their return at the press screening will likely be heard at cinemas, and while some do genuinely work (Molina and Dafoe are the predictable MVPs), there’s something a little overused and ultimately a little lazy about using familiarity as a form of surprise. In a year that’s also seen Cumberbatch’s greatest performance to date, a shattering turn as a closeted rancher in Jane Campion’s The Power of the Dog, it’s disappointing to see him lumped with laboured one-liners once again as one of the most powerful yet least interesting Avengers (“This is why I didn’t have kids” is one of many that needed a serious punch-up). Holland and pals are as up-to-the-task as ever though, and while it’s a shame they’re not furnished with some better lines, their combined charm and lived-in chemistry carries a great deal of the film through. While it would have been preferable to see a less convoluted plot constructed more from a desire to progress rather than regress, relying on fan service as a driving force, the script is more coherent than it could have been given the many moving parts and is not quite as overstuffed as say Civil War, the third Captain America instalment that also pushed the series from its own world to that of multiple others. It’s flawed for sure but still moves with more deftness than most (arriving after Eternals is a blessing for any Marvel film) and there’s an ending that suggests an awareness of its roots (post-credits scene aside), hinting at a promising way forward rather than back. Consider the curse of sorts sort of broken. Spider-Man: No Way Home is out in UK cinemas on 15 December and in the US on 17 DecemberTop story: ‘I don’t support the Human Rights Act’ Hello, Warren Murray here once again in service to the light of knowledge. Dominic Raab, the justice secretary, is to outline today a highly controversial overhaul of human rights law that it is claimed will deter spurious claims, counter “wokery and political correctness” and expedite the deportation of foreign criminals. Lawyers have described the proposed changes to the Human Rights Act as dangerous and fuelled by political rhetoric rather than necessity. Critics believe the paper is the culmination of a steady 12-year campaign by Raab, who once said: “I don’t support the Human Rights Act and I don’t believe in economic and social rights.” The Ministry of Justice (MoJ) said the intended reforms would allow judges to override rulings from the European court of human rights. But Stephanie Boyce, president of the Law Society, said any changes to the Human Rights Act should be led by evidence and not driven by political rhetoric. It was already the case that “British judges deliver British justice based on British laws”, she said. * * * ‘Difficult weeks ahead’ – Boris Johnson today faces the biggest rebellion yet against his prime ministership, with about 80 Tory MPs confirmed to be preparing to vote against “plan B” Covid measures. The PM will have to rely on Labour support – Keir Starmer said it was Labour’s “patriotic duty” to vote for plan B. The NHS has been put on a crisis footing, with hospitals in England told to discharge as many patients as possible as estimated daily Omicron cases hit 200,000 and the variant claimed its first life in the UK. Hospitals and GPs have been told to scale back normal services and limit care to those needing urgent attention so that NHS staff can be freed up to deliver boosters. Doctors are calling for further restrictions to be imposed and Downing Street has not ruled out fresh measures. Sajid Javid, the health secretary, said around 20% of confirmed cases in England had been identified as Omicron and warned of “difficult weeks ahead”. Head teachers have warned of “chaos” in schools, with high levels of staff and pupil absences, and reports of some parents planning to keep children home to avoid the virus before Christmas. * * * ‘Options for 6 JAN’ – The committee investigating the US Capitol attack has recommended the former Trump White House chief of staff Mark Meadows face criminal prosecution. The committee says Donald Trump’s most senior aide handed over records but refused to appear to answer questions arising from them about the 6 January insurrection. Among the material Meadows turned over to the select committee was a PowerPoint presentation titled “Election Fraud, Foreign Interference and Options for 6 JAN”, which recommended Trump declare a national security emergency to unilaterally return himself to office. Meadows is the third former Trump aide to be recommended for prosecution for contempt of Congress or defying subpoenas over the Capitol attack investigation. * * * Call to snuff incinerators – MPs are calling for a moratorium on the expansion of waste incineration plants just days before councils in London vote on awarding a contract for a huge new plant in Edmonton. A report from the MPs concludes that ultrafine particles from the incerators are a significant health hazard. A recent report from the National Infrastructure committee warned rising greenhouse gas emissions from waste incineration would prevent the UK meeting its net zero targets by 2050. Clyde Loakes, chair of the North London Waste Authority, said: “We’re absolutely clear that our facility will be the safest and cleanest in the country, using state-of-the-art technology to protect residents’ health and eliminate pollution to effectively zero.” * * * ‘Land of the lawless’ – Britain’s online safety bill needs an overhaul to add extra protections, according to a committee of MPs and peers. Their report proposes making cyberflashing a crime and punishing tech platforms for hosting fraudulent adverts. Online has become a “land of the lawless”, according to the committee’s Conservative chair, Damian Collins MP. The report calls for tech companies to appoint a boardroom-level executive as “safety controller” liable to a new criminal offence: failing to deal with “repeated and systemic failings that result in a significant risk of serious harm to users”. The government is expected to respond to the report early next year, followed by publication of a revised bill, a second reading in parliament by April, and the bill becoming law in late 2022 or early 2023. * * * Blocked pipe causes gas bubble – Gas prices across the UK and Europe are on course to return to record highs after Germany said the controversial Nord Stream 2 pipeline from Russia could not be approved amid deepening tensions on the Ukrainian border. Europe has experienced record high gas prices in recent months owing to a global squeeze on gas supplies. This has been compounded by a slowdown of Russian gas exports to the continent as negotiations over Nord Stream 2 have stalled. Germany has faced pressure from the US to block Nord Stream 2, which runs from Russia to Germany beneath the Baltic Sea, bypassing Ukraine. This might allow Russia to increase its military aggression towards Ukraine without fear of disrupting its own gas exports. Today in Focus podcast: Is Tory turmoil Labour’s chance? The opposition party is performing well in the polls, but still doesn’t have an easy pathway to power, says Observer leader writer Sonia Sodha. Lunchtime read: China’s troll king Hu Xijin is China’s most famous propagandist. At the Global Times, he helped establish a chest-thumping new tone for China on the world stage – but can he keep up with the forces he has unleashed? Sport The carefully crafted sense of stability around English football began to crumble on Monday night after a record number of positive Covid-19 tests, with Manchester United’s Tuesday game at Brentford called off and the possibility of more postponements to come. Steven Gerrard has admitted Aston Villa will take a player’s vaccine status into consideration when drawing up their list of January transfer targets. Premiership rugby clubs are facing tighter Covid-19 restrictions in light of the spread of the Omicron variant, with new measures expected to be finalised this week. Emma Raducanu has tested positive for Covid-19, on the same day she was confirmed as overwhelming favourite to win the BBC’s Sports Personality of the Year award. Max Verstappen pipped Lewis Hamilton again at the Formula One season awards while Lando Norris stepped up. Hamilton accused the FIA of manipulating the final race of the season shortly before losing his F1 world title to Verstappen, it has emerged. England’s cricket team are still licking their wounds after their opening nine-wicket Ashes thrashing in Brisbane, but Adelaide Oval could be a glorious setting for a new beginning. Business The pound is already under pressure today after slipping 0.15% to $1.319 thanks to expectations that the Omicron outbreak will prevent a rate hike this week. It is also down against the euro at €1.170. Also on the markets, Turkey is facing a full-blown financial crisis after the lira plunged to fresh lows against the US dollar. UK food and farming leaders have called on the government to fix the supply chain problems in order to ensure UK food security. A summit today will urge ministers to introduce policies to keep Britain’s food self-sufficiency at 60% or risk the kind of “meltdown” in pig production where up to 120,000 animals face being culled. The papers Our Guardian print edition leads today with “NHS put on crisis footing as Omicron variant surges”. The i has “Britain’s race to get boosted” across its front. The Telegraph’s splash is “We can’t hit booster jabs target, warn NHS bosses”. The paper appears to relish Dominic Raab’s plans: “Criminals to be deported under new bill of rights”. The Times says the NHS is “overwhelmed” as “millions answer call for jabs”. “Vaccine rush – Britain fights back” – that’s the Mirror, while the Metro repeats the PM’s call for volunteer jabbers to “Sign up to Omi army”. Similar in the Daily Mail: “Boris: now join my volunteer booster army”. The Financial Times has a grumble: “Business accuses Johnson of bringing in ‘lockdown by stealth’” though what bears that out is unclear. With the plan B vote due in the Commons today, the Express is in anguish over the PM’s potential humiliation at the hands of his own MPs. Its headline: “Boris pleads with rebels: back my ‘balanced’ measures”. Sign up The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekendJosh Frydenberg’s nomination for chair of the competition watchdog may have to recuse herself from any decisions relating to one of the regulator’s biggest cases if she is approved for the job. Gina Cass-Gottlieb, a partner at corporate law firm Gilbert &amp; Tobin, has represented a key participant in a criminal case alleging cartel behaviour that the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission brought against ANZ, Deutsche Bank CitiGroup and banking executives over trading in ANZ shares. If approved by the states and territories, she will replace Rod Sims, who has served as chair for more than a decade, and become the first woman in the ACCC’s history to take the role. The banking cartel case is one of the ACCC’s most difficult, with a federal court judge last month describing the indictment brought by prosecutors as a “complete shemozzle” because charges had not been finalised more than three years after they were first laid. Prosecutors also dropped the charges against ANZ and its senior executive, Rick Moscati, last month. Cass-Gottlieb was closely involved in the case, acting on behalf of investment bank JP Morgan, which earned itself immunity from prosecution after agreeing to provide evidence against other alleged players. She personally met with prosecutors in October and November last year to outline the evidence JP Morgan employees were willing to give in the case. Sims said the ACCC had robust rules to manage potential conflicts of interest under which Cass-Gottlieb would not be involved with the prosecution. However, he said that although the ACCC originally investigated the matter, it was now in the hands of the commonwealth director of public prosecutions. “So yes, we’re providing backup support, but it’s not as if we need to make more decisions,” he said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Cass-Gottlieb, who has been a partner at Gilbert &amp; Tobin for 25 years, has regularly represented corporate clients who have tangled with the ACCC over competition law. Sims said her experience made Cass-Gottlieb a good choice. “You wouldn’t want an ACCC that didn’t have people who worked on both sides of the fence,” he said. “You don’t come to the ACCC unless you’ve got some alignment with what the ACCC is trying to do, and I’m sure Gina does.” He said Cass-Gottlieb was “such a good candidate” to lead the ACCC. “I’m delighted that we’ve had such a smooth transition which will continue it as a great institution,” he said. Sims’ term, his third, finishes in March, by which time he will have served 11 years as competition tsar. He is already the ACCC’s longest-serving chair. “I think it never really became an issue to serve a fourth term,” he said. “I did have a chat to the treasurer about that [and] we both agree that was the sensible way forward.” In a statement, Cass-Gottlieb said she was “honoured to be entrusted to be the next chair of the ACCC”. “I look forward to stepping into leadership of this important regulator and its dedicated team of staff and commissioners and wish to acknowledge the lasting contributions Rod Sims has made to the ACCC and to competition law,” she said. Frydenberg also thanked Sims for his “outstanding contribution to competition, consumer and infrastructure policy in his time at the ACCC, helping to advance world-leading reforms including most recently with respect to the digital platforms”. “I also acknowledge his wider contribution to public policy during his distinguished public service career which spans more than three decades,” Frydenberg said. “I wish him well for the future.” Labor’s treasury spokesman, Jim Chalmers, also thanked Sims “for his dedication, commitment, and contribution to the ACCC for more than a decade”. Her appointment is subject to the consent of the states and territories, which has not been withheld in living memory.Immediate action must be taken to prevent trafficking and exploitation of children in orphanages, according to a report published on Monday. International children’s charity Lumos says that an estimated 5.4 million children worldwide live in institutions that cannot meet their needs and neglect their rights and where they are exposed to multiple forms of exploitation and harm. The report is the first to identify global patterns of institution-related trafficking, taking into account evidence from 84 organisations in 45 countries around the world. It highlights instances of sexual exploitation, as well as children being forced to work and coerced into performing for foreign donors to secure more funding. In some instances, children were left malnourished and held in cramped, unhygienic conditions to attract money from donors and volunteers. Lumos also found cases where the institution operated as a base from which children were made available to perpetrators for several hours or days before being returned. The charity says many vulnerable children enter institutions with forged identity documents, including false parental death certificates or paperwork attesting to abandonment, and are “coached to pose as orphans in the presence of volunteers and other visitors”. They are then trafficked out of the same institutions into other forms of exploitation, including sex work and forced begging. In Ghana, trafficked children were subjected to some of the worst forms of abuse, with children sold by institutions to work on cocoa farms and in goldmines. In Cambodia, some orphanage owners were found to have bought vulnerable children from disadvantaged families and marketed them to donors for profit. The report shows that trafficking is more prevalent in countries with a significant tourism industry. In Uganda, the number of children in homes has increased from about 1,000 in the late 1990s to 55,000 today, and in Cambodia, the number of residential care institutions has increased by 75% in the last decade, despite a sharp decline in the number of orphans in both countries. Most institutions are developed in tourist hotspots. In 2017, more than 100 children attempted to flee an orphanage in Guatemala after experiencing abuse, but were brought back by law enforcement officers and placed in confinement. Fifty-six of the girls, who had been placed together in a cramped room, started a fire to gain the attention of the officers outside. The officers did not respond to the situation, resulting in the death of 41 girls. In 2019, the United Nations General Assembly recognised the link between children’s institutions and human trafficking but the charity says there are few examples of it being tackled effectively. Lina Gyllensten, acting director of evidence, advocacy and campaigns at Lumos, said: “Lumos’ report shows that institutions are playing a significant role in many instances of child exploitation and abuse around the world. Vulnerable children are being trapped in a complex web of institution-related trafficking and are being repeatedly exposed to multiple forms of harm. It is time to break these cycles of exploitation.” Parosha Chandran, barrister at One Pump Court, said: “I suspect that many people will be shocked by this report. They may recognise themselves as a well-intentioned orphanage volunteer, or as a generous donor who has supported children left vulnerable after a humanitarian disaster. Reading what follows may be the first time that they realise that they’d unwittingly played a part in propping up a harmful ecosystem in which children, most of whom have at least one living parent, act as commodities in an industry of profit-making orphanages.” The report makes recommendations for breaking the cycles of exploitation, including the reinvestment of funding from institutions into family and community-based services, better data collection and a new model law, outlining the steps national governments need to take to combat the problem. Lumos is urging national governments to boost specialist support to children in care and ensure children get expert support and information to know their rights.In June 2018, Colm Tóibín was four chapters into writing his most recent novel The Magician, an epic fictional biography of Thomas Mann that he had put off for decades, when he was diagnosed with cancer. “It all started with my balls,” he begins a blisteringly witty essay about his months in hospital; cancer of the testicles had spread to his lungs and liver. In bed he amuses himself by identifying the difference between blood clots (a new emergency) and cancer: “Boris Johnson would be a blood clot … Angela Merkel the cancer.” He has seen off both Johnson and Merkel. In the month when he hopes he will have a final scan, he has just been awarded the David Cohen prize (dubbed “the UK Nobel”) for a lifetime achievement in literature. The author of 10 novels, two short story collections, three plays, several nonfiction books and countless essays, Tóibín has been shortlisted for the Booker prize three times and won the Costa novel award in 2009 for Brooklyn, about a young Irish woman who emigrates to New York in the 1950s, made into an award-winning film in 2015. He is surely Ireland’s most prolific and prestigious living writer. Broodingly striking in appearance – in a movie he would be the gangster with a kind heart – he is animated, gracious and gossipy in conversation: we are on a video call from Los Angeles, where he spends part of the year with his boyfriend, editor Hedi El Kholti. He is very much alive (he played tennis yesterday). Meeting Tóibín in person (in more normal times) is to be struck by the disconnect between this ebullient, expansive raconteur and the spare, mournful fictional worlds for which he is famous. His short stories, in particular, are as steeped in gentle misery as his native Wexford is in rain. “I’d love to have an integrated personality,” he once told a psychiatrist friend (he has a way of telling stories that sound like the beginning of a joke). Tóibín said: “The books are so filled with melancholy and I wander about like some sort of party animal.” “Well, which would you like to be?” his friend asked. To which he replied “I don’t know.” “Oh go away!” the psychiatrist said. “I have serious patients with serious problems.” For a man who can plough through a weighty biography in a day (preferably in a hammock in the California garden he shows off when he angles the computer) or turn out more than 20,000 words, when he is “on the flow”, one of the hardest things about his illness was that he was unable to read or write. This is something known only to “the chemo club”, he says. “How could it be that you couldn’t even turn on Bach? It would sound like noise! You can’t sleep, you can’t eat, you can’t read, you can’t listen to music.” The steroids, however, would give him a boost, “a false energy” like a “chardonnay rush”, which would last no longer than an hour, during which “grinding time” he was able to write a couple of poems. He hadn’t seriously written poetry since his teens. Then, during the pandemic, at seven o’clock almost every evening, a line would come to him out of the blue “like a melody”. The rest of the poem would materialise quite quickly and in the mornings he would get up and cut some lines, or abandon them altogether. And so, at the age of 66, early next year he will add his first poetry collection to that impressive list of publications. The day before we speak, he received one of those “recommended new releases” emails from Amazon – recommending his own book. Really. “Oh my Gaahd, this book actually exists!” he says, with the longest God I’ve ever heard. “It was a big shock yesterday,” not least because the cover is a painting by his mother. The title Vinegar Hill refers to the battle during the Irish Rebellion, but the collection is not all about the motherland, with poems set in Barcelona and LA. “Anywhere I’ve ever been there’s a poem”, including the hospital in Dublin, which coincidentally was built on the site of the fictional house of Joyce’s Blooms. “How very strange to be in this space where Leopold and Molly once were,” he would muse in bed. He will be doing Ulysses when he returns to Columbia University, where he teaches a semester each year, in January. To finish The Magician he switched from his customary longhand to a computer. “If the treatment worked, or if it didn’t kill me, I needed to get the book done before a recurrence,” he says. “The recurrence didn’t happen. I got the book done.” Like The Master, Tóibín’s acclaimed 2004 novel about Henry James, The Magician is another portrait of a sexually repressed artist. “I don’t have a third,” he says of this trick of inhabiting the inner-worlds of great writers to explore his theme of creativity driven by thwarted desire. Both writers were hugely important to him during his late teens and early 20s. Growing up gay in a small town in Ireland, “where homosexuality was unmentionable”, left him “fascinated by figures who had lived in the shadows erotically”. As always he was drawn to secrets, to lives lived between the lines, to the sense of James and Mann as being “like ghosts in certain rooms”, a distance created by their “uneasy homosexuality”, he says. “Mann’s was more self-aware than James, but you can never be sure with James. James’s work is filled with sexual secrets.” Tóibín’s life has parallels with both authors (he shares James’s unapologetic sociability), most strikingly with Mann, one of five siblings, the artistic son of a widowed mother, who ends up in exile in LA; he even taught at Princeton. “You end up exploring the things that interest you,” Tóibín says. “Obviously there were things I had to imagine: the money and the power, the rise of Hitler.” Mann doesn’t emerge as an heroic figure either privately (he didn’t attend his son Klaus’ funeral because he was on a book tour) or as the most influential writer in Germany during the interwar years: a willingness to write morally ambiguous, complex or unlikeable characters is “essential” in fiction, Tóibín believes. From his first novel The South, published when he was 35, he has returned repeatedly to the stretch of Wexford coast of his childhood. He would never have believed that this “very mild place, where in summer there is more drizzle than rain, more cloud than sun” could have provided him with “enough expression or felt life or drama” as the backdrop for so many novels, he says. “Going back to it over and over has been rich and surprising.” But, like so many of his Irish literary forebears, he also needs to escape; each novel he says, is a reaction against its predecessor. After his fourth, the Booker shortlisted The Blackwater Lightship, in which three generations of women and three gay men are stuck in a crumbling house on the coast for seven days – “there’s a lot of rain and a lot of making of tea and a lot of recriminations” – it was a relief to absorb himself in the sophisticated milieu of Henry James, “to write those longer sentences, more elaborate dialogue and to have a lot of duchesses”. But then he was done with duchesses and wanted to go back home. So he wrote Brooklyn, which returns to Enniscorthy and the lives of small-town Irish people. “Oh thank God, a book of yours we can finally read,” someone told him. After Nora Webster, an austerely moving fictionalisation of the aftermath of his father’s death, he felt “I never ever want to go back to that house again, I never want to go back into that sort of slow-burning grief.” And so it was a pleasure to turn to the cosmopolitan, wealthy Manns, “after writing another Irish novel in which no one has a penny.” While he might be in sunny California right now, he is also deep in Wexford once more, working on his next two novels, one of which, thrillingly, is a sequel to Brooklyn, and a collection of short stories. “So it is coming up again big time.” Another constant in his fiction is the longing for an absent mother (when his father was taken ill suddenly he didn’t see his mother for three months), and it is there again in The Magician, when the young Thomas is left alone for a year in Lubeck. “It won’t go away!” Tóibín whispers theatrically. He credits his reputation for convincing, complicated female characters – Eilis Lacey in Brooklyn, Nora Webster – to a childhood spent in a houseful of women, listening to his mother, aunts and sisters speak. “It’s more about voices,” he says. Also his fascination with the gaps between what is said and what is felt, especially the unspeakable. Of all his work, he is most proud of the novella-length (25,000 words) short story, A Long Winter, which ends his collection Mothers and Sons. Written after the deaths of his mother and brother, he found in the story of poor Miguel searching day after day for his mother in the Pyrenees, a metaphor for his “very raw and difficult feelings,” he says. “That’s when I felt that everything came right.” On a good day, he will do nothing but write. “You need to immerse yourself in it, because you want the reading process to be immersive in the same way,” he says. “It is a question of being in your mental pyjamas all day.” He is back to writing by hand – holding a neatly written notebook with early pages of the new Brooklyn to the screen – making corrections and additions when he types it up. “What will happen if you get writer’s block?” a bank clerk once asked, when he was looking for a loan. ‘I said, ‘Will you stop that nonsense!’ Writer’s block for God’s sake! It is one of those things that other people think writers have.” Despite his prodigious output and boundless curiosity, he feels himself to be “lazy as sin”. It must be a Catholic thing. “I think I’m a big slouch, that there are other people who are out there working really hard and that I’m not one of those people. And that I need to buck up,” he says. “That’s a funny thing and it’s true.” For Tóibín, writing is a form of self-erasure: “the page is not a mirror, it is blank”, he reminds himself constantly. As a novelist, you “need to disappear,” he says, waving his hands like a magician, “to hand over the feelings to the character and to make sure they are not yours. This is for a reader, it is not for you. You are not here,” he says covering his face with his hands. “And when you look there’s NOTHING, except what’s blank and you have to fill it.” • This article was amended on 15 December 2021. Tóibín teaches at Columbia University, not Princeton as stated in an earlier version. • The Magician by Colm Tóibín is published by Viking (£18.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyFor the second December in succession, Europe’s rail operators face an end-of-year balancing act. The 2022 rail schedules came into force across Europe on 12 December, but train companies are unsure whether to shout about bold innovations or hunker down and keep quiet until the pandemic abates. This time last year we were anticipating the launch of sleeper services from Amsterdam to Vienna and Innsbruck. In the end, those new trains from the Netherlands to Austria didn’t start until May. The pandemic has made 2021 a challenge for anyone trying to keep up with Europe’s changing railway timetables. Schedules were tweaked frequently, often with very positive results. A wonderful new direct daytime Eurocity service from Vienna to Trieste started in June, as did new summer season night trains from Bratislava and Vienna to Split. So, looking ahead to what’s on offer in the 2022 schedules, bear in mind that Covid’s cruel grip may still lead to some services not running over the immediate upcoming period. Uncertainties over travel prospects are challenging for tour operators who specialise in rail-based holidays, but Byway Travel, for example, is already advertising Austrian and Hungarian trips that make the most of some new routes highlighted below. Over the past 12 months the outstanding hub of timetabling innovation has been Vienna, and that looks set to continue in 2022, reinforcing the Austrian capital’s status as Europe’s best-connected city in terms of rail links. But there are also important developments in Spain, Italy and elsewhere. Here are some top choices for new routes that should debut this month, focusing on two night trains, two daytime detours and two new high-speed rail options. Paris to Vienna by night 14 to 15 hrs (overnight, timings vary). Thrice weekly from 14 Dec. From Paris on Tues, Fri and Sun, returning from Vienna on Mon, Thur and Sat nights. One-way in a couchette from €59.90 or in a sleeper from €94.90 Austrian operator ÖBB adds Paris to its network this month with a new Nightjet to Vienna. Train NJ469 will leave Paris Gare de l’Est in the early evening. It’s a trip for the longer evenings, when the ride up the Marne Valley is a delight at low sun angles. Slip past Champagne vineyards, and by the time the train crosses the Rhine you’ll be dozing off, to awaken next morning in Austria. The train drops passengers in Salzburg at 07.30. Travellers bound for Vienna can linger over breakfast, with arrival in the Austrian capital just after 10am. This new Nightjet follows the same route to Vienna as that taken by the Orient Express prior to the latter’s withdrawal in late 2009. During its final spell in service, the Orient Express carried the train number 469, so the Nightjet’s number is a nice nod to railway history. The Vienna Nightjet is not the only new night train to start from Paris this month – there’s also a new SNCF overnight service to Tarbes and Lourdes. Amsterdam to Zürich by night 11 hrs 37 mins. Daily from 12 Dec. One-way in a couchette from €59.90 or from €99.90 for a sleeper After the success of the new night trains from the Netherlands to Austria, Switzerland steps up this month with a new daily Nightjet from Amsterdam to Zürich. This night train follows the classic Rhine Valley route south from Cologne, so passengers who twitch the window blinds at one in the morning may well be rewarded with glimpses of the Lorelei. Travellers to and from London wanting an unhurried way to reach the Swiss Alps will value this new link, using the Eurostar to Amsterdam and having a wander there before joining the night train. Onward connections in Zürich are excellent, with an easy transfer onto the new direct service to Bologna (arrival 14.35) or the train to Genoa (arrival 15.52). This new Nightjet connects in Zürich with the Eurocity Transalpin train to Graz via Innsbruck. Stuttgart to Vienna via the Tyrol 9 hrs 45 mins. Daily from 12 Dec. Fares from €37.90 second class, €56.90 first class, €71.90 business class Austrian operator ÖBB and its partners have been aggressively expanding their daytime Railjet network in recent years. This time last year saw the first regular Railjet service to Berlin from Graz in Austria, and now Stuttgart gets a daily Railjet to Vienna. This new train will be called Bregenzerwald. It isn’t the fastest, and those in a hurry to reach Austria from Stuttgart will still find it faster to travel via Munich. But the beauty of the new direct train from Swabia to the Austrian capital is the glorious route it takes, meandering south down to Lake Constance, then running via Bregenz to join the celebrated Arlberg Railway to reach Innsbruck. It then loops back through a corner of Bavaria, without stopping on German territory, continuing east to Salzburg and following the Empress Elizabeth Railway to Vienna. It’s a longish ride, but there’s a restaurant car on board. This is surely a case for splashing out that bit extra for first class or even ÖBB’s swish business class, which comes at a fixed premium of just €15 above the first-class fare. And if you don’t like the idea of a 07.44 start in Stuttgart, there’s the option of joining the same train in Ulm at 09.02. Ljubljana to Budapest via Graz 8 hrs 40 mins. Daily from 12 Dec. Fares from €39.40 second class and €51.90 first class There has long been a direct train from Ljubljana to Budapest. It’s called Cittadella. Now there’s a newcomer linking the two cities by a very unusual route, which is more scenic and also twice crosses the line of the former iron curtain. If there’s a train which captures how Europe has changed over the past 30 years, it is this new direct service from Slovenia to Hungary via Austria’s Styria region. Make this a journey for a June day, when the sun rises in Ljubljana just after 5am. Perfect timing for the new 05.05 to Budapest, which runs down the Sava Valley before cutting through the hills to reach Austria. Expect a feast of fine scenery on this journey, which takes in some deeply rural terrain to reach the Hungarian capital in the early afternoon. Madrid to Santiago de Compostela (high speed) From 3 hrs 20 mins. Four trains per day from 21 Dec. Fares from €20.65 standard class, €36.60 comfort class Spain continues to expand its high-speed network by stealth, giving little notice of the opening of new lines. A long stretch of the 400-mile Madrid to Galicia route opened last autumn, with another 75 miles of new railway opening this month, so from 21 December the travel time from Madrid Chamartin to Santiago de Compostela is trimmed by another 70 minutes. A decade ago this scenically thrilling journey took seven hours, now it’s less than half that. Genoa to Naples (high speed) 6 hrs 40 mins. Daily from 12 Dec. Fares from €59.90 in Smart, €66.90 in Prima, €116.90 in Club Executive Private operator NTV Italo continues to challenge Trenitalia by expanding its network across Italy. This month sees Italo regularly serving Genoa for the first time, with a new daily service from the Ligurian port to Naples from 12 December. Trenitalia’s only direct daytime train between the two cities follows the coastal railway, taking eight hours to do the 450-mile trip. NTV Italo’s new service loops north through Milan to join Italy’s main high-speed route south, through Florence to Rome and beyond. That 590-mile journey to Naples gives those who only reluctantly leave their private jets at home plenty of time to relax in Italo’s smart Club Executive class and enjoy a high-speed dash through a great sweep of Italian countryside. Other key changes Unfortunately, new timetables inevitably bring some bad tidings. The much-anticipated reinstatement of a direct train from Warsaw to Lithuania has been delayed again, and probably won’t happen before mid-2023. There is as yet little sign of normal rail services being reinstated from the European Union to the Russian Federation or the Republic of Belarus, but from 12 December the high-speed Allegro trains are running again from St Petersburg and Vyborg to Helsinki. Sunday’s departures launched the first regular passenger service from Russia to an EU capital for almost 20 months [see footnote]. Berlin loses its night train to Przemyśl in south-east Poland, but gets a new direct daytime link by way of compensation. It means that this modestly sized community near the Ukrainian border can now claim direct daytime trains to seven European capitals. Many direct trains from Przemyśl into Ukraine have been reinstated over the past six weeks and on 12 December the direct overnight service to the Black Sea port of Odessa returned. Of the “might happen, might not” new routes being touted for 2022, the one that really kept rail travellers on tenterhooks was Trenitalia’s proposed new twice-daily Frecciarossa service from Milan to Paris via Turin and Lyon. It was rumoured that the first trains might roll before the end of the year, though Trenitalia was very coy when it came to any mention of the start date. But tickets eventually went on sale on 13 December, with one-way fares from just €29 and the first Frecciarossa departing on 18 December. When it leaves Paris’ Gare de Lyon at 07.26 on Saturday, it will herald a new era of competition for SNCF’s long-standing TGV service from Paris to Milan, and for SNCF’s plum business route from Paris to Lyon. Let’s not forget the growing interest in slow travel. In Britain, travellers with time on their hands may relish the new direct trains on Sundays from Carlisle to Whitby; they started on 12 December. The 4 hr, 30 min trip takes in Cumbria, the Tyne Valley and the North York Moors, with 38 stops along the way. Surely fun, but wouldn’t it be so much better if the timetable allowed more than just 26 minutes in the Yorkshire seaside town before the train sets off on the ride back to Carlisle? • Nicky Gardner is co-editor of hidden europe magazine and co-author of the book Europe by Rail: The Definitive Guide • Footnote added 15 December 2021. Due to coronavirus-related restrictions, use of the Allegro trains is currently limited mainly to holders of Finnish or Russian passports. Check the relevant government websites and advice from rail operators before booking.I was recently refused boarding for a Ryanair flight from Kyiv to London because I had not completed a passenger locator form. I explained that as I was only transiting through London – I had another Ryanair flight booked on to Málaga – I would complete the form while waiting for the second flight. However, they would not listen and refused to let me board. I had to spend a night in a hotel and buy two new flights for the next day. I sent a recorded delivery letter to Ryanair explaining what had happened but have had no reply. MM, by email I am sorry but I am very much going to side with Ryanair on this. Passengers are only deemed to be transiting a country if they have a single through-ticket. You bought two Ryanair singles and, as such, would have been required to collect any luggage and enter the UK through the border. The UK government’s website states that those doing a “landside” transit – as you did – have to fill in the passenger locator form before they travel to England. Those who transit airside, without going through the border, don’t have to. And as anyone who has been on a recent Ryanair flight will confirm, the airline repeatedly warns passengers that they must fill in these forms or risk being denied boarding if they don’t. On that basis, I don’t think you have a claim. If you are travelling anywhere in the next few weeks, it really pays to make sure you understand all the current rules as the financial consequences can be horrible. And finally … As more people expect parcels for Christmas, a reminder not to fall for scam texts claiming to be from a courier company saying a delivery is due, or “sorry we missed you”. A link asks for personal details, then victims are called and persuaded they are speaking to their bank’s fraud department and need to move money into a “safe account”. TSB says that in October, 81% of text-based scams involving its customers began with a message claiming to be from a delivery firm. We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Include a phone number. Letters are subject to our terms: gu.com/letters-termsA number of the world’s biggest record labels have united to commit to action on their environmental impact. The three major labels – Sony Music Entertainment, Universal Music Group and Warner Music Group – plus independents such as the Beggars and Secretly groups of labels, Warp, Ninja Tune and more, have signed the Music Climate Pact which will see them pledge “actionable climate targets”. The companies will sign up to one of two existing schemes, Science Based Targets or the SME Climate Commitment, the latter part of the the UN’s Race to Zero initiative. Both schemes require signatories to reduce greenhouse gas emissions to net zero by 2050, and achieve a 50% reduction by 2030. Under the terms of the pact, the companies have also pledged to collaborate on measuring carbon emissions in the music industry, to help their artists to speak out on climate issues, and to communicate with artists’ fans about how the music industry impacts on the environment. They will aim to work with streaming companies such as Spotify “to obtain data and drive emission reduction projects in a collaborative fashion”. Paul Redding, chief executive of Beggars Group (which includes 4AD, XL, Rough Trade and others), said the signatories will be “pulling in the same direction on sustainability topics” to “carry out the same work, in the same way, at the same time”. The industry is reckoning with issues including the impact of global touring, vinyl manufacturing, and the energy used to power streaming. In October, Coldplay became one of the highest-profile acts to commit to a reduction in emissions, promising a 50% cut for their forthcoming world tour in comparison with their previous one.The first Covid rebellion 30 September 2020 The first signs of who would be the leaders of the anti-lockdown rebels in parliament began at the vote for the renewal of the Coronavirus Act 2020. Graham Brady, who chairs the 1922 Committee of Tory backbenchers, had put forward an amendment to give MPs more scrutiny powers that was eventually agreed in a deal with ministers. This set the precedent that there would be a vote on “significant national measures with effect in the whole of England or UK-wide”. Rebellion grows over curfews and fines 13 October 2020 Although about a dozen MPs rebelled over the rule of six a week previously, it was a new 10pm curfew and additional fines that prompted the biggest Covid rebellion yet as 42 MPs organised a symbolic vote against one of six restrictions that the Commons voted on. Labour formally abstained, but there were also 23 Labour rebels. Chris Green resigned from his junior government role in protest at the new localised restrictions in his Bolton constituency, saying: “I believe that the cure is worse than the disease.” The Rashford rebellion 21 October 2020 Far smaller in number but more consequential for Boris Johnson’s reputation. After a damaging row and U-turn over the summer, five Conservative MPs voted with Labour on extending free school meals after another compelling campaign by the footballer Marcus Rashford. Those who did not rebel found themselves in the middle of another social media storm and another eventual U-turn by No 10 – leading to widespread anger at the ineptitude of Johnson’s response. Widespread Tory rebellion over plans for tier restrictions 1 December 2020 Johnson suffered his biggest rebellion of his premiership when 55 MPs voted against a new Covid-19 tier system for England and another 16 abstained. The prime minister stood by the voting lobbies and personally pleaded with MPs to back him, but ultimately he was forced to rely on Labour’s abstention to avoid defeat on a tightened system of measures that put 99% of England in the strictest tiers. Rebels revived over delay to restrictions ending 16 June 2021 There was some Tory resistance to measures in 2021, but given the progress of the vaccine programme, there was little difficulty in parliament until Johnson made the call to delay the final stage of the roadmap on lifting restrictions. Several Conservative MPs joined the rebel ranks at the vote – in which 49 Tories rebelled – saying they were particularly incensed by the uncertainty around gatherings like weddings. It was the second biggest rebellion on Covid. Treasury sees off international aid rebels 13 July 2021 Tory opponents of the cut to international aid were confident they could band together with Labour and defeat the government. But in the end, the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, sprang a surprise vote, leaving them with little time to organise, and a concerted effort by No 10 meant many MPs were persuaded that the cut to 0.5% of GDP would be temporary. Still, there were a significant number of high-profile rebels, including Theresa May, who voted against her party for the first time in a 24-year career as an MP. Plan B restrictions introduced to combat Omicron 14 December 2021 Tuesday’s vote is likely to register the biggest revolt of Johnson’s premiership and leave him again reliant on Labour votes to pass the measures to increase mask-wearing and the use of Covid passports to enter mass events. There are more than 70 declared Tory rebels, which would mean about one in three Conservative MPs are voting against the government – once you discount those on the government “payroll vote”, which includes ministers, whips and parliamentary private secretaries.“I had a rough year, dad.” The whole of Wes Anderson’s The Royal Tenenbaums builds to those six words, one syllable each. The line carries the weight of a family entombed by two decades of failure, depression and personal rancor, but finding some small path forward, a moment of reconciliation that might keep their disappointments from defining their future. Anderson has a gift for packing big emotions into small gestures – think about the look of recognition on Bill Murray’s face when he finally meets Max Fischer’s father in Rushmore – and this father-son moment pays off the countless other details that make it possible. This is why Anderson’s best work holds up so beautifully on repeat viewings: they’re dense with feeling, yet ruthlessly economical. Twenty years later, The Royal Tenenbaums feels like his signature achievement, proof that he could manage an ensemble like a complex organism, with many individual parts harmonizing in perfect balance. Where his previous films, Bottle Rocket and Rushmore, orbited around one charismatic visionary, this one covers an entire “family of geniuses”, taking care to give proper weight to every person and relationship. There’s plenty of Andersonian touches on the soundtrack, in the costume and production design, and in the crisp, witty exchanges of dialogue, but he never gets lost in his own fussy pointillism. Take a step back and this is a film about a family that’s fallen short of the dreams it had for itself. In that’s it’s touchingly commonplace. From the beginning, the melancholy heart of Anderson’s comedy is masked by dry wit, like the callous patriarch of the Tenenbaum family, Royal (Gene Hackman), explaining that while it’s not their fault their parents are separating, “obviously, we made certain sacrifices as the result of having children”. While it’s clear that Royal’s wife Etheline (Anjelica Huston) was the primary driver of their precocious kids’ success, the separation also helps account for their unraveling as young adults. Then again, they may have all just peaked too early: Chas (Ben Stiller), Richie (Luke Wilson), and Margot (Gwyneth Paltrow) might have dazzled as savants in business, tennis, and theater, respectively, but their talent still needs to evolve as young adults, when it isn’t such a novelty. When the narration finally catches up to the Tenenbaums in the present day, Etheline’s days as an empty-nester are about to come to a precipitous end. Still reeling from a plane crash that killed his wife and spared his two sons, Chas moves back into the crumbling multi-story family home on Archer Avenue, citing safety concerns. Facing eviction from the hotel that’s taken the last of his dwindling fortune, Royal fakes a terrible case of stomach cancer to convince Etheline to put him up for the last six weeks of his life. From there, Margot uses the opportunity to move out on her second husband, a grizzled neurologist (Bill Murray), and that’s enough to bring Richie home from his literal time at sea, because he’s in love with Margot. (She’s adopted. Such relationships are “frowned upon”, as Royal notes, “but what isn’t these days?”) It seems like a cute gesture for Anderson to start The Royal Tenenbaums as if it were a book checked out from the New York Public Library, similar to the theatrical curtains open and close Rushmore. But the film’s literary qualities, along with Anderson’s gift for the quick flashback or musical montage, allow for the elegant layering of time, with revelations from the past coming exactly when they can have the biggest impact. When we finally learn why, for example, Richie had an epic meltdown on the tennis court, it’s a moment used to underscore how little Royal understands about his son. A reference to the wooden prosthetic on one of Margot’s fingers is explained later by a hilarious flashback to a reunion with her birth family in rural Indiana. Asked if she tried to sew the finger back on, Margot can only sigh, “It wasn’t worth it.” A great punchline, but like many other in the film, suffused with sadness. One of Anderson’s greatest talents is his lightness of touch: The Royal Tenenbaums is about disappointment, regret, grief, loneliness, and at-times suicidal depression, and it has the Nico, Nick Drake, and Elliott Smith songs to prove it. Beyond the separation of their parents and breakup of the family that followed, the Tenenbaum siblings feel like their lives are in a state of permanent anticlimax and they can’t even turn to each other for reassurance. That extends to their neighbor Eli Cash (Owen Wilson), who might enjoy literary success for his historical fiction, but sulks over his own love for Margot and his continuing desire to be part of the Tenenbaum family. In the middle of this vast sea of melancholy, Hackman splashes around brilliantly as Royal, who’s an important catalyst because everyone has to react to his presence, even if his insensitivity and deceit infuriates them. In Anderson’s neatly ordered world, Royal gets to be the chaos agent, the scamp who eats three cheeseburgers a day with a stomach tumor and “brews some recklessness” in his grandsons by treating them to an afternoon of dangerous and illegal activity. It’s a weird gift for the other Tenenbaums to bond in opposition to him, and then to realize that he cares about them more than they assume. Anderson seems to agree that a little recklessness is what they all need. Their reward isn’t renewed brilliance, as if togetherness alone would be enough rekindle an old spark within the Tenenbaums. Maybe they were never geniuses at all. Maybe Margot was always a mediocre playwright, and Richie got as far as he was ever going to get on the tennis circuit. In a perfect grace note toward the end of the film, we’re told that Margot’s new play opened to mixed reviews and closed two weeks later. No matter. The Tenenbaums get to be a family again. That’s all the magic the film needs to muster.What happened? Powerful tornadoes barrelled through five US states on Friday, levelling houses and factories and bringing down power lines. In Kentucky, the worst-hit state, one tornado alone followed an extraordinarily long and destructive path of more than 200 miles. Authorities are still tallying the devastation, and the death toll has not been confirmed, but Kentucky’s governor, Andy Beshear, said on Monday that at least 74 people had died there with more than 100 unaccounted for. At least six people have been killed in Illinois, four in Tennessee, two in Arkansas and two in Missouri. One of the hardest-hit towns was Mayfield in west Kentucky, where a candle factory was levelled, killing at least eight people. Police and fire stations in Mayfield were destroyed, homes were flattened or lost roofs, giant trees were uprooted and street signs mangled. At least six people died in an Amazon distribution centre in Edwardsville in Illinois that was badly damaged. Two people were killed and others were injured and trapped at the Monette Manor nursing home in Arkansas. What has the reaction been? Joe Biden declared a major federal disaster in Kentucky on Sunday, following a request from Beshear, who described the tornadoes as the most destructive in the state’s history. Biden has separately announced that he will ask the Environmental Protection Agency to examine what role climate change might have played in the storms. Some people in communities close to factories that were damaged have questioned why those factories stayed open after storm warnings were issued. What causes tornadoes? Tornadoes are whirling, vertical air columns that form from thunderstorms and stretch to the ground and travel with ferocious speed. Thunderstorms occur when denser, drier cold air is pushed over warmer, humid air, conditions scientists call atmospheric instability. As that happens, an updraft is created when the warm air rises. When winds vary in speed or direction at different altitudes – a condition known as wind shear - the updraft will start to spin. These changes in winds produce the spin necessary for a tornado. Are December tornadoes common? The greatest threat from tornadoes is typically in spring and summer, and although tornadoes can happen at any time of the year in the US, it is incredibly rare for twisters as destructive as those that struck on Friday to occur in December. “It was really a late spring type of setup in in the middle of December,” Northern Illinois University meteorology professor Victor Gensini told Associated Press. Usually, there’s not a lot of instability in the winter that’s needed for tornadoes because the air isn’t as warm and humid, he added. This time there was. What do we know about the role of the climate crisis? Scientists have been wary of attributing the frequency and intensity of convective storms that can produce tornadoes to climate change, in part because historical and observational data around tornadoes is relatively limited. In simple terms, that’s due to fact that tornadoes are relatively small and can easily go unreported, said Michael Tippett, a professor of applied mathematics at Columbia University. “In linking climate change to extreme weather like hurricanes or extreme rainfall and flooding some connections are easier to make than others,” Tippett said. “Making the connection to tornadoes is the hardest of all.” In a recent paper, Future Global Convective Environments, the authors looked at the atmospheric ingredients necessary to produce extreme weather that could in turn produce tornadoes. The authors projected that for each degree of global temperature increase, conditions favourable to severe weather increased by 5%–20%. “We have circumstantial evidence, yes, but the key caveat is that favourable conditions do not guarantee that a storm occurs,” Tippett said. Jennifer Francis, a senior scientist at Woodwell Climate Research Center, said climate change was “making some of the ingredients needed to create an outbreak like this more likely”. “The atmosphere has more fuel in it now, both in terms of heat and moisture. The large dip in the jet-stream that created the clash between warm, tropical air and cold Arctic air – another necessary ingredient – is also more likely to occur in our changed climate.” “It all makes sense, but the rarity of these events makes it difficult to detect any definite signal of change in tornado behaviour.” Some scientists have been able to establish that the number of tornadoes in large outbreaks is on the rise and that the weather environments that produce severe storms are occurring more often. The five largest US winter tornado outbreaks have all hit since 1999. “Circumstantial evidence points to an increase in frequency, but it’s not a direct line of evidence,” said Tippett. Associated Press contributed to this reportIn 2013, Syrian beekeeper Ryad Alsous drank his last cup of mint tea on the balcony of his flat in Damascus. He was about to leave the city where he had spent his whole life and move to Britain. Eight years later, he is again drinking mint tea made in the same flask but this time in Huddersfield. The flask is the only item he still has from his home in Syria. He is talking about the moment he left. “It was very difficult. And also full of hope,” he says. His block of flats had been bombed twice, and explosions in the eastern part of the city were happening daily. On the day he left, a loud bang nearby caused the doves perched on his balcony to briefly flutter into the air. He had been feeding the birds for years and realised they would have no one to look after them once he left. “I opened my window by about 25cm, enough to allow the birds to get inside. I opened all the cupboards in my kitchen so the birds could eat everything we had. I felt that at that moment, I was swapping places with the birds. They gave me acceptance to enter the UK, a safe country, and I gave them my safe home to stay in, to eat, to drink, to nest, and produce offspring.” He had forgotten this until five years later when he asked his neighbour to send him a picture of the flat. It was covered in nests – in the kitchen, bedrooms, cupboards, in an old shoe. His beautiful city had been destroyed, but his flat was filled with life. At least 350,000 people have died in 10 years of fighting in Syria, and this number is likely to be higher according to the UN, with 13.5 million people (half the population) forcibly displaced. A few years after arriving in the UK with his wife and five children, Alsous set up the Buzz Project, a charity that helps refugees take up beekeeping. The story of how he did it is one of the inspirations for the character of Mustafa in the bestselling book The Beekeeper of Aleppo. Like Alsous, Mustafa arrives in Yorkshire, where he starts an apiary with rare British black bees and teaches refugees the art of producing honey. The Buzz Project is a biodiversity initiative, Alsous says. His aim is to help people like him, who have been exiled from their country, to feel at home in an unfamiliar land. “It is through [understanding] biodiversity that we can make that connection between humans and bees, between humans and their environment, to make successful people,” he says. He has helped more than 30 refugees from countries including Syria, Sudan, Kurdistan and Turkey. Over the past 60 years, armed conflicts have taken place in two-thirds of the planet’s biodiversity hotspots. In the 1990s, Saddam Hussein’s troops drained the Mesopotamian marshes in Iraq, the largest wetland ecosystem in the Middle East, reducing them to 10% of their original size. Decades of war have destroyed more than half of Afghanistan’s forests. Meanwhile, the climate crisis is displacing more people. Last year, an estimated 30 million people were internally displaced by floods, storms and wildfires – three times greater than displacements caused by violent conflicts. Many of the places Alsous loved in Syria no longer exist, and this sadness is likely to be shared by a growing number of people in the future. In Alsous’s pebble-dash house, bees are everywhere – embroidered on pillows, depicted in paintings – and there are dozens of pots of honey. I notice a collection of paper bees on thank-you letters from a class of schoolchildren Alsous spoke to. One reads: “I hope you enjoy England.” His bees are showing him the charms of a new landscape. He talks lovingly of the British countryside. He marvels at the hawthorn and lime trees – which are favourites with the bees – lining the M6 when he drives from Huddersfield to London to see his daughter. It is the first time I’ve heard anyone compliment the M6. He got his first hive in the UK in 2015, thanks to Debbie, a woman from Manchester who he found on Facebook. Now he manages 100 of them. He asks me to put in a callout for Debbie (whose phone number has changed) because he wants to hug her and thank her for what she did. To Alsous, the UK is a land of plenty. “Come on, I want to show you part of my happiness,” he says. Around the corner are several hives in his kitchen, which explains the lingering sweet smell in the house. There is honey everywhere (thankfully no bees) and an extractor and bucket for processing it. “I am happy because everything in my home relates to bees. I could be a bee in a hive,” he says. Alsous is forever trying to escape the lingering sadness of leaving his country, something he never imagined would happen. “I built and shared Damascus. I remember every corner of that city,” he says. A few months ago, Alsous’s younger sister died of Covid in Syria while he was speaking to her on the phone. She could not get to a hospital for treatment because there was no fuel. He hadn’t seen her since he left. His remaining two sisters and two brothers are in Syria – none of them were able to leave. His dream is to go back and see them one day. He fell in love with bees when he was 21, while he was studying them at agricultural college. His father was a journalist and his mother a seamstress. Alsous saved up and bought two hives with a friend, which grew rapidly into colonies. He made good money selling honey to friends and family. He did a PhD in the composition, texture and flavour of honey, and he tastes honey like a sommelier tastes wine. In Syria, the bees collected nectar from cotton flowers, sunflowers, eucalyptus, heather and citrus plants – Alsous knew exactly what flowers the bees had visited when he tasted the honey. Alsous, who helped establish a beekeeping association in Syria, says the number of beekeepers in the country quadrupled to 25,000 between 1989 and 2011, although there is no official data to back this up. He estimates that more than three-quarters of the bee colonies in Syria were destroyed in the war. He was a prominent professor at Damascus University and had 500 hives, all of which were destroyed – either set on fire or the bees starved because crops were no longer planted. He shows me photos of him getting his British passport in October 2019 and tells me how much he loves this country. One of his daughters, who lives in London, got married recently. We watch a video of Alsous walking her down the aisle. He has two other daughters, living in the UK and the US, and two sons, one in the UK and one in Australia, as well as seven grandchildren. His Syrian-born family is putting down roots in different cultures and countries. For him, bees are an ideal society – they work well together, are cooperative and care for one another. They don’t fail in ways humans do. “Bees mean peace and life. They do their job and they produce honey,” he says. • This article was amended on 14 December 2021. Huddersfield is not on the M6 as an earlier version suggested. Find more age of extinction coverage here, and follow biodiversity reporters Phoebe Weston and Patrick Greenfield on Twitter for all the latest news and featuresMoreland City Council in Melbourne’s inner-north will change its name after a request from traditional owners to consider a name not connected with a 19th-century Jamaican slave estate. The council was named in 1994 when the City of Brunswick, City of Coburg and parts of Broadmeadows were amalgamated by the Victorian state government. The council now represents one of the most progressive parts of not only Melbourne but the country. The name Moreland is taken from land between Moonee Ponds Creek and Sydney Road that Farquhar McCrae acquired in 1839. McCrae named it after a Jamaican slave estate his forebears had run, which traded in slaves, sugar and rum. At its peak in 1827, the estate held 700 enslaved people. At a special meeting of the council on Monday night, the council voted six to three, with the support of Greens, Labor and socialist councillors, to change the name. The request to change the name came from the traditional owners of the land, the Wurundjeri Woi-wurrung elders, and other community leaders in a letter in November. “There are some uncomfortable facts ingrained in the City of Moreland’s current identity,” the letter states. “Robust evidence now readily available clearly confirms the details and magnitude of these connections with brutal enslavement globally and mass dispossession locally. “Retention of this name for the principal civic body for a diverse community of 200,000 citizens is untenable.” The council will work with the Wurundjeri Woi-wurrung Cultural Heritage Aboriginal Corporation and consult with the community on proposed new names in 2022. It will take a new name to the state minister for local government, Shaun Leane, who has indicated support for the name change, provided the proposed name is supported by the council and the community. “We believe this is an important local issue and we are focused on working through this process in a thorough, fair and equitable way,” Moreland mayor Mark Riley said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Changing the corporate name of our council is symbolic and that’s our focus. We’re not considering changing suburb names, road names or the train station name. They’re not ours to change, but others may choose to,” he said. The council has allocated $500,000 over the next two years to change the largest signs in the city, but will update smaller street and park signs, and other items bearing the existing name within existing budgets over ten years as those need replacing. One of the councillors who voted against the name change, Oscar Yildiz told Melbourne radio station 3AW that “this is the most important decision of any local council” and questioned why the name change had been decided so quickly without wide consultation of the community. He argued it would cost much more than the $500,000 allocated, and the money could be better spent on improving Indigenous disadvantage. “I want to ask the latte-sipping Brunswick trendies when was the last time they actually went into an Indigenous community and witnessed the challenges of our Aboriginal people?” he said. Greens councillor Adam Pulford said in his speech to council on Monday night that reflecting on the impact of the same-sex marriage postal survey, a public vote on whether to change the name would hurt the community. “If we were to run a community-wide vote on renaming, it would essentially become a debate about whether racism is OK and acceptable in our community, and would cause hurt to First Peoples and other community members,” he said. “I’ve also heard people say that this conversation about renaming our city is now causing division in our community. I think this is wrong: wherever racism exists, division exists. Not acting on racism perpetuates this division, but acting on it is our opportunity to bring us together.”It became clear that things had gone terribly awry on this particular day when I saw that the most moderate option on the desk in front of me involved killing at least five million people. I could kill up to 45 million if I chose the more comprehensive of the alternatives laid out on three pieces of paper, but it was hard to focus on the details because there were people shouting at me through my earpiece and from the screens in front of me. I was experiencing what a US president would have to do in the event of a nuclear crisis: make a decision that would end many millions of lives – and quite possibly life on the planet – with incomplete information and in less than 15 minutes. In the real world, I was in a meeting room in a Washington hotel, but with virtual reality goggles strapped on. I was sitting behind the president’s desk in the Oval Office. The television news was on and there was a report about Russian troop movements, but the volume was muted and someone was telling me the national security adviser was running late for our meeting. I tried to shift my focus back to the news but a few seconds later a siren went off and a bald man in a uniform and dark glasses appeared from the door to my left. “Mr President, we have a national emergency,” a woman’s voice said. “Please follow the military officer right away.” The bald officer ushered me into a wood-paneled lift which had been concealed behind a wall, and we began our descent. The VR simulation has been developed by a team from Princeton, American and Hamburg universities, based on extensive research, including interviews with former officials, into what would happen if the US was – or believed itself to be – under nuclear attack. They have called their project the Nuclear Biscuit, after the small card bearing the president’s launch authorization codes. Over the past few days, it has been tried out in Washington by nuclear weapons experts and former officials (the researchers would not say whether any serving decision-makers had a go). “You walk into that simulation and come out a changed person,” Richard Burt, who was the US chief negotiator in arms control negotiations with the Soviet Union, said after his turn. Having gone through the full, terrifying, 15 minutes, I can see what he means. I emerged from the lift with my military aide into the underground situation room. Unlike the famous scene in Dr Strangelove, I was not surrounded by advisers. In the real world, it is unlikely that they would be instantly on hand when the alarm sounds. On this occasion my national security adviser was still stuck in traffic, and the military aide is trained to say nothing. His job is to hold on to the briefcase, the “nuclear football”, containing the launch plans and biscuit. In the US system, the president has sole command authority. He or she can make the decision without asking for any advice. As soon as I took a seat, a voice in my headset started to tell me the situation. Early warning sensors had detected the launch of 299 missiles in Russia which were thought, with high confidence, to be heading for the US mainland and most likely, the intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) silos in the north-west. An estimated 2 million Americans would be killed. While this was being explained, another voice – this time a secret service officer – was telling me helicopters were on the way to evacuate me. I struggled to understand all the details because the siren was still going on. It took me a few minutes to remember I was the commander-in-chief and could order it to be turned off. It was silenced immediately but I could not be sure I had not missed a vital nuance. A general from strategic command appeared on one of the screens in front of me and told me I did not have much time to make a decision and to keep an eye on the digital clock on the conference table. It said I had 12 minutes, 44 seconds left. “If you don’t make a decision before the clock hits zero, we will lose our entire ICBM force,” the general said, in a voice that implied I had already let the nation down. The silent military aide opened the football and put my three options in front of me. The first was a “limited counterforce” strike, aimed at Russian ICBM silos and major submarine and bomber bases. That was the version that would kill five to 15 million Russians. Option 2 was a “full-scale counterforce” with a 10-25 million casualty estimate. Option 3 also targeted “war sustaining industries”, the Russian leadership and would kill 30-45 million. In 1979, the world came within minutes of nuclear war because someone had left a training tape simulating a Russian attack in the early warning system monitors. In September 1983, Russian computers erroneously showed incoming US missiles. Armageddon was only averted because the duty officer, Lieutenant Colonel Stanislav Petrov, went against protocols and decided not to act on the alert because his gut told him it was a glitch. In the decades since, the technology has been updated but it is theoretically possible early warning systems could be hacked just like other supposedly super-secure networks have in the past. I asked my aides if a cyber attack was possible and was told it was impossible to know for sure. My national security adviser (who had by then overcome his problems with traffic) recalled there had been something in the daily brief about the early warning network repelling a cyber attack. I decided to scrap all three options and ordered an attack on Russia’s remaining arsenal only after the first incoming missiles had landed and it was confirmed to be a real attack. In case I was dead by then, I was advised to delegate launch authority to the vice president. What happens next was deliberately left unclear. The simulation ends with the military aide displaying the codes necessary to order the launch. The point of the exercise is to underline the mind-numbing impossibility of the choices facing the leader of a nuclear weapons state. Moritz Kütt, senior researcher at the University of Hamburg’s Institute for Peace Research and Security Policy, said the great majority of the participants in the experiment so far had selected one of the three options on the table. “Most people picked an escalatory option and only very few decided not to respond,” Kütt said. “People felt they were making decisions under uncertainty,” Sharon Weiner, associate professor at the School of International Service at American University, said. “They wished they knew more or thought that something wasn’t clear, but there was pressure to make a decision anyway. “I think some people pick an option just because they want to be over,” she added. The pressure to take one of the options presented by the Pentagon felt almost overwhelming. At one point an aide asked how I would be able to face my country if I failed to respond. The simulation raises the question of who chooses those options in the first place. In the 15 minutes available, it would be impossible to put all feasible alternatives in front of a president, so whoever whittles them down holds a huge amount of power. All we know is that it is someone from the US military. Diplomats, politicians or ethicists are not part of the process. In the event of a nuclear alert, it would be too late for any broader reflection – just a few minutes of trying to think clearly amid sirens, raised voices and a multitude of unknowns. “The tendency to take mental shortcuts is greater in high stakes situations,” Weiner said. People take more risks in crises. “Some of the literature says it depends on whether you feel secure personally or in your career. If you feel you’re not doing well, you take unnecessary risks.” In my case, I froze in the last few minutes of the countdown, unable to think of anything else to do. I should have tried calling Vladimir Putin perhaps, but it turns out the simulation would have told me he was not available. Shockingly, the researchers found no evidence that any US president except Jimmy Carter, had taken part in realistic drills to practise potentially world-ending decisions. Other presidents occasionally participated in table-top exercises with aides to discuss options but more often sent surrogates in their place. In January, the research team will take their experiment to Capitol Hill, with the aim of provoking some contemplation about the realities underlying US nuclear planning. “Hopefully members of Congress will come to experience this and at least see the consequences of the choices they’ve made about nuclear weapons issues,” Weiner said. “They will see everybody in that virtual room is trying to do their job, but it’s an impossible job.”The federal and Victorian governments and pharmaceutical giant Moderna have struck an in-principle agreement to manufacture mRNA vaccines in Australia. Under the deal, announced on Tuesday, a manufacturing facility will be built in Victoria, enabling up to 100m mRNA vaccines to be produced locally each year. The announcement comes almost a year after experts urged the government to establish a local mRNA manufacturing facility, and vaccine production is not set to begin until 2024. With vaccine production still years away, will mRNA vaccines still be useful then? Why wasn’t Australia making its own mRNA vaccines already? mRNA vaccines have been in development for years, but were only brought to market for the first time during the Covid-19 pandemic, with the Pfizer and Moderna vaccines. In 2018, the technology was described by scientists as “a new era in vaccinology” for its “capacity for rapid development and potential for low-cost manufacture”. Australia’s biotechnology infrastructure is not as developed as some other countries in the Asia-Pacific, such as Singapore and South Korea. At present, CSL Limited is Australia’s only onshore vaccine manufacturer, and to produce approved mRNA vaccines it would have had to license the intellectual property from Pfizer or Moderna. Though the Moderna deal is welcome news, progress has been “very slow”, said Prof Trent Munro, a biopharmaceuticals expert at the University of Queensland. “The fact that it took this long to get an agreement across the line, and the fact that it’s just an in-principle agreement … there’s probably still a lot to be hashed out.” In May, the federal government announced an approach to market, calling on bids from firms interested in manufacturing mRNA vaccines locally. Leading Australian scientists had advocated for such a move since February, in order to reduce reliance on overseas supply and to safeguard against potential supply disruptions. Will mRNA vaccines still be useful in 2024? While Pfizer and Moderna have developed mRNA vaccines for Covid-19, the technology has the potential to treat a variety of illnesses. mRNA vaccines were initially tested for cancer treatment, and have also shown promise in treating autoimmune conditions. mRNA vaccines contain synthetic sequences of messenger ribonucleic acid, a genetic blueprint our cells use to make proteins. In mRNA Covid vaccines, the sequence tells cells to produce copies of the virus’s spike protein, triggering an immune response. To treat other conditions, this sequence can be changed to encode for other proteins. According to Moderna, the deal will result in the onshore manufacturing of a “portfolio of mRNA vaccines against respiratory viruses, including Covid-19, seasonal influenza, respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) and potential other vaccines, pending licensure”. “In the vaccine space, what people are really hopeful about is that mRNA vaccines allow you to put multiple targets into one vial,” Munro said. “The big hope [is] that you can have a vaccine against RSV, flu, cytomegalovirus, Covid-19 all in one shot … It’s quite difficult to do that with other vaccine types.” In a statement, the Australian Academy of Science said the mRNA vaccine manufacturing deal would “significantly grow our sovereign capability to respond to future pandemics”. “The opportunity to take advantage of the potential to develop more advanced uses of RNA therapies and technologies in the future, including the treatment of disorders such as arthritis, cancer and malaria and producing environmentally friendly biopesticides, should be seized,” it said. Why will it take years before mRNA vaccines are locally produced? Locally manufacturing mRNA vaccines by 2024 is an “incredibly aggressive” time frame, Munro said. “Moderna as an organisation is under stress as it is to even manufacture products today.” Munro said the Australian deal would be resource intensive, especially given existing manufacturing commitments the pharmaceutical giant has in countries such as Canada and South Korea. Fitting out a facility to a produce high-quality therapeutics – a standard known as GMP – would also take time, Munro said. “Globally, there are huge pressures on supply chains for specialist equipment,” he added. Australia could eventually become an exporter of mRNA vaccines. “The issue is, of course, that profit essentially goes back to Moderna. It doesn’t come here to Australia,” Munro said. “We’d like to see more Australian innovation come forward, and we’d like to see Moderna support Australian R&amp;D.”A Queensland court has ruled an Aboriginal man was maliciously prosecuted by police when he was wrongly jailed for a bank robbery almost three decades ago. The court of appeal ruled on Tuesday that Terry Irving had wrongly spent 1671 days in prison for an armed bank robbery he did not commit. On 19 March 1993, a robber armed with a sawn-off shotgun and wearing a beret, dark glasses and a scarf partially covering his face entered the Cairns ANZ branch and stole about $6,000 cash. Irving was charged less than two months after the robbery, and spent more than four and a half years in prison. He was released in December 1997 after the director of public prosecutions conceded during a high court hearing that he had not been given a fair trial, and the court quashed his convictions. He had firstly been charged with being an accessory after the fact to the robbery, and was investigated while he was in custody for the first charge. It was the accessory prosecution which the court agreed was malicious. The Townsville man said Tuesday’s decision, which means he can seek compensation for police misconduct, underlined issues with the treatment of Aboriginal people within the justice system that continue to endure. “The police culture at the time of my conviction meant that they could do whatever they wanted to secure a conviction,” Irving said in a statement. “Aboriginal people continue to be overrepresented in the Australian prison population and we continue to confront very particular challenges in having wrongful convictions recognised and remedied.” Court of appeal justice Hugh Fraser said in the decision on Tuesday that while judgment for Irving had been given in relation to the malicious prosecution claim, and that the proceedings would be sent to the supreme court to assess damages, other aspects of Irving’s claim were dismissed. Irving had sued the detective who investigated the robbery and the state of Queensland. Melissa Meyers, a senior associate at Maurice Blackburn, said in a statement that it should not have taken so long for Irving to achieve justice. “In Terry’s case it was clearly shown that [police] guidelines were ignored and that there was cherry-picking of evidence and the downplaying or deliberate omission of evidence,” she said. “Today the Queensland court of appeal agreed with us that Terry should be compensated for his traumatic ordeal. “Unfortunately, no amount of compensation can take away from the emotional and physical abuse that he suffered whilst falsely imprisoned for a crime he did not commit.”With that, we’ll end our live coverage for today. Here’s a recap of today’s major news developments: The Australian and Victorian governments have announced a deal with Moderna to establish an mRNA vaccine facility in Melbourne by as early as 2024. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, says the emergent Omicron variant will not “take us back” to more Covid-19 restrictions, and Australia is now prepared to open up and live with the virus. The New South Wales government will push ahead with easing Covid restrictions, including those for unvaccinated people, from Wednesday despite epidemiologists urging caution amid rising case numbers and the Omicron variant. Tasmania is set to reopen to all vaccinated Australians on Wednesday. While businesses will welcome the tourists, some are concerned the health system won’t cope. Gina Cass-Gottlieb, treasurer Josh Frydenberg’s nomination for chair of the competition watchdog, may have to recuse herself from any decisions relating to one of the regulator’s biggest cases if she is approved for the job. A report into the Covidsafe contact-tracing app found it was used just 13 times in the past six months during the Delta outbreaks in NSW and Victoria. Have a great evening. We’ll be back tomorrow to do it all over again. One of Australia’s largest national disability insurance scheme providers has apologised to the residents of two troubled group homes after allegations of violence, abuse and neglect were aired at an inquiry. The commission also heard on Tuesday that Life Without Barriers charged residents at a Victoria home a substantial proportion of their disability pension for “rent” despite the property being leased on a peppercorn deal of $1 a month. During hearings in the past week, the disability royal commission has heard violence between residents at the Victoria group home run by the provider was so bad it had become “normal”, while there were also allegations of violence, sexual abuse, and neglect at another home in New South Wales. In one case aired at the commission last week, a resident in the NSW home was hospitalised with a bowel condition and “nearly died” after staff allegedly did not follow care protocol. The provider did not report the incident to the NDIS watchdog. In another incident, the commission heard a Life Without Barriers investigation found there was not enough evidence to substantiate claims a support worker pushed a client at the NSW home to the ground, even though the employee admitted doing so. Read more: An Indigenous prisoner in NSW has been taken to hospital after concerns were raised that the prison was not adequately managing his care for an infection in his hip. The 37-year-old’s lawyer, Lisa De Luca, said the man had been sent to hospital after pressure from her and other advocates for authorities to treat his illness as serious. De Luca said the man, an inmate at Junee correctional centre, 450km west of Sydney, was in a lot of pain, could not walk and had only been offered paracetamol for the infection, she said. “He’s in a bad way, he rang me yesterday,” De Luca said. “(The prison) are saying he saw a doctor. The GP said ‘yes you have an infection it’s in your hip replacement’. The client was in distress.” The lawyer contacted the prison multiple times, which she alleges played down the seriousness of the infection. Read more: The Morrison government has announced an $85m financial package to bolster Fiji’s economic recovery. The support follows a similar commitment last year of $83.5m, and will help the Fijian government finance essential services and support economic growth. The recovery package will have “a focus on fiscal management, private sector recovery, gender equality and social inclusion”, according to a joint statement. Fiji’s attorney-general and minister for economy, Aiyaz Sayed-Khaiyum, said: As a result of severe travel restrictions, the Covid-19 pandemic’s economic ramifications have been steep across the Pacific. We appreciate Australia’s confidence in Fiji’s financial management through this direct budgetary support that will help alleviate the socioeconomic burden on Fijian society. With more than 90% adults in Fiji now fully vaccinated –– owed in significant part to Australian-donated vaccines –– we look forward to a normalisation of trade and tourism that reconnects our region and allows our recovery to begin in earnest.” Foreign minister Marise Payne said: No country – big or small – has been immune to the Covid-19 pandemic. Australia is pleased to be supporting our close friend and neighbour, Fiji, as the country continues its economic recovery.” Forensic teams searching for evidence in relation to the disappearance of William Tyrrell will finish their operation in coming days. In mid-November, police began a renewed effort to search for evidence at multiple sites in Kendall, the town on the New South Wales mid-north coast where William went missing from the home of his foster grandmother in September 2014. When announcing the renewed search, police were upfront that they were searching for remains. Search sites have included the home where William was last seen, a nearby creek and bushland, with subterranean imaging equipment used to detect inconsistencies in soil. While forensic teams were seen bagging various pieces of cloth throughout the several weeks of searching that was hampered by rain, they are yet to make any announcements in relation the significance of any discoveries made during the dig. In a statement released on Tuesday afternoon, NSW Police said: The NSW Police Force advise current inquiries and search operations being undertaken in the Kendall area are expected to be completed in coming days. The forensic search, which is being conducted under a Coronial Order as part of ongoing investigations into the disappearance of William Tyrrell, has been ongoing since Monday 15 November 2021. Once the search operation is complete, a team will facilitate a repatriation of the site. Further, forensic examinations of seized items and a significant quantity of soil remain ongoing. Deputy State Coroner Harriet Grahame has been appraised, and Strike Force Rosann detectives continue to prepare a brief for the information of Her Honour. Investigators would like to thank the NSW Rural Fire Service, Salvation Army, and the local community for their hospitality and assistance. The NSW Police Force remains committed to finding William Tyrrell and investigations by the Homicide Squad’s Strike Force Rosann are ongoing.” Western Australia’s health minister Roger Cook is speaking about potential Covid exposure in his state. Two truck drivers from South Australia who were in WA between 9-11 December have tested positive to Covid. Cook said close contacts will be notified and exposure sites listed later today. “At this stage we haven’t allocated any contacts as close contacts, they are simply contacts,” Cook said. Cook said authorities’ main concerns lie with the movements of one of the drivers. A baby girl is in a critical condition in hospital in Adelaide after contracting invasive meningococcal disease. The seven-month-old has the W strain of the disease, with seven of her close contacts receiving precautionary antibiotics, reports AAP. South Australia has reported 11 cases of meningococcal so far this year compared to five at the same time last year. The Northern Territory has detected four new Covid-19 cases in the community as an outbreak spreads towards the Western Australian border. One of the infections is linked to a cluster in the town of Katherine, 320km south of Darwin, reports AAP. The other three cases are unconfirmed, but Health Minister, Natasha Fyles, said they are very likely to be genuine infections due to the close contacts. Two of those are in remote Timber Creek near the WA border, 225km east of Kununurra, and the other one is in Kalkarindji, 550km south of Darwin. “Today’s case numbers are nowhere near as high as yesterday but we do expect more cases in the coming days,” Fyles said on Tuesday. It brings the current outbreak to 88 cases but that is expected to rise to 91 later in the day once the three infections are confirmed. It started when an infected woman illegally entered the NT in late October. People in Timber Creek have been ordered to wear a face mask in most public places until 2pm on Friday as a rapid response team prepares to travel to the town. A lockout in the Aboriginal community of Beswick, 425km southeast of Darwin, will end at 2pm Tuesday but masks will need to be worn until the same time on Friday. The mask order is also in place in nearby Barunga Aboriginal community, Katherine and the town of Tennant Creek, 990km south of Darwin. Earlier this afternoon, my colleague Josh Taylor wrote about how a report into the Covidsafe contact-tracing app found it was used just 13 times in the past six months during the Delta outbreaks in NSW and Victoria. Nationals senator Matt Canavan, appearing on ABC TV this afternoon, acknowledged the app spearheaded by his government didn’t work, and pointed out he has said this before. He said: That app didn’t work. You have to try different things when you have a global pandemic in front of you...It didn’t work but it was worth trying.” Half of all young people held in detention facilities in Australia are Indigenous and almost two-thirds have yet to be sentenced for a crime, new data shows. It comes after a commitment by Australian governments to raise the age of criminal responsibility from 10 to 12, a move advocates and lawyers say does not go far enough to protect the most vulnerable children from the trauma of being incarcerated. A report by the Australian Institute of Health and Welfare (AIHW), released on Tuesday, found that 72% of the more than 800 children and young people held in detention on an average night in the June quarter this year were unsentenced – meaning they were either remanded in custody while awaiting the outcome of a court case or held in custody by police. It also found 50% of those in youth detention were Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children, despite Indigenous children making up just 6% of the 10-17 age cohort in the broader population. Indigenous children were jailed at 20 times the rate of non-Indigenous children as of June 2021 and were also more likely to be jailed without being sentenced and more likely to be under the age of 18 when incarcerated, the report showed. Read more: On a picturesque stretch of Tasmania’s east coast, Kate Bradley’s berry farm and cafe has struggled since Covid drastically cut the number of hungry tourists pulling up for her “desserts with a view”. But as Tasmanians prepare for the border with the rest of the nation to open fully on Wednesday, Bradley shares mixed feelings of anxiety and relief with many in the island state. “I’m a little bit apprehensive about opening up. One part of me says bring it on as quickly as possible, the other says, how are we going to go?” Bradley says. “But we need the business and I’m optimistic. “All my staff are vaccinated and most of our family are too. I’ve got all the cleaning and sanitation gear here and I’m also going to buy for all my staff these rapid antigen tests. I’m as prepared as I can be.” Tasmanians have enjoyed a relatively restriction-free lifestyle throughout 2021, with no community cases of Covid. Apart from a three-day lockdown when a traveller fled hotel quarantine, there have been no orders to wear masks except in hospitals, airports and at large events. Read more of Sally Glaetzer’s piece about Tasmania’s preparations ahead of relaxing its border rules from Wednesday: Health authorities in South Australia have announced 12 new Covid-19 cases have been detected in the most recent 24-hour reporting period. Two of the new cases are reported as being aged care health workers. It comes as a Covid case attended a school assembly in Adelaide, which has prompted hundreds of people in the city’s south report for testing. It will come as no surprise but the Covidsafe contact-tracing app has been used just 13 times in the past six months during the Delta outbreaks in NSW and Victoria. The second report on the operation of the app, released this month, reveals between May and November this year, contact tracers downloaded data from the app just 13 times, with only two potential close contacts identified through the app. The 13 users who uploaded their data showed 331 exchanges between phones using the app, with nine encounters (where the phones were within 1.5m of each other for a period of time). With just two potential close contacts identified. It shows a massive decline in not only people using the app, but contact tracers relying on it in the peak of the Delta wave in Australia. Since the launch 2020, there have been 792 people with Covid uploading data from the app, with 2,829 potential close contacts identified. As previously reported, there are less than two dozen close contacts identified who weren’t found through manual contact tracing. The report says by identifying a previously-unknown exposure date at Mounties in Sydney, two people who were at that venue were found to have tested positive for Covid-19. The report also reveals the measurement was changed to account for Delta in October. Instead of needing people to be in contact for 15 minutes or more, public health officers can now view encounters of between one minute and 15 minutes, meaning fleeting contacts where Delta could have been transmitted could have been captured by the app, provided people were using it. The government still refuses to say how many users continue to use the app. The department said in the report that the Sydney outbreak in June led to a doubling of registrations nationally, and numbers increased again after the fourth and fifth lockdowns in Melbourne. I’ve been watching the ongoing case against sitting judge Salvatore Vasta, who is being personally sued for his handling of a routine property settlement case in 2018, during which he jailed a man for contempt. Such proceedings are remarkably rare. Judges like Vasta, who sits on the federal circuit court bench, are generally protected by judicial immunity, shielding them from being sued as a result of errors. In this case, Vasta has conceded he mistakenly assumed that another judge had previously found the man, known by the pseudonym Mr Stradford, to have breached a court order, making him guilty of contempt. Vasta then sentenced him to 12 months imprisonment, to serve six. Stradford says he endured a torrid time in prison. His lawyers are arguing Vasta, as an inferior court judge, exceeded his jurisdiction in jailing Stradford and has therefore lost the protection of judicial immunity. Jeremy Kirk, SC, acting for Vasta, said in his closing submissions on Tuesday that he accepted Vasta could have found out there had been no hearing on Stradford’s alleged previous contempt prior to jailing him. Kirk said: We accept he could have found it out with reasonable inquiries. It was as I said a significant human mistake, but a human mistake nonetheless. It did have serious consequences, we don’t avoid that conclusion or characterisation either. That being said, many exercises of judicial power can have serious consequences. But Kirk maintained that Vasta is protected by judicial immunity and should not even be before the court. The hearing continues before justice Michael Wigney in the federal court. Commuters in Sydney are being urged to wear masks and socially distance on trains as best they can on Tuesday, as rail employees taking industrial action see the city’s network operate at 25% of its weekday capacity. Dale Merrick, chief operating officer of New South Wales TrainLink, warned that travellers on some lines would have limited personal space in carriages. “Customers travelling to the Hunter Valley, into the Blue Mountains and the South Coast, [are] today effectively experiencing a weekend timetable and as I said, [this is] utterly disappointing that we have had to do so today,” Merrick said. All lines on the Sydney network are affected, with workers refusing to staff foreign-made trains as part of failed enterprise agreement negotiations between the the Rail, Tram and Bus Union and NSW Trains. Industrial action was also taken last week, and Merrick said he was “greatly disappointed that again today our employees and the union have taken this action”. Merrick said negotiations with the union are ongoing. Two dogs have been rescued from mine shafts by specialist Victorian firefighters in separate incidents in the same week. The Country Fire Authority’s Bendigo-based Oscar1 Brigade rescued Bruno the bull-Arab on 5 December after he fell down a mine shaft at Castlemaine Diggins National Park, reports AAP. Less than six days later, the brigade was called to rescue Terry the kelpie-cross from a mine shaft at Woodend. “The owner said they were camping and the dog just went for a run, but as it was night and you can’t see these mine shafts at the best of times, he just fell down the hole,” Captain Daniel McMahon said. “It was a 15-metre shaft but we thought it may have been a false floor, meaning there could have been another 10 or 20 metres below if the floor had collapsed. “Terry was in surprisingly good nick though with no injuries, so we hooked him up to the ropes and Woodend brigade helped pull him up.” McMahon said he was pleased both incidents ended with a good result. “Rescuing a dog in a mineshaft is a serious job, but for us, it also doubles as real-world experience in case we are called to a community member in the same unfortunate situation,” he said. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, says the emergent Omicron variant will not “take us back” to more Covid-19 restrictions, and Australia is now prepared to open up and live with the virus. Announcing a deal with Moderna and the Victorian government that will see a new manufacturing facility built in Melbourne by as early as 2024, Morrison said the country’s high vaccination rate meant Australia could “continue to move forward”. “We’re not letting Omicron take us back,” Morrison said. “We’ve decided as a country to live with this virus and Australians have worked so hard for that. “Australia can now open up. This Christmas we’re about to have is a gift Australians have given to themselves by the way they’ve worked together with the settings that we’ve put in place.” Morrison also conceded the Coalition had made mistakes during the pandemic, including in the early phases of the vaccination rollout, but said these had been overcome. Read more: The New South Wales auditor general has reportedly refused to sign off on the state’s finances, prompting fears public assets could be sold to cover up a $10bn government “accounting sham”, reports AAP. Margaret Crawford has told Treasury she will not approve the budget, Nine Newspapers report, unless a solution is found to what she described as “significant accounting issues” with the government’s Transport Asset Holding Entity. The state-owned corporation was set up in 2015 to own NSW’s transport assets but accountants and public servants have since warned it is being used to inflate the NSW budget. NSW Treasury had miscalculated the benefit of TAHE to the state budget to the tune of $10 billion over the next 10 years, a parliamentary inquiry has heard. Former transport department secretary Rod Staples has also warned the setup blurs the lines of responsibility for maintenance of the assets and public safety. The government is scrambling to find a solution, two days before it is due to hand down its half-yearly budget update. Opposition leader Chris Minns fears Sydney Trains, NSW trains or the entire Transport department could be sold to plug the massive hole in the budget. If you’re still unclear on what TAHE is, here’s an explainer we prepared earlier. Australia’s drugs regulator, the Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA), has tested a number of imported products labelled as ivermectin and found that they are counterfeit. The products Iversun-12, Covimectin-12, and Ivilife-12 failed laboratory tests. In a statement the TGA said the findings should “serve as a warning against buying ivermectin products from unverified online sellers”. “Counterfeit products may contain undeclared and hazardous ingredients that could cause a serious adverse reaction. They may also be contaminated because of a lack of manufacturing and testing standards.” The TGA is working with the Australian Border Force to target counterfeit and unlawful ivermectin entering Australia. Border force will refer suspected counterfeit products to the TGA for further direction. The TGA has also warned against self-medicating with unproven Covid-19 drugs like ivermectin. “It is very dangerous to take large doses of ivermectin and there is insufficient evidence to validate its safe and effective use for Covid-19,” the TGA said. As Covid cases in New South Wales continue to rise, the state government has committed to its plan to lift restrictions for unvaccinated residents from tomorrow. On Tuesday, as NSW recorded 804 new cases, the government insisted it had considered all the options but was committed to easing restrictions on Wednesday in order to return the state “back to a full life of normality”, AAP reports. From Wednesday, unvaccinated people will be allowed back in pubs, cafes, gyms and shops and mask mandates will be eased. The NSW health minister Brad Hazzard made the comments as health authorities are battling to contain an outbreak of the Omicron variant, with a total of 85 cases now confirmed in the state. “We’re not about to start backflipping on issues we promised,” Hazzard said. Hazzard also warned “once the unvaccinated are mixing with the vaccinated, the numbers will increase even further”. “That’s worrying because that puts pressure on our doctors and nurses and our frontline health system,” he said. He was scathing about people who refused to get vaccinated, saying they were “very vulnerable to what is a rapidly increasing number of Covid cases”. A decade of reforms to save the Murray-Darling basin could be undermined by New South Wales’ plans to license too much flood water harvesting, with insiders warning that NSW’s processes will result in irrigators being licensed to take billions of litres of flows without proper environmental assessment. Two members of the four-person Healthy Floodplains Review committee, which hears appeals from irrigators about their proposed flood plain water entitlements, say the system is “sloppy”, “flawed” and should be reviewed immediately. They say over the last 12 months the committee has been swamped with more than 400 appeals, involving 1,300 separate flood plain harvesting structures; the committee is overwhelmed and applications are often accompanied by poor evidence. Irrigators, they say, are now “consultant shopping” to achieve outcomes many times larger than the initial assessment by the Natural Resources Access Regulator, which conducted an on-the-ground survey of dams and other structures used in flood plain harvesting. Read more: With that, I shall pass you over to the always amazing Elias Visontay who will expertly guide you through the rest of the day’s news. See you tomorrow! Retail giant Woolworths has endured one of its most challenging trading periods following the emergence of the highly contagious Delta variant of Covid-19, AAP reports. The supermarket operator said its stock flows and operating rhythm were rocked by the scare in the first six months of fiscal 2022. Chief executive Brad Banducci said today in a market update: The first half of F22 has been one of the most challenging halves we have experienced in recent memory due to the far-reaching impact of the Covid Delta strain. He said the costs of trading in a Covid environment would affect first-half earnings. Woolworths, which will release its first-half results in late February, expects to see a direct cost hit of $150 million in its Australian Food division in addition to direct costs of between $60 million to $70 million. Australian Food earnings before interest and tax are forecast to be between $1.19 billion and $1.22 billion, compared with about $1.33 billion in the same period in fiscal 2021. Banducci said during a call with analysts also saw challenges in Christmas trade, namely sourcing goods due to the supply chain difficulties of the pandemic. It’s not going to be an easy ride into Christmas. We’ll have a white knuckle ride – not in demand, but in having the stock there for them to buy. Consumer electronics and some toys were proving difficult to source for Big W stores. The retail giant will also book a bonus payment for staff of between $35m and $40m as a way of saying thank you for their efforts during the pandemic. Shares in Woolworths Group on the ASX were down 8.5% to $37.08 at 11.44 AEDT. I just want to make sure no one has forgotten that THIS was just said at a press conference. Here is the full statement from the PM’s office about the new agreement with Moderna to produce mRNA vaccines in Australia by 2024. Jam Land, the company part-owned by the energy minister Angus Taylor and his brother Richard, illegally poisoned critically endangered grasslands and should restore native habitat, a ministerial review of the original investigation has concluded. The decision, published late Friday, follows an 18-month review of the original determination which ordered Jam Land to restore 103 hectares of grasslands on a property in the New South Wales Monaro region. It comes more than five years after the company poisoned the grasslands, known as the natural temperate grassland of the south-eastern highlands, on a property in Corrowong. You can read the full report below: New Zealanders stuck overseas and Kiwi business groups have reacted with despair to Jacinda Ardern’s border rethink, AAP reports. The change-up was the biggest talking point in New Zealand’s Parliament House on Tuesday, where politicians have returned for the last sitting week of the year. On Monday, Ardern announced the planned reopening to Australia-based New Zealanders, set for 17 January, would be subject to a last-minute review in early January. We haven’t changed any decisions at this stage around reconnection ... but I think people understand we need to review the latest details and evidence around Omicron. The review is in contrast to previous statements from Ardern’s ministers they were “very committed” to the date, and Kiwis should make travel plans for then, knowing they could bypass hotel quarantine for self-isolation. Covid-19 minister Chris Hipkins insisted on Tuesday: It’s looking very likely that we’ll proceed. But we can’t discount the possibility that Omicron could prove to be a spanner in the works. The border rethink comes amid surging vaccine rates in New Zealand. As of Tuesday, 89% of Kiwis aged 12 or over are fully vaccinated, and 94% have had one dose. New Zealand’s reticence to reopen contrasts with shifts from hold-out Australian states. After hitting vaccine targets, Queensland has opened up without self-isolation requirements for fully vaccinated travellers, Tasmania is following suit on Wednesday, and Western Australia will do so from February 5. Business NZ chief executive Kirk Hope said the NZ government was “overly cautious”. They’re using an approach that has suited them well. But it’s increasingly frustrating for business, who are going to be at a competitive disadvantage to Australia. The (border rethink) signal has created quite a lot of uncertainty for business, which had been looking forward to the door opening on the border even just a bit. The border review – slated for 7 or 8 January – has drawn scorn from opposition parties. Opposition leader Christopher Luxon – the big winner from polling released on Tuesday that indicated 20% of New Zealanders rated him their preferred prime minister – said the time had come to reopen. The rest of the world is moving on. They are finding a way to move forward ... it is about risk management. We have to find a way through to manage risk intelligently. Separated families are also aghast, given many had put off applying for quarantine places in recent weeks believing the border would be open to them from 17 January. Just on that ACCC news from before, here is the treasurer’s tweet on his top pick: A-League Men’s and Women’s clubs are expected to receive a cash windfall after an US private equity firm bought a minority share in the body which oversees both competitions. Technology investment specialist Silver Lake has struck the deal with the Australian Professional Leagues (APL), which is responsible for the operation and commercialisation of the country’s professional football competitions. It’s understood the deal is for a 30% stake in the body and is worth approximately $130m. The investment will be used to build a digital media platform. You can read more in the article below: Just out of the NSW press conference, chief health officer Dr Kerry Chant has confirmed that the cluster which started at a prom-themed event at Newcastle nightclub has ballooned, with 150 of the 650 attendees now testing positive to Covid-19. Yesterday there were 28 Covid cases in the Hunter New England region, today this jumped to 224. Just back to that question Scott Morrison was asked about Karen Andrews suggesting that Australia would have domestic mRNA manufacturing capacity by October this year: Queensland chief health officer John Gerrard says Queensland won’t be following NSW in removing restrictions for unvaccinated people anytime soon: We are not even looking at removing the mandate, it’s not even something that’s on the agenda, so that that is not a good plan at all. Luckily it seems that this Queensland community case was not infectious while out and about. Queensland’s Covid-19 graphics are extremely confusing nowadays, as they don’t seem to count infected people from other states who test positive while out and about in Queensland as local cases. But the long and short of it is that one new case has been detected in the community. South Australia will find out by the end of the week what restrictions will be eased once the state reaches 90% double vaccination. Vaccination vans which have travelled to Aboriginal communities around Victoria have helped push the vaccine rate of First Nations people in the state up to 83.5%, the Victorian Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Organisation has said. As of this week, the Australian Immunisation Register states that 87.8% of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people aged 15 and over in Victoria have received their first dose of a Covid-19 vaccine and 83.5% have received their second dose. The high vaccine rate reflects a steady climb up from low figures in September, when it was revealed that a record-keeping error meant the actual Indigenous vaccination rate in Victoria was less than half what had previously been reported. It follows nine weeks of targeted vaccination campaigns in the form of vaccination vans which have travelled to Mildura, Shepparton, Warrnambool, Seymore, Wodonga, Benalla, Morwell, Drouin and Warragul. VACCHO chief executive Jill Gallagher: I’m so proud of our community in welcoming the vans with open arms – it has been incredible. We have seen some great outcomes achieved by the ACCO vaccine van. This reflects what trust looks like in the community ... I have also been particularly pleased to see so many elders coming to visit the vans to have a yarn and get vaccinated. Aboriginal communities across Australia have been targeted by misinformation campaigns, which have slowed the vaccine rollout. Scott Morrison has been pressed on what he meant when he said no government had got everything right during the pandemic. I mean – and I said this last night at the Sydney Institute – no government has got everything right, but no government can in a pandemic. To think that that was 100% strike rate on every decision, I think Australians understand and I think the honesty of governments in being able to say that clearly – I know the Victorian government feel the same way . But what I can tell us is we did make the big calls and we did get the balance right and the proof of that is the fact that we have saved 40,000 lives based on looking at the average amongst the OECD. Think about that – 40,000 lives saved because of how Australia has responded to this pandemic. One of the strongest advanced economies to come through the pandemic in the world and one of the highest vaccination rates. That is the proof of the combination of decisions and responses that our government and, work being other governments around the country, have made. No country gets it all right but I can tell you we got it right a lot more often than so many other places around the world and Australians are safer today and better prepared today for what’s coming next than almost any other country in the world. For once the prime minister and the Victorian government seem to be on the same page when it comes to Covid-19. Here is what Victorian deputy premier James Merlino has to say in response to that same question: In terms of what the settings will be in this week, the minister for health will make an announcement later in the week. It’s based on the latest health advice but what we have done is in line with the national plan and we can do it because Victorians have been so fantastic in getting vaccinated. But the answer to your question, whether it’s Omicron or Delta or the next variant, it’s vaccines that protects the citizen, protects families and means that we can enjoy the freedoms that we do right now. Reporter: Is lifting the masks going backwards or keeping masks on, say, for a few weeks, in your mind is that going backwards? Or if they said we need to do it that would be OK? Scott Morrison: Well, we had a pause on the opening that starts tomorrow and we did that because we were waiting for the picture to emerge a bit more clearly before taking that next step and now we feel confident to take that next step and states and territories are doing exactly the same thing. You know, over the course of this pandemic, sometimes there has been that need for patience. And I know that can be frustrating. I welcome, on the issue of patience, Western Australia giving a clear timetable about when it’s opening. Tomorrow, Tasmania opens. Tremendous, just in time for the Tassie Test next month, which I’m thrilled to see happening. But all of that, I think, goes to the national plan that [Jodie] McVernon from Doherty helped us construct with the premiers. We’re in phase C now and we look forward to getting to phase D, and that’s all about living with the virus. Scott Morrison says Covid-19 health decisions can no longer be based just on case numbers: We’re now in a different phase. Cases are not the issue and I know over a period of time we may have become conditioned to case numbers being the trigger. That’s not the case ... Now, here in Victoria, as you rightly say, you’ve been having cases of over 1,000 a day for some time and the Victorian public hospital system and health system is coping strongly. They did the work, they did the planning, New South Wales is the same. So that is the way forward. Questions have turned to the NSW situation now, where the state plans to lift a large number of restrictions on unvaccinated people tomorrow despite today being its most infectious day in more than 10 weeks. Scott Morrison is asked what he thinks of this but the prime minister says we can’t start walking backwards: We’re taking Omicron incredibly seriously. We had a very long discussion about this in the meeting with premiers and chief ministers last week. We’re not letting Omicron take us back, though. We’ve decided as a country to live with this virus and Australians have worked so hard for that. When we have vaccination rates about to hit 90%, one of the highest in the world, that means we have choices today that we didn’t have 18 months ago and that means that we can continue to move forward. Tomorrow, we will begin welcoming students to Australia again, skilled migrants, working holiday-makers, under those visa programs. From tomorrow, Korea, as I announced yesterday with the president, and Japan, also join with Singapore and New Zealand. But we have watched this very closely and made careful decisions and taken the best medical advice on this. Reporter: Last year Karen Andrews promised mRNA manufacturing by October of this year. Is that a failed promise? Scott Morrison: No, that’s not what she said. I know that’s been misrepresented, particularly by our opponents in the Labor party who seem to think you can do this by time travel. I’ll ask Angus to comment on that. Angus Taylor: That’s not what Karen said. The point she made was the timeline depends on getting access to the intellectual property. We have that now. Getting access to a site. We’re close to having that ... and we’re committed to getting this done as fast as possible. It’s important to point out there’s been no development of a new mRNA manufacturing facility anywhere else in the world since the pandemic struck and this will be one of the first in the world. We’re in a good situation to get onto this as quickly as possible, and make it as effective as possible, not just for health outcomes but also for jobs, development of a medical technology hub and development of capabilities I talked about. NOOOOOOOOOOOO Scott Morrison just added to this accidentally horrific metaphor with “meet and beat”: Angus and I and Greg like to talk about meeting and beating of targets. It’s like shake and bake. Meet and beat. And that’s what we want to see happen here. We want this on the ground as quickly as possible. Am I going crazy? Is this satire? Does anyone want to tell this Moderna representative what “pitching a tent” actually means? I want to thank you, prime minister, acting Premier, and other ministers and most importantly the Doherty. I’m thrilled and proud to be here today, to announce that Moderna will be pitching tent in Australia, upon the finalisation of our agreement. We have played a critical role during the pandemic, and as we have all learned, pandemics can come at the time we least expect them. Anyone else weirdly shocked that official army regalia comes in a short sleeve option? The Moderna man at the press conference (apologies to you, but you didn’t say your name at the start) says a definite location has not yet been locked in for the new mRNA manufacturing hub. Since all the politicians are speaking from the Doherty Institue, named after Australia Nobel laureate Prof Peter Doherty, I think it’s only fair that I once again share his most iconic tweet. A tweet that I genuinely believe changed Australian culture forever. Josh Frydenberg has put forward lawyer Gina Cass-Gottlieb as a poacher-turned-gamekeeper candidate to chair the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission. If approved by the states and territories, Cass-Gottlieb will replace Rod Sims, who has been in the job for a decade, when his term expires in March. It’s a big change for Cass-Gottlieb, a partner at law firm Gilbert &amp; Tobin, who has spent much of her career bashing Sims’ ACCC over mergers and acquisitions on behalf of big companies, as well as representing clients under investigation by it and other regulators. On approval by the states and territories, who haven’t withheld the thumbs-up in living memory, she will become the first woman to chair the ACCC, one of Australia’s most powerful regulators. Frydenberg thanked Sims for his service: Mr Sims has made an outstanding contribution to competition, consumer and infrastructure policy in his time at the ACCC, helping to advance world-leading reforms, including most recently with respect to the digital platforms ... I also acknowledge his wider contribution to public policy during his distinguished public service career which spans more than three decades. I wish him well for the future. James Merlino: This is a huge announcement because this is the first time in the southern hemisphere we’ll have mRNA manufacturing based in this nation. And 25m vaccines, the ability to ramp up to 100m, and it’s not just in regards to vaccine developments, whether it’s variants of coronavirus right now, pandemics of the future, but beyond, beyond that, treatment of cancer, treatment of rare diseases, this is a massive game-changer and to have that manufacturing capacity, the research capacity, right here in Melbourne, Victoria, Australia, is a great thing. This will create jobs: 1,000 jobs, 500 in construction, 500 ongoing, but beyond that, it saves lives. Whether it’s dealing with a pandemic, treatment of cancer, treatment of rare diseases, this is a major, major announcement. Victoria’s deputy premier James Merlino is speaking now (the Moderna deal is a collaboration between the state and federal governments), and seems to have a new slogan: Boston, London, Melbourne. Merlino: When you think about medical research and biotechnology, think about Boston, think about London, and you think about Melbourne. This is the place to be. Boston, London and Melbourne, the three great leading cities when it comes to medical research and biotechnology. In Melbourne and Victoria, 30,000 jobs in medical research, biotechnology, across our industry, universities, and institutes such as the Doherty. Forty per cent of the nation’s medical tech and biotech companies are based in Melbourne, and 60% of the nation’s pharmaceutical exports come from Victoria. So this is a great announcement and it’s the logical place to do it. Scott Morrison: We are building our sovereign capability here. Which protects Australia’s national interests. Our sovereign capability to manufacture these vaccines here in Australia. Up to 100m-a-year* capacity to do this in this arrangement is extraordinary. But we’ve got it right. We’ve spent the time to get it right. This is not an arrangement that you just rush into and do a deal on a coffee shop somewhere. This is something you do the meticulous work on. We worked with a number of states and we came to the very, I think, sensible conclusion here in the Victoria, we have the strong foundation to continue to build, not just a great research and collaboration infrastructure, but a powerhouse of medical manufacturing, that plays exactly into our economic goals of securing the economic recovery, 1 million Australians are now employed in manufacturing. *But remember, the first year isn’t until 2024. So, obviously when chatting about doing a deal to set up domestic vaccine manufacturing, the elephant in the room is Scott Morrison’s decision last year to do a deal to produce AstraZeneca domestically, which ended up being, well ... not the best move. The prime minister is going with the “well, everyone got stuff wrong and I promise we are getting it right this time” tactic to explain this: It was in this country that already we have produced here in Victoria, 25m AstraZeneca vaccines. In August of 2020, we did the deal to ensure that could be done right here in Australia and that provided the workhorse, the backbone of the vaccine program that’s seen us get to where we are today. But we also know during this pandemic, as we have learned many lessons, no government has got everything right, I’m sure that James [Merlino] would agree with me, we all sought to work together to make the best calls we possibly can. But the mRNA vaccines have proven to be, I argue, the biggest scientific discovery over the course of this pandemic. OK, jumping down to Victoria now where the prime minister is speaking from the Doherty Institute in Melbourne. This morning he is announcing that Australia has made a deal with the pharmaceutical company Moderna to create an mRNA vaccine manufacturing facility in Australia. (It won’t be functional until 2024.) Scott Morrison seems to be feeling a little poetic and, dare I say, sentimental this morning. It was in February 2020, I was here with Greg Hunt, and I got to stare in the face of the virus because it was reproduced here for the first time anywhere in the world. Since that day, together, Australians have been staring this virus down. We have made some big calls. We got the balance right, I believe, working together as a country. Working together with states and territories, working together with our health and medical, science and research community, that is enabled us to achieve incredible things in this country. We have the lowest fatality rate of almost every country in the world, saved more than 30,000 lives. A number of flood warnings have just been published for NSW: Brad Hazzard: The numbers of people in the hospital at the moment are fairly low. There’s only 21 in ICU today. I think there’s one on extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, or Ecmo. The numbers are slight this morning. But once the unvaccinated are mixing with the vaccinated, the numbers will increase even further. That’s worrying because that puts pressure on our doctors and nurses and our frontline health system. I said this once before, I will say it again – to the unvaccinated, it’s not fair to health workers that you can be so selfish to think that being unvaccinated is OK. It’s not. It’s the doctors and nurses in our hospitals who then have to care for you when you come to our hospital. I have no doubt there will be people coming to hospitals because they have been unvaccinated. Brad Hazzard is asked if he is ruling out the possibility that the Newcastle area could go into lockdown after a spike of cases in the area: New South Wales is not planning on any snap lockdowns. What we’re planning on is making sure the community understand the need to have boosters and being vaccinated. Brad Hazzard: The circumstances of what is occurring right now in the Hunter district, where we are seeing substantial increases in numbers of Covid, is a very telling reminder to all of us, particularly as we open up to the unvaccinated. My message to the vaccinated, you might be out and about now but you are very vulnerable to what is a rapidly increasing number of Covid cases here in NSW. Go and get vaccinated. Give up on the current views you have and going get vaccinated.* *Wow! If only there were some legal incentives that would encourage people to go get vaccinated! NSW health minister Brad Hazzard is speaking now after the state recorded its most infectious day in 10 weeks. And yes, there is a brass band playing Feliz Navidad in the background. Though NSW Health is easing a huge number of restrictions for unvaccinated people tomorrow, Hazzard says he worried about the lack of Covid-19 booster shot take-up: I am concerned not enough people are actually understanding the benefit of getting the booster. A third shot of vaccine is going to make all the difference. What we do know, is it does not matter whether you have had AstraZeneca or Pfizer or Moderna, whatever you may have had, it does drop off in terms of the effect on your immunity. Particularly if over 60, immunity drops off after three to four months and we need to go and get a booster. The wild weather that’s been battering the east coast of Australia has led to widespread flooding in multiple states and a surge in insurance claims, reports Jack Gramenz from AAP. NRMA Insurance says the number of weather-related damage claims during the spring season, which included NSW’s wettest November on record, was 35% above average. All up, 10,000 homes claimed weather damage from the insurer in Queensland, NSW and the ACT. NRMA data shows nearly half the claims were for hail damage in the Coffs Harbour region on the NSW north coast in October, and wild weather was responsible for two-thirds of the claims. The insurer’s natural perils executive manager Mark Leplastrier says it’s been “an ominous start to storm season”. Spring featured some of the most unpredictable and extreme weather we have seen in many years, and with a La Niña system now declared, we could be in for more wet weather over summer ... There has been some relief from flooding in NSW at least, with river heights dropping in several areas around the state after persistent wet weather. The Hunter River has receded below minor flood levels, as have the Severn and Hawkesbury rivers. Minor to moderate flooding is still occurring along the Gwydir, Macquarie, Macintyre, Bogan, Murrumbidgee, Warrego, Paroo and Snowy rivers. There is still a risk of major flooding on the Namoi, Lachlan, Barwon, and Weir rivers. The Namoi could send Wee Waa back into isolation with a major flood peak predicted on Tuesday night. The river is expected to peak near 7.1 metres. Lepastrier said climate change impacts could make severe storms more frequent over a wider area, and seven out of 10 people in a survey said they worried natural disasters were increasing in frequency and severity. Disaster assistance is available in local government areas around NSW. The clean-up will come too late for many of the state’s farmers, who have had their hopes of a prosperous harvest crushed by weeks of heavy rain and flooding. A survey of rural confidence by Rabobank released on Tuesday showed confidence was high leading into the harvest season, with 88% of respondents predicting excellent conditions to continue, before flooding devastated crops. Rabobank central NSW regional manager Toby Mendl said: A few weeks ago, it was hard to imagine that cropping conditions in NSW could get any better but we now have a situation where some growers, who had been preparing to harvest record-yielding crops, will actually harvest nothing. Domestic border restrictions in Australia have eased as local cases of the Omicron variant rise. Overseas, the UK has raised its Covid alert level and reintroduced restrictions amid concerns that Omicron poses a “rapidly increasing risk to the public and healthcare services”. Here’s what we know so far about Omicron and how worried Australia should be about the new variant of concern. Get all the most important info in the article below: A reminder that Triple J’s Hottest 100 is open for voting this morning, and yes, I will be giving every single one of my votes to All Too Well (10 Minute Version) (Taylor’s Version) (From the Vault). Just in case you forgot about that other diseases still exist, as I have over the last two years! Remember to get your flu shot, especially if you are planning an amazing European getaway. We will be hearing from the Tasmanian premier at 11am today AEDT. They’re trying to silence me! You can’t swim in the ocean! They changed the 389 Bondi bus timetable! Won’t somebody think of the property developers? Alan Jones, having lost his low-rating spot on Sky News and his regular rant in Sydney’s Daily Telegraph, is back with a new show called Direct to the People. Jones began at 8pm on Monday night, thundering about being silenced. “You’re not allowed to have an alternative viewpoint,” he bellowed on YouTube, Facebook and his own website, while spruiking his new morning podcast. “They won’t silence you or me,” he continued. Alas, he was silenced. Find out what happened in the article below: Firefighters will be able to more accurately predict whims of deadly bushfires thanks to new modelling it is hoped will save lives and properties, reports AAP’s Tiffanie Turnbull. Australia’s national science agency CSIRO and the NSW Rural Fire Service have developed the country’s most advanced model for predicting the speed and behaviour of eucalypt forest fires. Eucalypt forests make up more than 70% of Australia’s forests, and have featured in some of its fiercest fires. The model is a mathematical description of how a fire responds to environmental conditions, and will be rolled out nationally this summer. CSIRO bushfire behaviour researcher and leader of the project Miguel Cruz said: This model was built using analysis of the most extensive set of data gathered from observations of large, high-intensity experimental fires and wildfires, collated from around the country over the past 40 years. Firefighters input forecast weather and wind information from the Bureau of Meteorology, data on the fuel load within the forest from vegetation databases, and patterns of existing behaviour of a fire from fireground reports. CSIRO bushfire behaviour researcher Andrew Sullivan said the new model would give firefighters an extra advantage in controlling complex and difficult blazes. Firefighters often have to battle steep terrain and challenging conditions just to reach the fire ... Critically, this model can accurately predict the speed that a fire front will advance across a landscape, which is essential to enable authorities to efficiently identify threats, issue bushfire warning messages, signal evacuations and plan fire suppression actions. A real estate agency in Queensland has come under fire after it emailed tenants offering them the chance to buy a Christmas gift for their landlords. Kanik &amp; Co, located near Brisbane, sent out an email to tenants offering to facilitate the purchasing of select gifts, along with any “handwritten notes”, that would be delivered to the owner of the property. Some of the offered gifts include a $50 “white wine grazing box”, a $55 “festive sweets basket”, a $70 “self care hamper”, a $99 “foodies hamper” and a $115 gift called “all things golden”. You can read the full report below: A reminder that this significant jump in Covid-19 cases in NSW comes before a huge range of vaccinated economy restrictions being lifted across the state tomorrow. From 15 December the following rules apply to everyone, regardless of vaccination status: Masks will only be required on public transport and planes, at airports and for indoors front-of-house hospitality staff who are not fully vaccinated QR check-in is only required for hospitals, aged and disability care facilities, gyms, places of worship, funerals or memorial services, personal services, pubs, small bars, registered clubs, nightclubs, strip clubs, sex on premises, and indoor music festivals with more than 1,000 people No person limit in gyms, indoor recreation and sporting facilities Non-critical retail reopens to all No person limit for personal services including hairdressers, spas, beauty and nail salons, tattoo and massage parlours Employers allow staff to work from home at their discretion International travellers who are not fully vaccinated still need to quarantine on arrival for 14 days No limit to number of visitors in your home No limit to number of people for outdoor public gatherings All visitors to residents in aged care facilities and disability homes permitted in line with their policies No person limit in hospitality venues Singing and dancing is permitted indoors and outdoors for all Travel between greater Sydney and regional NSW permitted for all Carpooling permitted for all Caravan parks and camping grounds open for all No person limit for major recreation facilities like stadiums, theme parks and racecourses No person limit for entertainment facilities including cinemas and theatres No person limit for information and education facilities including art galleries, museums and libraries No person limit for outdoor public gatherings and recreation Music festivals reopen with 20,000 person limit Amusement centres and play centres open to all Weddings and funerals permitted with no person limit, eating and drinking allowed while standing and dancing permitted for all Singing and dancing indoors permitted by all Places of worship open to all Rules via AAP. The deaths of two Queensland infant twins with special needs is being investigated by child protection police, reports AAP. Emergency services were called to an apartment block in Bungalow, an inner suburb of Cairns, on Monday morning. They were unable to revive the two infants, who both had special medical needs. On Tuesday morning police said the Cairns child protection investigation unit was investigating their deaths. Australia’s eight planned nuclear submarines will cost $70bn at an “absolute minimum” and it’s “highly likely” to be more than that, defence analysts say. With inflation, the cost could be as high as $171bn, according to a report from the Australian Strategic Policy Institute. The thinktank’s report contains a series of estimates ranging from low to high and concedes that estimating the final cost of the project is necessarily an “extremely assumption-rich activity”. Under the low range, for a smaller submarine with a more efficient build, the “constant” cost (not including inflation) would be about $70bn. Including inflation (the “out-turned” cost), it would be $116bn. You can read the full report below: Here is the full statement from the Victorian government on the Moderna manufacturing facility that’s set to be operational by 2024. Scott Morrison has called on states and territories to ease their last remaining Covid-19 restrictions, as Western Australia announced plans to reopen its hard border to the rest of the nation, reports AAP’s Andrew Brown. Speaking at the Sydney Institute’s annual dinner on Monday night, Morrison urged jurisdictions to “facilitate, rather than dictate”: Australians kept their side of the deal, it is time for governments to now keep theirs; to step back and let Australians step forward ... To put Australians back in charge of their own lives, relying on the connecting points and relationships that exist between the state and the individual. It comes as West Australian premier Mark McGowan announced the state would relax its border restrictions from 5 February. The prime minister congratulated WA for making it to the 80% vaccination level and for announcing plans to scrap its hard border: Australia is going to be connected and together again ... This will be welcome news for thousands of Western Australians looking forward to reuniting with family and friends after so long apart. The prime minister also confirmed that a two-week pause on allowing visa holders to enter the country without an exemption would end as scheduled on Wednesday. This has not yet been independently confirmed by Guardian Australia but Nine News is reporting that NSW is set to record 804 new Covid-19 cases today, a significant bump up from previous days. We will have to wait till 9am to find out for sure. Fresh doubts have emerged over whether Australia can rely on boosting soil carbon to achieve its net zero emissions goals with a NSW government report predicting the land sector will become a significant source of emissions in a warmer climate. The concerns are raised in a report on soil health trends in NSW forests, published without fanfare by the state’s Natural Resources Commission. It examined soil organic carbon levels in eastern NSW forests and how they may be affected by projected rising temperatures and shifting rainfall patterns. They found major losses could be expected, particularly for southern forests, suggesting “forest managers will have to implement appropriate soil carbon-enhancing strategies even to just maintain current SOC levels”. You can read the full report below: More people in Newcastle have been forced into isolation after others infected with Covid-19 visited a pub last weekend, reports AAP. NSW Health is battling to contain several large transmission events and there are now 64 cases of the new Omicron strain on record. Anyone who was at Newcastle’s Finnegan’s Hotel in Darby Street on Friday between 6.30pm and 2.30am on Saturday, has been advised to get tested and self-isolate for seven days. NSW Health said on Monday night: All household contacts of close contacts must also be tested and self-isolate until a negative result is received by everyone in the household ... It is likely some of these cases have the Omicron variant of concern. NSW Health is appealing for anyone who didn’t check in using the QR code to also get tested and self-isolate. The latest alert comes after cases linked to an outbreak that started at Newcastle’s Argyle House nightclub on Wednesday spiked from 24 to 84 on Monday, with a number of the cases also likely to be the Omicron variant. Nearly 700 people checked into the venue and chief health officer Kerry Chant on Monday said it was “incredibly important” that anyone who was at the venue gets a test, “given the high transmission at this venue”. Here is a little blog treat to get you through the morning! Religious Australians will be given greater freedom of speech than non-religious expressions of conscience under the Coalition’s bill, a leading academic has warned. Prof George Williams raised the issue in a submission to the human rights committee inquiry into the religious discrimination package. The bill faces an uncertain future with two inquiries running over summer and some religious organisations threatening to withdraw their support over the Morrison government’s deal with four Liberal moderates to strengthen protections for gay students at religious schools at the same time. You can read the full report here: Deputy prime minister Barnaby Joyce says WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange should not be extradited to the United States to face charges. Joyce has penned an opinion piece for the Sydney Morning Herald stating that he believes a trial should be held in the UK or Assange should return to Australia, as he wasn’t on American soil at the time the alleged espionage offences occurred: As an individual, whether you like him or despise him, it is beyond him, given his circumstances, to protect his rights by himself. So we must hope for the British courts to do so, and we will judge its society accordingly. I have never met him and, from observation, don’t respect him. I presume I would not like him. And I view these facts as a clarion call to be all the more vigilant that he is treated just as one of my most powerful colleagues or dearest friends would be. Joyce also noted that Assange “was not in breach of any Australian laws at the time of his actions”, urging the UK courts not to cave to pressure from the US to send him over. Good day everyone and welcome to this glorious Tuesday! It’s Matilda Boseley here and I hope your morning is going better than mine as my phone appears to have died. Why don’t we jump into the news to try and distract me from my woes! One of the big headlines today: Australia is getting its own mRNA vaccine manufacturing facility ... but not until 2024. The factory will be built in Victoria in partnership with vaccine manufacturer Moderna and is expected to produce as many as 100m vaccines each year. It’s unlikely this factory will make much of an impact on the Covid-19 pandemic, with at least a two-year lead time until jabs start coming of the production line. Prime minister Scott Morrison, who will make an official announcement later this morning, said it would help the country be prepared should there be another pandemic. In other news, the NSW rail network is once again being put to the test with the union taking industrial action today. The Rail, Tram and Bus Union said it would refuse to drive foreign-made trains as part of ongoing enterprise agreement negotiations with NSW Trains, a move that will impact about 75% of trains on the network. RTBU NSW secretary Alex Claassens said in a statement that he was hopeful the state government would come to the bargaining table. It’s disappointing that another week has passed, and there’s still no indication [of] the NSW government stepping in and doing the right thing ... The NSW government has been refusing to commit to providing workers and commuters with basic guarantees around hygiene, safety and privatisation for many months now ... We’re very aware of the impact this will have on commuters, but we also know that not taking action will leave workers and commuters at risk. As part of the EBA negotiations, the union wants an end to privatisation, safety standards maintained and a commitment to retaining current hygiene levels while not relying on contractors to provide it.Records including the name, tax file number and banking details of almost 80,000 South Australian government employees may have been stolen in a cyber-attack, with workers advised to assume their personal information has been stolen. The South Australian treasurer, Rob Lucas, first disclosed on Friday that records of 38,000 government employees had been stolen in a cyber-attack, but confirmed the extent of the data breach on Tuesday. The attack was carried out against Frontier Software, an external company that has provided the South Australian government’s payroll software for the last 20 years. It affects employees working for the government as of July last year, with only employees at the Department of Education excluded from the hack. Investigations are ongoing but it is believed the incident involved a ransomware attack by Russian hackers that took place five weeks ago. The personal information stolen includes – but is not limited to – employees’ first and last names, date of birth, tax file number, home address and bank account details. Lucas apologised to employees affected saying it was a “very serious breach”. “It’s almost everyone, members of parliament, right through to the premier, also people who serve on government boards and committees,” he said. “To the extent we can, we are providing the maximum amount of security we can now that this has occurred.” All employees were advised to take security steps such as changing passwords and security questions used to identify a person while monitoring their accounts for any unusual activity. Lucas said the government could not immediately terminate the contract with Frontier Software as it would take at least six months to find a new provider. Frontier Software Australia CEO Nick Southcombe said the company, was monitoring for any other suspicious activity as further investigations continued. “We are continuing to communicate closely with our customers to share the latest information about the incident, as well as offering additional cyber security support to ensure the ongoing security of their systems,” Southcombe said. “We can confirm that this is the first such cyber incident that Frontier Software has ever experienced. We are committed to learning from this experience and implementing all necessary cyber security measures to minimise the likelihood of an incident occurring in future.” In a notice posted on its website on 9 December, Frontier Software said some of its Australian customer systems had been hit be a cyber incident on 13 November and it had begun informing clients. The SA Privacy Committee, Office of the Australian Information Commissioner and the Australian federal police have been notified about the incident. Public Service Association acting general secretary Natasha Brown said the union was seeking legal advice on behalf of its members. “The government must take full responsibility for the integrity of this very sensitive data,” Brown said. “The government might have privatised the service – but they cannot privatise their responsibility for our members’ personal sensitive data.” “The PSA expects the government to cover any costs to members of any adverse consequences of this serious data breach – including any financial losses.” Justin Warren, chair of Electronic Frontiers Australia, said the incident was “all too familiar” and that those affected should be compensated for “the work they have to do to respond to this violation of their privacy”. “This data breach demonstrates, yet again, that once government or business has your data there is very little you can do if their cybersecurity isn’t good enough,” Warren said. “Governments keep demanding we trust them with our data but I struggle to see why anyone would. If governments want our trust they have to earn it.”On Sunday night at the Santiago Bernabéu, Atlético Madrid pulled off a spectacular smash-and-grab 2-0 victory against Real Madrid. Both Atlético goals came from surgical counterattacks, after being forced to soak up long spells of pressure. Despite playing most of the game on the front foot and having the majority of the chances, Real were undone by customary defensive lapses and a curious lack of intensity in key moments of the game. Sounds pretty plausible, right? And to be fair, that’s almost what happened. As the particularly observant among you will have noticed, I just swapped the names of the two teams. In reality, it was Carlo Ancelotti’s Real Madrid who spent much of the game camped in their penalty area. It was Diego Simeone’s Atléti who ended up weaving lots of pretty patterns to very little effect. And in reality it was Real who won, opening up a 13-point gap between the city rivals that nobody seriously believes will be overhauled. And yes, it felt strange. Not so much the result of the game as the way it unfolded: particularly if like many observers of a certain age you are still somehow conditioned by your idea of what Simeone’s Atlético should be, what they were, what they represent in the popular imagination. Atlético defend deep. They’re well organised. They make themselves suffer and in so doing make everyone else suffer. They don’t always win, but they know who they are. They’re bad bastards. The catch is that none of this has really been true for a while. It wasn’t true when they won La Liga last season, a title won on the flair of Marcos Llorente and João Félix and Thomas Lemar as much as any intrinsic bastardness, and it certainly isn’t true now. For the most part Atléti don’t play 4-4-2 any more, they don’t defend deep or even particularly well. Most chillingly of all, they don’t really seem to know who they are. Watching Luka Jovic and Vinícius Júnior barge their way up the field for Real’s second goal on Sunday felt curiously disorienting and perhaps even a little moving. The feyness of the challenges, the shambolic marking, the sense that here there was once something and now there isn’t. Or the previous weekend, when Real Mallorca overhauled a 1-0 deficit to win 2-1 with a counterattack and – you may need to sit down at this point – a header from a set piece. Clearly this is no longer Atlético, at least not how we remembered it. So what is it? The title is gone and after scraping through their Champions League group with seven points, it’s hard to see a challenge emerging on that front either. And so, as ever at Atléti, the existential angst is never far away. “It looks like they have lost some of their identity,” Luis García said on ESPN at the weekend. “The bulldog has become a poodle dressed in Prada,” wrote Iñako Díaz-Guerra in Monday’s El Mundo. Some of the more militant fans on social media are adamant that Simeone has come to the end of the road. Others argue that only a return to Simeone’s core principles – total cholismo – will restore them to prominence. Underpinning all this is a basic sense of loss, perhaps even a sort of rusting nostalgia. The same nostalgia you feel when the local old man’s pub gets converted into a trendy craft beer hangout selling pints by the third and something called “posh dogs”. You never visited the old place. You would actually cross the street to avoid it. Deep down, you quite like posh dogs. But still you feel sad, because it was familiar and timeless, and now it feels like nothing is. And so in a way it’s pointless trying to make the argument that Simeone’s Atlético actually won the title playing possession-based football, or that Simeone himself is tactically a far more flexible coach than he is given credit for, or that injuries to players such as Stefan Savic and José María Giménez and Kieran Trippier have prevented Simeone from fielding a first-choice defence for most of the season, or that the classic Simeone sides were frequently derided as joyless, cynical anti-football. The memories are just too strong. Even in their new, evolving iteration it’s impossible to watch Simeone’s Atlético without simultaneously seeing what they were: a persistent refrain that you just can’t get out of your head. Occasionally even Atlético themselves succumb to this. Often this season in big or tight games Simeone has reverted to what he knows best: low blocks, compactness, sitting on a lead rather than trying to extend it. Last Tuesday, after they beat Porto 3-1 in an ugly, ill-tempered Champions League game that saw a mass brawl and three red cards, the defender Mario Hermoso hailed it as an expression of classic Atléti values. “We’re Atlético Madrid,” he said. “We do things the hard way, and it tastes much better like this.” In times of plenty, the answer is always to move forward. In times of strife, the answer is always to go back. Perhaps this is the essential paradox of Atlético Madrid, a team trapped between their past and their future, trying to articulate a new identity for themselves in the immense shadow of the old. In a way, you wonder if Atléti will ever really be able to move on while Simeone is still there. If the blessing was to build a team and an era that will stand as one of the great enterprises in the modern history of football, then maybe the curse is never being able to escape it.Given his meteoric rise to the summit of world darts, you would forgive Gerwyn Price for allowing himself a moment to take stock and enjoy his newfound success. But the reigning PDC world darts champion is in no mood to put his feet up. He is instead intent on dominating the sport he only turned to seven years ago before enjoying an early retirement. “I don’t think you’ll see me flogging myself on the tour once I get past 50 like some other players do,” he tells me. “So that gives me 14 years to do as much as I can in this game. But I have that hunger and desire to dominate the game like guys like Phil [Taylor] did. This is the start, not the end.” Comparisons with the 16-times world champion Taylor are lofty to say the least, but Price has so far backed up all of his swagger and talk on the board, epitomised by his first world title last winter at Alexandra Palace. The defence of that crown begins on Wednesday with a tie against either Ritchie Edhouse or Lihao Wen, with Price again among the favourites to win the £500,000 top prize. It was only in 2014 that Price won his tour card, enabling him to turn professional and abandon his career in rugby, after his friend and ex-professional Barrie Bates convinced him to chance his arm at Qualifying School. Price caught the attention of Bates after playing in local competitions in his hometown of Markham. In just seven years, Price has secured millions in prize money and is the current world No 1. “Barrie was on at me for two or three years to have a go at it, but I kept turning it down,” Price says. “Had I known then that you had to pay to enter the events after winning a tour card, I wouldn’t have even gone and we wouldn’t be sat here. I remember him telling me in Wigan after I won the card that I had to pay to get in to some tournaments, I thought he was joking. But I’d missed the boat in rugby, I was stuck in a rut and I needed a change. I was lucky to have darts as an option.” It is some story and some rise, but even success on this scale has its challenges. The 36-year-old is the pantomime villain of darts, his enthusiastic celebrations, which sometimes border on overstepping the mark, making him an obvious target for hostility from supporters. Fans return to the world championship this year after last year’s event was played behind closed doors. “If it looks like water off a duck’s back, I’m hiding it well,” Price says with a smile. “It’s difficult, sometimes really difficult, especially with your family watching. But I can’t worry about that. I do actually like the crowds, and playing to them. Winning it last year without them was strange though, and it gives me that extra hunger to do it again this year and win it with them shouting, jeering – whatever they’re doing.” By his own admission, the aftermath of January’s victory against Gary Anderson left him lacking in motivation about what to do next, given he had risen to the top of the sport in the blink of an eye. But now, refocused and re-energised, and with his form improving in the second half of this year, the Welshman is ready to try to lay down a marker for a period of dominance with a second consecutive world title. “I’ve won it once, and that might be enough for some people, but it isn’t for me,” he says. “I want to do this again and again. I want to be called out as a multiple world champion, and spoken about like some of the greats of the game. It was tough after winning it last year, but you realise there’s lots left to achieve. “Initially it was a bit like ... what do I do now? But the desire is there to stay at the top of this game for as long as I can.” The riches that accompany such success have set Price and his young family up for life – he has invested in property as well as launching a darts academy in Wales to nurture the next generation of stars. It is all a far cry from just a few years ago, when Price was struggling to make it as a professional in rugby and wondering what was next. Household names such as Michael van Gerwen and Peter Wright will fancy their own chances at the Palace over the coming weeks, but as he has proven so many times in the past, it would take a brave man to write off Gerwyn Price.A powerful network of conservative election lawyers and groups with links to Donald Trump have spent millions of dollars promoting new and onerous voting laws that many battleground states such as Georgia and Texas have enacted. The moves have prompted election and voting rights watchdogs in the US to warn about the suppression of non-white voters aimed at providing Republicans an edge in coming elections. The lawyers and groups spearheading self-professed election integrity measures include some figures who pushed Trump’s baseless claims of fraud after the 2020 election. Key advocates include Cleta Mitchell with the Conservative Partnership institute; J Christian Adams of the Public Interest Legal Foundation; Hans von Spakovsky of the Heritage Foundation; Jason Snead of the Honest Elections Project; and J Kenneth Blackwell with the America First Policy Institute. These conservative outfits tout their goal as curbing significant voter fraud, despite the fact that numerous courts, the vast majority of voting experts and even former top Trump officials, such as ex-attorney general Bill Barr, concluded the 2020 elections were without serious problems. Watchdogs say that tightening state voting laws endanger the rights of Black voters and other communities of color who historically back Democrats by creating new rules limiting absentee voting and same day registration, while imposing other voting curbs. Among the election lawyers and groups advocating tougher voting laws, Mitchell, a veteran conservative lawyer , boasts the highest profile and has sparked the most scrutiny. She took part in the 2 January call where Trump prodded Georgia’s secretary of state Brad Raffensperger to “find” about 11,780 votes to overturn Joe Biden’s victory there. After details emerged about Mitchell’s role on the call, Foley &amp; Lardner, where she had worked for nearly 20 years, mounted an internal review, and she resigned. Trump’s 2 January call also spawned a criminal investigation by Georgia’s Fulton county district attorney that could create problems for Mitchell, say ex-prosecutors, and may bring scrutiny of the lawyer by the House committee looking into the 6 January Capitol attack. Mitchell, who reportedly raised $1m to help fund a baseless investigation of Arizona’s largest county that Trump pushed aggressively, generated more controversy last month when she was named to an advisory board for the federal Election Assistance Commission with backing from her close legal ally Adams whose foundation Mitchell chairs. Using her perch at CPI and another post with the libertarian FreedomWorks that early this year announced a seven-state drive to revamp voting laws led by Mitchell, the lawyer has helped spearhead new state election measures and block two congressional bills – the John Lewis Voting Rights Advancement Act and the Freedom to Vote Act – which Democrats have been trying to enact to counter the wave of new state laws. According to an October update from the Brennan Center for Justice, 19 states had enacted 33 new laws this year that “will make it harder for Americans to vote”. To press for new state voting laws, Mitchell has worked closely with some influential groups quietly backing new measures, such as the American Legislative Exchange Council, a powerful and shadowy group of state legislators that historically promotes model bills where she used to be outside counsel. At an Alec meeting on 1 December in California, Mitchell helped lead a secretive “process working group” session devoted to election and voting law changes and related matters that included several top legal allies such as Adams and Von Spakovsky, according to reports from the Center for Media and Democracy, and Documented. Adams’ foundation, which in 2020 received about $300,000 from the Bradley Foundation, whose board includes Mitchell, has brought lawsuits to defend some of the tough new voting laws in Texas and other states. Top funders of the right’s armada include a family foundation tied to billionaire Richard Uihlein, the Bradley Foundation, and two dark money giants, the Concord Fund and Donors Trust, according to public records. Legal watchdogs raise strong concerns about the new laws promoted by the right in numerous states such as Georgia and Texas, and note that the arguments for changing voting rules seem rife with contradictions. “During the 2021 legislative session, we saw anti-voter organizations push cookie-cutter legislation restricting the right to vote in legislatures across the country,” said Danielle Lang, senior director of voting rights at the nonpartisan Campaign Legal Center. “The same language appeared in state after state without regard for the state’s particular needs. For example, strict cutbacks on access to vote by mail were introduced in states that had wholly positive vote by mail experiences in 2020,” she added. Such complaints have not deterred the legislative blitz by Mitchell with allied lawyers and groups nationwide to change voting laws. Mitchell declined to answer questions from the Guardian about her voting law work or the Georgia investigation, though in an interview early this year with the AP she boasted “I love legislatures and working with legislators”, and revealed that she talks to Trump “fairly frequently”, but provided no details. Mitchell’s ties to Mark Meadows, Trump’s former chief of staff, are palpable, too, including post election as a frenzied and baseless drive was under way to overturn Trump’s loss. On 30 December, according to the Washington Post magazine, Mitchell wrote Meadows and “offered to send some 1,800 pages of documents purporting to support claims of election fraud”. Meadows, who also has a senior post at CPI, now faces contempt charges for reneging on testifying to the House panel about the 6 January Capitol attack and earlier efforts to block Biden from taking office. Mitchell’s effort to support Trump’s baseless case during the 2 January call with Raffensperger could pose new headaches for the lawyer as the Fulton county district attorney’s investigation proceeds. During the call, Mitchell claimed to have evidence of voter fraud, but a top lawyer for Raffensperger’s office replied she was mistaken and faulted her data. “You can’t make yourself much more of a participant to Trump’s efforts that day than actually making statements during the call,” said Michael J Moore, a former US attorney in Georgia. “That’s what Ms Mitchell did. That conduct alone will be enough bait to get the attention of the prosecutors. Whether it’s enough to snare her in the trap, only the DA and the grand jury can answer that.”There’s a moment in the current series of MasterChef: The Professionals where the contestants are asked to make filled agnolotti pasta for their opening “skills test”, and Gregg Wallace, in his role as the man on the Clapham omnibus, declares he can’t remember what shape they should be. And then it slowly dawns on us that the chefs aren’t sure what they should look like either. And just when we’re enjoying this schadenfreude, it is compounded by a brief, glorious eruption, as one of chef Kirsty’s not-agnolotti makes a desperate leap for freedom from her pan – as if knowing its very existence is a crime against God. The chefs may well be professionals, the next big things of British fine dining, but they are also only human – such is the nuanced joy of the show. Love it or loathe it, MasterChef: The Professionals is now in its 14th series, and it’s still the single biggest showcase for where the British restaurant industry is at right now: its latest trends, its eccentric obsessions and its frustrating limitations. The dishes that appear tell us something about the food world outside the BBC studio, even when it’s scallops and black pudding or rack of lamb with a red wine jus for the umpteenth time. Tonight the drama of “finals week” commences, as the remaining six chefs battle it out in front of an audience of millions – for the MasterChef winner’s trophy, but also the huge career boost that will follow. It’s easy to account for the show’s longevity. I spend half my time enthralled by the magic being performed by these kitchen wizards, and the other half in hysterics at seeing people who literally cook for a living somehow messing up bog-standard weekday meals: scrappy omelettes, rock-hard “soft-boiled” eggs, burst bangers and gloopy mash. It’s this culinary whiplash that keeps me watching. There’s also an impressive emotional range to the many and varied facial expressions that Monica Galetti and Marcus Wareing pull, and Sean Pertwee’s mesmerising voiceover: each husky word suggests he would like to get intimate with every single ingredient on every single plate. Just listen to him say “spicy, spreadable sausage” and you’ll need a cold shower, as well as some nduja. But – and there is always a but – when people in the UK are routinely buying jerk chicken ready meals for their dinner from Tesco, laksa for their lunch from Pret, and Thai green curry in their local pub (whatever their quality might be), why does so much of the food on MasterChef: The Professionals still come across as so conservative, and so, well, French? Sole veronique, which featured in one of this year’s quarter-finals, was a dish invented by Auguste Escoffier more than a century ago. Chocolate fondants – or fon-don’ts, as Gregg would have it – seem to have finally shuffled off the scene, but chocolate crémeux, basically just a brick of custard, have become their successor, with just as high a failure rate. Sweet and savoury tuiles still crop up everywhere, and that cliched nemesis of every cook, the soufflé, is still a regular feature – although one contestant, John, at least gave his cherry soufflé an unexpected jaunty little shortbread hat worthy of Ted Lasso. The truth is that “professional” in cooking still means an aspiration to Michelin-quality, which inevitably means French, or at least French in spirit. The Michelin guide was first published in France in 1904, but it still holds sway as the Oscars of the restaurant world. French dishes, classical techniques and the so-called “mother” sauces (classed by Escoffier as béchamel, espagnole, tomato, velouté and hollandaise) are still considered the foundation of all fine dining. This holds true beyond western Europe: the acclaimed Indian chef Vineet Bhatia has spoken of how when he was first cooking in New Delhi, his colleagues looked askance at his devotion to the local cuisine, as they had all been trained in, and were dedicated to, classical French cookery. All this leads to judges being wary, upset or confused by anything not meeting the Gallic ideal, such as when one contestant, Charith, made the coconut custard and jaggery dessert watalappan – and which, to add insult to injury, Pertwee even described in his voiceover as “a Sri Lankan crème brûlée”. It’s equally jarring whenever a judge’s first response to a non-western dish is to query whether it can be “refined” or “elevated”, the uncomfortable implication being that its original state is automatically clumsy or primitive. Thankfully though, it seems there is some dissent and self-awareness about these tropes even among the chefs’ ranks – one contestant, Ollie, remarked of his mackerel and apple dish that it was still “classical, but going to be nice”. Indeed, it’s hard not to fall a little for all of the contestants. I have a soft spot for Matt the forager, whose main skill is his mastery of ancient and pungent herbs with names like football pundits, such as “costmary” and “spignel”. As finals week begins, my money’s on Daniel Marreiros. His take on his childhood gazpacho looked utterly divine, I’m a sucker for his Portuguese accent, and he really looks as if he could do with a good nap – and after the last few years we’ve had, don’t we all? MiMi Aye is the author of Mandalay: Recipes &amp; Tales from a Burmese Kitchen, and host of the food &amp; culture podcast The MSG PodUnemployment in the UK fell in October despite the end of the furlough scheme, according to official figures, as companies continued to hire amid record numbers of staff vacancies. The Office for National Statistics said the unemployment rate fell to 4.2% in the three months to the end of October, representing about 1.4 million people, down from 4.3% in the three months to the end of September. Reflecting a continued recovery in the labour market after the end of the Treasury’s multibillion-pound job support scheme in September, it said the number of workers on company payrolls rose by 257,000 in November from a month earlier - the largest monthly rise in payroll employment on records dating back to 2014. Fuelled by growth in part-time work since the easing of lockdown measures earlier this year, the increase lifted the number of workers on company payrolls to about 29.4 million – almost half a million higher than pre-Covid levels. The ONS said it was likely that some furloughed workers could yet move into unemployment because they might be working out their notice periods, but that the early responses to its business surveys suggest the numbers being made redundant were likely to be small. Darren Morgan, the director of economic statistics at the ONS, said: “With still no sign of the end of the furlough scheme hitting the number of jobs, the total of employees on payroll continued to grow strongly in November, although it could include people recently made redundant but still working out their notice.” It comes as the Bank of England considers whether or not to raise interest rates on Thursday for the first time since the onset of the pandemic. Threadneedle Street’s rate-setting monetary policy committee (MPC) unexpectedly held back from taking action last month, preferring to wait and see if the end of the furlough scheme had a significant impact on the jobs market. However, analysts believe the emergence of the coronavirus Omicron variant will force the Bank to delay action this month amid rising concern over the worsening economic outlook. Suren Thiru, the head of economics at the British Chambers of Commerce, said: “While current labour market trends provide no barrier to raising interest rates, uncertainty over the economic impact of the Omicron variant means a December rate hike is unlikely. Interest rates may start rising from February 2022, but only if concerns over the new variant have faded.” According to the latest snapshot, the number of job vacancies continued to rise to a fresh record high of 1.2m despite some early signs of a slowdown in the growth rate. The ONS said that annual wage growth, excluding bonuses, fell back slightly to 4.9% in the three months to October, down from 5% in the three months to September, as distortions in the pay data caused by the pandemic gradually fade. Although settling at a rate marginally higher than the pre-pandemic trend, single month growth figures for October suggest the rate of growth slipped to 3.8% – falling below the rate of inflation for the first time since June 2020. The ONS warns against too much weight on single-month figures, preferring to use a rolling three-month average. However, the drop could signal the start of a squeeze on living standards from surging inflation outpacing wage growth, in a development expected to last well into 2022. With the fall in headline unemployment to 4.2%, the jobless rate remains 0.2 percentage points higher than in February 2020 before the onset of the pandemic. Although the jobs market remained robust last month, economists warned that tougher government restrictions and a sharp rise in consumer caution in response to Omicron could damage the jobs recovery. Business leaders and trade unions have warned the government will need to step in with emergency financial support for companies and their workers, warning that the outlook for jobs was deteriorating fast. Frances O’Grady, the general secretary of the TUC, said a reboot of furlough was required alongside additional support for the hardest-hit sectors of the economy. “It is good to see jobs were recovering – but the situation has changed since these figures … We need a plan B to protect jobs and livelihoods now,” she said.Two Liberal MP have backed calls for the Australian government to seek Julian Assange’s return to Australia “as quickly as possible” after Barnaby Joyce said the US extradition request was unfair. Liberal backbenchers Jason Falinski and Bridget Archer called for diplomatic action to secure the WikiLeaks co-founder’s return to his home country after the deputy prime minister said it was unfair that the US wanted to extradite Assange to face prosecution over actions allegedly not committed inside the US. But Falinski also cautioned against megaphone diplomacy over the case, saying it “requires a level of subtlety to get the best possible deal we can for one of our citizens”. Joyce is the most prominent member of the government to speak out against the US government’s efforts to try Assange in the US in connection with WikiLeaks’ publication of hundreds of thousands of leaked documents about the Afghanistan and Iraq wars, as well as diplomatic cables. In an op-ed in the Nine newspapers on Tuesday, Joyce, the Nationals leader, argued that the UK “should try him there for any crime he is alleged to have committed on British soil or send him back to Australia, where he is a citizen”. The high court in London ruled last week that Assange could be extradited to the US. Assange’s legal team have vowed to appeal. It also prompted warnings from press freedom and rights groups that the prosecution of a publisher under the US Espionage Act sets “a dangerous precedent”. Falinski told Guardian Australia on Tuesday the government had “to do what we can to get an Australian citizen back to Australia as quickly as possible”. But he rejected claims the government had given up on Assange, suggesting diplomats were working behind the scenes to extract concessions from the US. That included assurances about Assange’s treatment in the US prison system and that the US would allow him to be transferred to Australia to serve any prison sentence. Falinski said Australia should pursue the matter out of public view. “Clearly it’s a very delicate balancing act,” said Falinski, the MP for Mackellar. “I’m not sure a public spat with America … will end up with a better outcome.” Archer told Guardian Australia: “The fact is that he is an Australian citizen who continues to suffer significant mental and physical health issues as a result of his ongoing incarceration because of the protracted legal battle. “I believe he should be released and returned to Australia, and will continue to advocate for diplomatic action for that to occur,” the Tasmanian Liberal MP said. The Labor MP Julian Hill, a member of the parliamentary friends of the Bring Julian Assange Home campaign, welcomed Joyce’s intervention. Hill said, like Joyce, he had “never met Julian Assange” nor did he “agree with everything he’s said or done”. “Frankly, he’s a ratbag – but he’s our ratbag,” Hill said. “But he’s entitled to the same protections as an Australian as you or me.” Hill said it was “disgraceful that Australia’s foreign minister and prime minister have done effectively nothing to speak up for him”. “I hope that Barnaby Joyce coming out will finally give Liberals the confidence to also speak up. There is no legal resolution to this case – there never can be. It is inherently political, it needs political leaders to speak up in support of our values and our citizen.” Hill accused Liberals of “hiding” on the issue, suggesting that more support intervention on Assange’s behalf than are prepared to say so publicly. There are 24 members of the Assange parliamentary group, including nine Greens, eight Labor, four from the independents or crossbench, and three from the Coalition: Joyce, Nationals MP George Christensen and Archer. The office of the prime minister, Scott Morrison, was contacted for comment about the Assange case on Sunday and Tuesday. Morrison has not responded to questions about whether he agrees with Joyce’s concerns about the treatment of Assange and whether he has ever directly raised the matter with the US president, Joe Biden, or plans to make additional representations. So far, the Australian government appears to be staring down calls to intervene to secure Assange’s freedom. The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade said on Sunday it was monitoring the Australian citizen’s case closely, but would “continue to respect the UK legal process – including any further appeals under UK law” – and emphasised Australia was “not a party to the case”. “The Australian government has raised the situation of Mr Assange with US and UK counterparts – including our expectations of due process, humane and fair treatment, access to proper medical and other care, and access to his legal team – and will continue to do so,” the department spokesperson said. The US alleges that Assange conspired with the army intelligence analyst Chelsea Manning to crack a password hash to a classified US Department of Defence computer, among other allegations. Reporters Without Borders has raised concerns that the US Espionage Act lacks a public interest defence, and the precedent “could be applied to any media outlet that published stories based on the leaked documents, or indeed any journalist, publisher or source anywhere in the world”. The opposition leader, Anthony Albanese, said he failed to see “what purpose is being served by the ongoing incarceration of Julian Assange”. “I don’t agree with a whole range of Julian Assange’s views but there needs to be a point in which you say that enough is enough,” Albanese said on Monday. The independent Tasmanian MP Andrew Wilkie called on Morrison to “end this lunacy” and demand the US and UK release Assange, while the Greens said Australia should press the Biden administration “to drop these absurd charges”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The US offered a number of assurances that were crucial to the successful appeal, including that Assange would not be held at a maximum security “ADX” facility and could apply, if convicted, to be transferred to a prison in Australia. Assange was remanded in custody and the case was remitted to the Westminster magistrates court with a direction to send the case to the British home secretary, Priti Patel.The billionaire Patrick Drahi has increased his stake in BT to 18%, prompting the government to warn it could step in to block a full potential takeover of the British telecoms giant. Drahi’s telecoms group Altice UK, which in June paid £2.2bn for a 12.1% stake to become BT’s largest shareholder, has paid about a further £1bn to further boost its shareholding. “We are pleased to take this opportunity to increase our shareholding in BT,” said Drahi. “Over recent months we have engaged constructively with the board and management of BT and look forward to continuing that dialogue.” Drahi, who had been blocked under UK takeover rules from making a further move until 11 December, played down the stake-building and reiterated that he did not intend to make an offer for BT, but said that could change if circumstances did – including if a third party made an offer. “We continue to hold them in high regard and remain fully supportive of their strategy, principally to play the pivotal role in delivering the expansion of access to a full-fibre broadband network; an investment programme which is so important to both BT and to the UK,” Drahi said. A government spokesperson said it would “not hesitate to act” to protect BT from foreign takeover if necessary. “We are monitoring the situation carefully,” a spokesperson said. “The government is committed to levelling up the country through digital infrastructure, and will not hesitate to act if required to protect our critical national telecoms infrastructure.” Britain has become more wary of threats to the economy and national security posed by the sale of certain UK companies to foreign rivals and private equity firms. Shares in BT fell nearly 6% on Tuesday, making it one of the biggest fallers on the FTSE 100. “I can’t imagine the government would allow BT to be taken over and I think investors are paying close attention to the immediate and very defensive response from the government,” said Neil Wilson, chief market analyst at Markets.com. The government has already ordered investigations into deals including the $75bn (£57bn) takeover of the Cambridge-based chip designer Arm by its US rival Nvidia. From January, the government will gain tougher powers to block the takeover of important national assets, which BT would certainly be designated, under the National Security and Investment Act 2021. The board of BT, which since 1 December has been headed by the former ITV and Royal Mail chief executive Adam Crozier, said it will continue to act in the interest of all shareholders. “The board and management of BT Group will continue to operate the business in the interest of all shareholders and remains focused on the successful execution of its strategy and building on recent performance momentum,” the company said.Ocado has promised the “best ever Christmas” is ahead for its food retail joint venture with Marks &amp; Spencer thanks to booming demand for online grocery delivery, despite shoppers buying less on each visit to its website. Customer order numbers each week were up 9% in the 13 weeks to 28 November compared with 2020 thanks to a 22% rise in active customer numbers, according to a trading update published on Tuesday. Ocado has been one of the winners during the coronavirus pandemic, as lockdowns prompted a wave of customers to order groceries online for the first time. The company’s market value peaked at almost £22bn in September 2020, according to Sentieo, as investors scrambled to adjust to the pandemic economy. However, it has since fallen back to £12bn – albeit still well above its pre-pandemic level. The rise in orders has been accompanied by pressures such as a shortage of workers and capacity constraints as Ocado races to build more warehouses. On Tuesday the company said it would spend £50m more than previously expected on investments to try to keep up. Ocado also said shoppers were returning towards pre-pandemic trends of smaller – and less profitable – baskets. The pressures meant that retail revenues from Ocado and Marks &amp; Spencer’s retail joint venture fell by 3.6% during the period compared with 2020, although they remained nearly a third higher than in 2019. However, average weekly orders of 375,100 were significantly higher than the 345,000 in the same period in 2020. Ocado nevertheless insisted it saw “strong momentum in underlying demand”. For 2022 it expects “mid-teens” sales growth as it opens a new automated warehouse in Bicester, Oxfordshire, and ramps up deliveries from Purfleet, Essex, and Andover in Hampshire, where a warehouse suffered significant damage from a fire in 2019. Ocado also claimed a victory in a long-running battle against US robotic warehouse rival AutoStore. Of five patents claimed by AutoStore, the International Trade Commission found that three were invalid, one was not infringed and another was abandoned the night before trial, according to Ocado. The robot technology is vital for Ocado, which hopes its automated systems will eventually be much more profitable than rival systems that rely on humans to fill baskets. An Ocado spokesperson said the AutoStore action was “a misconceived attempt by AutoStore to interfere with our business in the United States”, and added that the company will “vigorously” continue its own infringement claims against AutoStore in the US and Europe. AutoStore was approached for comment. Ocado shares rose 3.7% on Tuesday morning, making it the top riser on the FTSE 100.My head is filled with nothing but glitter. I recognise no language other than fart jokes. The only way you can contact me now is via audience participation. It’s been a big day: I’ve attended three weddings, defeated multiple villains, and heard more jokes about Downing Street’s cheese and wine not-a-party than Ant and Dec can fit into a whole season of I’m a Celebrity. With last Christmas spent in lockdown and festive shows pulled off the stages, I’ve been sent to overload on festive cheer by watching three pantos back to back: that’s three hapless heroes falling in love and saving the world, all in one long, loud, dizzyingly sequin-filled day. First up is the small-scale Sleeping Beauty in Hoxton Hall, the beautiful old music hall where we’re told it’s rumoured that Princess Beauty was once kept safe as she slept. Led by Danny Charles as Nurse Nala Nigella Knickerbocker, the cast of five roll out Hackneyed London puns (thank you) and strongly evoke children’s TV presenters with their colourful dungarees and inexhaustible smiles. Though the pace of the story sometimes lags, the show shines in the more raucous moments, as with the utter chaos of their rowdy version of 12 days of Christmas. The roof almost comes off with children’s screams of “five toilet rolls”. A hilarious mishap occurs when Mary, who turns seven on 23 December, hasn’t shown up. Thankfully, Maisie in the stalls turns six on the 28th, so we sing to her instead. I head to my parents’ house to watch the livestream of the New Wolsey’s Jack &amp; the Beanstalk. We were meant to take my grandma to a panto this weekend, but her care home has just gone into lockdown. To distract ourselves from thinking about what this means for when we might next meet up with her, we gather Quality Streets, tea and flapjacks for the matinee, only to run into technical difficulties. It turns out mum hasn’t updated her computer since 1995. We arrive 20 minutes late and stumble into a run of Steve Simmonds’s fast-flowing puns as Dame Dolly Durden. Immediately, this production is ruder and louder, feeling more directly designed for adults than the morning show. A rocky live band plays in the background, with the cast donning guitars over their costumes to join in. It’s a riot. As a ridiculous giant fee-fi-fo-fums at the top of the beanstalk, the geography of our jokes moves east: “Your father said I should look for a village that needs an idiot,” says local boy Billy, played by James Haggie, “so I thought I’d try Norwich.” I’m starting to get disheartened by the amount of times I’m told “you can do better than that” when we all yell out, but we persevere and shout at the screen regardless. The livestream is well-considered, with the multi-camera production giving us a tangible sense of the fun in the room. Smartly pre-recorded clips are inserted, showing Bessie the dancing cow strolling through Ipswich, past the town’s “mooseum” and local “cowncil”. It makes the families watching from home feel just as integral as the live audience. The show’s low-brow humour is perfect; Mum and I can’t stop cackling at the constant stream of fart gags. For the finale, it’s down to the New Wimbledon theatre, the panto my family have gone to every year since I can remember. It’s also the site of my long-held bruise from being rejected as a child for a place in a previous panto’s ensemble. My dream of dancing with the soapstars was squashed. This production of Dick Whittington – truly the most incomprehensible of all panto plotlines – is almost blindingly glitzy, packed to the rafters with glittering lights and fizzing pyrotechnics. Shane Richie is brilliantly cheeky with the audience, frequently falling into fits of giggles when someone fluffs a line. With a full orchestra and enormous cast, the difference in budget between this show and Hoxton Hall’s is stark, but this sometimes works to the production’s detriment. The choreography is so slick and speedy, it feels almost formulaic, lacking some of the heart that both Hoxton’s slightly scrappier production and the New Wolsey’s raucous show had in spades. But God, the flying motorbike is cool. By now, the stories have started to roll into one. I can barely distinguish between Sleeping Beauty climbing a beanstalk, Dick falling asleep for 100 years, and Jack fighting an army of stinking rats. The sticky sweetness of popcorn is starting to cloy. The flashing lights are leaving imprints on my brain. Yet after more than six hours of constant razzle-dazzle, the cheer never fades. All three shows have such visceral moments of delight, and the audiences are all buzzing. There is such unbridled joy in panto, in the safety of knowing that good will triumph over evil, that friendship is one of the best things we can have and that silliness is encouraged no matter your age. But do I recommend three in one day? Oh no, I don’t. Sleeping Beauty is at Hoxton Hall, London, until 24 December. Jack &amp; the Beanstalk is at the New Wolsey theatre, Ipswich, and livestreamed, until 8 January. Dick Whittington is at the New Wimbledon theatre, until 2 January.Just when we thought things were getting better, a new Covid variant is making things worse. Some people are reacting with anger, some are reacting with disbelief, most – if the patients I have seen in the last 24 hours are anything to go by – are reacting with a kind of fatalistic “what will be will be”. All these views are understandable. The government’s response, which medical royal colleges across the UK support, is, bluntly, to throw everything we have at this. That’s a move that’s being taken for one simple reason: there is, once again, a real danger the NHS will be overwhelmed. And according to the modellers, we’ll reach that point at some point in January, if not sooner. We cannot let that happen, but if we do nothing now, that is precisely what we will be facing in four weeks’ time. It will not be easy. It will require everyone in the NHS, and many others as well, to help deliver the one million booster jabs a day by the end of this month the scientists say we’ll need. It will be a herculean task. But it’s not just the challenge of resources needing to be met that we must be ready for. There will be a need for huge amounts of patience and understanding by patients, many of whom have already waited too long for the tests, treatments and procedures they have been prescribed and promised. We had only just begun to tackle the backlog; with further delays, there will inevitably be a negative impact on the health and wellbeing of those patients waiting. We must also face the harsh fact that the waiting list itself will lengthen. It will also require – and this may be no less challenging for many – everyone to do their bit by going back to proper social distancing, getting ourselves fully vaccinated and appropriately boosted. It is inevitable that tough choices need to be made. But, that doesn’t mean irresponsible choices. If a patient needs to be seen in the NHS, they should be seen, and while it won’t necessarily feel like business as usual for the next few weeks it certainly shouldn’t feel as if no regular business is being done at all. And to be clear, no one is saying that we should “hit the pause button” on urgent care – that really does need to continue as closely as we can come to business as usual. And this is where we can all help: the more beds that are taken up with Covid patients, the fewer beds there are for those with other serious conditions who have been admitted via A&amp;E departments. If that part of the system gets clogged, it makes it harder to bring people in by ambulance. Covid will hit all of us if we aren’t very careful. Angry commentators seem to be seeking to blame anyone and everyone for this situation that is of no one’s making. As soon as the science changed, the joint committee on vaccination and immunisation (JCVI) advice changed and the appropriately ramped-up response is what we are now seeing. These past few days have seen records being broken for boosters, but there’s still more capacity now and even more being created. And we should be mighty proud of the NHS staff and the brilliant volunteers and army personnel for delivering those jabs and to the people who are prepared to queue, sometimes for many hours in the cold and the rain, to get one. This will save lives. Of course, there are many other things we need to address if we are to chart a course through this pandemic. More doctors and nurses, more beds in social care and clearer messaging would be a great starting point. Two of those three will take time, but where we might start today is a more honest conversation about the scale of the problem before us, and a realistic assessment of what’s achievable and what’s not. As chair of the Academy of Medical Royal Colleges it would be easy for me to say, “It’s all going to hell in a handcart.” It is not at that stage yet, but it will be soon if we don’t all play our part. Helen Stokes-Lampard is a GP in Lichfield and the chair of the Academy of Medical Royal CollegesBillie Eilish has revealed that she had Covid-19 in August, and said that she felt sure she “would have died” had she not been vaccinated. Appearing on Howard Stern’s US radio show on Monday, Eilish said: “The vaccine is fucking amazing and it also saved [her brother/musical collaborator] Finneas from getting it; it saved my parents from getting it; it saved my friends from getting it.” Eilish said she was unwell with the virus for two months and that she was still experiencing undisclosed side effects. “I want it to be clear that it is because of the vaccine I’m fine,” she said. “I think if I weren’t vaccinated, I would have died, because it was bad. “When I say it was bad, I more just mean that it felt horrible. But really, in the scheme of Covid, it was not bad. You know what I mean? When you’re sick, you feel fucking horrible.” Eilish was recently nominated in seven categories at the 2022 Grammy awards, including album of the year for her second album, Happier Than Ever, and song of the year for the track of the same name. She also presented Saturday Night Live alongside SNL stalwart Kate McKinnon. Next June, she will become the youngest ever solo headliner of Glastonbury festival, a show that will conclude her UK and Ireland tour in support of Happier Than Ever. Eilish’s second album has ranked highly in many publications’ year-end lists, including the Guardian, Billboard and Rolling Stone. “She and her collaborator brother Finneas brought the same thrill to intimacy as they did to adolescent fears on her debut, tracing the scope of Eilish’s newfound commitment to her own pleasure in dreamy golden-age classicism and hormone-spiking techno,” said the Guardian. Eilish, the most famous teenage pop star in the world, turns 20 on 18 December. “I was always very scared of getting older – I dreaded it,” she told the Observer recently. “And honestly, I have almost only found, besides a few hiccups, that I’ve been enjoying just having a little adulthood. Doing things for the first time like getting gas and doing laundry and calling your doctor on your own.”Further Covid restrictions between Christmas and New Year are under discussion in government, Dominic Raab has said, but stressed he believed plan B measures should be enough to allow people to spend the season with loved ones. Raab’s comments came as Boris Johnson faces the biggest rebellion of his premiership, with at least 80 Tory MPs planning to vote against the restrictions, which include additional mask-wearing and Covid passes for large events. Asked if the measures, which also include guidance on working from home, were enough to stop the spread of the virus without further restrictions, Raab said: “These issues are always discussed but we have got plan B, that’s what we think is required over the Christmas period.” The deputy prime minister and justice secretary told Times Radio he thought Christmas Day was safe to spend with family. “I think it is. I want to give that reassurance. I think people can look forward to spending Christmas with loved ones in a way that we couldn’t last year.” On Monday, Sajid Javid said estimated daily Omicron cases hit 200,000 and the variant claimed its first life in the UK. The government’s campaign to give booster vaccines to more than 1 million people a day also got under way, prompting the NHS website to crash and people to queue in the street for up to five hours for their jabs. Amid the alarming figures, Raab was forced to clarify on BBC Breakfast that nine people were in hospital with the variant, having previously sparked concern by saying there were around 250. A source close to Raab said he had misheard the question on Sky News. The correct figure is understood to be 10. He acknowledged there were “teething problems” after people queued for hours for vaccines. “It does take a few days just to make sure we get to a steady state. We’ll keep straining every sinew to make sure we can reach that target.” Defending the government’s plan to introduce passes to show vaccine or test status, Raab said it was “crass” to compare the measure to Nazi Germany, as rebel MP Marcus Fysh had done. “I don’t like that kind of language and I don’t think it’s appropriate,” he told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. But Tobias Ellwood, the former minister who now chairs the defence select committee, said the plan was illogical, even though he backed more widespread wearing of masks. “It’s this final one to do with vaccine passports for large events, there are some practical implications as to how this will be enforced,” he told Radio 4’s Today programme. “But, more importantly, you can go into a large venue with a recent negative lateral flow test, again that makes sense, but you can also turn up if you had proof of having two jabs, which may have been completed six months ago, so even with a new mutation you could actually be carrying Covid. “Leadership is about taking people to where perhaps they didn’t realise they needed to go, but they must understand the plan, and this is illogical at the moment.” Raab said Covid health certificates were not a “big step or a slippery slope” and said it would not discriminate against those who were unvaccinated because people could also provide a negative test. “If you want to go into a crowded venue, I think most people would think that voluntarily as a matter of their own safety, but also [for] those around them, that that is a reasonable thing to do,” Raab said. “I do understand the concerns and that’s why we should have a proper debate. “But, ultimately, I think people should vote for these measures; they are a proportionate, targeted approach given what we don’t know and the precautionary approach we need to take, just temporarily, while we get to grips with Omicron.”Sunderland has a smart new concert venue: it’s called The Fire Station, the whole complex cost £18m and, as you might expect, it’s very red. Terracotta detailing on the outside, rust coloured wood panelling on the inside, the building (designed by Jason Flanagan, the architect behind Sage Gateshead) is a mid-sized, multi-purpose auditorium. It is tagged on to the disused fire station building that is now a live music and performance venue, as well as housing a bistro, bars and studios. Adaptability is the auditorium’s aim, yet despite the slim classical programming for this season, the new hall’s acoustics and sight lines work well for this sort of music. It seats up to 500, and while the stage would struggle to accommodate a full size symphony orchestra, it makes an ideal chamber venue. The Royal Northern Sinfonia’s first Fire Station concert was, however, not without teething problems. A delayed start drew attention to the lack of a programme, printed or online. After the interval, leader Maria Włoszczowska was forced to list – rather gracelessly – what had been played, and what was to come. The lack of programme information meant a missed opportunity to give an insight into William Herschel’s fascinating life. Court astronomer of King George III, discoverer of both Uranus and infrared radiation and a prolific composer to boot, his Eighth Symphony, the “Sunderland” (composed while living in the area) opened the concert. Although only 12 minutes long, the work has bags of style and possesses a couple of really devastating earworms. Though the second movement felt too breathless, the Sinfonia were suitably responsive to the dramatic shapes of Włoszczowska, directing from the violin. This was a highlight of a disappointing first half. Vivaldi’s Concerto “Alla Rustica” seemed to sap the ensemble’s energy, and a tepid, unbalanced episode from Bach’s Christmas Oratorio followed. The orchestra, nearly all standing on one level, struggled for ensemble through a selection of movements from Handel’s first Water Music suite. Vivaldi’s Concerto for Two Trumpets was well-received, but one-dimensional. The second half worked better. Corelli’s Christmas Concerto was touching and surprisingly dramatic, and Haydn’s Fire Symphony, with its relentlessly energetic mottos, found strings and winds united under Włoszczowska’s sharply angled vision of the work. But the vivacity of the Sinfonia’s Haydn failed to mask a lacklustre evening not befitting of an important, versatile addition to cultural life in the north-east.Time to Walk Technically, any podcast you listen to while you walk is a walking podcast. But if you want to get specific, you should first address what you want. If you’re after a companion, try Apple’s Time to Walk series, which is available to Apple Fitness+ subscribers with an Apple Watch. In each episode, a star such as Stephen Fry, Naomi Campbell, Dolly Parton, Malcolm Gladwell or Nick Jonas talks about their careers and their attitudes to walking as they stroll around their neighbourhood. Obviously your enjoyment of this series will be directly linked to how much you like each presenter. But it is authentic in one way: just like spending any time with a celebrity, it’s always all about them and you’re never allowed to talk back. National Trust walking podcasts There are two ways to listen to the National Trust’s series of walking podcasts. Each episode takes place in a different part of the country – one in Box Hill, Surrey, another through an East Anglian fen, another on Long Nanny beach in Northumberland – where ranger Kate Martin enthusiastically discusses local history and legends. Ideally, you’d want to be right there with Martin, so that you can take in the surroundings together. But this is a warm and inviting listen, and you’d probably get just as much out of it as you trudge back from the school run. Walking Through Landscape This BBC Radio Scotland series is now more than a decade old, but it remains the high watermark of what this sort of podcast can achieve. In every episode geologist Iain Stewart visits a different part of Scotland, from the forests of Moray to the fishing villages of Fife. The expectation again seems to be that you will track the same walk as Stewart as you listen – episodes begin with reminders that you’ll need a map – but just ignore that. This is an exploration of nature in all its quiet, awe-inspiring glory. Headspace Walking Meditation If you are walking to relax, it’s worth checking out the Headspace app. There are a number of different walking scenarios to choose from – nature, the city, home – but they’re all rooted in basic mindfulness techniques. You head out and a calming voice reminds you to pay attention to all the sights and sensations that would usually go ignored. The list of meditations includes one called Walk It Off which, in just 13 minutes, does a very good job of erasing the grot of your working day, and stops you dragging all your tension home with you. Walking Is Fitness And then there are those of us who still need to be motivated to walk … In this case, try Walking Is Fitness. Hosted by strolling fanatic Dave Paul, each 10-minute episode is accompanied by the brisk tempo of his footsteps as he discusses various aspects of walking for exercise. A podcast like this always runs the risk of overcooking the enthusiasm – you’re just walking, after all, not doing Zumba – but Dave keeps the tone just the right side of unbearable. If you need help getting out of the door, this is where you start.There has long been familiar faces among the Old Trafford coaching staff. From Ryan Giggs to Michael Carrick to Ole Gunnar Solskjaer, Manchester United have been keen to maintain the link between players and coaches. However, the appointment of Ralf Rangnick as interim manager hints at a different approach. Rangnick is just one of the new faces United fans will have to become familiar with and Chris Armas, announced as the club’s new assistant coach following the exit of Carrick, is another. The former USA midfielder has been out of work since leaving Toronto FC in Major League Soccer in July, and is, on the surface, a left-field choice. Few in Premier League circles had heard of him before his arrival at Old Trafford. Armas and Rangnick, however, have history together. The new Manchester United interim manager was head of sport and development for Red Bull’s football operations while Armas was head coach of the New York Red Bulls between 2018 and 2020. Appointed to give Manchester United wings, Rangnick is seemingly keen to replicate many of the ideas that worked so well for him as the architect of the Red Bull football empire. The arrival of Armas at the club is just another sign of how the German will seek to put his own stamp on a club in desperate need of a new direction, as is the hiring of former RB Leipzig sports psychologist Sascha Lense. For MLS fans, the sight of Armas in the dugout of one of the world’s biggest clubs will be jarring. While the former midfielder lifted the Supporters’ Shield (the trophy handed to the team with the best regular-season record in MLS) as New York Red Bulls head coach, his managerial career on the other side of the Atlantic isn’t exactly held in the highest regard. The strong pillars put in place at New York Red Bulls by Jesse Marsch, who Armas worked with as an assistant before replacing midway through the 2018 season, were eroded. The Red Bulls won the Supporters’ Shield in 2018, but in Armas’ only full season at the helm, in 2019, the team finished sixth in the Eastern Conference, their joint-lowest finish in 10 years. He parted ways with the club after a difficult start to the 2020 season. The regression was undeniable. A six-month spell as Toronto FC head coach in 2021 was even more troublesome. He took over a team that had finished second in the Eastern Conference and had grown accustomed to challenging for honours in recent seasons. But under Armas their start to the campaign was terrible and he left on the back of a 7-1 loss to DC United, the worst defeat in the team’s history. In New York, Armas was given the benefit of the doubt by some due to the club’s relatively modest budget compared to that of some of their rivals. He might have inherited Marsch’s team, but RBNY continued to play a brand of dynamic, high-pressing soccer under Armas. What’s more, they had a better record in the second half of 2018, (after Marsch left) even if 2019 witnessed a dramatic dip in performance levels. At Toronto FC, though, Armas flatlined at a club with one of the highest payrolls in the league, and he might struggle to find another head coach job in MLS because of it. But there are reasons to think Armas can thrive at Old Trafford. The skillset to be a successful assistant manager is very different to that of a successful manager and it’s possible Armas has the people skills to act as an effective liaison between Rangnick and his new players at Manchester United. This is, after all, a role he performed for a number of years before becoming a head coach. Indeed, Armas’s social skills have been praised by players who have worked under him. The former New York Red Bulls midfielder Dax McCarty told the Athletic that: “Chris cares about people deeply. He wants to foster and establish relationships that go beyond the soccer field. As an athlete, I can tell you that’s one of the most valuable assets that an assistant coach can have – or any coach for that matter. It doesn’t surprise me that Ralf would want someone like that on his staff.” Much of the discussion around Rangnick’s appointment at Old Trafford has revolved around his ‘Gegenpressing’ ideology and how Manchester United will be expected to play a more proactive, high-pressing game under the German. Armas, as an assistant, was a key figure alongside Marsch in implementing a similar style of play at the New York Red Bulls. Regression only happened when Armas was left in sole charge, but he will have the more experienced Rangnick to guide things in England. For Rangnick to be truly influential, Manchester United must give him the freedom to reshape the club. They must trust the German to make the right decisions for the future and that includes allowing him to pick a backroom staff that best reflect his philosophy. If Armas helps Rangnick communicate his ideas more clearly, that can only be a good thing for United. This is a club that has learned the hard way that good players don’t always make good managers and now they are making a bet that bad managers don’t always make bad assistants.For many older people, tattoos came with baggage. Now, social mores have changed and for those in their 60s, 70s and 80s: “The stigma associated with prisoners’ tattoos, or sailors or misfits getting them, has disappeared,” says Louise Krystahl, a tattoo artist. That may be why she now gets a lot of clients over the age of 60, who feel ready for their first tattoo at her studio, Inkscape, in Bexhill-on-Sea. She once tattooed a ladybird on the wrist of a woman in her 80s. “For older people, it’s usually a sentimental reason, not just that they fancy a butterfly,” says Krystahl. “Some of them have a new lease of life, or want to tick it off their bucket list.” The pandemic, she says, may have spurred on others: “I think people are doing stuff they have thought about for a long time and it has given them the impetus.” Here are some people who decided that it’s never too late to get inked. ‘When somebody says, “What’s that on your arm?” it’s an excuse to talk about Emily’ Neil Davies, 67, lives in West Sussex and got his first tattoo in 2019 My daughter Emily died in January 2019, from breast cancer, when she was 37. On the day she died, we were in bits. It struck me that I wanted something with me that meant Emily was with me for ever. The only thing I always wear is my wedding ring, but I didn’t want just another piece of jewellery. I wanted something that I could wake up with in the morning and go to sleep with at night. I had her name tattooed on my arm on my 65th birthday, three days after she died. A few weeks later, I came up with this little saying, “Sometimes the star that shines brightest, shines but briefly.” I had that tattooed underneath her name. That, to me, was Emily. She was a very bright, vivacious person, always the life and soul of any party. She had friends for life. She worked very hard, she brought up her little boy until he was five, until she couldn’t, on her own. She kept a job going at the same time. A lot of people loved her because she had a lot of love to give. I find that talking about her is the greatest relief. When you lose somebody, the worst possible thing is when people stop talking about them. When somebody says to me, “What’s that on your arm?” it’s an excuse to talk about Emily. Grief is there all the time, but occasionally something will trigger it and it hits you like a wave. Then I grab my arm and take a minute and calm down, then I’m usually OK. I can’t explain why, at the age of 67, I should need a comfort blanket, but it helps. We are bringing up our grandson who has just turned eight. Every year on my birthday, I get a little star tattooed near Emily’s name, and my plan is, for the sake of my grandson, to get my arm covered in stars because I want to live until he’s at least 21. That’s our tribute to Emily, bringing up her son. ‘This is me saying this is my body – I’m going to celebrate it!’ Sarah Browne is in her 60s, lives in London and got a tattoo last year When I was seven, I was burned very badly after an accident with our gas stove, and spent almost a year in hospital. I had extensive skin grafts, and have scars over about 60% of my body. My father had very strong feelings about the way women should look, and it did not include having tattoos, so I grew up with that. But things have changed. My daughter has five tattoos and she had been on my case for ages about getting one. I finally just said, “To hell with it – I’m going to do it.” I wanted to pick the very worst of the skin grafts for my tattoo, and I was thrilled that they could tattoo on that area. It’s basically me saying, “This is my body – I’m going to celebrate it, whatever is going on with it!” I chose a sun because my favourite song is Here Comes the Sun, and a good friend calls me a solar-powered person. I have always been open about my scars – I would never try to cover them up – but it does get tiresome to be stared at. Now, I don’t know if they are staring at my scars, or this awesome tattoo. I actively look for dresses that are off-the-shoulder so I can show it off. It makes me feel that, at this age, I get to be a little bit sexy. It’s a lift. Now we’re talking about what’s next. I want to get one on my ankle where I have scars from when I was fed intravenously for eight months. The wonderful thing about getting older is you have the freedom to be whoever you want to be. Getting a tattoo is part of that. This is my body, I don’t care what anybody else thinks. I wish I had believed earlier that I could decorate my back. ‘When you’re 86 you can do what you like’ Nancy Venables, 86, lives in Wolverhampton and got a tattoo earlier this year My granddaughter Emma is a tattoo artist. She said, “Nan, I could do one on you.” I said: “Not likely.” Then: “Well, I might, one of these days. I want a little angel.” I lost my husband, Len, last year, just before Christmas. We were married 67 years. He wouldn’t have liked my tattoo at all. He wouldn’t have let me. I’m of the age where, when we were younger, you did what your husband told you. It’s a different game now, life today. I warmed to the idea about a year ago. One day, she phoned and said she was coming to pick me up. She did a fairy on my wrist. I said “That’s not an angel, Emma.” And she said, “Oh, you can have an angel next time.” I chose an angel because of my friend. Her place is absolutely full of angels. I wear one round my neck now all the time – that’s my guardian angel. It means a hell of lot to me that Emma did it. I wouldn’t have had one otherwise. I’m not planning another, but you never know. You’re never too old to do anything. Getting a tattoo could be about me thinking I can do what I like now. It doesn’t matter what I say or do in my old age. It’s a bit of fun. When you’re 86, you can do what you like! ‘My mum said “If you ever have a tattoo, you’ll be out of the house’’’ Mark Warren, 70, lives in East Sussex and got a tattoo three years ago My home town is Dagenham, where having a tattoo was very much linked to working at Ford, or the docks. My mum said “If you ever have one done, you’ll be out of the house,” so it wasn’t something I was interested in. It was only in the last 20 years or so, as they’ve become an art form in their own right that I started to get interested. My partner, Sally, was having a tattoo done, in remembrance of a friend. I was fascinated, so when she finished I booked in. Years ago, we were on holiday in Spain, staying in the mountains above Benidorm at Sally’s uncle’s house. I saw this thing dash across the floor, and I jumped back. He said, “It’s a gecko, nothing to worry about.” And I warmed to it. Sally turned round and said, “I double dog dare you to have a gecko tattoo.” If somebody challenges you to a double dog dare, it’s on pain of death. So 15 years later, I did. When I see people with loads of tattoos, I quite often stop them and say, “Do you mind me asking which was your first one and why?” I met a guy in the supermarket – he wasn’t wearing a lot and was covered head to foot in tattoos. Had I discovered all this younger, maybe I’d have gone for some other bits. Even now, when I look at my arm in the mirror, I’m really chuffed, and I’m planning on having another on the other side. My brother was pretty shocked and then confided that he’d been thinking about one. ‘My tattoo marked my retirement and reminds me I’m free’ Francis Lacy Scott, 66, lives in Brighton and got a tattoo last year I retired as a solicitor in May and booked my tattoo the following month, but, because of the lockdown, there was a big waiting list, so I had it done in September. I had been thinking about having one for at least five years, but it probably would have been frowned on in the conservative law circles. My last firm had a policy of no visible tattoos. It marked my retirement – it reminds me every day that I’m free. The kids thought it was great, my wife is indifferent to it. I think other people think it’s quite fun, although some think I’m having a belated midlife crisis. I wanted a scallop shell. It’s the symbol of the Camino de Santiago, the pilgrimage to Santiago de Compostela in northern Spain, with a little yellow arrow on it – that’s the marker on rocks. I’ve done parts of the route, but I want to walk a long stretch all in one go, which I’m planning to do in April. It’s a beautiful walk, and although I’m not religious, there is something spiritual about it. It’s an opportunity to reflect and have a clear head about what I want to do next. I worked for 42 years. The law is a very conservative environment, and you record time in six-minute units. You are programmed, throughout your whole career, to account for every six minutes. Walking through northern Spain for five or six weeks, not knowing where you’re going to stop each day is completely the opposite of being in an office, watching the dial and thinking: have you done your chargeable hours for the day? My tattoo makes me smile and reminds me of the fact that I’ve finished with those restrictions and I can do what I like. ‘It’s the start of my new life’ Janet Davies, 72, lives in Amsterdam and got a tattoo when she was 70 I’ve never been fussed about age, but turning 70 shocked me. I was just like, “Fuck. That’s so old!” Then I just thought, this is ridiculous. I’ve got plenty of years left. So I formulated the idea then. My husband always hated tattoos, but I saw them as works of art. I wouldn’t have had one while he was alive because it would have upset him. He passed away in 2017. I had been his carer for many years and gave up work in 2010 to nurse him 24/7. When he died, he had just been diagnosed with his fourth cancer, he had an aortic aneurysm, he’d had open heart surgery – we’d been through the mill. We were married nearly 50 years, and I’d given up a lot of my life to care for him. Not that I’m complaining – he’d have done it for me – but I thought, it’s my time now. When I was a carer, I had two weeks’ respite a year and used to come to Amsterdam. It felt like home. When he died, I knew I wanted to live here. It’s the start of my new life, and I had my tattoo done in Amsterdam. Everybody said, “Oh, it’s so painful!” I’m sorry – you’ve had two kids and you’ve been a carer and haven’t slept for years – a tattoo is nothing! I’ve got a Charles Rennie Mackintosh rose. I went to Glasgow about 20 years ago and visited the Glasgow School of Art – it blew me away. My tattoo is beautiful, I love it. I had it done for me and I don’t care what anybody else thinks because that’s not important. I suppose it was the statement: yes, I might be 70, but I could still do new things.Mahershala Ali gives a heartfelt performance in this elegant and rather melancholy sci-fi mystery with which Irish film-maker Benjamin Cleary makes his impressive feature debut. It’s an unsettling picture in the tradition of John Frankenheimer’s Seconds or Alex Garland’s Ex Machina. The time is the not-too-distant future in which Cameron (Ali) is a graphic designer married to Poppy (Naomie Harris), whom he met-cute one morning on a commuter train over a misunderstanding concerning a candy bar (a micro-comedy-of-errors routine which I do have to say has already been used in a number of short films). They now have a small son. But Cameron has a terminal illness and fears revealing it to Poppy will devastate her, as she is only just getting over a family tragedy. So he secretly approaches a new biotech firm headed by the enigmatic Dr Scott (Glenn Close), who specialises in creating perfect healthy carbon copies of people who can then slot right back into the patient’s life, an avatar with all his or her memories – minus the ones about this procedure – while the originals self-sacrificially live out their days on the remote island owned by this corporation. Now, of course, it’s an open question as to how the modestly-off Cameron could possibly afford what must be a terribly expensive business – but no matter. Maybe it’s on his insurance. Anyway, Cameron splitting into two, and then having profound and angry second thoughts about this doppelganger taking over his life, is very commandingly and convincingly portrayed. Some script hints in the early part of the film seem to be pointing to a certain icily ironic twist, but Cleary’s film keeps you guessing and there’s a strange, sad seriousness to it all which this great-looking movie brings off with some style. • Swan Song is released on 17 December in cinemas and on Apple TV+ • This article was amended on 16 December 2021 to change the rating from three to four stars.Millions more people will die from Covid-19 in the coming year, and most will be unvaccinated. The vaccines that could save millions of lives are not reaching the poor majority of the world’s population. The contrast is stark: the current share of people fully vaccinated in high, upper-middle income, lower-middle income and low income countries is 69%, 68%, 30% and 3.5% respectively. The UK, Canada, Germany and other EU states have supported a deliberate policy to withhold vaccines from the poorest countries in the world, and defended an immoral and unethical economic system which places big pharma patents ahead of millions of lives. In this context, is the only option left to ask whether the states facilitating this might be prosecuted in the international criminal court, on the grounds of a crime against humanity? First let’s consider the impact so far. The official statistics of global Covid deaths (5.2 million) greatly underestimate the real figures, which may already be more than 20 million deaths. In India, for example, analyses suggest that the real death rates are 10 times higher than the official figure of 400,000. Meanwhile, another study has found that more than 1.5 million children have been orphaned by the pandemic. The situation is dire, and yet one year after the discovery of multiple effective vaccines, we still face a vaccine apartheid. Patent-protected vaccines are sold at great profit to wealthy countries by a few pharmaceutical companies. The global vaccine price ranges from $2 (for AstraZeneca) to $37 per dose, with mRNA vaccines such as Pfizer/BioNTech and Moderna the most expensive. Between January 2020 and December 2021 the market capitalisations of Moderna rose from $6.9bn to $134bn; Pfizer from $206bn to $314bn; and BioNTech from $6.6bn to $84bn. It is clear that the existing efforts to distribute vaccines to poorer countries are not working. The Covax Advanced Market Commitment was set up in September 2020 by the Global Alliance Vaccine Initiative, in alliance with the World Health Organization, to accelerate the development and manufacture of Covid-19 vaccines, as well as diagnostics and treatments, and to guarantee rapid, fair and equitable access to them for people in all countries. Donor countries would thereby fund guaranteed volumes of vaccines from manufacturers to supply low- and middle-income countries. The Covax scheme’s target was to deliver 2bn doses by the end of this month. And yet, by 5 December, well over a year since its launch, the Covax scheme had shipped only 669m doses to 144 countries, with just 250m donated to the poorest 95 countries at time of writing. Not only is it way off track, millions of vaccine doses donated to African countries have passed their expiry dates and have either been sent back or destroyed. In April 2021 the WHO established a Covid-19 mRNA vaccine technology transfer hub to try to speed up global manufacturing. All three mRNA vaccine manufacturers have refused to take part. If we want the world vaccinated with three doses, it will require the distribution of at least 20bn doses. Pfizer/BioNTech, whose vaccine requires ultra-cold storage that makes it difficult to distribute in low-income settings, predicts it will expand production to 4bn doses at best by the end of 2022. What can the world do when massive financial interests are placed before the survival of millions of men, women and children? There are several options. One is a patent waiver. A year ago India, South Africa, Kenya and Eswatini among others called for one, so that emerging economy companies were not under threat of future litigation. The USA and France eventually supported them. But Germany, Canada, Japan, South Korea and the UK blocked this move to protect big pharma. Bill Gates, a major donor to Covax, also defended patent rights. After months of wrangling, the WTO has failed to broker an agreement. Another option, put forward by Dr Peter Singer, senior adviser to the WHO director general, is to appeal to the moral and ethical values of the big pharma board members and investors. Many of these people have led institutions committed to global public goods and equity. One would think they might also have religious or moral principles that would make them think again. But there is little historical precedent, when stocks are booming, for such a display of altruism. A more effective line may be to take action against states such as Germany, Canada, the UK et al, over what is arguably an infringement of human rights. There is little doubt that their policies break the UN convention on the rights of the child, which requires states to “combat disease and malnutrition … [through] the application of readily available technology”, with particular attention paid to the “needs of developing countries”. Likewise, the UN guiding principles on business and human rights, unanimously endorsed by the UN human rights council, calls for “business enterprises … to comply with all applicable laws and to respect internationally recognised human rights”, and describes the state duty to protect against human rights abuses by businesses through policies, regulation and adjudication. Sadly, neither of these conventions have much teeth, and they are regularly broken with impunity. This leaves the nuclear option: prosecution in the international criminal court for crimes against humanity. In article 7 (1) of the Rome statute, these are described as “a widespread or systematic attack directed against any civilian population” and “inhumane acts … intentionally causing great suffering, or serious injury to body or to mental or physical health”. International lawyers should consider this option and act quickly. We cannot let this carnage drag on. We could see another 12 million deaths in the next year. People across the world want justice. They should have a right to vaccine access, especially when many of the vaccines in question were researched and developed largely by government scientists trained and employed at taxpayers’ expense. Anyone standing in the way of saving lives in the name of private profits should be held responsible. • Anthony Costello is professor of global health at UCL, and a former director at the World Health OrganizationDutch political parties have reached a new coalition agreement, paving the way for the country’s caretaker prime minister, Mark Rutte, to form his fourth successive government a record 271 days after general elections in March. The text of the accord between Rutte’s rightwing liberal VVD party, the progressive D66, Christian Democrat CDA and orthodox Christian party Christen Unie will be presented to the parties’ MPs on Tuesday and the whole parliament on Wednesday. If approved, the coalition will make Rutte the longest-serving Dutch prime minister nearly a year after his third cabinet resigned over a child benefit scandal in which thousands of parents were falsely accused of fraud, sometimes after racial profiling. The new government would take office in January after the parties select ministers. “It’s a good agreement,” Rutte told reporters as he left the talks late on Monday night. “But how it’s put into practice is what really matters.” He warned while the negotiators had reached an agreement, the deal “still has to go to the parties, through parliament. We are not done yet.” Sigrid Kaag, whose D66 party won the second most seats in the March 17 elections, said it was a “balanced accord”. Details of the accord have not been released but Dutch media have said policy highlights will include spending to address the country’s structural housing shortage, subsidies for childcare, and higher spending on healthcare and schools. The new government is also expected to spend billions on measures to fight the climate crisis, as the Netherlands has constantly missed its goals over the years and is still among the countries with the highest CO2 emissions per capita in the EU. It was also being billed as a “recovery government” to help the country back on its feet after the pandemic, the public broadcaster NOS, said, and spend heavily on “problems that have not been solved for a long time” – although without a majority in the upper house it will need opposition support to pass controversial legislation. The nine months of coalition talks are the longest in Dutch history, beating the 215 days it took to record to form the last cabinet. They were derailed early on when parliament formally censured Rutte, accusing him of undermining public trust and “not speaking the truth” about the negotiations. The Christen Unie leader said he would not join a fourth Rutte government, while Kaag told Rutte – prime minister since 2010 – that he should resign. Nicknamed Teflon Mark for his ability to survive, Rutte is poised to be confirmed as the EU’s longest-serving government leader together with Hungary’s Viktor Orbán.The charismatic prime minister of Barbados, Mia Mottley, elevated her country’s status in the world with her stinging speech at Cop26 in Glasgow last month. This speech resonated throughout the West Indies, a region that has largely been devoid of a strong leader to give these vulnerable small island developing states (SIDS) a voice in the climate crisis debate. The survival of SIDS such as Barbados depends on the finance to invest in measures to limit the global temperature rise to 1.5C, which was the Paris agreement’s main objective. Mottley called on all leaders of developed countries to step up their efforts as she outlined a solution embodied in flexible development finance. First, create a loss and damage fund made up of 1% of revenues from fossil fuels (which she estimated would amount to about $70bn, or £50bn, a year), accessible only to countries that have suffered a climate disaster and loss of 5% of their economy. In addition, Mottley demanded special drawing rights (SDR) of $500bn a year over the next two decades, to accompany the proposed $50bn IMF resilience and sustainability trust targeted at the most vulnerable countries. SDRs – funds from the IMF to supplement countries’ reserves – are allocated to countries according to the size of their economy. Sadly, and counterintuitively, richer nations receive most of the support. However, G20 members have graciously agreed to reallocate some of this money to nations with lesser resources. A few weeks later, Mottley, a strong advocate for reparations for slavery and colonisation, was again in the news as Barbados instituted significant constitutional change to become a republic. By removing Queen Elizabeth as their head of state, and replacing her with President Sandra Mason, Barbados, an island with a population of about 290,000, joined Dominica, Guyana, and Trinidad and Tobago, all of which became republics in the 1970s. However, like the other Caribbean nations, Barbados remains part of the Commonwealth. A significant but often overlooked fact is that Barbados performs well on Transparency International’s corruption perceptions index (CPI) and its global corruption barometer. In the 2020 CPI, Barbados scored 64 and was ranked 24th out of 179 countries, leading the Caribbean. The worst-performing country in the region was Trinidad and Tobago, which scored 40 and ranked 86th. Trinidad and Tobago, one of the world’s oldest oil-producing countries, a republic since 1976 and a high-incomedeveloping country, is today suffering from the real long-term effects of the “resource curse”, corruption and decades of poor and myopic leadership. The main avenue that facilitates corruption in Trinidad and Tobago, as well as most other Caribbean islands, is through government procurement by ministries and state-owned enterprises, rewarding party financiers, friends and family members with inflated contracts. Poor procurement legislation and an absence of laws on party funding are hallmarks of corrupt nations. Why has Barbados done better than other Caribbean countries in alleviating corruption? In other British territories, there have been allegations of significant political corruption, major governance issues and even claims of criminal gangs infiltrating the elected and administrative branches of government. The answer may be that Barbados has had stronger institutions, more transparent public procurement and better anti-corruption policies and legislation. It has also had good governance and visionary leadership since Mottley took office in 2018. It could also be that the island’s financial mainstay lies in tourism and not in the venal oil and gas industry, with its huge windfalls providing incentives for corruption. Regardless, Barbados can learn a lot from the mistakes of Trinidad and Tobago, which has not just had several corruption allegations surrounding the presidential role over the years but has also seen much public resentment towards the office, which is seen as a drain on the country’s resources and an ineffective, neo-colonial mantle. Barbados can be a beacon in making the president’s role more meaningful and relevant, ensuring strong institutions, and overseeing the fight against corruption. With presidential oversight, an independent, forthright, anti-corruption agency, supported by effective legislation, and a diligent and expert financial intelligence unit, can remove incentives for bribery and kickbacks within public services, police, parliamentarians and the office of the prime minister. When political corruption does occur, a process of financial investigation, including tracing of assets and their recovery complement the anti-corruption toolkit. This will be fundamental in the fight but will also ensure that any perception of corruption diminishes in Barbados as the nation moves higher up the ranking towards a developed nation score. The president must not be simply a figurehead but must proactively remove any anachronistic duties and establish a role that is relevant and modern in creating a society of integrity among its public officials. Corruption is a cancer that creates inequality by harming development and economic growth. Aid to alleviate poverty, disease or climate disaster can easily be siphoned away by corrupt officials, unless measures are installed to prevent this. Both Barbados’s new president, Sandra Mason, and Mia Mottley, the prime minister, need to present a united front of integrity in ensuring transparency and accountability in all matters of government expenditure, including the allocation of climate change funding outlined at Cop26. Mason and the rest of the Caribbean’s presidents and prime ministers must follow the inspirational example of Mottley in being outspoken, courageous and irreproachable. The region desperately needs it. Kenneth Mohammed is a senior adviser at Intelligent Sanctuary.An Indian exam board has withdrawn a passage from a nationwide English exam that appeared to promote the subservience of wives, after an outcry over “blatant misogyny”. All students have been awarded full marks for the comprehension section of the exam covering the passage, which appeared to explicitly state that women’s independence was undermining discipline and parenting in the home. The passage appeared in an English language and literature exam taken by 14 and 15-year-olds on Saturday. The offending passage contained lines such as the “emancipation of the wife destroyed the parent’s authority over the children” and “in bringing the man down from his pedestal, the wife and mother deprived herself, in fact, of the means of discipline”. The passage also said “it was only by accepting her husband’s way that a mother could gain obedience over the younger ones” and “wives stopped obeying their husbands … the main reason why children and servants are undisciplined”. After students, teachers and parents objected, Sonia Gandhi, the president of the opposition Congress party, drew attention to the exam. In a rare public intervention, Gandhi read the passages aloud in parliament on Monday and voiced her disgust at the impact they could have had on India’s children. She described the exam as “atrocious”, “shockingly regressive” and perpetuating “blatant misogyny”. “The entire passage is riddled with such condemnable ideas and the questions that follow are equally nonsensical,” said Gandhi. “It reflects extremely poorly on the standards of education and testing, and it goes against all norms and principles of a progressive and empowered society.” After the outcry, the Central Board of Secondary Education said it was withdrawing the passage. “The matter was referred to a committee of subject experts. As per their recommendations, it’s been decided to drop the passage,” the board said in a statement. All students would be given full marks for the passage, it added. Gandhi demanded a review of the exam in question and also called for a broader investigation into gender sensitivity standards in the national curriculum. Although the number of girls attending school in India continues to rise, the literacy rate of those aged 15 is still behind that of boys, by 59.3% to 78.8%. The national curriculum has often been accused of perpetuating rigid stereotypes. However, there have been some attempts to shift perceptions. In March this year, in the state of Punjab, a “gender sensitisation” curriculum was introduced for children aged from 10 to 14 to try to challenge gender norms. In 2018, a school in Kochi in the southern state of Kerala won plaudits after it became the first to introduce gender neutral uniforms.Time magazine’s decision to make Tesla billionaire Elon Musk its person of the year for 2021 has been criticised because of his attitude to tax, opposition to unions and playing down the dangers of Covid. Musk, who is also the founder and chief executive of space exploration company SpaceX, recently passed Amazon founder Jeff Bezos as the world’s wealthiest person as the rising price of Tesla shares pushed his net worth to around $300bn (£227bn). Describing him as a “clown, genius, edgelord, visionary, industrialist, showman”, Time cited the breadth of Musk’s endeavours, from his founding of SpaceX in 2002, to his hand in the creation of the alternative energy company SolarCity in addition to Tesla, the most valuable car company in the world. The magazine emphasised that its annual acknowledgement was not an award, but rather, “recognition of the person who had the most influence on the events of the year, for good or for ill”. The award has previously been bestowed to popes, Ebola healthcare workers and Greta Thunberg but also Hitler and Stalin, who received it twice. In 1982, it went to “The Computer”. But the accolade drew sharp criticism in the US, where Musk is a controversial figure because of his attitude to tax, opposing a “billionaires tax” floated by some. He, along with other prominent super-wealthy people, paid only small tax rates relative to the significant increase in his total wealth between 2014 and 2018 according to a Propublica investigation this year, with Musk paying a “real” rate of 3.27%. While legal, the rates expose the failures of America’s tax laws to levy increases in wealth derived from assets in the way wages – the prime source of income for most Americans – are taxed. Senator Elizabeth Warren tweeted that the Time decision highlighted the need for the tax code to be reformed “so the person of the year will actually pay taxes and stop freeloading off everyone else”. Robert Reich, who served as labour secretary in the Clinton administration, said the announcement was a good time to remind people that he “illegally threatened to take away stock options if employees unionised”, an apparent reference to a 2019 National Labour Relations Board finding regarding a tweet in which Musk wrote: “Why pay union dues &amp; give up stock options for nothing?” Musk also earned controversy in 2020 by playing down the dangers of Covid in a series of tweets and initially kept his northern California factory open despite a local “shelter-in-place” order, before later halting production. The author Kurt Eichenwald said it was the “worst choice ever”. Time magazine also noted the sway Musk holds over an army of loyal followers (and investors) on social media, where he skewers the powerful and also regulators attempting to keep in check an executive that is far from traditional. Using his 66 million followers on Twitter, he offers outlandish advice to the world and drives even his own followers and investors mad by roiling markets. He was sued by stock market regulators for tweeting in 2018 about taking Tesla private, and they alleged in correspondence to Tesla this year that two further tweets were not pre-approved by the company’s lawyers, as required by a court settlement in the earlier case. Though it became profitable only in recent years, Tesla is by far the world’s most valuable car company, at one point this year crossing the $1tn market capitalisation threshold. Traditional heavyweights such as Ford and General Motors combined are worth less than $200bn. Musk said last month that SpaceX would attempt to launch its futuristic, bullet-shaped Starship to orbit in January. Nasa has contracted SpaceX to use Starship to deliver astronauts to the lunar surface as early as 2025. Musk said he plans to use the reusable ships to eventually land people on Mars. Time highlighted Musk’s recent admission on Twitter that half his tweets were “made on a porcelain throne”. In its profile of the provocative boss, Time went on to chronicle one of those toilet tweet storms in detail before concluding: “This is the man who aspires to save our planet and get us a new one to inhabit.” The choice was questioned on Twitter, by users who suggested other figures might be more worthy of recognition this year. Joe Biden and Kamala Harris were Time magazine’s person – or persons – of the year for 2020. With Associated PressMy wife and I have been together for 18 years. We have a good sex life but for the past few years I have brought up the fact that I feel it’s become very “vanilla”. I have asked for her input on spicing things up, but she’s never given me any ideas. I’ve bought toys, books and made suggestions, but often these are ignored. My wife has a very stressful job that is demanding of her time and attention. I’m a stay-at-home dad to our two school-age children. My wife says she is too stressed from work and feels too bad about her appearance to have the time to fantasise or be creative in the bedroom, and that I have to be content with what we have. I am just as attracted to her now as I was when we first met. She has also recently confessed that she is resentful of my not having a job and that some of her stress comes from me spending money that she works so hard for. I’m trying to rein in my expenditure, but I’m having a hard time connecting her lack of interest and inability to fantasise about sex with her reasons because my feelings come naturally out of my love and attraction for her in good times and bad. Stress, fatigue and resentment are three of the main barriers to an exciting sex life, so anything you can do to help alleviate her job strain and money concerns would probably help. At the moment, she may feel that you are only adding to her stress by putting pressure on her to be erotically enthusiastic on top of a difficult work day. Try a programme of providing her with after-work soothing, de-stressing activities that are ostensibly non-sexual, such as offering a light massage with aromatherapy oils, preparing a bubble bath … without asking for sex. When she feels you are truly empathic about her work struggle and prepared to support her as a strong, caring and responsible partner without further demands, she may well become more erotically connected to you. Pamela Stephenson Connolly is a US-based psychotherapist who specialises in treating sexual disorders. If you would like advice from Pamela on sexual matters, send us a brief description of your concerns to private.lives@theguardian.com (please don’t send attachments). Each week, Pamela chooses one problem to answer, which will be published online. She regrets that she cannot enter into personal correspondence. Submissions are subject to our terms and conditions: see gu.com/letters-terms. Comments on this piece are premoderated to ensure discussion remains on topics raised by the writer. Please be aware there may be a short delay in comments appearing on the site.Grenfell Tower survivors are demanding police accelerate their criminal investigation into the disaster so prosecutors can bring charges immediately, arguing enough evidence has emerged to deliver justice for their 72 loved ones. On Tuesday, exactly four and a half years since the fatal fire, they launched a “#demandcharges” campaign with billboards across the country, a protest outside Kensington and Chelsea town hall and a statement on behalf of dozens of families that reads: “We’ve been patient, we’ve stayed dignified but we’ve waited too long. Today we say enough is enough. We demand charges” The push represents a change in gear for the Grenfell United families group but will be resisted by Scotland Yard, which insists it must wait for the findings of the public inquiry that is not expected until at least late next year at the earliest. A spokesperson for Scotland Yard said: “The police and the Crown Prosecution Service agree that the criminal investigation must take into account any findings or reports produced by the inquiry, including its final reports for both phase 1 and phase 2 … We have always explained to families and survivors this is a large and complex criminal investigation and the anticipated timeline for the police.” In October 2020, police investigating the disaster arrested an unnamed 38-year-old man in Sussex on suspicion of perverting the course of justice. He remains released under investigation. Detectives have also interviewed several people under caution relating to gross negligence manslaughter, corporate manslaughter and health and safety offences. A Grenfell United spokesperson said: “For four and a half years we’ve suffered knowing Grenfell was no accident, but now we have the evidence. Our justice was delayed to ensure that lessons were learned and people are safe in their homes – the evidence has been laid bare. Millions of documents have been uncovered.” The inquiry has already heard that in 2013 executives at Celotex, which made most of the insulation on the tower, had known that “in the event of a fire [its insulation] would burn”. In 2007, tests by Kingspan on a new formula of foam boards that were later used at Grenfell caused “a raging inferno”. The company kept using test results from an earlier version to market the product. And in 2009, an Arconic executive shared images of a burning tower fitted with similar panels to those it sold to Grenfell “to show you how dangerous PE [polyethylene] can be when it comes to architecture”. Ed Daffarn, who escaped from the 16th floor on 14 June 2017, said: “If the experience of Hillsborough is to mean anything, the Grenfell community should not be made to wait 28 years for justice.”Good morning. Kentucky’s governor, Andy Beshear, broke down in tears yesterday as he announced the deaths of at least 74 people from Friday’s deadly tornadoes that swept across multiple midwest and southern states, and warned that the death toll was expected to grow. The ages of those killed ranged from a few months to 86 years, six of them younger than 18, Beshear said at an emotional press conference in Frankfort, the state capital. He said 109 Kentuckians were still unaccounted for and that the eventual number of confirmed deaths might not be known for weeks. “I know, like the folks of western Kentucky, I’m not doing so well today. And I’m not sure how many of us are,” he said, his voice faltering. Are rescuers still looking for survivors? Yes, rescuers are continuing to search the wreckage in Mayfield and across the state. Meanwhile thousands remained without power and water, or have been left homeless. What has the government response been like? Joe Biden declared a major federal disaster in Kentucky. Federal agencies, the president said, were “working like the devil” to get affected states the help and resources they needed. Capitol attack panel recommends Mark Meadows for criminal prosecution The House select committee investigating the Capitol attack yesterday voted to recommend the criminal prosecution for the former Trump White House chief of staff Mark Meadows, punishing Donald Trump’s most senior aide for refusing to testify about the 6 January insurrection. The select committee advanced the contempt of Congress report for Meadows unanimously, sending the matter to a vote before the full House of Representatives, which is expected to approve the citation as soon as today. Bennie Thompson, the chair of the select committee, said in an opening statement that Trump’s former White House chief of staff displayed willful noncompliance in his defiance of his subpoena. What did Thompson say? “When the records raise questions – as these most certainly do – you have to come in and answer those questions. And when it was time for him to follow the law, come in, and testify on those questions, he changed his mind and told us to pound sand. He didn’t even show up.” What else happened? The select committee’s vice chair, Liz Cheney read out texts Meadows received as the 6 January riot unfolded, including from Trump’s eldest son, Don Jr, who implored him “we need an Oval Office address” to stop the Capitol attack. Protesting voting rights activists arrested as Biden meets with Manchin During a crucial week for Biden’s agenda that will probably feature a political showdown on his Build Back Better legislation in the Senate, voting rights activists are turning up the pressure in Washington. As the US president had a meeting with a key centrist Democrat who has acted as a roadblock to his plans – the West Virginia Senator Joe Manchin – more than 60 people were arrested as they protested, singing songs and blocking traffic near the US Capitol. The diverse group of activists came to Washington from around the country and were focused primarily on issues around voting rights and poverty. When the focus turned to voting rights, the talk became more focused on Manchin and the White House’s apparent inability to apply all of its power to pass federal legislation to protect the vote. Meanwhile, voting rights watchdogs have warned of a powerful web of attorneys and groups who have spent millions promoting new and onerous voting laws that many key battleground states have enacted. In other news … Time magazine’s decision to make Elon Musk its person of the year for 2021 has been criticized because of his attitude to tax, unions and Covid-19. Describing him as a “clown, genius, edgelord, visionary, industrialist, showman”, the magazine emphasized that its annual acknowledgement was not an award, but rather, “recognition of the person who had the most influence on the events of the year, for good or for ill”. US secretary of state Antony Blinken has used a visit to Indo-Pacific to urge China to cease “aggressive actions” in the region, as Washington seeks to bolster alliances against Beijing. The Biden administration is trying to reset relations and reassert its influence in Asia after the Trump era. The US air force has discharged 27 people for refusing to get the Covid-19 vaccine. They are thought to be the first service members to be removed for disobeying the mandate. The force gave its forces until 2 November to get the vaccine. Thousands either refused or sought an exemption. Navy prosecutors have alleged that a sailor charged with setting the fire that destroyed the USS Bonhomme Richard last year was “disgruntled” after dropping out of Navy Seal training. Mays has denied igniting the amphibious assault ship that burned for nearly five days and injured dozens onboard. Don’t miss this: Meet the people who had their first tattoo after 60 For many older people, tattoos came with baggage. Now, social mores have changed and for those in their 60s, 70s and 80s: “The stigma associated with prisoners’ tattoos, or sailors or misfits getting them, has disappeared,” says Louise Krystahl, a tattoo artist. That may be why she now gets a lot of clients over the age of 60, who feel ready for their first tattoo. She once tattooed a ladybird on the wrist of a woman in her 80s. “For older people, it’s usually a sentimental reason, not just that they fancy a butterfly,” says Krystahl. Climate check: Vanessa Nakate’s fight for the forgotten countries of the climate crisis Launching a hard conversation about climate reparations and environmental imperialism on a global stage is not where Vanessa Nakate thought she was heading three years ago but when she started to research global warming, she realised the impact it was having. Nakate started a youth strike in Uganda – then just kept going. “I had this realisation that I could not let another week pass without speaking up,” she says. “It wasn’t climate change – it was a climate crisis.” Last Thing: South Dakota teachers scramble for dollar bills in ‘demeaning’ game A competition pitting 10 teachers against each other to scramble for dollar bills to fund school supplies in a city in South Dakota has been described as “demeaning” and drawn comparisons with the Netflix hit series Squid Game. The Argus Leader reported $5,000 (£3,770) in single dollar bills were laid out during the Sioux Falls Stampede hockey game, and teachers from nearby schools competed to grab as many as possible in less than five minutes. The company and the Sioux Falls Stampede has since apologised.A motorist who deliberately ran over a cyclist after the victim spat on his luxury Land Rover during a road rage row has been jailed for 18 months. Retired engineer Alan Moult, 74, left Nick Cook with multiple injuries after accelerating over him “in a moment of madness” in Stockport, Greater Manchester, in July 2020, a court was told. Moments earlier, Moult had lost his temper when Cook accidentally collided with his vehicle at a set of traffic lights after a bin lorry stopped suddenly in front of him. Dashcam footage recorded Moult’s wife, Irene, begging him to avoid the confrontation as Moult sped after the victim, blaming him for damaging the wing mirror on his Freelander. “It’s not worth it – don’t, love,” she said. He ignored her and caught up with Cook to argue with him on the roadside. After Cook spat on the Land Rover bonnet, Moult got back in the driver’s seat, put his foot down and crushed the victim under the wheels of the car, Minshull Street crown court in Manchester heard. As Cook lay seriously injured, Moult called him a “prick”. The victim was left with his pelvis broken in two places, six broken ribs and a punctured liver. He later lost his job and is now too scared to cycle. He still cannot bend over to tie his shoelaces, the court heard. This week, Moult admitted causing serious injury by dangerous driving. He was also given a three-year road ban, which will start when he is released from prison. In mitigation, his defence counsel, Rachel Shenton, said there was “a certain amount of goading” from Cook in the run-up to the attack, but that Moult expressed “bitter regret” for what he had done. “Had his vehicle not been damaged this would never have happened. It was a moment of madness,” she told the court. Sentencing Moult, the judge, Recorder Dan Prowse, said of Cook’s spitting: ‘‘It was plainly a provocative act but your response was grossly disproportionate. You deliberately drove into and over Mr Cook, accelerating hard as you did so having aimed your vehicle directly at him and he went under your vehicle. “Your wife was shrieking and was plainly frightened but your response, knowing you had just run that man down, was to say the word: ‘prick’. ‘‘You were consumed by anger and wanted a confrontation with Mr Cook. You deliberately ran that man down in anger in an action that could have been fatal.’’Anyone remember the “carried interest” loophole that lets hedge fund executives and private equity managers – among the wealthiest people in America – pay a tax rate no higher than most Americans? It’s a pure scam. They get the tax break even though they invest other peoples’ money rather than risk their own. Barack Obama promised to get rid of the loophole. He failed. So, remarkably, did Donald Trump. Guess what happened? Nothing. “I don’t know what happened,” said Larry Kudlow, the conservative economist who crafted Trump’s campaign tax plan. “I don’t know how that thing survived,” he said, adding, “I’m sure the lobbying was intense.” Now that Democrats are trying to find ways to finance President Biden’s Build Back Better package, you might think that the carried interest loophole would be high on their list. After all, closing it could raise $180bn over 10 years. That’s $180bn that could go toward supporting vulnerable Americans and investing in America’s future. Think again. The loophole – which treats the earnings of private equity managers and venture capitalists as capital gains, taxed at a top rate of just 20%, instead of income, whose top tax rate is 37% – remains as big as ever. Bigger. Influential Democrats, such as House ways and means committee chair Richard Neal, argue that closing the loophole would hobble the private equity industry, and, by extension, the US economy. Neal’s ways and means committee wants only to require private equity firms to hold assets for slightly longer than they do now in order for their managers to qualify for the loophole. The truth is there’s zero economic justification for retaining this loophole. Private equity firms borrow money to buy companies they see as ripe for turnarounds – where they can cut wages, outsource jobs, strip assets – and then resell what’s left, often laden with debt. The firms don’t risk their partners’ own capital. Instead, they charge their investors a management fee of 2% and keep 20% of future profits that their investments generate – which is known as “carried interest”. (Fourteenth-century Italian ship captains were compensated in part with an interest in whatever profits were realized on the cargo they carried.) The sole reason the loophole survives even during Democratic Congresses, is fierce lobbying by the private equity industry – and the dependence of too many Democrats on campaign funding from the partners of private equity and hedge funds. “This is a loophole that absolutely should be closed,” said Biden adviser Jared Bernstein. But “when you go up to Capitol Hill and you start negotiating on taxes, there are more lobbyists in this town on taxes than there are members of Congress.” Last year 4,108 individual lobbyists formally registered to lobby Congress and the executive branch on taxes, according to the Open Secrets lobbying database. It’s likely that hundreds more work to influence federal tax policy on behalf of clients but have not formally registered as lobbyists. The private equity industry spends millions of dollars on lobbyists to fight any effort to change how it is taxed. It has contributed hundreds of millions of dollars to congressional campaigns – $600m over the past decade, according to a New York Times analysis earlier this year. During the 2020 election, Biden’s presidential campaign received over $3m from people working in private equity and related types of investment funds, according to data from the nonpartisan Center for Responsive Politics. Biden was the top recipient of campaign money from that industry in the last campaign cycle. All told, nearly 60% of campaign donations from those in the private equity industry during the 2020 election went toward Democratic candidates for federal office. In 2010, House Democrats squeaked through a tax plan that closed the loophole, but Democrats who controlled Senate wouldn’t go along. Senator Charles Schumer was among those who argued against closing it. The United States, he said, “should not do anything” to “make it easier for capital and ideas to flow to London or anywhere else”. As if Wall Street needed billions in annual bribes to stay put. When I publicly criticized Schumer for this, he explained to me that he didn’t think it fair to close the loophole for private equity and hedge fund partners but to leave it in place for other partnerships, such as housing developers. Well, one person’s view of fairness may differ from another’s. But I don’t think there’s any question that the carried interest loophole is unfair to everyone except the fabulously rich who benefit from it. Democrats must close this loophole. Now.The EU executive is under pressure to ratchet up green energy standards for buildings, as it prepares a further batch of legislation to tackle the climate emergency. The European Commission is expected to propose mandatory energy efficiency upgrades for buildings in the EU in legislative proposals published on Wednesday, but MEPs and Green NGOs fear they will not be strict enough. The Guardian understands that the worst-performing houses and flats will be required to be renovated to energy-efficiency standard F by 2030, then to E by 2033. The most energy-wasteful public and non-residential buildings will have to hit the F grade by 2027 and E by 2030. EU energy efficiency classification runs from A to G, with G being the worst in class. Buildings account for 36% of the EU’s greenhouse gas emissions, meaning millions of homes, offices, shops, schools and hospitals will have to be renovated, if the bloc is to meet a pledge of net zero emissions by 2050. The draft law on buildings, accompanied by plans for greener transport, cutting methane and revising EU energy rules, form part of the EU’s green deal to transform its economy in less than three decades. Another tranche of proposals, including on renewable energy and industrial pollution, were released in July and are going through the EU legislative process. Under the buildings plan, all new constructions would have to be net zero-emissions by 2030. EU member states would face a legal obligation to draw up a timeline to ensure their buildings were net zero emissions by 2050. The biggest controversy has centred on energy efficiency targets for existing buildings, triggering frantic last-minute rewrites. More than 85% of EU buildings were constructed before 2001 and the vast majority are expected to be still standing in 2050. Frans Timmermans, the commission vice-president in charge of the EU green deal, has called for a “renovation wave” based on stronger regulations on the energy performance of buildings. But an ambitious early draft of the EU’s updated energy performance in buildings directive by his team ran into opposition from a Brussels watchdog. Timmermans’ officials had proposed that all residential buildings sold or rented after 2027 should achieve energy class E. But the Regulatory Scrutiny Group, a body of officials and experts, overruled the idea, saying the commission risked stepping on powers that belonged to national governments. Since then a cross-party group of MEPs has urged the commission not to blunt its ambition. Mandatory targets are key to bring buildings in line with the EU’s 2030 and 2050 climate targets, wrote MEPs from the Greens, centre-right European People’s party and centrist Renew groups in a letter to Timmermans and other commission officials. “[The] ‘worst performing buildings’ are often inhabited by the energy poor and the renovation of those buildings clearly pays off in terms of costs, energy consumption, and health. Delaying action to 2030, and only covering part of our homes or limiting to the F and G classes is just not enough.” The buildings plan has to be approved by EU ministers and the European parliament. Adeline Rochet, a senior policy adviser at the E3G thinktank in Brussels, said minimum energy performance standards were a cornerstone of the commission’s strategy. “A good energy performance certificate regime is necessary but it won’t be sufficient. If it’s not backed by mandatory energy standards it won’t be enough.” One European parliament source said there was not enough detail in the latest plans about how millions of buildings were going to hit the best energy efficiency standards in less than three decades. “We only know that magically in 2050 all of them should be in energy class ‘A’, but the timeline for this is not spelt out and that is the big problem.” The source added that there were too many exemptions for historic buildings. “The exemptions are formulated in such a broad way that maybe all the buildings in Italy will be exempt.” Ciarán Cuffe, an Irish Green MEP, said it was essential that minimum energy performance standards (Meps) were included in the revision of the energy performance in buildings directive. “ have the potential to improve our worst-performing homes, to alleviate energy poverty, and significantly reduce the emissions from the EU’s building stock.” “Meps will help to increase the energy efficiency of buildings and therefore they reduce energy bills for citizens, which especially benefits those at risk of energy poverty. In order to make sure that vulnerable households are protected, we should have targeted funds that would act as adequate social safeguards to help ensure the affordability of housing at a national and local level.”Halo Infinite In order to appease a fanbase on the brink of disillusion, 343 Industries has abandoned some of the narrative extravagances from Halo 5 and built an unapologetically gung-ho sci-fi blaster with Master Chief doing what he does best: running about blasting aliens with cool guns. The open worlds and new grappling gun add variety and the standalone multiplayer is a frenetic competitor to the Battle Royale big fish, but this is classic Halo fare. • Read the review. Forza Horizon 5 A racing game that really captures the feel and fantasy of the open road, set in a sumptuous virtual Mexico. It offers an overwhelming buffet of racing events to take on by yourself or with others, in hundreds of different perfectly-recreated cars, through jungles, deserts and around volcanoes, on the streets or off-road in Baja buggies. A unique way to see one of the world’s most interesting places. • Read the review. Ori and the Will of the Wisps Even if it weren’t beautiful, this game would be a delight – but man, it certainly helps that it is beautiful. Little spirit creature Ori flows gorgeously around the screen as you explore a watercolour forest full of strange creatures, winkling out all its secrets and probing its hidden corners. This is like a playable painting that you can sink into, where every daring jump and fast-paced fight feels great. • Read the review. Psychonauts 2 This endearingly bizarre adventure is a true original, effortlessly funny and unapologetically itself. You play Raz, a trainee psychonaut and reluctant acrobat, learning the fine art of delving into people’s brains to understand their psyche (and, sometimes, mess around with their motivations). You will not soon forget the weird escapades that you have in this game, from competing in a gameshow constructed inside an agoraphobic psychic’s mind, to fleeing a witch made of bees. • Read the review. Microsoft Flight Simulator With its technically astonishing, AI-augmented recreation of the entire planet and surprisingly intuitive controls, Flight Simulator has appeal far beyond the core audience of sim fanatics. Whether you’re landing an Airbus A320 at Seattle–Tacoma airport or swooping over Strasbourg in a Cessna 152, the feel of being in flight is wonderfully replicated. A lovely surprise. • Read the review. Sea of Thieves Originally released in 2018, Rare’s wonderful pirating adventure has continued to evolve and expand, with fresh stories, monsters and hidden loot to discover. It is, in effect, a vast story generator allowing friends to get together on a galleon and sail away on their own quests for fortune and glory. Enhanced for Xbox Series S/X, running in glorious 4K and with much faster loading times, this treasured game is now even more valuable. It Takes Two A co-operative adventure about a failing marriage doesn’t sound like the stuff of gaming magic, but Hazelight Studios has brought startling innovative flair to what could have been a mawkish trial. Arguing parents May and Cody are shrunk down to toy size and have to fight their way through their own home and garden to reach their daughter, fighting giant insects and working together to solve clever, engrossing puzzles (and these are truly collaborative ventures, not just one player standing on a switch, while the other opens a door). Ultimately, this is a game about the value of communication and beyond the annoying talking-book narrator, it delivers its marriage guidance in the subtlest of ways. • Read the review. Hades A stylish, moreish and unexpectedly sexy game in which you try to fight your way out of the Greek underworld as Zagreus, son of Hades. The ingredients are simple – a few different weapons, various perks from the gods of Olympus rooting for your escape, snappy and intelligent dialogue – but they combine into something different and interesting, and with every attempt you edge closer to the surface. Its memorable, playful take on mythology helps make this the best game in its genre. • Read the review. Hitman 3 The latest assassination adventure from IO Interactive follows the usual recipe – infiltrate glamorous locations and kill people – but the team has expertly refined all the systems and given us a range of iconic set-pieces, from Berlin raves to Argentinian wineries. Highly optimised for Xbox Series X/S, with smoother framerates and more intricate visuals, Hitman 3 is a joy on the new consoles, and worth checking out again even if you’ve already played on Xbox One. Committing deadly crimes for a nefarious global spy network has never looked so fresh and appealing. • Read the review. Resident Evil Village Set immediately after Resident Evil 7 in a sinister Eastern European town filled with cackling crones and lurking monsters, Village continues the rejuvenation of the Resi Evil brand. The giant femme fatale Lady Dimitrescu was the star of the pre-release trailers, but there are darker enemies stalking these luscious gothic castles and weird victorian mansions, and every time you think you know what’s what, a major tonal shift completely changes the feel and focus of the game. Comfortingly chilling. • Read the review.21 May 2019 Star Hobson is born to Frankie Smith, who is one month off her 18th birthday. September 2019 On a holiday to Bridlington, Smith repeatedly leaves Star with a friend so that she can go out drinking. November 2019 Smith breaks up with Jordan Hobson, Star’s dad. She gets together with Savannah Brockhill, a bouncer at the Sun pub in Bradford, West Yorkshire. 27 January 2020 First referral to social services due to concern for Star’s wellbeing is made by Hollie Jones, a friend of Smith’s. A social worker visits twice. February 2020 Brockhill records a video calling herself the “number one psycho” and sends a message to one of Smith’s sisters asking if Smith is cheating on her, saying: “I’m broken, I’ll stab someone tonight, I swear.” She threatens to go and confront Smith: “I don’t care about kids in the house, I will rage. Fuck it, they’re going to need police in the house to take me away.” March 2020 Around the start of the first lockdown, Frankie Smith gets her own flat in Keighley. 14 March 2020 Brockhill punches Smith in the face at the Sun and later says it was an accident. 15 March 2020 Brockhill texts her boxing sparring partner to say she tried to kill herself and Smith by driving off a cliff but ended up just giving Smith “a hiding”. She says she thinks she needs help, “mentally” and that “I’m out of control. Honestly, I just can’t, I just lose it”. March 20 Social services close the case on Star. May 2020 Smith’s grandmother, Anita Smith, makes a referral to social services after learning that Brockhill has been restraining Star with a wrestling move called a slam choke. A social worker visits the same day. June Jordan Hobson makes a referral to social services. Police visit and arrange for Star to have a medical examination at Bradford Royal infirmary. Other referrals are made this month, by Smith’s sister, Alicia, and a friend of Smith’s mother, Rachel Whiteley. 8 July Social services close the case on Star. 2 September Frankie’s grandfather Frank Smith makes a referral to social services after seeing bruises on Star’s face. Social services make an unannounced visit the following day and note a clean and tidy home but that Star has a few bruises. Smith says she has fallen down the stairs. 7 September Social worker texts Smith to say the case is closed. 13 September Brockhill is captured on CCTV assaulting Star at a recycling plant in Doncaster where she worked. She was babysitting Star because Smith wanted to go out drinking. 20 September CCTV footage shows Smith dragging Star through Bradford city centre on her reins, with Star’s head dropping to one side. 22 September 2020 Star dies. 14 December 2021 Brockhill is convicted of murdering Star at Bradford crown court. The jury find Smith not guilty of murder or manslaughter, but guilty of causing or allowing the death of a child. • This article was amended on 15 December 2021. The Sun pub where Brockhill worked as a bouncer is in Bradford, not Keighley as an earlier version said.It was only a few months after Star Hobson’s birth on 21 May 2019 that her mother, Frankie Smith, seemed to lose interest in her daughter. She took a holiday that September and got a friend to look after Star as soon as she boarded the coach to Bridlington, leaving the friend to babysit in the evenings so she could go out drinking. That friend became the first person to call Bradford’s social services expressing concerns about Star, in January 2020. Others followed, including Smith’s sister and grandmother, and Star’s dad, Jordan Hobson. Smith turned 18 a month after Star was born, and her family said she was very immature for her age. She was still playing with dolls when she was 16, favouring lifelike models that she would wrap up when it got cold. She grew up in a chaotic house with her single-parent mum and various siblings. After her arrest a psychologist assessed her as being in the bottom 2% of intelligence. The psychologist said she was “abnormally compliant” and “abnormally prone to going along with what an authority figure is telling her to do”. Savannah Brockhill, who became her on-off girlfriend, was one such figure, the prosecution argued. Eight years older, she left school at 10 and had hidden her bisexuality from most of her family until she discussed it in the witness box. A keen amateur boxer, she hoped to compete in the Olympics but got injured and worked as a carer and later a security guard. The couple met in the Sun pub in Bradford, where Brockhill worked as a bouncer. Their tempestuous relationship began in November 2019, around the time Smith split up with Hobson. Before long, Smith’s friends noticed her further losing interest in Star and becoming “obsessed” with Brockhill, spending hours and hours on the phone to her. It was Brockhill’s phone that ultimately secured her conviction: every time she assaulted Star she would Google for tips to cover her tracks, querying “can you die from getting winded?”, “‘sickening after head trauma?”, “how to get bruising down” and “signs of an abused baby”. When, on 22 September 2020, she punched Star so hard she caused the injuries that ultimately caused the girl’s death, Brockhill again went online, Googling “shock in babies” and “how to bring a baby out of shock”, 11 minutes before she or Smith texted 999. The signs that Brockhill had a problem with violence had been there since at least February 2020 when she posted a video online calling herself the “number one psycho”. Each half of the couple was jealous of the other. In February 2020, Brockhill was paranoid that Smith was cheating on her, sending a message to one of Smith’s sisters saying: “I’m broken, I’ll stab someone tonight I swear.” She threatened to confront Smith: “I don’t care about kids in the house I will rage. Fuck it, they’re going to need police in the house to take me away.” Family members started to suspect the relationship was violent after seeing Smith with bruises and black eyes. In mid-March 2020, Brockhill hit Smith in the Sun pub – she said accidentally, but Smith’s mum, Yvonne Spedley, said Brockhill punched her in the face. The couple then sped off in Brockhill’s car. The next day Brockhill texted her boxing sparring partner to say she had tried to kill herself and Smith by driving off a cliff but ended up just giving Smith “a hiding”. She said she needed help “mentally” and that “I’m out of control.” In May 2020, Star’s wider family say, they were told they could no longer see her, on Brockhill’s orders. The catalyst was Smith’s grandmother calling social services after learning Brockhill had been holding Star in a “slam choke”. This wrestling move involved Star being “lifted up by her neck or throat and then thrust on the bed”, the court heard. Challenged by her grandma, Smith said it was to toughen Star up. But some family members still managed to see Star. In June, they noticed she had bruises and had changed from being a happy, healthy child to a withdrawn, fearful one who often seemed to be in pain and had lost weight. Late that month, Hobson called social services after seeing pictures of bruises on his daughter’s face, which resulted in a police visit and Star being checked over at the local hospital. When friends and family were allowed near the couple, they were alarmed to see the strict regime Brockhill seemed to have instigated for Star. She was deliberately deprived of sleep and was barely a year old when she was forced to spend five minutes or more standing alone facing a wall for the most minor of transgressions – transgressions that she was in any case far too young to understand. It was again the couple’s phones that proved beyond reasonable doubt that they had been abusing Star for their own amusement. In June 2020, they both filmed Star wobbling in a daze of exhaustion before falling head first off her chair. They found the video hilarious, sending a version to friends edited by Brockhill with a soundtrack and captions added for dramatic effect. Brockhill later told the jury she was inspired by You’ve Been Framed when editing the videos. Smith told the jury she did not understand at the time that what she was doing amounted to child abuse. “I loved my Star,” she said, despite them having heard she had previously referred to her daughter as “cunt” and “it”. Partway through the trial she said she had seen the light, and pleaded guilty to neglecting Star on at least eight separate occasions in the month up to her death. This included one incident caught on CCTV in Bradford city centre, where she was seen dragging Star along the pavement using her reins. She said she did not know that day that Star’s leg was already broken. That fracture was the result of one of 21 blows inflicted on Star by Brockhill a few days earlier when she took her to work at a recycling centre in Doncaster so Smith could go out drinking. CCTV captured the relentless abuse, which also resulted in a fractured skull. Brockhill tried to persuade the jury the cameras lied, admitting to slapping Star once on the cheek but nothing worse. She suggested that the fatal blow to Star’s abdomen on 22 September was inflicted not by her, an 11-stone amateur boxer, but one of the other children in the room at a time when she had her back turned. Alternatively, she suggested, perhaps Star simply fell off the sofa. Throughout the seven-week trial, Brockhill insisted she too loved Star and was just trying to get her into a “routine”. She told paramedics that Star was “my little girl as well, I brought her up”, and then casually put her coffee cup down on the hospital trolley where Star lay dead. At times during the evidence she cried, wiping away tears with a disposable face mask. The day Star was murdered, social services were due to visit Smith – numerous visits were made throughout 2020 as files were opened and shut into Star’s care – but Smith had successfully “fobbed off” the social worker, the court heard, and postponed the meeting. Bradford council said a local child safeguarding practice review was ongoing and would be finalised after the trial’s conclusion. Star’s family said they hoped it would explain why social workers did not take steps to keep Star safe despite numerous warnings. Smith and Brockhill may have managed to pull the wool over a social worker’s eyes but the jury was not convinced. • This article was amended on 15 December 2021. The Sun pub where Brockhill worked as a bouncer is in Bradford, not Keighley as an earlier version said.Last week, $5,000 was dropped on the ice of a local hockey rink. It was intermission and the crowd wanted to be entertained. School teachers duked it out for the one-dollar bills to pay for classroom supplies. One teacher came away with $592 for supplies and school programs in the so-called “dash for cash”. Another pocketed $380. The cash was donated by CU Mortgage Direct, a home lender. News of the stunt went viral and many online commentators were rightfully horrified. Why were public school teachers battling each other at a hockey game for much-needed funding that should be coming from the state and federal governments? Why were pencil, paper and whiteboard purchases fodder for a frenzied competition? The answer, of course, is that many US states do not properly fund public schools and the federal government doesn’t do nearly enough to guarantee every child has a right to a functioning school building and well-paid staff. In certain states, public school teachers can enjoy comfortable pay and strong union protections, but there are many places where teachers have to work second jobs to create the semblance of a middle-class life. South Dakota ranks among the very last in average teacher compensation. Rural states with Republican governors, like South Dakota’s Kristi Noem – a Trump favorite – tend to underfund their public school systems. Teachers’ unions are feared because they are viewed as a bastion of Democratic politics. For Republicans like Noem, weaker or nonexistent unions are preferred. It is moral, of course, to pay public educators more and not force them to fight each other at hockey games for classroom supplies. On a practical level, it’s important too – many public school systems struggle to retain young teachers. Long hours at limited pay are punishing for new recruits and talented teachers can decide, after a few years, to take on private sector jobs elsewhere. No teacher wants to stress over how much it might cost to properly stock their classrooms with pencils and paper. The teaching profession should be where the best college graduates in America go. In a number of wealthier nations around the world, where teaching is treated like an elite vocation, this is the case – a teacher in Germany, for example, can out-earn an entry-level doctor or web developer, which would be unheard of the United States. The top graduates from the best American colleges and universities simply don’t consider teaching because there are far better salaries and working conditions to be had on Wall Street, in the tech sector or in the medical field. Part of the trouble is that the federal government spends relatively little on public education. A vast majority of the cost is foisted on state and local governments. In most counties, property taxes determine the physical quality of the schools and teacher pay. Affluent parents pay more in taxes for stronger schools for their children, while school districts with poorer parents lose out, left to beg for whatever federal funding might be available. There are stirrings of a better world. In 2018, teachers in West Virginia went on strike for several weeks, protesting low pay and escalating healthcare costs. Similar strikes followed in Oklahoma, Colorado and Arizona. In West Virginia, the teachers were able to win small pay increases while galvanizing the public behind them. Change won’t come, though, until governors and state legislatures do far more to fund public schools and the federal government pumps cash into these school systems when local politicians refuse to help. If Noem wants to fail South Dakota, Joe Biden and the Democrat-run Congress shouldn’t let her. Congress just approved a $768bn spending bill for the military, promising a de-facto blank check for warmongering across the globe and armaments factories back home. Most of it is unnecessary. Instead, members of Congress could actually consider carving off a large chunk of that cash for the public schools of America. No teachers would have to take to a hockey rink ever again. Ross Barkan is a writer based in New York CityStay in the shadows for a while and people begin to wonder why it didn’t happen for you; do it a little while longer and you just might become a legend. As grime blazed through conventional milestones, the rapper born Darren Dixon – key former member of early 00s groups Nasty Crew and Newham Generals – struggled to keep pace as the genre entered the mainstream. This first ever nationwide tour is part of an overdue victory lap for his successful second act, befitting an artist who was an early inspiration to Dizzee Rascal, Skepta and Wiley. Introduced with fitting reverence by opener Novelist, Dixon appears in military fatigues, large gold chain and cropped dark hair. The ominous, rattling 2019 single Top Boy showcases Dixon’s taut flow, with bars that flirt with his own mythology and nearly-man status. Coming some 14 years after his first releases, in 2018 Dixon released an album somehow both debut and comeback record – followed by 2020’s better Double or Nothing – and tonight mostly reflects that one-two punch. Lemon Trees, dedicated tonight to the “bare flavours” seemingly on offer in Manchester, is a spirited homily to herb, peppered with the MC’s signature, absurdist ad libs – “bluku bluku”, “bud-a-bup-bup” – linguistic trademarks repeated back by the audience with the recognition of other stars’ biggest bars. It’s a set that genuflects to a few different generations of Black creativity, reflecting grime’s roots in not just pirate radio and rave but in parents’ record collections. Contact Us combines both 80s soul horns with brittle, first-phase grime, while the brilliant Tell Me a Ting is loaded with drill’s malevolence. Late 90s jungle galvanises recent single Selecta – a well-chosen collaboration with early drum’n’bass practitioner Danny Byrd, it’s a weapons-grade crowd-pleaser for two generations in the room tonight. “2021’s been a hard year” says an unusually quiet Dixon (he will later tweet that he has lost his voice, which barely shows) “but I’ve been learning to grind.” Recent adverts for Ikea and Pepsi suggest an artist playing the game and having fun with it. This is old school British rap with a foot in the new, done assuredly by an originator.Five years after it was first shown at the Venice film festival, Terrence Malick’s 45-minute docu-meditation about the dawn of time, nature and humankind finally gets a release in the UK on streaming platform Mubi. With its bold images of the natural world and occasional dinosaur-fantasy sequences, accompanied by a sonorous voiceover from Brad Pitt, this was always conceived by the director as a standalone project but is effectively a kind of adjunct or mood-footnote to his award-winning 2011 experimental epic The Tree of Life. That had many of the same preoccupations and imagery, but crucially a smaller-scale human component, the story of a 1950s Texas family which gave the cosmic effusions a filmic immediacy and relevance. A longer feature-length version of Voyage of Time was made, but slightly mystifyingly it is specifically this shorter version, intended for Imax theatres, which is being released now and what was undoubtedly a spectacular Imax event is left looking pretty exposed on the small screen. There is nothing here we haven’t seen on David Attenborough’s programmes, and Attenborough’s witty, informative and unobtrusive commentary feels more to the point now than Pitt who at one moment gasps: “What is nature? The inexhaustible giver …” Blandly calling nature “inexhaustible” is very naive given the climate crisis. That said: there is nothing necessarily absurd in Malick’s awe and Heideggerian astonishment in the face of the inexplicable vastness and complexity of existence, his style is still urgent and distinctive and his question is perfectly valid: “Why is there something rather than nothing?” But without the dramatic dimension that Malick created for The Tree of Life, this feels platitudinous: the kind of presentation that might be shown to parties of schoolchildren at the Science Museum. • Voyage of Time is released on 17 December on Mubi.Sean Dyche is not a man to be concerned by league position in mid-December. In three of the past four seasons Burnley have not recorded more than two league wins before the final month of the year. It was at the Emirates on 13 December last year that they beat Arsenal to collect their second victory of the campaign, in a spell that yielded 11 points from six matches. It is a feat they may need to repeat to avoid returning to the Championship. Burnley spent four years looking at home in the Premier League but last season they began to tread water, finishing 17th on 39 points, 11 points clear of a dreadful bottom three and scoring only 33 goals. That was their lowest points and goals total since their return to the top flight in 2016 and a sign that things needed to improve. Within the squad a mental barrier was broken this season when Brentford were defeated for Burnley’s first win at the 10th time of asking in late October, giving the players a mantra that the campaign had started after that match. They are a resilient side, knowing their strengths and ensuring they play to them, not allowing one another to drop off for the split second that can cost a team such as Burnley, who win or lose by fine margins. Dyche was angered by Burnley’s first-half performance against West Ham on Sunday but pleased by the response to his half-time criticism, a sign he can still get a positive reaction from his team. Morale remains high within the squad and they believe two positive results in a row would turn their season. They hope that will start at home to their relegation rivals Watford on Wednesday. A trip to Aston Villa follows, before struggling Everton come to Turf Moor, giving Burnley games to target. “We’ve got a reality to most seasons here” Dyche says. “Not every season – we’ve had some big finishes – but most seasons are a challenge for us. We do know the market we are in, we know how it operates. It’s all well and good knowing that, but you still have to go out and perform … because football doesn’t owe you anything – that’s something I have been talking to the players about.” Burnley’s continued presence in the Premier League is built on a successful defence. They have conceded 21 times in 15 games, three fewer than Manchester United in fifth, on their way to a lone victory and eight draws that leave them in the relegation zone, two points behind Watford with a game in hand, . Nick Pope, Matt Lowton, James Tarkowski, Ben Mee and Charlie Taylor provide the foundation for a team to attack but a lack of quality and ambition in the final third is costing Burnley. “We’ve slowly but surely been getting back to where I think we can be, certainly with clean sheets and being tighter in games and draws,” Dyche said. “We’re well aware we’ve got to make those draws into wins.” A goal ratio of less than one a game shows where the shortcomings are, and the reason for so many draws. The summer signing Maxwel Cornet is the leading scorer with five in 10 Premier League appearances but has succumbed to two injuries since his arrival from Lyon and without him Burnley have looked blunt, with their usual talisman Chris Wood getting three goals in 16 games. Cornet has provided an individual improvement to the forward line but that has not had a collective impact as others struggle to find the target. Dyche, asked how he had tried to improve the attack this season, said: “The personnel – with Cornet coming in to add a different flavour to it, to add a different feel to how we play. That’s the plan and he’s certainly done that. We are hoping that opens up avenues to others to score more goals.” Cornet’s influence can only go so far in a squad where Jay Rodriguez has nine league goals in 79 appearances since returning in 2019 and Matej Vydra has seven goals in three and a half seasons at Turf Moor. Cornet has been a breath of fresh air to Burnley, bringing much-needed confidence to a squad that has lacked investment in recent years, and he is a sign of how the club can profit from wise moves in the market. January recruitment is in the pipeline but the money available is unknown and if they fail to secure key targets, while clubs such as Newcastle invest, it could leave them further behind. The Burnley squad have written the history books on Premier League survival so will be confident of finishing above the red line. But December’s run could determine whether they get a seventh successive season in the top flight or they have been left behind.In the year we got a ninth Fast and Furious movie, Japanese director Ryûsuke Hamaguchi gave us something at the very opposite end of the petrolhead scale with Drive My Car. You could call it Slow and Circuitous, but that would be doing his monumental, highly moving meditation on how life, art and desire intertwine a huge disservice. Vast in philosophical scope but intimate; beautifully controlled but pulsing with erotic undercurrents, it marks Hamaguchi’s emergence as a new cinematic master. Liberally adapted from Haruki Murakami’s short story, it sees avant garde theatre director Kafuku (Hidetoshi Nishijima) mourning the death of his wife Oto (Reika Kirishima) – whose infidelity he had just discovered. Accepting an assignment to direct a new multilingual production of Uncle Vanya in Hiroshima, he reluctantly consents to being chauffeured around by the taciturn Misaki (Tôko Miura). Every morning on the way to the theatre, he listens to a cassette recording of Oto’s voice running his lines. In taxing rehearsals, he encourages the actors to surrender themselves to Chekhov’s text – including Oto’s bad-boy former lover Koji, whom Kafuku has cast in some form of punishment as the self-doubting Vanya. Willingly or unwillingly, everyone is a passenger on a journey here. Hamaguchi has been circling these themes for years – since his graduation feature Passion and on into the acclaimed Asako I &amp; II: the ebb and flow of art and life, the revelatory effects of role-playing, how desire sculpts our identity from within. But in Drive My Car they all flow powerfully into each other: grieving for Oto, who used sex to unleash her creativity, Kafuku begins to confide in Misaki, and their new intimacy starts to dislodge her secrets. Using driving as a brilliantly concise metaphor for how storytelling, acting and loving all draw us towards unknown destinations certain to change us, Hamaguchi orchestrates his ideas with a cool and elegant insistency. Drive My Car’s red Saab 900 – weaving quietly through Hiroshima, and the expressways and byways of the human heart – deserves to be up there in the iconic movie symbol stakes with Rosebud the sledge.Ever wonder why, with every new piece of so-called productivity enhancing technology we adopt, we just end up with more, not less work? Slack was supposed to get rid of email – only now we find time to email and reply to our co-workers on Slack. Email was supposed to free us from reading through lengthy paper documents everyday, but we now email ourselves the pdfs home to read in the quiet hours after work. And smart phones? Don’t even get me started. A lot of us find ourselves replying to our bosses on the bus, while putting our kids to sleep, or even, God forbid, on the toilet. Out of Office, a new book by journalists Charlie Wartzel and Anne Helen Petersen, explores why productivity culture has been so successful at making us working more, not less. And with millions either quitting their jobs or having to work from home, they ask how we can capitalize on this moment for the good of workers, not our bosses. I talked to Warzel and Petersen over – what else? – Zoom the week their book launched. Everybody seems very fed up with their jobs right now. Why do you think that is? Charlie Warzel: For years, people in knowledge work have wanted flexibility in their jobs. And they were told by their bosses that offices are this nucleus of productivity that holds the fabric of our organization together. And then the pandemic comes, we all get forced into this experiment, and productivity doesn’t suffer – workers pull it off. And I think there’s this realization: “Okay, so, if that was bullshit, what else about this arrangement is bullshit?” Anne Helen Petersen: All of these people quitting – what is that if not a general strike? People are coming together to say: We will not work as waitresses for this pay anymore. We will not work as childcare workers for this sort of treatment. There’s something more to life than my ability to reply to emails. If people can harness that energy, then it could change the way that work is moving forward. I loved the bit of the book where you talk about how many hours of work people spend actually doing their core jobs. CW: That was a wild thing. We weren’t like “confess how much you actually work.” And yet somewhere in the survey, 80% of the people were like, “I just got to tell you, I only do real work three hours a week, like when my kids go to bed on Thursday night”, or “Oh, shit, I didn’t do anything this week.” This book came at a very annoying time for me, because I was reading it during an exceptionally busy work week. I was like, “Yes! I’m going to redesign my life!” But then I was like, “Oh, wait, I need money.” AHP: Ideally, we still get money. But how can you figure out how to work less, but still make sure you are doing [what’s required of you]? I think it’s possible. If you can figure out the balance so that when you are working, the work is great and when you’re not working, you’re not thinking about your work all the time. Do you think it’s possible for somebody who is on a minimum wage? AHP: The fetishization of work is a very bourgeois thing. Office workers are very bad at understanding themselves as labour. [Their work] is an expression of self, instead of the work that they do. Whereas other jobs have something that says: “This is how many hours I work a day. And when I’m done, I’m done.” When I was a nanny, there was no way for me to think about being a better nanny, I could have gone to classes but it would have had no influence on how much I was paid when my job was done. Now that I think about it … often when I have tried to work less, I have felt like I don’t have a personality anymore. AHP: We – especially millennials – have poured ourselves into school, work, success – if you take away some of those parts of your identity, what is left? CW: It’s like, really fucking traumatic, that self audit. When I started doing it, I said to myself: I’m one of the luckiest people! I have a job I like, I am succeeding in it, I’m marching up the career ladder. And yet at the core [I’m] pretty miserable. But when I really started doing the inventory of [my work life balance], it was deeply upsetting. I didn’t know what my hobbies were. I realised I was like a ladder-climbing robot to some degree. Well, yes! Even when I try to work less, I spend most of my time thinking about how I’m going to be a better worker. What time I will go to bed to be fresh for work? Should I have a drink the night before work? Should I go for a run to make my mind clearer for work? AHP: That’s a perfect example of work being the primary axis of your life, right? All decisions are made so that you can be better at work. When you de-centre work, you can be like, “Okay, I’m not drinking tonight because I just want to feel good.” You have a section in the book about how corporations give us “wellness activities” instead of time off, and it made me laugh. I’m staying with a friend at the moment, and she has been working non-stop; she has a very demanding job in the banking sector. I came into the kitchen earlier, and she took out her headphones and said she couldn’t talk because she was doing a company wellness exercise – she was meditating on a screen that she’d already been looking at for the last 12 hours. AHP: Totally, that’s the worst example of companies trying to give lip service to balance with these programs: the best way to promote wellness in your organisation is to encourage people not to work – but that’s counter to the capitalist ethos. Are you happy now that you have both de-centered work in your lives? CW: I find it very similar to going to therapy or to exercise: there isn’t one day when someone says, “Congratulations, you’re in shape, you never have to do this again.” I have weeks when I relapse into my old work habits, where work is the only way I can feel self-worth or value; I slip back into the warm security blanket of letting work define me. That deprogramming takes a lot of time. I am happier, but I don’t want to make it sound like a fairy tale. Like anything, you’re gonna have good days and bad days. You say we’re at a crossroads. If we go one way, the pandemic and the shift to working from home for some people will present an opportunity to work 12-hour days under increasing surveillance. Or we have a chance to change our relationship with work. How do you take steps towards choosing the latter? AHP: Institutions are going to be really resistant to changing their way of doing things. If that’s the case – if all of the signals show the way that you succeed in this organization is through burning yourself out and through removing all sorts of boundaries between life and work – leave that organization. Start looking for a different job now, because the relationship is broken. CW: But I also think it’s exciting – I spoke to an HR consultant who tries to diagnose toxic corporate cultures. And they were saying the one constant across industries right now is that they’re freaking out. Superiors are scrambling – they don’t want these mass resignations. I think we’re starting to see glimmers of worker power in ways that we haven’t before. And it doesn’t seem to just be office workers either – the hospitality industry is quitting en masse; teachers are quitting; nurses are quitting. CW: It’s bigger than remote work. It’s this type of reckoning happening everywhere. It’s the conceptualization of what these jobs ought to mean to us, and what we owe [our bosses] and what they owe us. I bet loads of people are saying to you, “You’ve got a Substack newsletter, you wrote a book together, Anne has recently published a seven part series of articles in Vox. You’re always working!” AHP: Now is a bad time, right? Because we’re doing all this press for work. So we’re doing work all the time. CW: The difference for me is that before, I spent so much of my time performatively working. I would often not have anything to do between three o’clock and six when I left the office, and I would just sit around and fire off emails to make people feel like I was working, causing other work for other people. Walking up to people and having meetings about things that weren’t meetings. I don’t do that anymore.I often say I met Nawal El Saadawi four times but only two of those were in person, because the other two times made such a massive impression on me. When I was 13 and living in London, we were watching a documentary on telly about Egypt and this woman with bright white hair came on the screen. She spoke so powerfully and was so completely in charge, I thought, “Wow, who is she?” Then an Egyptian man came on and said: “This woman is ruining Egypt’s reputation.” I was so blown away by this idea that one woman could ruin a country’s reputation, I thought, oh my God, I want to be that. The second time I “met” her was when I was 18 and living in Saudi Arabia. I was in a deep depression because of the misogyny and ultra-conservatism there, but at university I discovered a bookshelf of feminist literature. It included works by Nawal and they saved my mind. I actually met her in Cairo in the early 1990s, to interview her as a journalist, and she was just as dynamic and electrifying as the woman I first saw on TV aged 13. I will never forget her saying that her grandmother had told her that religion was very simple: it was justice, freedom and love. That has stayed with me ever since. Soon after I interviewed her, she went into self-imposed exile in the United States. She had been imprisoned by Anwar Sadat in 1981, not long before he was assassinated, because he felt she was threatening his reputation as a dictator, but in 1993, she left Egypt for the US because the militant Islamists felt that she was ruining their reputation too and they put her on a death list. Wherever she went, Nawal was this terrifying and thrilling feminist who made everyone uncomfortable. When people ask me if I could distil Nawal’s ethos, it would be what her protagonist in the novel Woman at Point Zero says when she is accused in court of being a savage and dangerous woman. She says: “I speak the truth and the truth is savage and dangerous.” That is what Nawal was and that is what feminism must be: savage and dangerous. Nawal was the first woman in Egypt to write openly about the female genital mutilation that she was subjected to, at the age of six, and she wrote about it so poignantly, not just the torture that was committed against her body, but the fact that when this was happening, she looked around for her mother, hoping she would come and comfort her, and to her shock and horror she found that her mother was standing on the side of these women who were cutting her. Then she recognised the way the patriarchy recruits women to hurt other women and girls for the sake of its supremacy. In her 20s, Nawal became a doctor, working in a village, and she was able to see the ways the patriarchy ravages the human body. In her book Women and Sex, she made the connection between FGM and the way that it robs women of sexual pleasure. The book was banned for about a decade. When it was finally published in Egypt, she was fired from her position at the ministry of health. The last time that I met her was when she came to New York City in 2011, on a speaking tour about her time in Tahrir Square – she was demonstrating there in her late 70s. When asked why Sadat sent her to prison in 1981, she said: “I went to prison so that I could be free.” This exactly explains the arc of her life – all the powers that she challenged and the price that she paid for challenging them. She was married several times and she would say openly that in each of her marriages, her husband was asking something of her that was essentially saying: “Hand over your freedom to me” and she refused. So in her personal life, as well as in her political life (though they were basically one), she paid a price. On the day that she died, so many people were referring to her as the Simone de Beauvoir of the Arab world that it drove me crazy. We are not local versions of white feminists. She is the Nawal El Saadawi of the world, because all of those white feminists need her and her feminism much more than we need their white feminism. Nawal was an intersectional feminist before we began using the phrase and wherever she moved, whether in Egypt or the United States, she took that ethos of being savage and dangerous to hold accountable all the ways the patriarchy crushes us into submission.In 1977, the Myanmar military launched a national drive to register citizens and drive out people they deemed to be “foreigners”. Since then, more than 2.5 million Rohingya people have fled the country, with 740,000 fleeing to Bangladesh in the displacement crisis of 2017 alone. It is nearly a decade since the Myanmar regime and its supporters were first denounced by the international community for carrying out a “campaign of ethnic cleansing” against the Rohingya people. Legal initiatives on behalf of Rohingya survivors issued this week allege that the campaign of clearances and genocide perpetrated on the Rohingya people was facilitated by a Goliath, Facebook. “Facebook turned away while a genocide was being perpetrated,” claims Tun Khin, the president of the Burmese Rohingya Organisation UK. “Putting profit before the human rights of the Rohingya people, permitting the spread of hateful anti-Rohingya propaganda which directly led to unspeakable violence.” We believe Facebook is guilty of many things. Facebook was greedy: it sought to monopolise the Myanmar market by providing access to its platform without incurring data charges. This meant that, for many in Myanmar, Facebook was the internet. The design of Facebook’s algorithm promoted hateful and divisive content: it handed the Myanmar military and its extremist supporters the perfect tool for distributing and amplifying hate speech and for inciting violence against the Rohingya people. We believe Facebook was negligent: it failed in its policy and in its practice to invest sufficiently in content moderators who spoke Burmese or Rohingya, or local factcheckers with an understanding of the political situation in Myanmar. Moreover, it allowed vast numbers of posts inciting violence or containing hate speech to be published, and permitted many accounts that posted such material to stay online. Finally, Facebook was callous: even after it was warned – as early as 2013 – about the extensive anti-Rohingya content on its platform, it did not do anywhere near enough to intervene. Facebook executives admitted in 2018 that they knew the company needed to “do more”. That was three years ago, but it was only this week, after being notified about our legal actions, that Facebook announced it was closing further military regime accounts. It is the same old story: corporate giants from the global north roaming with impunity in the global south for profit, to the detriment of those who are the most vulnerable in the world. The Rohingya people have no access to the courts in their native land while the Myanmar constitution forbids them having any rights. Even if they did, what form of fair hearing would they have in the courts of a regime that is committing genocide against them? Today, the majority of Rohingya survivors are dispersed across the globe and those that remain continue to face crimes against humanity. The Rohingya people have been displaced to Bangladesh, Pakistan, Malaysia, Saudi Arabia, the UAE, India, the US, Australia, Thailand and Europe. Stateless, without legal rights, they are some of the most vulnerable people in the world: following on from the primary act of genocide, they also face exposure to secondary vulnerabilities such as human trafficking, child labour and gender-based violence. To add insult to injury, the refugee camps endured a disastrous fire and Covid-19 complications. While cultural, ethnic and religious tensions are at the heart of their persecution, the Rohingya people also had environmental injustices thrown at them. The mass “clearance operations” (as the military described them) conveniently cleared swathes of land for oil and gas development. Major international oil giants have planned production-sharing initiatives with the Myanmar regime within the Rakhine basin. The Rohingya people’s plight was sealed by the Shwe gas project, which was designed to supply gas from Rakhine state (the Rohingya homeland) to China’s Yunnan province and factories owned by the Myanmar government and military, and their associates. The project has destroyed local fishing and farming – the backbone of Rohingya society. Land was confiscated to provide clear areas for the pipeline and associated infrastructure. The pipeline has torn through the Arakan Yoma forest ecosystems, created soil erosion and destroyed vast amounts of coral reefs – destroying the cultural infrastructure of the Rohingya people. Nothing short of genocide and ecocide has been carried out against the Rohingya and their homeland. It is now incumbent on the courts of the global north to provide access to justice for the vulnerable people of the global south. After all, it is within the jurisdictions of such established and hallowed courts that these errant Goliaths hide and are based. Such corporates repeatedly attempt to avoid accountability; indeed Facebook has so far only responded to letters alerting them to this litigation by claiming that the company cannot be held liable in the UK but only in Dublin, where it is provided greater legal protections. Corporate empires and tech businesses such as Facebook are purposely contrived to tap dance around corporate liability, but justice must eventually win out. A business model that is inherently global is inherently liable globally. It will be fitting for David to bring down Goliath after the mighty and powerful in government have failed so far to do so. Jason McCue is senior partner of McCue, Jury and Partners LLP and James Libson is managing partner of Mishcon de Reya LLPAdelaide has traditionally been a good surface, the kind a batter might look at and think: “I fancy that.” A good pitch with consistent bounce should provide the right balance between bat and ball, providing a good game of cricket – which is exactly what England need to play if they are going to get back into the series. I remember going into the day-night Test as batting coach four years ago and there was concern that the twilight period would be difficult, the transition from bright natural sunlight into evening. Batters can be a fragile lot, and there was some worried talk about the ball darting around under floodlights. I’ve no idea what the science says, but sometimes it also feels that as the sun sets and temperatures drop, the pitch speeds up and the ball skids on. In the end in 2017, I remember the wickets being reasonably evenly spread over each session, but the batters didn’t seem to have enough trust in their defence and failed to back themselves to bat for long periods of time. The impact was that they wanted to be proactive, trying to score quickly before they got a good ball. Even though the surface looked excellent, both teams played an aggressive game, scoring runs at a reasonable rate but with wickets falling regularly. In many ways it’s not an ideal mindset, but in fact I think it might help England – because it’s the same one they might adopt in typical English conditions, where with the ball darting around the lower order would enjoy licence to play a few shots while the better batters would look to be busy, seeking quick singles, latching on to any width or anything short and trying to put bowlers under pressure. But this approach does fly in the face of the template that England supposedly use, which is the only sensible explanation for Joe Root’s decision to bat first in Brisbane: bat big in the first innings, put their opponents under pressure, and then bowl them out twice. Maybe it’s one they have anyway been forced to rethink. England simply have to play the conditions in front of them, and to their strengths. In Brisbane Root won the toss, took in the green pitch and the heavy cloud cover, and got his decision horribly wrong. If he had been confronted with an identical surface and forecast at Edgbaston he would have bowled first and chosen a seamer-heavy attack; in Australia he left out the best part of 1,200 Test wickets in Jimmy Anderson and Stuart Broad, chose a spinner who can’t get a game in England, and decided to bat. I would have thought the decision would have involved a series of discussions with the experienced coaching staff, senior players and analyst. We have been told regularly that this Ashes campaign has been two years in the making and yet despite all this England completely blew the advantage of winning the toss and briefly grasping the initiative. If the team does not recover, those involved must take responsibility. Wrapping two senior bowlers in cotton wool in preparation for the day-night game is a dangerous gamble, because they come into it undercooked while players who have got useful match experience might be forced out. There is a weight of historical evidence that suggests if you go 1-0 down in Australia you’re in big trouble, so to do anything but select your best possible team for that game is extremely foolish – and without doubt England did not play to their strengths, which is seam bowling. They need a new strategy to give them the best chance of winning this Test match with the players they have available. In the old days, when I played there in 1994-95 and 1998-99, Jack Leach would definitely have been picked on pitches that were quite slow and would turn, but in these circumstances I would be very surprised if he stays in. Instead they will surely go with four seamers. However, if everybody is fit and firing, it’s hard to imagine how the same people who selected the team for the first Test can include both Anderson and Broad for the second. I expect the top seven to stay the same, which leaves four places for the bowlers. Of the three seamers who played in Brisbane, Mark Wood bowled well and at pace, and Ollie Robinson also impressed and took wickets. Leaving out Chris Woakes weakens the batting lineup, and having got some match cricket under his belt he should be fitter and sharper. That leaves Broad and Anderson fighting for one spot. In Adelaide there may be periods when the ball darts around and the bowlers move to attacking lengths to induce batters into coming forward, and other times when seamers will have to plug away and do some hard yakka, which England’s are capable of doing. The path to victory is to bang away with accurate seam bowlers. Which is why Josh Hazlewood’s injury will help England. He might not have taken as many wickets as some of his teammates in Brisbane but he bowled well, as he did in Adelaide when England were last there. Whoever comes in to replace him, Hazlewood is a proven performer and an important cog in the Australian attack. His absence might be quite important in the context of the series and it should give England a lift. Despite the first Test, and especially its first day, there are reasons for optimism for the tourists – but they will have to change their approach if they are to grasp any opportunities.Hyde Park could be redesigned and lost species including beavers reintroduced to London under ambitious rewilding plans. The city’s mayor, Sadiq Khan, is working with Ben Goldsmith – a member of the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs and the brother of Khan’s former rival for the mayoral election Zac Goldsmith – to boost nature in the capital, including making the royal parks wilder and encouraging people to plant green rooftops. Ben Goldsmith said the plans would involve “more wild spaces, more scrub, river rewiggling and species reintroductions”. Khan has released £600,000 in funding to assist the project, which will help London reach its net zero goal. Further fundraising will take place, with members of the new London rewilding roundtable group tasked with sourcing private donations. Goldsmith said: “I’m so excited to be working with Sadiq on this new rewilding taskforce for London. All people need to experience close connection with nature in their lives, and yet for many Londoners this is a remote possibility today. “From green rooftops to pocket parks, nest boxes for peregrines and swifts, rewiggling streams and reintroducing long lost native species, our plan is to weave wild nature back through the very fabric of our city.” There are 1,600 places designated by local authorities as sites of importance for nature conservation, covering 20% of the capital. These include Richmond Park, Sydenham Hill Wood and the downlands in Bromley and Croydon that inspired Charles Darwin’s discoveries. At the moment, just half of these are deemed appropriately managed to conserve or enhance the wildlife. The project will focus on 20-30 of these sites to protect species including stag beetles, sparrows, peregrine falcons and water voles. Khan has stated an aim for all Londoners to live within a 10-minute walk of green space, with this scheme aiming to connect existing spaces so everyone in the capital can enjoy nature. It is also hoped the work will help tackle problems that plague Londoners including flooding and air pollution. Improving floodplains, rewiggling streams and boosting the health of rivers can alleviate floods, and planting more greenery can ease air pollution. Khan said: “The UK is one of the most nature-depleted countries in the world. In London, we need to take bold action to ensure we not only halt the decline of biodiversity in our natural environment but pave the way for growth and change. “That’s why I’ve announced my new rewilding fund, which will help restore the capital’s precious wildlife sites, improve biodiversity and ensure all Londoners have a thriving web of nature on their doorstep. And as part of our green new deal, we’re supporting young Londoners to gain the skills required for jobs that help secure a future for London’s natural environment.” Nature campaigners have been trying to add wildlife back to London, with a beaver group comprising Wildlife Trusts, the Beaver Trust and Citizen Zoo working on how to return the species to the capital. The community wilding group Citizen Zoo is also involved with projects to return grasshoppers and water voles to areas in the city in which they have been depleted or lost.The chancellor, Rishi Sunak, should be drawing up contingency plans for a mini-furlough in the event that the Omicron variant forces the government into closing parts of the economy, the International Monetary Fund has said. In its annual health check of the UK, the IMF warned the fast-spreading mutation of the Covid-19 virus posed a fresh threat to the economy after what had been a “challenging year”. The Washington-based body added that with strong policy support the economy had proved resilient, but it stressed a return of some of the measures that prevented mass unemployment and large-scale business failures might soon be needed. “In the event of a virulent Covid-19 wave requiring widespread mandated closures, the authorities should be ready to redeploy a subset of the most successful previous exceptional programmes (such as a furlough scheme and targeted support to the most vulnerable households and small businesses), but with due attention to lessons learned about their design (including tapering and timely sunset),” the IMF said in its assessment. Its managing director, Kristalina Georgieva, said it was “highly unlikely” the UK would experience a return to the restrictions seen at previous stages of the crisis. “I do not expect a return either of a full lockdown or the policy support of the kind that required,” she said. Georgieva said it would take time to assess the impact of Omicron but admitted the new variant was “leading to rising uncertainty and complicating the policy response”. The IMF also warned that the UK faces more post-Brexit trade problems, when new customs checks are introduced on 1 January. “Trade with the EU has dropped significantly and we expect there will be more impact ahead as the custom checks are going to be introduced in UK in the beginning of next year,” Georgieva said. The Treasury has said it will respond if Omicron results in significant closure of the economy but has no plans currently to add to the £400bn spent on mitigating the impact of the pandemic over the past two years. Welcoming the IMF report, Sunak said it came against the uncertain backdrop of the new Omicron variant. The chancellor added: “The most important thing we can do to safeguard the economic recovery and protect the British people’s lives and livelihoods, is for everyone to get boosted now.” While praising the UK for its “overall impressive, coordinated and extended policy response”, the IMF said it was “clear that Covid-19 and the behavioural changes it has caused will not fade quickly”. The IMF said it expected the UK economy to grow by 6.8% in 2021 and 5% in 2022, but the faster-than-expected recovery would be accompanied by rising inflation. Supply bottlenecks would send the annual inflation rate to about 5.5% by next spring, the IMF said in its Article IV report. “The outlook suggests that growth will remain strong in the near term, but so too will price pressures.” The report said interest rate increases from the Bank of England would be needed to keep inflation under control, but added that Threadneedle Street’s policymakers needed to avoid killing off growth. “Risks are considerable in the period ahead,” the IMF said. “In the near term there is a risk of higher inflation but two to three years out the risk shifts to lower growth (as policy interventions pull inflation back). “External developments could impact this (such as a rapid tightening of global financial conditions and global slowdown, or continued frictions in the UK-EU relationship). However, the major risk is new Covid-19 waves and the uncertainty they bring.” A Treasury spokesperson said: “We welcome the IMF’s report on the UK’s economic support package and their assessment that the UK economy is resilient, and recovered faster than expected because of this government’s actions. “The IMF specifically credited the UK’s ‘rapid’ vaccination campaign which allowed the “worst health impacts of the pandemic” to be contained over the summer.National Express and rival Stagecoach have sealed an all-share deal that will forge a £1.9bn transport operating group. The proposed merger is expected to be completed in late 2022, bringing Stagecoach’s UK local bus operations together with National Express’s intercity coach network. Stagecoach, which shrank back after selling its US operations and being squeezed out of UK rail, will be valued at about £500m, a third of National Express. Its Megabus intercity coach operation will be sold off, to alleviate any competition concerns. The group will be headquartered at National Express’s home in the West Midlands, where it runs most bus services. The combined group will have a 40,000-strong vehicle fleet and employ about 70,000 people. National Express also exited UK rail after selling its last franchise in 2017 but still runs trains in Germany and buses in the US, Canada, Morocco and Spain. Stagecoach was launched by Sir Brian Souter and his sister, Dame Ann Gloag, in 1980. The takeover marks the end of the Souter family’s long interest in the sector, having grown from buying out a small local bus company to one of the main players in Britain’s privatised bus and rail industries. However, the operator’s fortunes dipped when it overbid for the east coast rail franchise and its Virgin Trains operation went bust. It also faced battles over the re-regulation of buses as the tide started to turn in favour of local authorities being able to set routes again, with Manchester leading the charge towards more public control. Souter invited interest in the takeover when he started to sell down his holding this year. News of talks with National Express leaked out in September. Stagecoach’s board and Gloag, another major shareholder, have now all approved the deal, which will need to be ratified by shareholders from both companies. In a joint statement, the boards of both companies said on Tuesday that the deal was “a highly compelling strategic proposition, with significant growth and cost synergies delivering strong value creation for both sets of shareholders as well as substantial benefits to the customers, employees and other stakeholders of both National Express and Stagecoach”. The boards estimate the savings from combining operations at £45m a year. Stagecoach’s executives are expected to leave but its chair, Ray O’Toole, will become chair of the new group, with National Express’s chief executive, Ignacio Garat, remaining at the helm.Some spent the lockdowns of 2020 baking bread, perfecting yoga poses or learning a few words of Japanese. Others got into a slightly more unusual hobby: amateur treasure hunting. These people contributed to the 50,000 archaeologically significant finds that were recorded by hobbyists in 2020 and which shed further light on Britain’s history, according to the portable antiquities scheme (PAS) annual report published by the British Museum. Among the finds was the millionth archaeological find made by the British public, a copper alloy medieval harness pendant found in Lincolnshire. The finds were recorded by 2,846 individuals and more than 1,000 were treasure discoveries. The overall number was lower than previous years as metal detectorists, who made 91% of the discoveries, were less active due to lockdowns, the report stated. The arts minister, Stephen Parkinson, launched the treasure annual report for 2019 and the PAS report for 2020 at the British Museum on Tuesday. He said: “Human beings have been fascinated by treasure from previous generations for centuries and these new statistics show the search for, and engagement with it, still captivates us today. It shows the important role we all can play in protecting and cherishing our heritage.” He paid tribute to treasure hunters who waived their right to reward, allowing museums to acquire the valuable historical finds for free: “Often people focus on the reward but the generous gesture of those who waive their right to reward, I would particularly like to thank those finders and landowners. An exhibit being displayed in the upcoming exhibition of Stonehenge at the British Museum was made by a metal detectorist.” More than a thousand discoveries of “treasure” were made in 2020, including almost 1,000 iron age gold coins in Essex and a copper alloy and silver early medieval disc brooch from Cheddar, Somerset, the report revealed. As of May this year, 54 parties waived their right to reward meaning a museum could acquire the treasure at no expense. The finds also include a gold cross pendant with a runic inscription found in Berwick-upon-Tweed, Northumberland, and Roman coins found in three pots in Wickwar, Gloucestershire. Metal detectorists discovered the coins buried in the ground, with conservational work uncovering more than 6,500 coins dating back to the 4th century AD at this previously unknown Roman site, the report revealed. A silver seal matrix dating to the early 13th century was discovered inscribed with the name Matilda de Cornhill. It is thought to have belonged to the wife of Reginald de Cornhill, high sheriff of Kent and constable of Rochester Castle. New sites discovered through the finds include a Neolithic productive site in Hampshire, bronze age barrows in Wiltshire, a potential Roman villa in Cornwall, a Roman burial site in Cumbria, two possible Roman settlements in Oxfordshire, and what seems to be an Anglo-Saxon burial site in Warwickshire. The PAS scheme is funded through the Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport’s grant-in-aid, managed by the British Museum and hosted through Amgueddfa Cymru, the National Museum Wales. Hartwig Fischer, the director of the British Museum, said treasure findings would benefit museum collections across England, Wales and Northern Ireland, and the PAS system was “admired and emulated” in other countries. “The portable antiquities scheme is an essential part of the British Museum’s national activity, reaching out to people across the country to record their archaeological finds so that these can add to our knowledge of the past,” he said.Welcome to Pushing Buttons, the Guardian’s brand new gaming newsletter. If you’d like to receive it in your inbox every weeek, just pop your email in below – and check your inbox (and spam) for the confirmation email. I want to use this first issue to tell you what to expect from this newsletter. The gaming world is fast-moving, and it can be hard to keep up with while also living a busy real life. I want to be a friendly guide to what’s interesting and relevant, and what games are worth your valuable time and attention. But this won’t just be a news rundown. Video games don’t exist in a cultural vacuum, and they’re not just products that appear and are quickly forgotten. For anyone who plays them – which, increasingly, is pretty much everyone – games are a part of life, not something separate from it. I want to talk about them in a way that reflects that. Ask any anthropologist and they’ll tell you that we can learn a lot about people by looking at how we play. I find that games that break through to become popular often reflect some interesting facet of our culture and the world we live in: whether that’s The Sims’ potent mixture of ultracapitalist fantasy and soothing control over human affairs, or pandemic space-skullduggery hit Among Us’ undercurrent of anxiety, instability and mistrust. Even a game that ostensibly has nothing much to say – Fortnite, for instance – can tell us a lot when we look at how people play it. Teenagers use it as a place to hang out; their generation’s equivalent of loitering pointlessly around the local park with your mates, though possibly without the covert cans of cider. And gaming culture – because it is young, because it is technologically cutting-edge – can give us an insight into what’s on the cards for the world as a whole. There’s the dismal example of Gamergate, the 2014 harassment campaign that foreshadowed the Trump campaign and the seductive tactics of the alt-right; but gamers were also early representatives of the Internet’s ability to connect and empower people, with our newsgroups and online lobbies. People were creating and curating new selves and friendship circles in video game worlds long before they were doing the same on Instagram. I say all this to reinforce the notion that games matter. They’re not some guilty pleasure, some pointless waste of time. Like all art and culture, they have power. Games connect and entertain and, sometimes, effect change. The people who make and play them can be fascinating. I love video games in all their forms, from the sublime to the very, very ridiculous, and that is exactly why I take them seriously. The right game at the right time can change your life. Or it can give you something fun and blissfully escapist to do inbetween working long days, raising your kids, or navigating the everyday heartbreaks of life. That’s good, too. I’ve been a games journalist for 16 years, and I still find them endlessly fascinating. I’m excited to share the games and stories that make my brain happy with all of you. What to play This week’s game recommendation is Death’s Door, an extraordinary wee game that flew somewhat under the radar this year – appropriately, as it stars a crow who works as a Grim Reaper. It’s an invitingly beautiful Zelda-like adventure game, with stylish, snappy fights and a world comprised of pleasing dioramas full of interesting secrets to find, but it’s also gently melancholy in a way that really got to me over time. There’s something almost Spirited Away about it, with moments of touching levity in among the dungeon-delving. Available on: PlayStation 4/5, Xbox One/Series X/S, PC, Nintendo Switch Approximate playtime: 10 hours What to read At the end of a year full of shocking stories about harassment and toxic work culture at studios from Ubisoft to Activision Blizzard and more, IGN’s Rebekah Valentine reports on claims of a troubling work environment at former Halo and current Destiny developers Bungie, which would sit at odds with the company’s virtuous self-image. Valentine’s wide-ranging reporting doesn’t just allege problems that are endemic across game development – sexism, boys-club culture, overwork, a lack of diversity – but gets into what it might take to try and solve them My heart was well and truly warmed by this feature on Terry Pratchett’s love for the 1998 stealth game Thief: The Dark Project. Rick Lane dug through Pratchett’s old posts on a video game newsgroup in the late 1990s to tell the story of the great author’s favourite video game in his own words. I was also greatly amused by his reaction to being introduced to The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion: “Aaargh! What have you done to me?” The Game Awards were last Friday, a glitzy mashup of celebrating the year’s gaming highlights and hours’ worth of adverts and announcements for upcoming games. The wild, creative, genre-hopping co-op family caper It Takes Two rather unexpectedly won Game of the Year, a game I had a lot of fun playing with my IRL partner earlier this year. The Verge has a full run-down of the game announcements – an open-world Sonic game has the old Sega fans squeaking with excitement, and horror aficionados should check out Slitterhead, a new game from Silent Hill creator Keiichiro Toyama. Question block This is where we ask you for your questions about all things gaming, and get interesting people to answer them. Today we ask Dominik Diamond, host of the iconic original GamesMaster TV show and legit games pop-culture legend: were video games better in the 90s? “Of course games were better in the nineties. Mainly because when you bought them, they were actually finished products. If you had said to people in the 90s, ‘Here is Super Mario Kart, you can play the first three tracks then it gets a bit buggy, but we’ll have a patch in a month’ you’d have been locked in a room with Mr Blobby and made to drink Sunny D until your skin changed colour. Oh, sure games these days have more graphical bells and whistles on them now but so what? Gameplay is gameplay. In the 90s we didn’t even need to know how to spell Nvidia.” What to click The 10 best games on PlayStation 5 I suppose I shouldn’t be surprised that this pirate game is full of hornswagglers How my lockdown obsession with Super Smash Bros led me to a vital epiphany Solar Ash review – ambitious sci-fi adventure leads to a boring new world Next week: I’ll be taking a look back at 2021, a year in which the effects of the pandemic on game development really began to be felt. Until then!A lone, weathered hawthorn, which has stood for at least half a century on the rugged Scottish coast, has been named tree of the year for 2021. Sticking out at an angle over the cockle shell beach at Kippford, with a tangle of broken and twisted branches, the prickly tree beat hundreds of nominations to become the UK’s favourite in the contest run by the Woodland Trust. Nominated by a tree surgeon who remembers climbing it during family holidays in Dalbeattie, Dumfries and Galloway, the hawthorn won 38% of the vote and will now go on to represent the UK in the European tree of the year 2022 contest. It finished above a Monterey cypress tree planted on a beach in Saundersfoot, Pembrokeshire, Wales, that was saved from felling this year after a public campaign and a parasol beech in Parkanaur Forest Park, County Tyrone, Northern Ireland – a rare specimen with knotted branches growing randomly back towards the ground. Drew Patterson, who nominated the winning hawthorn, was thrilled to see such a “beautiful specimen” take the prize, though he said his picture, taken on a mobile phone, did not do the tree justice. “Never in a million years did I think they’d pick my tree,” he said. “It is a superb hawthorn and it’s incredible it has survived this well having been climbed on, battered by the winds and even bumped into by cars turning. “It’s in a wild place and has been blown over at an angle, but it is still standing strong and proud on the edge of the beach.” Patterson, whose father, grandfather and great-grandfather all came from Dalbeattie, added: “It has been there as long as I can remember and I have so many fond memories going back through the generations. I have pictures of my grandfather and mum in front of the tree. “It is at least 60 years [old] and could be as many as 100. Seeing the tree win this award is special.” Now in its seventh year, the Woodland Trust’s tree of the year contest highlights the UK’s favourite trees to help show their value and need for protection. Adam Cormack, the head of campaigning for the Woodland Trust, said the tree, which is also known as the Kippford leaning tree, is a worthy winner. He said: “We’ve had winners of all shapes and sizes in previous years and this is a tree that stands out for different reasons, notably because of its striking presence in an unusual setting.”Rishi Sunak has issued a stark warning to Department of Health officials over the multibillion-pound cost of regular booster rollouts, the Guardian has learned. Sources said the chancellor raised the point in several Covid meetings that a mooted three-month booster regime – more frequent than originally anticipated – could begin to impact on future spending. A Whitehall source from outside the Treasury said Sunak had not opposed the measure but warned prices were likely to rise and that the cost to the exchequer should not be underestimated. They said the additional cost would need to be paid for in either spending cuts or tax rises. “He made the point, rightly, that people would feel the effects of that spending in NHS and household budgets. These doses do not grow on trees,” the source said. “Worst case scenario, if a new variant comes along or if Omicron doesn’t burn out, if we have to do this for years to come, that’s billions in costs that has not been foreseen which has to be paid for.” The increase in national insurance, earmarked for NHS waiting lists but eventually aimed to help tackle the increased costs of social care, is expected to bring in £12bn a year which the Treasury could raid for additional cash for jabs. This month, the government has signed contracts to buy 114m additional Pfizer/BioNTech and Moderna doses for 2022 and 2023. Those are in addition to the 35m additional doses of Pfizer/BioNTech that were ordered in August for delivery in the second half of next year. Sunak is said to have raised the point most recently during Wednesday’s meeting about “plan B” measures that more regular booster doses were not built into current spending plans. Additional boosters, should they be required every three to six months, could cost an additional £5bn a year. The UK does not disclose what it has paid for vaccines, citing commercial confidentiality. Reports have suggested a significant additional cost for the doses, after Pfizer raised prices because of increased demand. In August, the Financial Times reported Pfizer increased the price of its Covid-19 vaccine by more than a quarter and Moderna by more than a tenth in the latest EU supply contracts. A Treasury source said: “We are continuing to do whatever it takes to support our fight against Covid, including providing new funding to roll out our booster campaign as quickly as possible to protect people from Omicron. We will also ensure that taxpayers’ money is spent responsibly.” Sunak is also facing the possibility of having to revive Covid support measures for businesses, which have not been reintroduced under plan B measures because firms are not required to close or enforce social distancing measures that can limit capacity. Powerful business groups such as the CBI have not made public demands for further support – though footfall numbers have begun to drop and leisure and hospitality are likely to feel the effects of public caution. The research group Springboard found footfall at UK high streets fell by 2.7% in the week to last Saturday. They had been expecting a Christmas shopping surge on Saturday but that did not materialise, suggesting that concerns over Omicron kept people away. Demands from business groups, as well as MPs, are likely to increase if Boris Johnson needs to impose further restrictions – even if they do not include business closures. Lobby groups are likely to argue that stricter social distancing measures or curfews would have a significant financial effect that would need to be compensated. Sunak’s department was forced to defend itself over the weekend after it emerged that Treasury staff held celebratory drinks after the November budget, in contravention of lockdown rules in England. A spokesperson said it was a “small number” of staff who celebrated around their desk and Sunak was not aware of the event.“From end to end I’ve searched the land looking for a place where England is still England.” So says Lady Rumpers, not a present-day Brexiter but a disgruntled aristocrat from Alan Bennett’s 1973 home counties farce. If this play is a snapshot of bygone Britishness, with Lady Rumpers’ post-imperial delusions of grandeur, how does it speak to us today? At once like an overfamiliar 1970s sitcom – one that buzzes in the background, often on mute, forever on repeat – and an anthropological curiosity that reveals, to horrified fascination, what we found funny then and how far we have come since. Translated from its Latin as “You shall have the body”, Habeas Corpus does indeed circle around matters of the flesh. There is a doctor with wandering hands, Arthur Wicksteed (Jasper Britton), a flat-chested spinster (Kirsty Besterman), a door-to-door salesman (Abdul Salis) and a sexually hungry vicar called Canon Throbbing (Matthew Cottle). There is also a blizzard of breast jokes that serve as a reminder that in the 1970s, male playwrights found women’s breasts very, very funny. A farce without the revolving doors, there are flecks of saucy seaside postcard humour mixed with Restoration-style comedy. Illicit desires among these bed-hopping types of Hove, East Sussex, are expressed though Benny Hill trouserlessness and Carry On innuendo. There is even an upper-class equivalent of Barbara Windsor in the foxy blonde, Felicity Rumpers (Katie Bernstein), and a Hattie Jacques sort in the sexually domineering battle-axe Muriel Wicksteed (Catherine Russell). Under Patrick Marber’s direction, the cast runs on and off an almost bare stage, with only a coffin as a central prop, which speaks to the play’s spurious ruminations on death, love and some very British reflections on the flesh: the body is either a cesspit of self-loathing or a site of dirty carnal delirium. We remain uncertain if these philosophical musings are part of the play’s irony or in earnest. In fact, there is a confusing sense of a farce written by Bennett with what seems to be a degree of irony – a sending up of the genre itself, perhaps – and now acted with an extra layer of contemporary irony. This double perspective leaves us slightly cross-eyed. And while the other actors play it purely for comedy, all very energetically, Britton seems, heroically, to be channelling his inner Shakespearean, which adds a fruity twist. Because this is Bennett, even in a minor key, there is neat word play, amusing one-liners and lots of retro smut, from the bottleneck of breast jokes to the punning names. It is not that the jokes about big women, little men, big breasts and little breasts offend (although one throwaway line about a father putting his hands down his daughter’s top brings biliousness). The bigger crime here is that it is all so tragically unfunny: “Stand up,” says a tall man. “I am standing up,” says the shorter one. Sigh. “We’re into injury time now,” comments the cleaning lady in the second half, and we feel the spectator fatigue. On a more serious note, its retrograde Britishness feels loaded now: is this a full-circle audit of the national character before we had had time to assimilate into our new EU identities? A nostalgic clasping or a sending up? When it was initially staged on Broadway, Habeas Corpus closed in under three months. Perhaps the Americans didn’t enjoy the jokes as much as we did, and maybe, in these intervening decades, we have not only become more European but more American too. Habeas Corpus is at the Menier Chocolate Factory, London, until 27 February.Lawyers acting for Anne Sacoolas, the woman charged with causing the death of 19-year-old motorcyclist Harry Dunn in August 2019 have insisted she will not be returning to the UK to attend a hearing, insisting the collision was a terrible accident. They also added that she had yet not agreed to appear by videolink, raising questions over a hearing due to start at Westminster magistrates court on 18 January. Announcement of the hearing was made on Monday by the Crown Prosecution Service Radd Seiger, the adviser to the Dunn’s parents said: “I cannot comment on what her [Sacoolas’s] lawyers are saying. All I can say is that the Crown Prosecution Service very rarely speaks publicly. They have told us the first hearing will be Westminster magistrates court on 18 January. That is what we are going with.” The news of the hearing was welcomed by the foreign secretary, Liz Truss. She said the UK would continue to seek justice for the Dunn family. Amy Jeffress the lawyer acting for Sacoolas in the US said her client would not return to the UK to face a potential jail sentence of up to 14 years for what she claimed was a terrible but unintentional accident. No agreement had been reached on attendance via videolink, it was added. “While we have always been willing to discuss a virtual hearing, there is no agreement at this time,” a separate spokeswoman for the Arnold &amp; Porter law firm said. That raises the possibility that Sacoolas has agreed to make a statement to the court. Seiger said: “Our point of principle is that you do not get to do this sort of thing and just walk away.” He said it was up to the courts to make a judgment, adding: “We are not about separating this woman from her family. We do not want that either. We just want an acknowledgement, a recognition that if you do something wrong in your host country you face the consequences.” He also praised Joe Biden, and said the family received signals early on that the US president was going to take a different approach to that Donald Trump had taken. He claimed the US recognised that this was never going to go away He added that the former foreign secretary Dominic Raab fully accepted that decisions were made in the Foreign Office that should not have been made, and lessons have been learned. He said Raab’s first duty was to Dunn’s family rather than relations with the US, which he had put first. At some stage, he said, there should be an inquiry in parliament about how the case was handled by diplomats, including the decision to allow the Sacoolas family to leave for the US with the US government citing diplomatic immunity. The US claimed the RAF Croughton site – where Sacoolas’s husband worked – provided immunity to the families of US staff working there, a point disputed by the family. Separately a civil claim has been settled in a district court in Virginia. Seiger refused to say if this involved a financial settlement. • This article was amended on 14 December 2021 to correct the name of the base to RAF Croughton, not RAF Broughton as stated in an earlier version.Share details of your favourite travel discovery over the past year, whether it was in the UK or further afield. It might be a fantastic place to stay, an amazing historic site, a beautiful area off the beaten track, restaurant, an unsung town or city … anywhere that felt special. If you have a relevant photo, do send it in – but it’s your words that will be judged for the competition. Keep your tip to about 100 words The best tip of the week, chosen by Tom Hall of Lonely Planet, will win a £200 voucher to stay at a Sawday’s property – the company has more than 3,000 in the UK and Europe. The best tips will appear on the Guardian Travel website, and maybe in the paper, too. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here. We’re sorry, but for legal reasons you must be a UK resident to enter this competition. The competition closes on 21 December at 9am GMT Have a look at our past winners and other tips Read the terms and conditions here If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Christmas has never been white in Rio Branco, a sweltering Amazon river town where December temperatures often soar close to 40C. This year it may not be red either, owing to a politically charged ding-dong over the colour of a Santa’s grotto that has been erected by the city’s Jair Bolsonaro-supporting government. The wooden structure was reportedly built outside the city hall last week as part of seasonal festivities ordered by Rio Branco’s conservative mayor, Tião Bocalom. But there was an immediate outcry that Santa’s shelter had been painted blue, the colour of Bocalom’s rightwing party, rather than the red more commonly associated with Father Christmas. Some suspected the unorthodox colour scheme reflected the belief among supporters of Bolsonaro’s far-right movement that red is the colour of the communist degenerates they claim are plotting to turn the country into a Cuba-style dictatorship. “Our flag will never be red” is one of the favourite battle cries of Bolsonaro’s backers, of whom Rio Branco’s mayor is one. On Saturday Bocalom’s government appeared to cave in to a growing commotion over the grotto’s strange hue and it was repainted white and then red on the eve of its inauguration. “It sounds like a joke, but it isn’t,” said the local news website Ac24horas. By Sunday, however, the riverside dwelling had again been painted blue, leaving the mayor scrambling to explain his administration’s flip-flopping over the politicised paint job. “What difference does it make if it’s blue or red? I don’t know why people are going on about it so much,” Bocalom snapped when asked about the controversy by reporters. The mayor claimed that for years the leftist politicians who governed Rio Branco and the surrounding state of Acre had painted things red at Christmas. “Now we’re adopting blue. What’s the problem with this?” Analysts saw the Amazonian grotto furore as further proof of the often ludicrous political schism that has opened up since Bolsonaro won power in 2018 while vowing to banish “red outlaws” from his homeland. “Not even Father Christmas is immune,” tweeted Thomas Traumann, a Rio-based political commentator. Bocalom tried to defuse the row on Monday, saying: “Christmas is blue, it’s red, it’s yellow.” By Monday evening Christmas had turned black, after a tarpaulin was placed over Santa’s chameleonesque cabin for reasons that remained unclear. “We will continue to follow this story so we know what colour Christmas is going to be here in Rio Branco,” a mystified local radio reporter, Victor Lebre, assured listeners, as Brazilians struggled to fathom the city’s decorative dispute.After almost 20 years away from our screens, Carrie and co are back for a Sex and the City sequel: And Just Like That. But as the fiftysomething women grapple with the modern era of dating apps and teenage children in the long-anticipated reboot, fans are divided. Warning: these opinions contain spoilers from the first episode of And Just Like That. ‘It seems realistic to me, despite all the cringe it brings’ I was shocked by how much I loved it. It was fantastic to see these characters back on the small screen, a setting which suits the Sex and the City universe much better than the Hollywood missteps. I think there will be mixed reviews about the way the show has brought its social commentary up-to-date: the first episode is packed with dialogue on everything from modern sexual expression and gender identity to white privilege. In some ways, this is a clear effort to directly address the criticisms of the original series and films, but I think it’s authentic to see the main characters in a “woke” world and how they navigate new norms. This is realistic to me, despite all the cringe it brings. I’ve been rewatching Sex and the City over the past few months so my emotional reaction to the end of the first episode was intense. Seeing the central three back at lunch together was a moment of such happiness for me, but I am excited to find out more about the new characters, particularly Che, who I think is going to be an amazing addition to the formula of sharp-tongued, hilarious explorations into life, love and struggles. I’m hooked all over again. Katie, 31, event producer, Manchester ‘It was badly missing Samantha’ I used to love the original series, which I watched while living in a city in my 30s. I really related to some of their relationship experiences. But I thought this was dire. There was no humour at all – well, besides the unintentional. The scenes with Miranda and her tutor were embarrassing. It was right to update the series in terms of diversity and sex; I’ll never forget Carrie saying in the original series that she didn’t believe bisexuality really existed. But the attempts were cringe-worthy. Charlotte didn’t have anything to do apart from being a bossy mum/wife and friend. It was badly missing Samantha and humour, but maybe that will come in later episodes after the death of Mr Big. Claire, 48, housing association worker, Scotland ‘It is exactly what I wanted the spin-off to do’ I was nervous when the sequel was announced. Would it work without Samantha? Would it compound the sins of the second film? The leaked script in July allayed many of my fears. It finally gave Stanford his seat at the brunch table and revealed trouble for Carrie and Big’s relationship. Based on the first two episodes, I am delighted with it. And Just Like That is not a continuation of Sex and the City. It shows a remarkable evolution. Samantha’s absence – deftly dealt with (we laugh at Bitsy, not Samantha) in the first episode and sweetly acknowledged in the second – was far less significant than I expected. The new characters are well drawn. Given many of the best lines, non-binary Che will change people’s perceptions of gender and sexuality for the better. Lisa Todd Wexley, or LTW, shows us a side of New York rarely seen: affluent black society. And Just Like That seeks to start dialogue about societal change, yet the characters remain as un-PC as they want: we see Anthony cruising hot guys for his bread delivery service at a piano recital, and referring to LTW as “black Charlotte”. Without spoiling the twist at the end of episode one, it is exactly what I wanted the spin-off to do. Take the Carrie character and put her back where she belongs: looking, questioning, striving and yearning. This mature and savvy show has so much to offer – just don’t tune in expecting Sex and the City. Tom, 34, London ‘There was heartbreak, humour and friendship – all I want’ SATC always had something to say, wrapping each episode around a theme or relationship/friendship lesson. But episode one had none of this and was instead packed with surface-level dialogue and expensive lifestyles. I was unable to relate to my girls, who had always been so relatable! But then episode two happened and things changed. They became real characters with real connections to the people I remembered them to be. There was heartbreak and humour and friendship: all the things I want from SATC. The second episode did have something to say – a lesson about life and friendship – told through my old friends, the gal pals. Perry Seymour, 56, humanitarian training consultant, London ‘It’s really nice to see women over 50 at the centre of a show’ I thought this show showed a lot of potential. It stayed true to the characters in a way other revivals do not. I would really like Samantha to return, but I will still watch it if she doesn’t. It’s really nice to see women over 50 onscreen and at the centre of a show, with the focus on their friendships. I loved Carrie’s fashion and how it doesn’t really relate to a specific age. It simply shows a unique sense of style and personality. I found the initial twist sad, but a brave storytelling move that makes me feel invested in where the story will go next. I hope they keep the momentum going. Emily, 30s, administrator, Ireland ‘It felt too forced and tired’ The ending to the first episode felt cheap and I’m just unable to connect to Carrie’s response to it. She was so muted that even the Samantha mention in the second episode has more emotional heft. The first two episodes still brought no sensible argument as to why they should revive this series. It just felt too forced and honestly too tired. In the first episode, it’s a running gag that Che would honk a button that blares “woke moment!” every time they bring up something woke in the podcast. I think these two episodes we have seen so far are exactly that – a barrage of forced woke moments to compensate for the lack of diversity in the original series. Fadhil Ramadhani, 24, teacher, IndonesiaBoris Johnson has warned his cabinet that “a huge spike of Omicron is coming” as the government braces itself for a significant backbench rebellion over Covid restrictions in England. The cabinet met virtually on Tuesday before four Commons votes on “plan B” measures, including wider mandatory mask wearing and a requirement to show a Covid certificate or negative test result at large venues. MPs will also vote on whether healthcare workers should have to prove they have been vaccinated in order to remain in their posts. All four measures are expected to pass, but the government is likely to have to rely heavily on Labour support. According to an official readout of the cabinet meeting, the chief medical officer for England, Chris Whitty, warned ministers to expect a “significant increase” in hospitalisations, with cases doubling every two to three days. Whitty said it was too early to say whether cases in South Africa may have plateaued or peaked, as some reports have suggested, and there was not yet reliable evidence about the severity of the variant. Johnson told his ministers there would be a “huge spike” in cases, with the UK Health Security Agency suggesting there may have been as many as 200,000 Omicron cases on Monday alone. The government is working with Royal Mail to free up more delivery slots to keep up with public demand for lateral flow tests. While the plan B measures have infuriated some Tory backbenchers, with as many as 70 expected to abstain or vote against the government, some experts believe tougher curbs, such as hospitality closures, may yet be necessary. Asked whether ministers could take more stringent measures, the prime minister’s official spokesperson said: “We need to learn more about this variant, on things like severity, before we decide what, if any, action is required in the future.” The prime minister and the health secretary have been ringing round potential Tory rebels in an attempt to minimise the scale of the revolt in Tuesday’s votes. Conservative backbenchers have been particularly exercised about the new requirement to show a “vaccine passport” to enter large venues such as nightclubs. The government has changed the proposal to include the ability to show a negative lateral flow test, in an attempt to placate potential rebels. One parliamentary private secretary who had been deemed at risk of resigning rather than support the measures said on Tuesday he had been won over. Danny Kruger said he had been reassured by Johnson and Javid that the measures would mean that “there will never be compulsory vaccination for any citizen, or vaccination as a condition of employment for anyone except health and care workers, and that there will never be vaccine passports, as opposed to the ‘Covid passports’ that include a lateral flow test”.In rugby the shiny and the new can often hog the limelight and a dank Sunday in Coventry was a prime example. By the end of their 35-14 win over Wasps, a Covid-depleted Munster had introduced a dozen debutants, several of them gleaming ruby-bright on their first big outings for their province. Wherever their careers now take them, they will always be able to amuse their grandkids with the unlikely tale of where it all started. Beneath the “miracle” headlines, though, it was not all about fresh-faced students and precocious youth. Before the game had even started there was a telling snapshot as Peter O’Mahony led his eclectic red army on a half-lap of the field, deliberately jogging past Munster’s fans en route back to the away dressing room. As he passed us the skipper’s jaw was already visibly clenched in defiance. Technically it was a home game for Wasps but it did not feel like it. Not long into the contest there was another highly significant moment. Thomas Young, the perennially excellent Wasps flanker, burst clear and looked to have left the cover, O’Mahony included, in his wake. The Irish flanker has many physical attributes but even he would admit to being slightly more buffalo than antelope. Unless, that is, the pride and honour of his beloved province are at stake. Finding an extra gear from somewhere he improbably dragged down Young in the left corner and set the tone for much of what followed. Technically O’Mahony is “only” in his 33rd year but it was still a victory for old-ish battle-scarred warhorses everywhere. There are not millions of back-rowers born in the 1980s still cutting it in the modern professional game but the indefatigable Munster spirit, previously characterised by Anthony Foley, Mick Galwey, Peter Clohessy and Moss Keane, clearly lives on. It should be mentioned at this point that O’Mahony, who captained the Lions in the first Test against the All Blacks in 2017, is no saint. A couple of subsequent clear-outs were not pretty and he was also forced to apologise on Monday to those offended by a slightly overenthusiastic pre-final video message to UL Bohemians Under-15s, in which he advised them to stick it up Garryowen. In some ways, though, all this underlines precisely how and why he was able to make that remarkable tackle on Young. Rugby obsession still oozes from him, for better or worse. Up in the commentary box was another former Munster legend, Donncha O’Callaghan, who played until he was 39. The former Test lock delivered a splendid line about how it really feels to be a kid forward stepping up to the men’s game. Getting up from your first scrum and setting wearily off towards the next breakdown, he recalled, “feels like you’re wearing wellies”. Imagine strapping on a pair of those gumboots day-in, day-out for over a decade as increasingly younger teammates make increasingly disrespectful noises about your mobility. Mind over matter, indeed. And right there is a good reason, every now and then, to venerate experience and gnarled rugby wisdom as much as we do oval-shaped beauty and youth. This is not to condone O’Mahony’s occasional excesses, most obviously his three-game ban for an ugly challenge on Wales’ Tomas Francis in the last Six Nations, but young players will also tell you the life lessons picked up from players like him are hugely formative. On the same field as O’Mahony on Sunday, for example, was the 38-year-old Jimmy Gopperth, an enduring example for any youngster. Still going strong for Leinster and Ireland at 36, Johnny Sexton remains as competitive as anyone still togging out. Just this week arrived word from Italy that Sergio Parisse, now 38, wants to have one last hurrah in the 2022 Six Nations. There seems to be no vaccine available to combat their inexhaustible passion. They all have a long way to go to catch Mark Bright, the veteran No 8 who captained Richmond against Ealing Trailfinders in the English championship at the weekend at the age of 43. And even Bright must keep batting on a while yet to catch up with Graham Dawe (Plymouth Albion, 51), Maama Molitika (Ampthill, 45) and Dave Hilton (Bristol, 44) in the longevity stakes in the English game’s second tier. In every case, though, it is their unflinching commitment that counts for more than such tiny details as age or career length. Munster also had several other thirtysomethings on the pitch against Wasps in the form of Keith Earls, Conor Murray, Andrew Conway and Damian de Allende, a World Cup winner with South Africa, and all that attitude seemed to percolate straight into the minds and bodies of their younger teammates. As a consequence, anything is now once again possible in the minds of Munster’s brave and the faithful. Covid permitting, Castres’s visit to Thomond Park this Saturday is once more a prospect to be excited about, rather than fear. For all the individual brilliance – and how stunningly good they were – of Toulouse’s Antoine Dupont, the deserved world player of the year, and Racing 92’s Finn Russell, the rugby folk of Limerick and Cork tend to favour the intense collective joy that only team sport can generate.To repeat, O’Mahony is no angel but his unquenchable warrior spirit remains a fundamental part of rugby’s DNA. The game would be significantly poorer without his like. • This is an extract from our rugby union email, the Breakdown. To subscribe and receive the full email, just visit this page and follow the instructions.A survivor of the Miami Showband massacre during the Troubles in Northern Ireland has hit out against the “lies” of the British government as he and other victims of the atrocity agreed to £1.5m in damages over suspected state collusion with loyalist terrorists. Three members of the Miami Showband were killed by loyalists in a bomb and gun attack when their bus was stopped near Newry in 1975 as they travelled back to Dublin from a gig. Stephen Travers, who was injured in the attack, said he was convinced he would have won his civil case against the Ministry of Defence and the police showing there had been collaboration between the killers and serving soldiers. He said he agreed to settle because of a plan by the British government to bar all prosecutions relating to killings by soldiers and police during the Troubles. “The threat of the current British government to shut down all cases with the command paper set out in July threatening to dispense with justice rather than to dispense justice was a factor I had to take into consideration,” he told Newstalk’s Pat Kenny Show in Dublin on Tuesday. Legislation proposing an amnesty for all state agents involved in killings during the Troubles is to be tabled in January on the grounds that it serves no one to prosecute ageing soldiers and police involved in crimes 40 years or more ago. “Our case proves that it is not easy to get into court. The argument that they are vexatious claims being taken against the British government … is a complete lie.” “It took us 10 years to get them kicking and screaming into court. So all this is completely false,” he added. The Miami Showband were one of Ireland’s most famous showbands at the time, and were targeted after they stopped at a fake army patrol made up of Ulster Defence Regiment (UDR) soldiers and Ulster Volunteer Force (UVF) members. Band members were forced to line up at the side of the road while attempts were made to hide a bomb on the tour bus. The device exploded prematurely, killing some of the would-be bombers. Their accomplices then opened fire on the band, murdering the lead singer, Fran O’Toole, the guitarist Tony Geraghty and the trumpeter Brian McCoy. Two other band members, Des McAlea and Travers, were injured but survived. A report by the Historical Enquiries Team into the incident known as the Miami Showband massacre, raised concerns over collusion by a Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC) special branch agent. It found that the notorious UVF boss Robin “The Jackal” Jackson, a one-time UDR member who died in 1998, had been linked to one of the murder weapons by fingerprints. Jackson, a suspected RUC special branch agent linked to scores of murders, claimed in police interviews he had been tipped off by a senior police officer to lie low after the killings. He went on trial charged with possession of a silencer attached to a pistol used in the murders but was subsequently acquitted. Two serving members of the UDR were eventually convicted for their part in the attack. The legal actions, which sought damages for assault, trespass, conspiracy to injure, negligence, and misfeasance in public office, were settled at the Belfast high court on Monday, though there was no admission of liability. Travers will receive £425,000 in damages, while McAlea will receive £325,000. The personal representatives of Fran O’Toole and Brian McCoy are to receive £375,000 and £325,000 respectively. All four plaintiffs were awarded legal costs. A PSNI spokesperson said: “Out of respect for those involved, we will not publicly discuss or comment on the specifics of the case.” A government spokesperson said: “The MOD has reached settlements, without legal liability, with four claimants from the attack on the Miami Showband in 1975”.Microbes in oceans and soils across the globe are evolving to eat plastic, according to a study. The research scanned more than 200m genes found in DNA samples taken from the environment and found 30,000 different enzymes that could degrade 10 different types of plastic. The study is the first large-scale global assessment of the plastic-degrading potential of bacteria and found that one in four of the organisms analysed carried a suitable enzyme. The researchers found that the number and type of enzymes they discovered matched the amount and type of plastic pollution in different locations. The results “provide evidence of a measurable effect of plastic pollution on the global microbial ecology”, the scientists said. Millions of tonnes of plastic are dumped in the environment every year, and the pollution now pervades the planet, from the summit of Mount Everest to the deepest oceans. Reducing the amount of plastic used is vital, as is the proper collection and treatment of waste. But many plastics are currently hard to degrade and recycle. Using enzymes to rapidly break down plastics into their building blocks would enable new products to be made from old ones, cutting the need for virgin plastic production. The new research provides many new enzymes to be investigated and adapted for industrial use. “We found multiple lines of evidence supporting the fact that the global microbiome’s plastic-degrading potential correlates strongly with measurements of environmental plastic pollution – a significant demonstration of how the environment is responding to the pressures we are placing on it,” said Prof Aleksej Zelezniak, at Chalmers University of Technology in Sweden. Jan Zrimec, also at Chalmers University, said: “We did not expect to find such a large number of enzymes across so many different microbes and environmental habitats. This is a surprising discovery that really illustrates the scale of the issue.” The explosion of plastic production in the past 70 years, from 2m tonnes to 380m tonnes a year, had given microbes time to evolve to deal with plastic, the researchers said. The study, published in the journal mBio, started by compiling a dataset of 95 microbial enzymes already known to degrade plastic, often found in bacteria in rubbish dumps and similar places rife with plastic. The team then looked for similar enzymes in environmental DNA samples taken by other researchers from 236 different locations around the world. Importantly, the researchers ruled out potential false positives by comparing the enzymes initially identified with enzymes from the human gut, which is not known to have any plastic-degrading enzymes. About 12,000 of the new enzymes were found in ocean samples, taken at 67 locations and at three different depths. The results showed consistently higher levels of degrading enzymes at deeper levels, matching the higher levels of plastic pollution known to exist at lower depths. The soil samples were taken from 169 locations in 38 countries and 11 different habitats and contained 18,000 plastic-degrading enzymes. Soils are known to contain more plastics with phthalate additives than the oceans and the researchers found more enzymes that attack these chemicals in the land samples. Nearly 60% of the new enzymes did not fit into any known enzyme classes, the scientists said, suggesting these molecules degrade plastics in ways that were previously unknown. “The next step would be to test the most promising enzyme candidates in the lab to closely investigate their properties and the rate of plastic degradation they can achieve,” said Zelezniak. “From there you could engineer microbial communities with targeted degrading functions for specific polymer types.” The first bug that eats plastic was discovered in a Japanese waste dump in 2016. Scientists then tweaked it in 2018 to try to learn more about how it evolved, but inadvertently created an enzyme that was even better at breaking down plastic bottles. Further tweaks in 2020 increased the speed of degradation sixfold. Another mutant enzyme was created in 2020 by the company Carbios that breaks down plastic bottles for recycling in hours. German scientists have also discovered a bacterium that feeds on the toxic plastic polyurethane, which is usually dumped in landfills. Last week, scientists revealed that the levels of microplastics known to be eaten by people via their food caused damage to human cells in the laboratory. • This article was amended on 27 January 2022. The study in question was published by the journal mBio, not Microbial Ecology as an earlier version said.What’s a good celebratory meal to make for friends that isn’t a Christmas dinner? Ben, Manchester While Christmas dinner doesn’t necessarily mean a bird, roasties and a vat of gravy, Ben is wise not to overdo things before the big day. “Christmas can be meat-heavy, so I’d suggest a whole baked fish in a salt crust,” says Dan Smith, chef-patron of the Fordwich Arms in Kent. “It’s so simple, but a real centrepiece.” Combine salt and egg whites – “about 500g salt to four egg whites” – add herbs, if you like, and mix to a paste: “Not too loose, or it will fall off the fish.” Lay some of the mix on a tray, pop a turbot or trout in the middle, then cover with the rest of the salt crust and bake at 180C for 45 minutes, until crisp: “Serve with jerusalem artichokes roasted with garlic and herbs.” Alternatively, your fish could get stuffed. “Take a large fillet of meaty white fish, or salmon or trout, and spoon over a classic stuffing,” says Rick Toogood, co-owner of Prawn on the Lawn in Padstow, Cornwall, and London. “Sage and onion would be perfect.” Lay a second fillet on top, drizzle with olive oil and roast at 180C. Once it’s in the oven, roughly chop some soft herbs (parsley, oregano, tarragon), mix with white-wine vinegar, capers and olive oil, then “spoon this over the cooked fish to freshen it up and add a pop of festive colour”. You could also sprinkle over some chopped roasted chestnuts or walnuts for crunch. If you want to get ahead, meanwhile, Ed Smith, author of Crave, suggests “a celebratory suet crust pie that you can stick in the oven and ignore for an hour while you chat”. What you put in said pie depends, of course, on what you fancy, but Smith recommends a game bird filling or berkswell cheese and ham. “You’ll have already made some root vegetable mash that can be warmed up, and sauteed some greens with garlic and butter to go alongside. It’s pretty much no-hassle, but it’s definitely not something people will expect you to pull out of your hat midweek.” Max Rocha, chef-owner of Cafe Cecilia in east London, also looks to ham: “It’s the Irish in me.” He puts a ham hock in a pan with water and boils until the foam rises to the surface. “Drain, refresh in clean water, add cider and onions, and braise until the bone falls out.” Once cool, pick off chunks of meat and reserve the liquid. “Soak some butter beans overnight, then, on the day, cook them with half a garlic head, chilli, sage and a little water.” Season with salt and finish with good oil. “To turn this into a star dish, put the beans in a pot with a little of their cooking liquor and some ham stock, then fold through cabbage blanched in ham liquor.” Warm the ham in a little stock – “You don’t want it too wet” – then spoon over the beans and top with garlicky thyme breadcrumbs. If you’ve got vegetarians over, Rocha’s beans have got your back, too: “Poach some cabbage in the bean liquor and roast some squash, then serve on the beans topped with breadcrumbs and maybe a pesto.” Either way, eat with bitter leaves and homemade brown bread. “Or buy a loaf, warm it in the oven and pretend you made it.” Mum’s the word. • Got a culinary dilemma? Email feast@theguardian.com.LGBTQ+ trust and confidence in the police has been hammered by the inquest verdict on the serial killings committed by Stephen Port. It found that police errors “probably” contributed to the deaths of three young gay men. Within the LGBTQ+ community there is shock, anger and a sense of betrayal by the Metropolitan police, especially given the evidence of homophobic responses by some officers involved in the Port investigation. Many of us believe they should face disciplinary action and that the Met must now acknowledge its institutional homophobia – and fix it. Until that happens, police in uniform should be barred from Pride parades. Right now, a frank official appraisal of what the Met got wrong and an action plan to put it right seem a long way off. Just yesterday in parliament MPs called for an inquiry into police failures to stop Port and into whether homophobia was a factor in the bungled investigations. But the policing minister, Kit Malthouse, turned down that request. The way the police botched their inquiries and made a series of biased and prejudiced assumptions about gay men has parallels with their behaviour in the Stephen Lawrence case, which led to Sir William Macpherson’s landmark report declaring the police to be institutionally racist. A similar charge of institutional homophobia can be applied to the way the police mishandled the Port case and previous gay serial killings. Yet the Met ignores the evidence and rejects any allegation that it is institutionally homophobic. Deputy assistant commissioner Stuart Cundy admitted at the inquest that there had been a “serious failure of policing”, but said lessons had been learned: the Met has been reorganised to ensure more “resilience” in its investigations. We’ve heard similar assurances before. Mistakes in the Stephen Port case echo previous failings by officers after the multiple murders of gay men by Dennis Nilsen in the 1970s, Michael Lupo in the 1980s and Colin Ireland in the 1990s. In each of these three cases, the Met assured the LGBTQ+ community that they had learned from their errors and that substandard investigations would not be repeated. But then came the Port murders, with police investigators who were, according the inquest evidence, incompetent, negligent and unprofessional. I believe some were also homophobic. Gay people who expressed concerns that the deaths might have been murders was ignored, dismissed and treated with contempt by the police. Contradicting Met pledges after previous killings of gay men, for over a year officers made no public appeals for help and gave no warnings to the LGBTQ+ community. There was no liaison with LGBTQ+ organisations or the gay press. When Pink News and the gay hate crime charity, Galop UK, contacted the police in late 2014, after the third murder, they were told that the deaths were not related and there was no foul play or serial killer. The police reject the accusation of homophobia. But look at the way they treated the gay partners, ex-lovers and friends of the murdered men. Ricky Waumsley, the partner of murder victim Daniel Whitworth for four years, was excluded from police discussions with the insulting putdown: “You are not next of kin.” Ricky says he was treated this way because “we were a gay unmarried couple”. Thierry Amodio, Gabriel Kovari’s ex-partner of three years, repeatedly contacted the police. But officers never took a statement. Instead, they disparaged his inquiries as “fishing for information.” In fact, Amodio had information that would have led police to Port and probably could have prevented his third and fourth murders. Despite all the furore, none of the officers accused of homophobia and investigative failings have been disciplined. Indeed, all but one of the 17 officers who were the subject of an inquiry by the Independent Office for Police Conduct (IOPC) were uncooperative and replied with “no comment” when questioned. The upshot was that not a single officer was referred for misconduct charges by the IOPC. Instead, five of the criticised officers have been rewarded with promotion and a pay rise. So what should happen next? Given the inquest verdict, I hope the IOPC will reopen the case and reconsider whether misconduct charges should be pursued against some of the officers. If found guilty, at the very least they should be demoted, have their pay docked and be required to participate in LGBT+ awareness education and crime investigation retraining. While there are plenty of good officers, police understanding of LGBTQ+ issues and liaison with communities is still patchy. That’s why the LGBT+ Independent Advisory Group to the Met and the National LGBT+ Police Network need to be empowered with better resources, direct access to Met policymaking and participation from the outset in murder inquiries involving LGBTQ+ victims. The buck stops with the Met commissioner, Cressida Dick. She has expressed regrets but denied that her force is institutionally homophobic and initiated no action against the officers found by the IOPC to have conducted substandard investigations. No wonder some people are calling for her resignation. LGBTQ+ confidence in her leadership is at rock bottom. It is unlikely to revive until she has a change of heart. • Peter Tatchell is a human rights campaigner, a member of the gay rights group OutRage! and the left wing of the Green party. He is also director of the Peter Tatchell Foundation, a human rights organisationName: The semi-lucid dream trick. Age: At least 90 years old. Appearance: The no-fail way to boost your creativity. You have my interest. In that case, allow me to introduce you to something called interrupted hypnagogia. It’s when you deliberately wake yourself up before you fall into a state of deep sleep. No thanks. Why not? Don’t you want to enter a mental state proselytised by some of history’s greatest thinkers? Not if it stops me from sleeping properly. OK, maybe I’m not explaining it very well. A study conducted by the Paris Brain Institute has just revealed that people are better able to creatively solve problems if they wake up during sleep stage N1. N1? What’s that? It’s the stage of sleep before you enter rapid eye movement (REM), characterised by vivid, semi-lucid mind-wandering. The rational part of your brain becomes inhibited during N1, leaving the rest of it to form new and unexpected associations. You mentioned history’s greatest thinkers. I did. Salvador Dalí was a big proponent of this method. Thomas Edison, too. I don’t want to be like Edison. Didn’t he compulsively hijack the ideas of others? Well, in his defence, he was probably very tired. Fine. If I want to boost my creativity, what should I do? Have a nap with a bottle in your hand. As you drift off, your hands will relax, and the sound of the bottle hitting the floor will wake you up. Hopefully the hypnagogia will have given you a new and creative way of thinking. Will it also give me a new and creative way of cleaning all this broken glass off the floor? Maybe hypnagogia isn’t for you. But that’s OK! There are other ways to think creatively. Like what? You could try to create elaborate thought experiments to better conceptualise the problem at hand. It’s what the ancient Greeks did. Not for me. Dr Peter Lovatt mentions in his book The Dance Cure that spontaneous dance can enhance creative thinking and problem-solving. Absolutely not. Well, there has to be something. Creativity isn’t an infinite well. Sometimes you need to shake yourself out of set ways of thinking, and that’s what all of these methods have in common. … Hello? Are you still here? Have you fallen asleep? Zzz … You have, haven’t you? WAKE UP! I can see everything so clearly now. See? It works. Do say: “Waking up on the brink of deep sleep can unleash incredible creativity.” Don’t say: “Yeah, but think of the eye bags you’ll get.”Have you ever noticed how gigantic my jaw is? Freakishly angular: as if I had swallowed a rhombus. I think it’s quite dashing, but it seems to bother strangers on Twitter, who regularly send me jabs about my jaw. These, by the way, are the polite strangers. Most of the online messages I get are rather more explicit, albeit unimaginatively so. “You should have been aborted”; “die quicker, please”; rape threats; the usual insult that rhymes with Jeremy Hunt. Mostly it’s a manageable drip-drip-drip of nastiness. Some days, however, the volume of online abuse will be quite overwhelming, unbearable even, and I’ll have to temporarily deactivate my Twitter account. I’m not trying to throw myself a pity party. What is most depressing about my experience is just how common it is. More than a third of women, and almost half of younger women worldwide, have experienced abuse online, according to a 2021 study from the Economist Intelligence Unit. Social networks are constantly pledging to do something about the misogynistic hellholes they have created but clearly too busy selling our data to bother spending any time on user safety. In news that will shock nobody, a new analysis by Amnesty International has found that, despite repeated calls to improve the platform, Twitter is falling short on its promises to protect women and marginalised groups from online abuse. What is more, it seems that women have given up hoping Twitter will ever do anything. Amnesty found that 40% of women who use the platform more than once a day experience abuse and many don’t bother reporting it to the network. According to the survey, 100% of the women who use the platform numerous times a week and who didn’t report abuse said doing so was “not worth the effort.” Since nothing ever gets done, why waste your time? Online abuse has become shockingly normalised. Yes, there is outrage about it but there is also apathy: a sense that this is just what the internet is like. If you are a woman of colour who has the temerity to express an opinion online, then you know that vicious trolling is par for the course and you are just expected to get on with it. If you are a female journalist or politician – if you are anyone whose job means they have a public profile – then you are expected to put up with vile abuse every single day. That is simply the price you pay for having a voice. There have been times recently where I’ve wondered whether all the abuse is worth it. I’ve thought about giving up on writing and going back to a nice stable job outside the media where I don’t have to deal with daily viciousness, or worry about my safety. And that, of course, is the point of the online abuse – trolls don’t want to hurt your feelings, they want to shut you up. They want young women to look at the harassment that comes with having a platform and say, no thanks, not for me. They want people to look at the price you pay for talking about subjects such as racism and sexism and decide it’s better to keep quiet. I can acknowledge that ridding the internet of nastiness isn’t something you can do overnight. But tech companies can do a hell of a lot more about it than they are doing now. The problem is, they don’t want to. Their PR departments will spout a lot of guff about how concerned they are about user safety, but they never put their money where their mouth is. Their business models, after all, depend on engagement: that is the only thing they prioritise. Tech bros have spent years feeding the trolls and that toxicity has seeped into every part of society. We shouldn’t normalise this nastiness. If we can send people to Mars, surely we can make the internet a little less misogynistic? • Arwa Mahdawi is a Guardian columnistJessie Fleming played 433 minutes and made three starts in the Women’s Super League last season but rocked back into the Chelsea dressing room this summer with a gold Olympic medal. She was no bit-part player for Canada at Tokyo 2020 either, scoring four penalties in the knockout stage, including two in the final against Sweden and in a 1-0 win over the US in the semi-finals, Canada having not beaten their neighbours, the World Cup holders, in 20 years. Fleming has stood out for so long that these feats are not in the least surprising. Few players make their international debut at 15 and not many 23-year-olds have 94 caps four months into their second season as a professional. This season Fleming has already played nine minutes more than in the 2020-21 WSL campaign, starting five games and scoring three goals, and has been named as the Barclays player of the month for November. “It’s definitely been a busy time,” the attacking midfielder says. Busy is an understatement. Fleming is chatting on her day off, 12 hours after Chelsea were held 0-0 by Juventus at Kingsmeadow and four days after they hammered Arsenal 3-0 in the FA Cup final at Wembley. That game was cathartic in many ways, Arsenal having beaten Chelsea in the opening game. “The rivalry between our two clubs is quite fierce,” says Fleming. “They’ve been sat at the top of the league for most of the season and I think that’s kind of been in the back of our minds, wanting to be in that position. When you look at our performance it was dominant in a lot of ways and a lot of it just had to do with our work rate and players wanting to win the ball and doubling up on their players and just desire and passion from our entire group.” Dominant is another understatement. Chelsea bulldozed Arsenal, and Fleming slotted seamlessly into the front three alongside Fran Kirby and Sam Kerr, with Pernille Harder being eased back from injury. “I definitely feel like I’ve improved since coming here,” Fleming says. “Just the quality every day in training, the physicality and the quality in the league have definitely helped me improve. I’d say one big focus area or thing that I’ve been working on with our coaches is my attacking side of the game and being able to make quicker decisions, act more decisively in the attack and create more chances for the team. And then being able to deal with the physicality and navigate it, learning how to get out of certain situations and maybe be a bit smarter with how I use my body in some of those tighter pockets.” Before the final, played on the 100th anniversary of when the Football Association banned women’s football from all affiliated grounds, Chelsea’s manager, Emma Hayes, “read us an excerpt,” says Fleming. “It was a complaint that a citizen had placed to the FA talking about why women shouldn’t be allowed to play football. That was pretty powerful.” Hayes is a master at instilling belief. Fleming credits the way Hayes talks about the group and the language used as contributing to that. “But a lot of it also has to do with history and experience. We’ve won in the past and we know we can win again. We know we’re good enough to beat Arsenal because we’ve done it before and a lot of us felt like that game that we’d lost at the Emirates early in the season was something that kind of slipped away from us and people were definitely really disappointed.” Hayes also achieves what seems like an innate belief by putting lots of leaders on the pitch and empowering players to make decisions. “Something that’s special about our group is just how easily we can adapt to a change of formation or if something’s not working well, on the game,” says Fleming. “We have the leaders and the minds on the team to be able to adapt and not let it throw off our entire gameplan. Whether it’s players having to slightly adjust their position or that sort of thing, just all around, it’s a massive weapon.” Hayes is under pressure to give players minutes – a problem she both loves and hates – and Fleming is showing she deserves time on the pitch. After Olympic gold and a strong start to the season have her expectations changed? “Maybe they’ve changed a little bit,” says Fleming. “But I don’t really like to put a ton of pressure on myself in terms of playing. I’ve come to trust Emma’s decision making. I think she knows how to win games and I also have to appreciate the talent that is in our squad. When you look at Fran and Sam and Pernille, sometimes it’s hard to argue against them not playing. “For me, coming to Chelsea, the biggest thing I wanted was to be in a challenging environment and to improve, and I feel like I’m doing that. So it’s hard for me not to be happy. It is nice to be able to tangibly see some of that improvement but I also see a lot of the things that I still need to work on. I just want to get better and then the playing time, and maybe some of the trust from Emma, will continue to come.” Jessie Fleming is the Barclays WSL player of the month for November. Read our interview with October’s player of the month, Katie McCabe, here.More than 50 Nobel laureates have signed an open letter calling for all countries to cut their military spending by 2% a year for the next five years, and put half the saved money in a UN fund to combat pandemics, the climate crisis, and extreme poverty. Coordinated by the Italian physicist Carlo Rovelli, the letter is supported by a large group of scientists and mathematicians including Sir Roger Penrose, and is published at a time when rising global tensions have led to a steady increase in arms budgets. “Individual governments are under pressure to increase military spending because others do so,” the signatories say in support of the newly launched Peace Dividend campaign. “The feedback mechanism sustains a spiralling arms race – a colossal waste of resources that could be used far more wisely.” The high-profile group says the plan amounts to a “simple, concrete proposal for humankind”, although there is no realistic prospect that military spending cuts will be enacted by large or medium-sized governments, or that any sums saved would be handed over to the UN and its agencies. Total military spending amounted to $1,981bn (£1,496bn) last year, an increase of 2.6% according to the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute. The five biggest spenders were the US ($778bn), China ($252bn), India ($72.9bn), Russia ($61.7bn) and the UK ($59.2bn) – all of whom increased their budgets in 2020. Growing tensions between Russia and the west over situations such as Ukraine and between China and the US and its Pacific allies over Taiwan have helped contribute to rising spending, while in recent years some non-proliferation treaties such as the INF agreement, which kept nuclear missiles out of Europe, have been allowed to lapse. The letter’s signatories argue that arms races can lead to “deadly and destructive conflicts” and add: “We have a simple proposal for humankind: the governments of all UN member-states negotiate a joint reduction of their military expenditure by 2% every year for five years.” Other supporters of the letter include the Tibetan spiritual leader the Dalai Lama, who is a past winner of the Nobel peace prize, as well as the biologist and Cambridge University professor Sir Venki Ramakrishnan and the American molecular biologist Carol Greider. They call on the world’s political leaders to allow “half of the resources freed up by this agreement” to be allocated to “a global fund, under UN supervision, to address humanity’s grave common problems: pandemics, climate change, and extreme poverty”. Such a fund, they claim, could amount to $1tn by 2030. • This article was amended on 16 December 2021. We misspelled Dalai Lama as “Dalai Llama” in an earlier version.Less than a week into his tenure, Germany’s new chancellor, Olaf Scholz, is already reminding the rest of the world of one of his rarer political talents: an ability to frustrate journalists with answers so vague and formulaic they once earned him the nickname “Scholz-o-matic”. Social Democrat Scholz, who will govern in a “traffic light” coalition with the Green party and the liberal Free Democratic party, on Sunday left his Polish counterpart, Mateusz Morawiecki, none the wiser about his plans for the controversial Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline between Russia and Germany, which Poland has urged its western neighbour to scrap. At a joint press conference with the Polish prime minister, Germany’s ninth chancellor skirted the subject by projecting into the future: within 25 years, “which is not that far”, he said, Germany would no longer use gas as an energy resource anyway. The previous day, when asked after a meeting with Emmanuel Macron how the two European nations would react if Russia were to invade Ukraine, and whether he was ready to review the Maastricht criteria on inflation, the French president took almost three minutes to answer the questions at length. Scholz, meanwhile, responded with three generic statements: “One thing is very clear right now: we have to cooperate, we have to act, and put effort into this in Europe. But that requires that our borders hold firm, and we are working to de-escalate conflict. And we want to make sure that the future is open to everyone.” Scholz had already given the foreign press a flavour of his trademark rhetorical manoeuvre when presenting his left-liberal government’s coalition treaty earlier this month. Asked by a journalist from the Dutch newspaper De Telegraaf to comment on whether he felt responsible for the riots and lootings after the 2017 G20 in Hamburg, where Scholz was mayor at the time, he ignored the question entirely and said: “We agreed during coalition talks to do everything to ensure that domestic security is guaranteed. Police will receive all the support it needs to make sure crime won’t have a chance in Germany.” “The Scholzomat is back,” said the Welt am Sonntag journalist Dagmar Rosenfeld, reviewing clips of Scholz’s first press conferences on German television on Sunday night. The nickname was coined by the weekly broadsheet Die Zeit in 2003, when Scholz was general secretary of the Social Democratic party (SPD) under the then chancellor Gerhard Schröder and tended to defend his party’s line by repeating the same set of phrases. “General secretaries quickly learn to formulate their answers in the vaguest way possible, and delete the words ‘yes’ and ‘no’ from their vocabulary,” said Lars Haider in Olaf Scholz: The Path to Power, the first biography of the new chancellor, published this week. Haider, the editor of Hamburg’s local newspaper Hamburger Abendblatt, recalls in his book how the politician later adapted his strategy in dealings with the press, sometimes giving answers so monosyllabic that the interviewer simply ran out of questions. The purpose, however, remained the same. “As a rule questions are not answered directly, be it only not to give interviewers the impressions that they can determine the subject of the conversation,” Haider wrote. As such, Scholz’s rhetorical habits are not a far cry from those of his predecessor Angela Merkel’s, whose speeches were often deliberately flat and formulaic, as to not cause unintended diplomatic disturbances. “Every sentence a politician says has to be said in a way that is understandable by everyone, even those who aren’t present,” Scholz told Haider in one interview. “You can’t rely on the context to be conveyed in which the sentence is said.” The German press this week conceded Scholz’s robot-like ways had probably done his career more good than bad. “But it does lay bare a strange understanding of journalism,” said Der Spiegel’s Markus Feldenkirchen. “And especially a chancellor should aim higher.”The British Museum has recorded more than 50,000 archaeological finds, of which 1,000 were treasure, made by members of the general public in 2020. Here are some of the highlights. A record-breaking pendant The millionth record logged on the Portable Antiquities Scheme (PAS) database was a copper alloy medieval harness pendant found in Binbrook, Lincolnshire. A seal belonging to a woman of status An unusual silver seal matrix dating to the early 13th century inscribed in Latin with the name Matilda de Cornhill was found at Hollingbourne, Kent. It depicts a kneeling female figure, assumed to be a representation of Matilda herself, praying to the enthroned virgin and child, a well-known motif of the medieval period. The find is unusual because seal matrices from this period were more commonly owned by men, and were usually made of copper alloy or lead alloy, leading archaeologists to suspect that Matilda was a person of status in her own right. The owner may be Maud de Cornhill, the steward of St Augustine’s Abbey, Canterbury, whose husband was Reginald de Cornhill – active 1189–1215 – the high sheriff of Kent and constable of Rochester Castle. Rare runes A rare and mysterious early medieval gold pendant with a rare runic inscription was found in the north of England. The pendant, in the form of a cross, dates to about AD700-900 and was found near Berwick-upon-Tweed, Northumberland. Runic inscriptions often provide the name of a person associated with the object, such as its maker or owner. This one can be translated as Eadruf, suspected to be a previously unknown name, potentially making it a new addition to recorded early medieval names. A Roman hoard A hoard of Roman coins was found in three pots at Wickwar, Gloucestershire, by the metal detectorists Mark Lovell and Mark Wilcox. They contacted the British Museum, which block-lifted the hoard to keep it intact and brought to labs where it was X-rayed and carefully micro-excavated. Conservation work revealed more than 6,500 coins that dated to the 4th century AD, which seem to have been put in the ground at different times. During this period, Romans commonly buried hoards for safekeeping, making this potentially a previously unknown Roman site. Roman piping In September 2020, Steven Scott and David Taylor were metal detecting at Rudston, east Yorkshire, when they found an unusual shallow cylindrical lead object about 30cm deep. Subsequent archaeological excavation revealed the object had been placed in a circular pit cut into chalk subsoil beside a pre-existing wall. They found pottery shards, burnt animal bones and sandstone quern fragments around the container, which is thought to be the base of a Roman cistern. It is the first to be found in Yorkshire and has an unusual form, possibly used to collect water running from the roof of a building to supply water to the home.A man who killed one of the UK’s wealthiest landowners and repeatedly stabbed his own mother told a psychiatrist that lockdown was a “full frontal” attack on his mental health, a court has heard. Thomas Schreiber said his mental health had deteriorated in the weeks before the knife attack on Sir Richard Sutton and Anne Schreiber because he was trapped living with the couple in their Dorset mansion. Giving evidence at Schreiber’s trial, the psychiatrist Dr Timothy Rogers said he believed the defendant had a history of major depressive disorder and alcohol misuse. It was also possible he may have had attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), which can lead to impulsive actions. The psychiatrist said the defendant had struggled with low self-esteem since he was a teenager and was deeply affected by the “complete hell” of his parents’ separation. He could not come to terms with his mother setting up home with Sutton and felt his father, David, had been badly treated by the couple. Rogers said that because of the pandemic, pastimes he had used to maintain his wellbeing such as visiting art galleries or seeing friends were cut off and he was “locked into” an annexe at Sutton’s mansion “in the midst of all these family relationship problems”. The psychiatrist said: “He told me his mental health received a full frontal attack. He recalls feeling afraid to go downstairs. Things became mind-numbing. During lockdown he struggled with a number of depressive thoughts including feeling worthless, that his feelings didn’t matter, that everyone hated him.” Schreiber has told the jury at Winchester crown court that he snapped on the eighth anniversary of the death of his father, who had problems with alcohol. He claimed that just before the attack he was having a drink to mark the anniversary and was provoked by his mother supposedly telling him: “You’re drunk just like your father.” The defendant said a voice in his head shouted: “Attack, attack, attack.” Schreiber, 35, has admitted killing Sutton, 83, on 7 April but denies his murder and has pleaded not guilty to attempting to murder his mother, 66, who was left paralysed. Rogers said one particular thought that came back to Schreiber during lockdown was: “They don’t care about you, just like the didn’t care about Dad.” Schreiber visited a GP in March – about five weeks before the attack – and was prescribed antidepressants but did not take them. He is believed to have been three times the drink-drive limit at the time of the attack and has said he drank large gin and tonics that day while painting. Rogers said he had a “long history” of “heavy alcohol abuse” and a habit of drinking alone – but did not accept he was an alcoholic. The psychiatrist said he believed Schreiber’s depression could give him a partial defence of diminished responsibility but told the court he did not believe he was suffering from psychosis or experiencing hallucinations. A second psychiatrist, Dr John Sandford, described Schreiber as “a bit of a lost soul”, adding: “He didn’t think Sir Richard liked him, he felt Sir Richard adored his sisters Louisa and Rose but he was viewed as being work-shy and unable to achieve anything.” However, Sandford told the jury he did not believe Schreiber had amental disorder or a severe mental illness. The trial continues.Apple and Google have a “vice-like grip” over people’s mobile phones and their duopoly over the market should be investigated by the proposed new “big tech” regulator, the UK’s competition watchdog has said. The two companies effectively control users’ mobile phone experience in the UK, with Apple’s iOS and Google’s Android operating systems installed on 99.45% of all phones in use in the country. “Apple and Google have developed a vice-like grip over how we use mobile phones and we’re concerned that it’s causing millions of people across the UK to lose out,” said Andrea Coscelli, the chief executive of the Competition and Markets Authority (CMA), which published its interim report investigating the dominance of the tech giants in the UK mobile ecosystem on Tuesday. Once a consumer buys a phone they are essentially wedded to the ecosystem of one of the two companies – Apple’s App Store or Google’s Play Store and their respective web browsers Safari or Chrome. The CMA said the two Silicon Valley giants can control the content phone users can access, “tilt the playing field” towards their own services, and stifle competition by blocking rivals services and pre-installing their own software on devices. “Most people know that Apple and Google are the main players when it comes to choosing a phone,” said Coscelli. “But it can be easy to forget that they set all the rules too – from determining which apps are available on their app stores, to making it difficult for us to switch to alternative browsers on our phones. This control can limit innovation and choice, and lead to higher prices – none of which is good news for users.” The CMA said it was concerned that this was leading to less competition and meaningful choice for customers, who are missing out on the full benefit of new products and services, such as cloud-based gaming offered by firms not supported by Apple or Google. Coscelli said that if a move was made to curb the power of the duopoly and open up more choice and competition in the mobile phone market it should be handled by the Digital Markets Unit (DMU), which is in the process of being set up with a remit to crack down on the behaviour of tech giants. The new DMU, which will be part of the CMA, has been set up in shadow form until the government officially legislates to grant it regulatory powers. The DMU will enforce a code of conduct that the tech giants must follow when dealing with rivals and third parties based on “fair trading, trust and transparency”. The code will affect only those companies deemed to have strategic market status (SMS), although no tech firms have been officially awarded that status yet. “Any intervention must tackle the firms’ substantial market power across the key areas of operating systems, app stores and browsers,” said Coscelli. “We think that the best way to do this is through the Digital Markets Unit when it receives powers from government.” The CMA said that given the scale of Apple and Google they will qualify for SMS and be subject to the DMU’s regulatory overview. The “prioritisation criteria” for a company to be given SMS status is that it earns more than £1bn in UK revenues, or £25bn globally. Apple will make in excess of £82bn in profits this year, while Google made £36bn in profits last year. “We want the UK to remain a place where all tech firms can thrive and this study underlines the importance of ensuring mobile app stores are fair and competitive,” said Chris Philp, the UK government’s tech and digital economy minister. “Our new pro-competition regime will level the playing field between tech giants and smaller businesses and prevent abuses that could curtail growth and innovation. We are grateful for the CMA’s work to date and look forward to the final recommendations.” A spokeswoman for Apple said: “Apple believes in thriving and dynamic markets where innovation can flourish. We face intense competition in every segment in which we operate. We will continue to create new opportunities for developers while protecting our user’s privacy and security.” She added: “Our rules and guidelines are constantly evolving, and we have made many recent changes that benefit developers and consumers alike. We will continue to engage constructively with the UK Competition and Markets Authority as their work on this study progresses.” A Google spokesman said: “Android provides people with more choice than any other mobile platform in deciding which apps and app stores they use. The Android app ecosystem also supports nearly a quarter of a million jobs across thousands of app developer and phone-maker businesses in the UK. We’re committed to building thriving, open platforms that empower consumers and help developers succeed.”Time to wrap up... here’s today’s stories so far: Stocks have made a muted start to trading in New York, as the surge in US producer price inflation fuelled worries about inflation. Technology stocks, which are vulnerable to higher interest rates, are lower, with Microsoft losing 2.7% and Salesforce.com down 2.6%. The tech-focused Nasdaq Composite has fallen 1%, while the Dow Jones industrial average has gained 0.2% after an early dip, led by healthcare chain Walgreens Boots Alliance. Investors are awaiting tomorrow’s monetary policy decision from the Federal Reserve, where policymakers could decide to wind up their stimulus package more quickly, given inflationary worries. Britain’s biggest retailer Tesco has made a new pay offer to trade union Usdaw, following the threat of strike action by distribution centre workers in the run-up to Christmas. Usdaw has announced that it has secured a “new and much improved pay offer from Tesco” and will be balloting members in nine distribution sites from tomorrow. Planned industrial action in the week before Christmas Eve has been suspended pending the ballot result. Joanne McGuinness, Usdaw national officer, says: “After the overwhelming vote in favour of industrial action, Tesco reopened pay negotiations with Usdaw. I am pleased to say that we have been successful in achieving a significantly improved offer and Usdaw is recommending that members accept it in the ballot. “Full details of the offer will be shared from noon on Wednesday, when the ballot opens. Having reached this improved offer, we have withdrawn notice of strike action. “I want to thank our members for their support and determination during the industrial action ballot. This is a clear demonstration of what can be achieved when we collectively stand together.” The dispute began when the Unite union rejected a 4% pay increase, which it called “offensive” as it was below the retail price index inflation rate of 6%. Usdaw then followed, lifting the number of distribution centres facing staff walkouts from 4 to 13. Unite accepted a revised pay offer last week. A Tesco spokesperson said: “We’re pleased to have agreed a pay deal with Usdaw that it recommends to its members. “Colleagues at these centres will no longer be taking industrial action. We look forward to delivering a fantastic Christmas for customers.” Back in the UK, National Express and rival Stagecoach have sealed an all-share deal that will forge a £1.9bn transport operating group. The proposed merger is expected to be completed in late 2022, bringing Stagecoach’s UK local bus operations together with National Express’s intercity coach network. Stagecoach, which shrank back after selling its US operations and being squeezed out of UK rail, will be valued at about £500m, a third of National Express. Its Megabus intercity coach operation will be sold off, to alleviate any competition concerns. The group will be headquartered at National Express’s home in the West Midlands, where it runs most bus services. The combined group will have a 40,000-strong vehicle fleet and employ about 70,000 people. National Express also exited UK rail after selling its last franchise in 2017 but still runs trains in Germany and buses in the US, Canada, Morocco and Spain. Stagecoach was launched by Sir Brian Souter and his sister, Dame Ann Gloag, in 1980. The takeover marks the end of the Souter family’s long interest in the sector, having grown from buying out a small local bus company to one of the main players in Britain’s privatised bus and rail industries. US producers hiked their prices at the fastest rate in at least a decade last month, as supply constraints continued to hit America’s economy. The producer price index for final demand jumped by 9.6% in the 12 months to November, the Labor Department reported. That’s the largest gain since the data was first calculated in November 2010, and follows an 8.8% increase in October. In November alone, PPI rose by 0.8%, after a 0.6% rise in October. Increases in producer prices can be passed onto consumers in the shops, so this could show inflation will remain high for some time (with consumer price inflation at a 39-year high already). Economists polled by Reuters had forecast the PPI would climb by 0.5% on a monthly basis, and by 9.2% year-on-year, so this suggests prices are still hotter than expected. The IMF has also warned that the UK faces more post-Brexit trade problems, when new post-Brexit customs checks are introduced on January 1st. The head of the International Monetary Fund, Kristalina Georgieva, told reporters that: “Trade with the EU has dropped significantly and we expect there will be more impact ahead as the custom checks are going to be introduced in UK in the beginning of next year.” This chimes with a warning from the Institute of Directors yesterday, that nearly a third of British companies that import goods from the EU are “not at all prepared” for full post-Brexit customs checks. The chancellor, Rishi Sunak, should be drawing up contingency plans for a mini-furlough in the event that the Omicron variant forces the government into closing parts of the economy, the International Monetary Fund has said. In its annual health check of the UK, the Washington-based IMF warned the fast-spreading new strain of the Covid-19 virus posed a fresh threat to the economy after what had been a “challenging year”. The IMF said with strong policy support the economy had proved to be resilient, but it stressed a return of some of the measures that prevented mass unemployment and large-scale business failures might soon be needed. The IMF said in its assessment that: “In the event of a virulent Covid-19 wave requiring widespread mandated closures, the authorities should be ready to redeploy a subset of the most successful previous exceptional programmes (such as a furlough scheme and targeted support to the most vulnerable households and small businesses), but with due attention to lessons learned about their design (including tapering and timely sunset),” While praising the UK for its “overall impressive, coordinated and extended policy response”, the IMF said was “clear that Covid-19 and the behavioural changes it has caused will not fade quickly”. The IMF said it expected the UK economy to grow by 6.8% in 2021 and 5% in 2022, but the faster-than-expected recovery would be accompanied by rising inflation. Supply bottlenecks would send the annual inflation rate to about 5.5% by next spring, the IMF said in its Article IV report. “The outlook suggests that growth will remain strong in the near-term, but so too will price pressures.” Time Magazine’s person of the year has given the crypto market another jolt. Dogecoin, the “joke” cryptocurrency favoured by Elon Musk, has surged 17% after Tesla’s CEO tweeted that the electric car maker will begin accepting payments in doge for merchandise, and ‘see how it goes’. The price of dogecoin surged over $0.19 following the tweet, some 16% higher than a day ago. Earlier this week, Musk said that dogecoin worked better than bitcoin as a form of payment, telling Time Magazine that: “Fundamentally, bitcoin is not a good substitute for transactional currency. “Even though it was created as a silly joke, dogecoin is better suited for transactions.” Despite today’s rally, dogecoin is still sharply below its high of $0.72 set earlier this year, just before Musk went on Saturday Night Live, and appeared to call the coin a ‘hustle’. Jobs growth may now be stalling in the UK, as the Omicron variant hits the economy, warns Pawel Adrjan, economist at the global job site Indeed: He says the very earliest signs of the labour market’s ability to withstand another lockdown are not encouraging. Indeed’s data, which captures employers’ demand for staff in real-time, shows job posting growth may be stalling. As of last Friday, 10th December, postings on Indeed were still 47.3% higher than before the pandemic - but that’s a decline of 0.3% compared to the previous week, on a seasonally adjusted basis. “As the Omicron variant takes hold and MPs vote on a new set of Covid restrictions, many sectors that have been doing particularly well this year - from hospitality to high street retail - will be deeply worried that their progress could be abruptly halted.” Unemployment in the UK fell in October despite the end of the furlough scheme, according to official figures, as companies continued to hire amid record numbers of staff vacancies. The Office for National Statistics said the unemployment rate fell to 4.2% in the three months to the end of October, representing about 1.4 million people, down from 4.3% in the three months to the end of September. Reflecting a continued recovery in the labour market after the end of the Treasury’s multibillion-pound job support scheme in September, it said the number of workers on company payrolls rose by 257,000 in November from a month earlier to stand at 29.4 million – almost half a million higher than pre-Covid levels. The ONS said it was likely that some furloughed workers could yet move into unemployment because they might be working out their notice periods, but that the early responses to its business surveys suggest the numbers being made redundant were likely to be small. Darren Morgan, the director of economic statistics at the ONS, said: “With still no sign of the end of the furlough scheme hitting the number of jobs, the total of employees on payroll continued to grow strongly in November, although it could include people recently made redundant but still working out their notice.” Here’s the full story: The Omicron variant will dent global demand for oil, but not derail it, the International Energy Agency has predicted. The IEA has trimmed its forecast for oil demand this year and the next by 100,000 bpd each, mostly because new travel curbs will hit demand for jet fuel. In its latest monthly report, the IEA predicts that Omicron will have a more muted impact than earlier variants: “The surge in new COVID-19 cases is expected to temporarily slow, but not upend, the recovery in oil demand that is underway. “New containment measures put in place to halt the spread of the virus are likely to have a more muted impact on the economy versus previous COVID waves.” But in the short term, there could be an oil glut in early 2022, with output set to exceed demand this month and soar next year. The IEA has lowered forecasts for global oil demand in the first quarter by 600,000 barrels a day. So the market could be temporarily oversupplied, if suppliers continue to pump more oil (the Opec+ group will add another 400,000 bpd in January). In the City, the FTSE 100 index has risen around 42 points, or 0.6%, in early trading to 7274 points, recovering much of Monday’s omicron-driven losses. Ocado are the top riser, now up 8% after winning the patent infringement case brought by Autostore, and telling shareholders its ‘best-ever’ Christmas is ahead. Airline group IAG (+2.1%), jet engine maker/servicer Rolls Royce (+2.2%) and commercial property group British Land (+2.1%) are also higher. But BT have dropped 5%, after the government said it ‘wouldn’t hesitate to act’ if it needed to protect the UK’s telecoms infrastructure, after Patrick Drahi increased his stake to 18%. European markets are also higher in early trading: The billionaire Patrick Drahi has increased his stake in BT to 18%, prompting the government to warn it could step in to block a full potential takeover of the British telecoms giant. Drahi’s telecoms group Altice UK, which in June paid £2.2bn for a 12.1% stake to become BT’s largest shareholder, has paid about another £1bn to further boost its shareholding. “We are pleased to take this opportunity to increase our shareholding in BT,” said Drahi. “Over recent months we have engaged constructively with the board and management of BT and look forward to continuing that dialogue.” Drahi, who had been blocked under UK takeover rules from making a further move until 11 December, played down the stake-building and reiterated that he did not intend to make an offer for BT, but said that could change if circumstances did – including if a third party made an offer. Drahi said: We continue to hold them in high regard and remain fully supportive of their strategy, principally to play the pivotal role in delivering the expansion of access to a full-fibre broadband network; an investment programme which is so important to both BT and to the UK,” A government spokesperson said it would “not hesitate to act” to protect BT from foreign takeover if necessary.... Pubs and restaurants predict that Christmas cancellations made following the introduction of measures to limit the spread of the Omicron variant of Covid-19 in England will cut their festive takings by 40%. While hospitality venues have not yet been forced to reimpose measures such as social distancing or mandatory mask-wearing, industry leaders said tougher restrictions had already caused irreparable damage to trade, especially in city centres. Trade body UK Hospitality has forecast that takings will be down by as much as 40% for December, usually the most lucrative month for venues by far, after hard data from last week revealed early signs that customers were staying away. Here’s the full story: Online supermarket group Ocado has been hit by labour shortages. Revenues at Ocado Retail, its joint venture with Marks &amp; Spencer, dropped 3.9% year-on-year in the last three months. A shortage of staff at its warehouses (Customer Fulfilment Centres) or to deliver food to customers weighed on order growth. It told the City that the situation was improving: Sales growth was held back by labour shortages; early in the quarter, headcount decreased across our delivery and CFC roles in Ocado Logistics; but following the introduction of the additional measures announced at the Q3 Trading Statement, and the end of furlough, vacancies are returning to more normal levels. Share in Ocado have jumped by 4.4%, after it also reported it had won a patent infringement case brought by Norwegian robotics company Autostore. Despite the rise in payrolled workers in recent months, there are still 567,000 fewer people in employment than before the pandemic. More people left the labour market in the last quarter too - pushing up the UK’s economic inactivity rate by 0.1 percentage point, to 21.2%. Kitty Ussher, chief economist at the Institute of Directors, says this rise in economic inactivity among people of working age is a concern. Since the summer this appears to have been more to do with increased long-term sickness than from early retirement. Early in the pandemic we had also seen a fall in the number of people citing ‘looking after family/home’ as a reason for economic inactivity, perhaps as homeworking became easier, but that trend is now less clear as the economy settles.” The Institute for Employment Studies estimates more than one million fewer people now in the labour market than on pre-crisis trends, driven by older people leaving work (and also by lower migration). Tony Wilson, IES director, says the government must do more to help people into work: “On the face of it, today’s figures are some rare good news for the government, with unemployment now dropping fast towards pre-crisis levels, employment rising and more than twice as many vacancies as there were last Christmas. But beneath the headlines there is plenty here that will be concerning the government and Bank of England. Despite record vacancies and the tightest labour market in our lifetimes, the number of people out of work and not looking for work is rising, perhaps pushed up by people leaving the labour market entirely at the end of furlough. We estimate that there’s now one million fewer people in the jobs market than there would have been on pre-crisis trends, with more than half of this explained by fewer older people in work. At the same time, the number of people out of work due to ill health has hit its highest since 2005, at 2.5 million. As we said last month, these problems just won’t fix themselves. And with the prospect of tighter Covid restrictions in the new year, the government needs to be planning now for more support to help people get back into work as well as to protect those jobs that may be at risk in a Plan C lockdown.” Otherwise, firms will still struggle to fill vacancies, as Stephen Evans, chief executive of Learning and Work Institute, points out: We face an uncertain winter, with economic growth slowing and uncertainty around the impact of Omicron. We need to boost our efforts to match people with the available jobs and ensure they have the skills needed.” The bulk of the growth in employment came from part-time workers, who were hit hardest by the pandemic, as this chart shows: Sarah Coles, senior personal finance analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown, points out that the full impact of ending furlough isn’t evident yet: “The Bank of England’s fears of a post-furlough redundancy spike completely failed to materialise. In the three months to October, employment rose above its pre-pandemic levels, the claimant count continued to fall, long-term unemployment dropped for the first time since May last year, and job vacancies hit another record high. Unfortunately, now the Bank has something else to worry about. We’re not entirely out of the woods just yet, because some of those made redundant at the end of the scheme could be working their notice periods. UK wage growth continued to fall back from its peak earlier this year, just as inflation pushes higher. Average pay, including bonuses, was 4.9% higher than a year ago in August-October, after peaking at 8.8% this summer. Basic pay was 4.3% higher than a year ago. It means real basic pay (adjusted for inflation) rose by 1%, the ONS says. But with inflation likely to hit 5% early next year, the UK could be heading into another period of falling real wages, which will squeeze households. Chancellor of the Exchequer, Rishi Sunak, is calling for people to get their Covid-19 booster jabs, to protect the economic recovery. “The jobs outlook remains strong thanks to our £400bn economic support package, Plan for Jobs and fantastic vaccine programme; the unemployment rate fell to 4.2%, employee numbers grew at a record rate in November and redundancies are below pre-pandemic levels. “To keep safeguarding our economic recovery and the lives and livelihoods of the British people, I am now calling on everyone to keep playing their part and Get Boosted Now.” Yesterday there were long queues outside vaccination centres, as people flocked to get jabbed, with reports that the NHS booking site repeatedly crashing under huge demand. And here’s minister for employment Mims Davies MP: “With the number of people on payrolls now above pre-pandemic levels across every region and age group, including the biggest monthly increase on record in November, it’s clear our Plan for Jobs is working. “As we look ahead to next year, we remain wholeheartedly committed to helping employers recruit for the record number of opportunities out there and to giving people – at any age and any career stage – the support and skills they need to confidently land their next role.” The rise in payroll employment and falling unemployment shows the UK jobs market has continued to rebound strongly, says Suren Thiru, head of economics at the British Chambers of Commerce, despite a slowing recovery and the end of furlough. But with 1.2m vacancies unfilled, firms are clearly struggling to hire staff, he says: “Record vacancies underscore the severe recruitment crunch facing businesses. Although the changes to Covid self-isolation rules are welcome, with coronavirus and Brexit driving a structural decline in available labour, staff shortages may persistently constrain economic activity. The UK’s new Covid ‘plan B’ restrictions could damage the jobs recovery, particularly in hospitality and retail - where firms need more help, Thiru added: “More support is urgently needed to aid those firms worst effected by Plan B, including returning VAT for hospitality and tourism back to its emergency rate of 5%, reinstating full business rates relief for these firms and making additional grant funding available.” The BBC’s Faisal Islam has spotted that unemployment did rise in October, the first month after furlough ended... There is no sign yet that ending the furlough scheme has hit jobs, says ONS director of economic statistics Darren Morgan. But, he does point out that some staff could be working through their notice period, and that the growth in vacancies has slowed..... Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. Unemployment across the UK has dropped again as firms continued to take on more staff despite the ending of the furlough scheme in September. The unemployment total fell by 127,000 in the August-October quarter, new data shows, lowering the jobless total to 1.423m. This pulled the UK’s jobless rate down to 4.2% in the three months to October, down from 4.3% a month ago. It suggests that the labour market remained solid this autumn, even though firms could not longer use the Coronavirus Job Retention Scheme to cover the wages of temporarily sidelined staff. However, the emergence of the Omicron variant has now darkened the economic outlook, leading unions to call for furlough to be reinstated for hard-hit sectors. The Office for National Statistics also reports that companies added more workers to their payroll; an extra 257,000 people were in payrolled employment in November 2021 than the previous month. The number of people in work jumped by 149,000, to 32.5 million. And vacancies hit a new record high of 1.219m in September to November 2021. That’s 434,500 more than before the pandemic, with 13 of the 18 industry sectors showing record highs. But the growth in vacancies has slowed -- rising by 17.9% in September-November, down from 35% in the previous quarter. The largest quarterly increase was seen in Human health and social work, where vacancies rose by 26,000 (15.2%). The Bank of England had been looking for a strong jobs report today, before deciding whether to raise interest rates at its next meeting on Thursday, and this could certainly fit the bill. However....the emergence of the Omicron variant has now disrupted that plan, and could encourage policymakers to wait until early 2022. Last night, the BoE announced plans to ease mortgage lending rules in a move that could help thousands of first-time buyers get on to the property ladder. Removing a requirement that forces borrowers to be able to afford a three-percentage-point rise in interest rates before they can be approved for a home loan could help around 50,000 renters onto the housing ladder, and allow some borrowers to get higher loans. The agenda 7am GMT: UK labour force survey 9am GMT: IEA’s monthly oil market report 10am GMT: Eurozone industrial production data for October 1.30pm GMT: US producer prices index for NovemberOne of the few opinions I have that I’d actually go to war for is that work Christmas parties should not be allowed to be rescheduled for January. The idea should not even be floated. Before a number of people in Crocs send me aggressive messages on every possible platform of communication: I will allow a caveat only for people working in the hospitality industry, whose selfless sacrifice through December to keep me and millions of others fed and watered should be rightly rewarded with a weird early Tuesday lunchtime party, which ends up with at least one person paying the soiling charge for a taxi. But the rest of us: no. It’s December or nothing. “Oh, but we couldn’t get it booked in time” – sack your HR person, then, whose only actual job is to get that done. “Oh, but it’s slightly cheaper if we book it for January” – no, not allowed. If your staff aren’t worth the £35 a head, then you, simply, cannot afford your staff. I do not want to see a scrap of tinsel in the first month of the year! I don’t want to see anyone wearing a Santa hat and pretending they still want to eat a mince pie! January is for shell shock, sobriety and a weird eight-day period where you tell yourself you’re “getting really into juice, now, actually” before putting the blender away for ever. Nothing else. I do recognise this opinion is absurd, stupid and the symptom of a dangerously failing mind (if you’re short on time you can also just read this as “being British”). The point is, as the past week of politics has proved, that the work Christmas party is oddly holy in this country. To recap, last December – around the time that families said goodbye to their loved ones with socially distanced funerals, while grandparents waved at their new grandchildren through windows and a late-in-the-day tiered lockdown ruined Christmas for many – a select group of Conservatives we now know, were partying hard. Various alleged events included a 40-person shindig at Downing Street involving a Secret Santa and a Zoom quiz hosted by Boris Johnson. Often as I drift off to sleep, I idly imagine what hell (which is surely where I’m going) will look like for me. The answer now is this: it’s me eating a small piece of cheese with Rishi Sunak while Boris Johnson uneasily reads quiz questions his aides have prepared for him, forever. Dominic Cummings keeps jostling up to ask if I want to go on a cashpoint run. Laura Kuenssberg keeps laughing at her phone. And, ah don’t – don’t turn around. Matt Hancock’s been trying to catch my eye all evening. I told him about face filters and now he won’t stop doing selfies. If we lived in a real country, this scandal – the government brazenly breaking the restrictions it itself enforced, then aides laughing about it at a faux press conference a couple of days later – would have been enough to cause some shift in power. But instead what happened was: Carrie Johnson emitted a baby, Allegra Stratton sobbed outside her house for a bit, and Keir Starmer did one of those curious anti-zingers of his, like a deputy head doing standup at a teachers’ talent show then never coming back for spring term. Now we have to wait until the next scandal, which I have set for about six weeks’ time. But what’s unique about this one is it’s the first time in two years of catastrophe and 11 years of horror that the Tories have misjudged the importance of a number of this country’s sacred cows. It’s this – not, say, the number of preventable deaths, or the various chummy contracts scandals, or the way every single parent with a child in school has just had to resign themselves to getting phenomenally ill this winter – that has threatened them the most. So, for example: as has been pointed out, fairness in this country is the idea that everyone is miserable at the same time, so it rubbed a lot of people up the wrong way that some Tory MPs laughed and ate cheese while we had to sit at home and watch those “It’s been a tough year” Christmas adverts with none of our family. And, as proven by the fact that even the country’s finest thinkers have extreme opinions about Christmas parties (see my previous paragraph about Christmas parties), they are incredibly vital to the grinding ecosystem of working for a living, even the crap ones. More evidence that the shock was really felt lay in the fact that one of the hardest disses that came the prime minister’s way last week was from Ant and Dec. Properly weaponised, Ant and Dec have the power to directly influence about 60% of this country’s swing voters. Lose Ant and Dec, I’ve always thought, and you lose the country. But sadly, I think this brush with the raw edge of the British psyche will, in the long run, galvanise the Tories. They can see just how close they came to stepping on a cultural landmine, and they will be especially careful about not doing it again. Without this uproar, Boris Johnson might have blundered blindly into his next affront to the bedrock of our culture – calling a press conference to say “cauliflower cheese definitely belongs on a roast dinner”, getting photographed putting his milk in first while making a clumsy round of teas for NHS workers and so on. Instead he’ll be on his best behaviour, right up until Priti Patel mobilises her Border Force to boot the door of Downing Street in and stages a coup. It would have been nice if this year ended in the cosmic joke of Britain having to find its fourth leader in five years because of a Christmas party. Instead, people are just incredibly disgruntled about it and nothing significant will happen as a result. 2021, frankly, in a nutshell. Joel Golby is a writer for the Guardian and Vice and the author of Brilliant, Brilliant, Brilliant Brilliant BrilliantK-pop boy band BTS swept the American Music Awards last month, making history as the first Asian act to win artist of the year; they were also nominated for a Grammy for best pop duo/group performance for their single Butter. The seven-member band has a huge global following and their fans, known as Army, are known for their passion and loyalty. Here Guardian readers, who are BTS fans, speak about why the band means so much to them. ‘After reading their lyrics, a weight seemed to lift’ I was struggling with adjusting to life with a toddler and a newborn; exhausted and feeling insecure. Finding BTS gave me energy on sleepless nights, comfort during isolation, and confidence when I felt like I wasn’t good enough. During a cycle of depression and anxiety, I felt like I was wasting my life. One day, while I was using a free moment of nap time to scrub the kitchen, I started to panic. Paradise began playing from a BTS playlist and the melody and tone of the song touched me instantly. I stopped in my tracks to find the lyrics, and the words to that song were exactly what I needed to hear that day. “It’s alright to stop / There’s no need to run without even knowing the reason / It’s alright to not have a dream / If you have moments where you feel happiness for a while.” After reading those lyrics, a weight seemed to lift from my heart. I didn’t need to exhaust myself trying to prove my worth. I didn’t need to find a corporate ladder to climb or build a brand in order to feel happy. All I really wanted was a simple, comfortable life so my kids have a solid foundation. BTS taught me that I am enough; that I am worthy just by being myself. I think what sets BTS apart from other artists is their friendship. They are the definition of friendship goals. Their love and respect for each other is at the core of everything they do and it shows fans what genuine love and friendship looks like. During this pandemic, I’ve found comfort in watching the members comfort each other. Ashley Briggs, 36, full-time parent and podcast producer/writer, Tucson, Arizona, US ‘BTS inspire me to love myself without feeling ashamed’ What sets BTS apart from other bands is their pride in being Korean. As an Asian, I find this inspiring. I was born in Sweden to two Vietnamese immigrants so the insecurities over my heritage have always been lingering in the back of my head. I adapted a western name because I didn’t want to be the odd one out. But BTS have normalised hard to pronounce names. They proudly speak Korean during important award speeches (like their UN speech), wear hanbok (traditional Korean dress) and promote Korean culture. BTS represents those of us who had awkward lunch boxes at school, those of us who didn’t want to speak our parents language in public. BTS made me realise that my failures do not define who I am. I’ve never been vocal about my emotions so for me to have seven people who sing exactly what I feel truly helps me understand myself and find new ways to evolve. BTS inspires me to love myself without feeling ashamed. Stephanie Le, 28, paralegal, Stockholm, Sweden ‘BTS helped with my perception of myself as an invisible older woman’ When I was at my lowest last year, staring at my own mortality after a heart attack, they came to the rescue. The message of loving yourself that pervades most of their music was what I needed to hear. To believe that despite my small, nothing-special accomplishments in life, I was still a worthy person – that was a revelation to me. They helped with my perception of myself as an invisible older woman. It seems minor, but my style has changed. I’m more confident in choosing a youthful style instead of safe, neutral clothes, and wearing makeup more often. They make me feel young. Their humility and respect for all people, the politeness they always show was a lesson as well. It’s too easy at my age to think you’ve seen it all and have all the answers but nothing could be more wrong. I’m more open and accepting than I used to be but still have a long way to go. Critical care nurses often say that dying patients rarely talk about the money or possessions they had but wish they had given more of their time to experiences, like falling in love, the birth of a child, travelling, escapades with their friends, etc. I know the BTS concert on 1 December will be one of the top experiences I’ll be reviewing on my deathbed. Sharman, 68, retired, Canada ‘I had the impression that all K-pop sounded the same – I was gladly proven wrong’ There’s a saying within Army that “you find BTS when you need them most”. Although I started hearing about them in 2016, I had never played their music because I had this impression that all K-pop music sounded the same: noisy EDM sounds, unstructured rap etc. I was gladly proven wrong when the Love Yourself album was released. At that time in my life, I had many new thoughts, emotions, and feelings that scared me because I couldn’t define them. I was unable to share my thoughts or feelings with anyone because I was unable to describe them or to find the words. BTS did that for me. Anonymous, 25, Agadir, Morocco ‘People often think I’m a metal head but I love K-pop so much’ I’m particularly fond of rap music and once my wife introduced me to BTS and I heard Cypher 4, I was won over. Their rapping and storytelling is next level. I’m a big dude with a beard and tattoos and people often think I’m a metal head. Whilst that is true, I love K-pop so much. The shows are a whole vibe, the music, the dancing, the theatrics and the fan engagement. It has everything that I feel Western music and artists lack. I think the reason BTS stands out to me so much is because of their genre-bending music. So much goes into their instrumentals that it’s easy for anyone to find something they like. Lyrically, their messages of self-love are very powerful and genuine. You can tell they’re not just singing them for the sake of it, you know? Rob, 27, works in insurance, Liverpool, Australia ‘We all love an underdog story that ends well’ I became a fan when I heard their song Dynamite on a Spotify 2010s playlist in June this year. I was demotivated with work and felt isolated during the pandemic. Dynamite sounded like pure happiness encapsulated in a song. I was searching for non-English songs or other new upbeat songs to add to my work from home playlist. It was my first time hearing BTS or K-pop; I was surprised that Dynamite was in English and sounded like a Bruno Mars song. I ended up going on a five-hour BTS deep dive right after that. I love that they are Korean and fellow Asians; it’s relevant that they’re not from the West. Not only are they super talented and professional, they obviously love what they do, love being around each other, and they’re loyal to their fans. Despite their global success, they continue to be as hardworking, genuine, grounded, humble, and hilarious as when they started. They’ve been closely involved in the songwriting and production of their records from the start, and explore compelling themes in their songs. Also, we all love an underdog story that ends well, and BTS is one such story. Bernice Roldan, 42, gender consultant for a multilateral development bank, Manila, Philippines ‘I became a fan to heal my relationship with my cultural identity’ When the Atlanta shootings made headlines earlier this year, I realised that as an adult, I still had a lot of unresolved racial trauma. As a Korean-American who grew up in a predominantly white suburb of Chicago, I was always embarrassed about being different. I became a fan of BTS with the intention of acknowledging the shame I used to carry and to heal my broken relationship with my cultural identity. I love their music, performances, and personalities, but BTS’ breakthrough into mainstream media means so much more to me – it helps me believe that voices like mine matter and deserve to be heard.Ashley Cho, 30, school counselor, Seattle, Washington, US ‘BTS gave me the opportunity to say my final goodbye to my friend’ I had a childhood friend who passed away when I was in middle school, and I could never come to terms with the situation. I had my emotions bottled up. After hearing BTS’s Spring Day, I broke down and cried hard for a long time and realised that I missed them more than I imagined. The lyrics, “bogo sipda” (I miss you) being repeated over and over again drew out these emotions that I kept hidden for a long time. So, I’m grateful BTS gave me the opportunity to say my final goodbye. Theresa Frimpong, 21, medical student, Ghana ‘BTS probably have the most diverse fan base in the world’ The first time I came across BTS was in 2018, when they were on the Graham Norton Show. The turning point for me was when I heard them talk for the first time in the United Nations in 2018. The Love Yourself, Speak Yourself campaign really resonated with me, as did their Map of the Soul era that delved deeper to our personas. Their music and messaging gave me hope to fight my own inner demons and love myself. I’m a 31-year-old straight male who’s engaged. To some people, I’m not your typical fan of BTS. Everyone expects that boy bands only have screaming teenage girls as their fans but that is simply not true. I just wish that everyone understood that BTS actually has probably the most diverse fan base in the world. Eero Aleinikov, 31, Finland ‘I have made countless friends being part of the Army community’ As a young Asian American, I was lucky growing up in an inclusive suburb, where although known to be predominantly Caucasian, all blends of cultures and ethnicities were embodied in the school populations. That said, the “K-wave” had not reached the depths of Naperville yet, and I remember K-pop lovers being perceived as outcasts all over the States. As the pandemic hit and schools went on a break, I took a considerable amount of time, reflecting on my stressors, and learning how to value and love myself. This is when I became a BTS fan. I realised how the Army community carries a similar message as the members they stan. The countless friends I made and folks that reached out to send content, fangirl with, and later support my news account were so heartwarming, especially at a time where I needed the laughs and comfort. Zee S, 19, pre-med student, Naperville Illinois, US ‘What makes BTS stand out is their willingness to be vulnerable’ BTS gave my daughter and I a commonality that made it easier to navigate through that mother-teen daughter relationship. Now she is the founding member of our high school’s K-pop club and I’m the advisor. We’ve created a safe space that is so diverse but eclectic. There is a dance committee, a committee that focuses on the arts, and even one for conversations about cultural appropriation. Their music was so powerful and uplifting and real. These seven young men are speaking to the world in a universal language that came right on time. How could I not appreciate that? What makes BTS stand out is their willingness to be vulnerable. Yes, they work hard but they also aren’t afraid to mess up and own up to it. They let the world know when they need a break from it all and come back stronger. You can always find a BTS song that explains how you feel even when you can’t figure it out. NaShonda, 46, educator, Raleigh, North Carolina, USPatrick Drahi’s move to increase his control of BT puts him potentially just one step away from triggering a full takeover of the British telecoms business, although the billionaire will now have to wait six more months before he can seal the deal. Drahi, who informed BT’s chair, Adam Crozier, that he had upped his stake to 18% after the stock market closed on Monday, can continue to increase his control, snapping up more stock, but under UK rules cannot mount a full takeover bid until 15 June. While the founder of Altice, a telecoms and mass media company, has so far positioned himself as a benevolent investor, his decision to buy more stock on the first trading day after the expiration of a no-bid clause triggered when he made the surprise move to become BT’s biggest shareholder in June, sends a clear reminder of his activist intentions. One City source said the stake-building approach marked a strategy of “creeping control” without having to pay the premium that would come with a bid offer. Drahi is understood not to have outright economic control of all of the 18% he now holds, but he does have the voting rights. Drahi’s Altice UK is understood not to have acquired any of the 12.06% stake held by Deutsche Telekom (DT). Tim Höttges, the chief executive of BT’s second-largest shareholder, has said he is “entertaining all options” and referred to DT as a “kingmaker” in regards to the future of the UK company. A deal between Drahi and DT, which has held its stake in a passive capacity as a legacy of BT’s takeover of the mobile operator EE in 2015, would already pass the 30% threshold at which a takeover offer must be tabled. Until mid-June 2022 Drahi, who has not as yet requested a seat on the BT board, can only make a move for majority control with the agreement of BT’s board or if a third party emerges with an offer. BT confirmed that Crozier, the former chief executive of ITV and Royal Mail who officially took over as the chairman at BT on 1 December, and its chief executive, Philip Jansen, met with the culture secretary, Nadine Dorries, on Monday. The meeting, which was understood to be about BT’s role in the national rollout of 5G and broadband, was prior to Drahi snapping up the extra 6% stake. On Tuesday, the government said it would “not hesitate to act” to protect BT, which is considered critical to the UK’s national communications infrastructure, from foreign takeover if it was deemed necessary. BT has strengthened its defences by hiring advisers at Robey Warshaw as Drahi looks to cash in on the apparently undervalued telecoms company, which is trading at 65% below 2015 levels. Drahi’s move followed BT’s £15bn commitment to the rollout of full-fibre broadband to 25m homes by 2026, having gained valuable regulatory and financial incentives guaranteeing significant returns on its huge investment over the long term. BT’s share price fell more than 5% on the news, making it one of the biggest fallers in the FTSE 100, as investors’ hopes of a takeover for Christmas failed to materialise.Melanie remembers the day she busked in London well. The year was 1983 and the concert she was to play had been cancelled due to unsatisfactory ticket sales. So she was sitting with friends, drinking Pimm’s, when someone called to tell her that fans had congregated outside the Royal Albert Hall. “I thought, I’m just going to grab my guitar and go over there and sing,” she tells me by phone from her home in Tennessee. And so she did. The police arrived to move her on – and shortly thereafter, the headlines spun. “It wasn’t a press stunt, I was just doing what instinctively occurred to me,” says the 74-year-old once lazily hailed as the female Bob Dylan. It’s a philosophy that helped her defy her critics, as she tried to ignore the labels the business applied to her: winsome folk singer, flower child with an edge. “I had a guitar, I had long hair, so I must be a folk singer,” she jokes. Instead, her music is a beguiling mix of earthy folk, mournful blues and rhapsodic pop belted out with a soulful voice; equal parts naive and knowing, she sings with a gravelly rasp that seems to lasso your body. This year marks the 50th anniversary of her kaleidoscopic classic 1971 album Gather Me. Born Melanie Safka, she was raised in Queens, New York, and her vagabond journey as a musician began in Greenwich Village in the late 1960s. In 1969, she was helicoptered on to the stage at Woodstock festival where she was, in her own words, “an industry buzz” without a clue. “It was an unbelievably frightening day,” she says. “I just thought it was a weekend of singing. I pictured families with picnic blankets, and arts and crafts. I had no idea! I walked into the lobby and there was Janis Joplin.” Aged 22, Melanie had never seen a famous person before. “I thought, ‘I can’t do this. I don’t have any hit records, nobody knows who I am.’ I had no musicians with me, no roadie – I even brought my mom!” There is an endearing innocence to Melanie, even now, alongside a mellow acceptance of the many twists and turns in her career. But there is also an astute perception that, despite her complexities, she was often misunderstood as an artist, regularly made to feel like “a piece of Woodstock fluff” in the press. It’s not clear how much she has let this go. Take her most recognisable song, Brand New Key – on first listen it sounds like a naive ditty about brand new roller skates, but its twinkling demeanour belies a song about a determined loss of innocence. It rocketed to No 1 in the US singles chart in December 1971, before becoming a novelty hit in the UK when the Wurzels’ The Combine Harvester parodied it in 1976, and has come to define Gather Me in ways that Melanie hasn’t always enjoyed. “It was the bane of my existence for a few years,” she admits. More in keeping with Gather Me as a whole, Brand New Key was originally composed as a blues song, she says – it was subsequently sped up in the studio to attract a broader audience. “I’m not a trained musician and my husband [Peter Schekeryk] was the producer, he was mostly the person who communicated to the band, who were all guys,” Melanie recalls. She had production ideas, she tells me, but with little familiarity with the language of music, she had a hard time articulating them. Not so, however, with her counter-offering Some Say (I Got Devil) from side two of Gather Me, a subversive response to the bubblegum pop hit everyone is familiar with. “That’s Morrissey’s favourite, he did a version of it recently,” Melanie says. I’m not surprised. “Some have tried to sell me / all kinds of things to save me / from hurting like a woman,” she sings with an intoxicating mixture of desire and weariness. Subversive lyrics which go some way towards highlighting Gather Me’s often dark and radical beauty. “There was a big gap between my reality and the reality of how I was being perceived,” she says when I ask about that song’s narrative. “I was an introvert and all of a sudden I’m a celebrity. I knew that I wasn’t being presented in the way that I am.” Her non-conformity hasn’t always made things easy for her, in an industry where “a girl was just a ‘chick singer’, you know?” She mentions a notable fan, Nirvana’s bass player Krist Novoselic, and a comment he once made that she’d been airbrushed out of history. In 2007, Jarvis Cocker – another notable fan – introduced her on to the stage for a rare gig at London’s Queen Elizabeth Hall. In the reviews, journalists enthusiastically hoisted her into the pantheon of female singer-songwriters regardless of genre – Joni Mitchell, Joan Baez, Janis Joplin – as if she had not occupied that upper stratum previously. It was surely frustrating. Has she ever wondered why? “I could speculate,” she replies. “It wasn’t the age of smiling women. It had to be much more broody and I was way too cherubic. Men can be cute. Randy Newman can sing Short People and that’s OK because he’s a guy, he’s got something to say. But a girl? How could she possibly have any social significance?” I ask Melanie what she hoped to achieve as a 24-year-old songwriter recording Gather Me in New York’s Allegro Sound Studio. “I have this desire to be understood,” she says. Thinking back to those early days, she muses: “I kind of wished I didn’t have a body.” Her uncompromising appetite for independence got in the way, too. When she left Buddha Records and set up her own label, Neighborhood Records, in 1971, “it was like a slap in the face to the industry” – which came as a surprise to her at the time, but as she later says, “there was a whole slew of conditions [on] being a woman”. She flouted them anyway, and has since released more than 30 albums, most recently Ever Since You Never Heard of Me in 2010. As for that flower child label? “I never even felt like I was a hippie, I didn’t like the term. If anything, I was the beat generation – people in the Village expressing themselves in so many ways, not being pigeonholed.” It’s kind of a relief when you’re no longer “the girl”, Melanie says. She’s even thinking about re-recording Brand New Key as the blues single she always envisioned it to be. “I really want to communicate that I’m still here and I’m still doing it. It is 50 years later and I’m not quite decrepit. I think it was [baseball player] Satchel Paige who said, ‘How old would you be if you didn’t know how old you are?’” That desire to be understood is as strong as ever – and her self-confidence is similarly undimmed. “It’s pretty incredible all these years later that Gather Me could even be relevant; it’s amazing to think that I have soundtracked people’s lives. It really hits the mark.” • This article was amended on 17 December 2021. An earlier version incorrectly said that Melanie’s appearance at the Queen Elizabeth Hall was her “first British gig in 30 years”.Scots should limit their indoor social mixing to no more than three households over the festive season, but family Christmas celebrations can go ahead, Nicola Sturgeon has said. Emphasising that nobody should cancel their Christmas Day plans, Scotland’s first minister urged people to cut down social contacts “as much as possible” over the coming weeks in an attempt to slow the spread of the Omicron variant while the vaccine booster programme accelerates across the country. Sturgeon also asked the public to keep celebrations around Christmas Day itself “as small as your family circumstances allow”, to make sure all those gathering have been vaccinated and have done a test in advance, to keep rooms ventilated and follow strict hygiene rules. Sturgeon set out the new advice – which will not be a legal requirement – as she updated the Holyrood parliament on the progress of the booster vaccination programme. She told MSPs: “We are not banning or restricting household mixing in law as before. We understand the negative impact this has on mental health and wellbeing”. “But we are asking everyone - and we will issue strong guidance to this effect - to cut down as far as possible the number of people outside our own households that we are interacting with just now”. Sturgeon also said that her government would amend regulations to put a legal requirement on businesses to minimise the risk of transmission, including measures to avoid crowding in shops and bars, improved physical distancing and the reintroduction of protective screens. She said further measures were necessary with Scotland facing a “likely tsunami” of new infections in the weeks ahead and a “very significant” impact on health services. Referencing the “very high attack rate” of the new Omicron strain, Sturgeon explained: “That means if just one person in a gathering is infectious, that person is likely to infect many more people in the group than was the case with the Delta variant”. Reiterating these messages in a televised address to the nation on Tuesday evening, Sturgeon said: “Speaking to you in these terms is the last thing I wanted to be doing a few days before Christmas. We’ve all had enough of this. But the threat from Omicron is severe. And we must respond seriously.” Meanwhile, on Tuesday afternoon the UK Treasury pledged extra funding to devolved governments to support the vaccine rollout and wider health response. Sturgeon said her government had identified £100m from its own resources to help businesses affected by last week’s advice to postpone work Christmas parties. Sturgeon, who is expected to make a televised address on Tuesday evening, earlier rejected calls from Scotland’s largest teaching union, the EIS, to close schools immediately, stating her priority was to keep them open safely. Opposition parties have called on her to speed up the booster rollout, with the Scottish Conservatives leader, Douglas Ross, urging the Scottish government to reopen mass vaccination centres. Sturgeon responded that Scotland had the fastest progress on vaccinations of any UK nation and argued that mass clinics had high rates of non-attendance. Ross also challenged Sturgeon over the requirement for household contacts of a person who tests positive for Covid to self-isolate for 10 days, regardless of age, vaccination status or PCR test result, after she introduced an exemption for essential workers. Scottish Labour’s health spokesperson, Jackie Baillie, raised concerns about care packages being withdrawn due to staff absence. Last Thursday, Public Health Scotland said it was “strongly urging” people to cancel Christmas parties after a number of Omicron outbreaks linked to festive get-togethers. On Friday, the Scottish government published an evidence paper on Omicron, which suggested that the doubling time of the new strain was close to two days, and that it was very quickly going to overtake Delta as the country’s dominant strain.People rarely move to Oswaldtwistle, locals say. The 11,000 residents of the town outside Blackburn are mostly descendants of miners and textile workers, with some saying the last significant conflict was the 19th-century power-loom riots. But a dispute over a cemetery is now causing division. The Blackburn billionaires Mohsin and Zuber Issa – the new owners of Asda – have proposed building a cemetery with up to 35,000 burial plots alongside a Muslim funeral parlour and prayer rooms to allow traditional Muslim burial rites on the site. The cemetery would “meet the needs of all communities that wish to be buried at the site and will accommodate people from all faiths and backgrounds”, according to the Issa Foundation. Currently, Muslims in the area have to wash and shroud the body at a mosque before transporting it to a cemetery. The foundation said vacant Muslim burial plots in the UK were running out, especially after the coronavirus pandemic disproportionately affected Muslim communities. “Covid has put so much strain on our burial grounds that we are quite literally running out of space,” said Sabir Esa, a businessman from Lancashire. “In Blackburn we are now burying our dead on scrap pieces of land. It is a terrible situation.” But about 200 people attended a rally against the plan and more than 3,500 have signed a petition opposing the development. Some have cited water drainage as a problem. “I think everyone in the area is opposed to [the cemetery],” said Marlene Haworth, the leader of the Conservative group in Hyndburn council. Haworth said the field bought by the Issa Foundation was part of a green belt valued by local people for its natural beauty and wildlife. She added that the area was inappropriate for Muslim burial as “Oswaldtwistle has a very small Asian community”. The proposed site is a half an hour walk from a mosque in the town of Accrington, which merges with Oswaldtwistle to the east. More than 10% of people living within Hyndburn local authority are Muslim, double the national average, while in Accrington the Muslim population rises to 20%. There have been unsuccessful attempts to build a Muslim cemetery in Lancashire for the past nine years. Esa tried in 2012 and again in 2015 to build a cemetery in the Ribble Valley but faced similar opposition from residents. “The arguments they used were: ‘First they put a cemetery, then they’ll put a mosque,’” Esa said. “I have nothing against a mosque, but I don’t want a mosque in Oswaldtwistle,” said Paul Edmundson, 51, an electrician. He explained he was worried the project would expand to include places of worship – a concern repeated by other residents. Edmundson also values the green belt where the cemetery would be built and often walks his dog there. He is concerned about increased traffic on one of the most dangerous roads in the area. “I think there’s more appropriate places for it to be … not in a village like this,” he said. Many Muslim residents were reluctant to speak, citing fears of a backlash. But a Hyndburn Labour councillor, Noordad Aziz, spoke in favour of the cemetery. He reported one person to the police after he was intimidated during a public consultation. He said that afterwards comments about him were made on a Facebook group dedicated to opposing the cemetery. “I have been accused of being a ‘spy’ as well as being part of a ‘racial alliance’ and the group was full of Islamophobic and derogatory tropes,” he said. Aziz stressed the remarks were not representative of Oswaldtwistle residents. The main challenge is misinformation, he said, recalling instances of residents concerned that the grounds would be used for weddings or to build a mosque. “A burial site cannot be used as a mosque,” he said, “But when you explain that to people, they go: ‘Oh, well, I wasn’t aware of that.’ I think fundamentally, there needs to be better communication.”In October 1863, Charles Dodgson, better known by his pen name Lewis Carroll, visited the Rossetti family at home in Chelsea, London, photographing the poet and painter Dante Gabriel Rossetti playing chess, and his sister Christina, the poet, looking on benignly. The “extremely rare” photograph, which was arranged and printed by Dodgson himself, is now to be auctioned by Bonhams later this week. The image was taken in the garden of Dante Gabriel’s house on Cheyne Walk on 7 October 1863. Dodgson had been staying with the sculptor Alexander Munro in early October 1863, and Munro took him to meet the Rossetti family. The date was two years before the publication of Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland would make Dodgson famous as Lewis Carroll, and a year after Dante Gabriel’s wife, the poet and artist’s model Elizabeth Siddall, had died after an overdose of laudanum. Dante Gabriel buried his poems with Siddall – but exhumed them in 1869. Dodgson wrote in his diary that he “afterwards looked through a huge volume of drawings, some of which l am to photograph – a great treat, as I had never seen such exquisite drawing before”. Later, Dodgson said he “dined with Mr Rossetti, and spent some of the evening there”, describing his visit as “a memorable day”. He would come back the next day to photograph the whole family, as well as Dante Gabriel’s drawings – he helped found the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood - and one of his models. The image shows Christina Rossetti – who had published her collection Goblin Market and Other Poems, illustrated by Dante Gabriel and including her famous poem Remember, the previous year – at the left. She is watching her mother Frances Lavinia Rossetti and Dante Gabriel play chess, with their sister Maria Francesca – with a less interested look on her face - to her right. “It’s such an intimate photograph, to see the two of them playing chess together, and the sisters looking on,” said Ian Ehling, director of fine books and manuscripts at Bonhams New York. “Carroll was an intimate reader of Rossetti’s books, so that’s probably how the friendship came about, and then he himself was of course a very gifted amateur photographer throughout his life.” Dodgson would stay in touch with Christina over the years, giving her a copy of Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland and The Nursery Alice, while she gave him a copy of her Pageant and Other Poems. “It’s fascinating that Carroll is said to have been reading Goblin Market” – Christina’s poem about a girl seduced by the cry of the goblins, whose sister sets out to save her - “when he wrote Alice’s Adventures Underground,” said Ehling. Bonhams, which will auction the albumen print for an estimate of US$50,000-70,000 (£37,500-52,000) on Wednesday, said it was extremely rare. “Of the three known complete images of this photograph, only this and one other are in private hands,” said the auction house. “No similar quality original Lewis Carroll photograph of the Rossetti family has sold on the open market in recent years.” It previously belonged to Christina and Dante Gabriel’s other brother William Michael Rossetti, who passed it to his daughter, Helen Rossetti Angeli. It is now being sold by an American collector. “William Michael Rossetti was the historian or the archivist of the family,” said Ehling. “He held the family history close.” • This article was amended to correct the spelling of Frances Lavinia Rossetti’s middle name.Denmark and Norway have announced stricter Covid measures to battle soaring infection numbers, as authorities said the new Omicron variant was spreading fast and would probably become dominant in several EU countries within weeks or even days. Amid a varied continental picture that includes sharply declining case numbers in many countries, the two Scandinavian governments said they expected daily infections would soon exceed all previous records as the highly transmissible variant combined with and fuelled a wave still largely driven by the previous Delta mutation. Denmark, which like Britain carries out extensive rapid genetic sequencing to detect variants, is second only to the UK in the number of confirmed cases of the mutation, with 3,473 cases identified in a population of 5.8 million of which 80.6% are double jabbed. The Danish government, which last week said schools and colleges would close early, curbed nightlife and promoted remote working, on Tuesday began offering booster shots to all over-40s six weeks earlier than planned in an effort to curb the spread of the virus. The national health authority on Monday reported a 50% increase in the number of new weekly cases, the highest since the start of the pandemic, with daily infections hitting 7,799, double the number on the same day last week. While the surge was driven mostly by the Delta variant, it said Omicron was forecast to become dominant in the capital, Copenhagen, from this week, and nationwide soon afterwards. In Norway, authorities said Omicron was “becoming established and will dominate” across the country before Christmas. Norwegian officials have warned Omicron could infect between 90,000 and 300,000 people a day within the next three weeks unless new measures proved effective, compared with a previous peak of about 1,000, while hospital admissions could reach twice their previous level. Norway has registered record numbers of infections and hospital admissions in recent days, among them 958 Omicron cases reported on Monday, including 472 in the capital, Oslo. The prime minister, Jonas Gahr Støre, warned of a serious situation. A combination of the still-dominant Delta variant and the fast-spreading Omicron would create “a total saturation of the national health system”, Støre said, announcing on Monday evening that booster shots were to be brought forward for health workers and all over-45s. The prime minister also announced that from Wednesday, bars and restaurants would no longer serve alcohol, remote working would be compulsory where possible, mask mandates would be extended and access to pools and gyms restricted. “There is no doubt, the new variant really changes the rules. That’s why we need to act fast and we need to act again,” Støre said. “For many this will feel like a lockdown, if not of society then of their lives and of their livelihoods.” Elsewhere in Europe, infection numbers in countries that endured significant waves last month, before Omicron emerged – including Austria, Germany, the Netherlands and Belgium, as well as central and eastern European nations such as Slovakia, the Czech Republic and Croatia – have fallen sharply. However, officials in France, where there are also signs that the pace of a rapid recent surge may be starting to slow, have warned Omicron will almost certainly fuel a sixth wave, while cases in countries in southern Europe that largely escaped the autumn wave are starting to rise rapidly. Martin Hirsch, the head of Paris’s AP-HP hospitals group, Europe’s largest hospital system, said on Monday France should prepare for an Omicron-driven wave of infections starting in January, while Belgium’s chief epidemiologist said he expected a fresh surge to start “around about new year’s time”. Despite steadily falling case numbers, the Dutch government was expected on Tuesday to announce schools would close a week early for Christmas as infections remained high and hospitals struggled with a wave of patients. Restaurants, bars, non-essential stores and other public places have been closed from 5pm to 5am in the Netherlands since late November in an attempt to slow the virus’s spread. Experts have said Denmark’s advanced sequencing capacity – the country has developed a quick genetic test for Omicron, and is screening every positive test for the variant – provides a uniquely comprehensive picture of how the variant is spreading, and should serve as a warning of what is to come elsewhere in Europe. Researchers at the Statens Serum Institute in Copenhagen estimated in a report this week that Omicron cases in Denmark were doubling every two days, with about three-quarters of infections reported in people who have received two vaccine doses. They predicted the variant would push daily infections to more than 10,000 by the end of this week, with numbers rising further and hospitals coming under pressure even if, as most scientists believe, Omicron is less virulent than earlier variants – but said their modelling did not account for the impact of booster shots. • This article was amended on 15 December 2021 to clarify that early school closures were announced in Denmark last week; they did not happen then.GUNNED DOWN If recent history teaches us anything at all, it’s that the captain of Arsenal Football Club almost always gets himself into wholly avoidable trouble. Take William Gallas, who went out of his way to start an argument with his teammates and was stripped of the armband as a result. Or Granit Xhaka, who instigated a row with his own fans with predictably similar consequences. Patrick Vieira got into a brawl with Roy Keane that lasted six years, Cesc Fàbregas annoyed Hull boss Phil Brown by wearing a coat, and Tony Adams ended up in prison. That rumble you hear from below the ground isn’t the Piccadilly Line passing through; it’s Charlie Buchan, Alex James and Joe Mercer furiously spinning in their graves. Hats off to Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang, then, for selflessly going the extra yard to maintain this proud modern Arsenal tradition. The once-great striker hasn’t exactly enjoyed a stellar season so far, spending most of it shanking simple tap-ins from a couple of feet on to the woodwork and away. His most recent kick of a football was almost supernaturally abysmal, a gilt-edged chance to rescue a point deep into injury time against Everton slapped harmlessly wide. That egregious miss now stands as his last act as captain of the club, having been relieved of his duties upon breaching pre-match protocols for a second time in 10 months. January window gossip columns ahoy! To be fair, the player’s 2021 travails haven’t been all of his own making – his mother has been seriously ill, while he was hospitalised after contracting malaria – but ignoring Covid regulations to get a new tattoo wasn’t the smartest move, and so rocking up late yet again proved one stress test too many on Mikel Arteta’s already brittle patience. Aubameyang won’t be considered for Wednesday’s match with West Ham, Alexandre Lacazette taking over coin-tossing and performative-shouting-and-pointing duties. In the longer term, with Auba surely for the off and Lacazette’s future uncertain, Kieran Tierney and Martin Ødegaard will be considered for the captaincy full time. Check back with us in 18 months to see how the next man has managed to irritate and alienate all and sundry. LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE! Join Rob Smyth from 7.45pm GMT for hot MBM coverage of Norwich 1-1 Aston Villa in the Premier League, while Scott Murray will be on hand for Manchester City 3-2 Leeds at 8pm. QUOTE OF THE DAY “I am going to die for PSG in the game against Real Madrid … I’ll do everything possible to get through. They’re the team that bet on me” – Sergio Ramos gets a little carried away when asked if he’ll have conflicted feelings when he returns to the Bernabéu in Big Cup. FIVER LETTERS “The Liga MX gran final between Atlas and Léon was won by the former on penalties after a 3-3 tie over two legs, but the highlight had to be these honeymooners (at 6m 43s). Nothing says nuptial bliss like razor wire and bare-chested strangers” – Mike Edwards [you weren’t there for Weird Uncle Fiver’s third wedding – Fiver Ed]. “Did you know that in the Big Website column Ten Talking Points from the Weekend, from the 13 games Brighton have featured, they have been said talking point (and thus considered more interesting than their opponent) 10 times, or 77% of the time? The probability of this being by chance is (opening myself to the pedants here), less than 0.05% (0.035%, by my reckoning). Compare that with the team just above them (Brentford), or just below them (er, Palace), who clock in at 36% and 38% respectively, or even traffic generators Liverpool and Manchester United (both on a statistically insignificant 64%). Are we really saying that the south coast’s favourite goal-shy draw specialists have been that fascinating as they once more work their way towards 15th place? Is The Man in fact Attila the Stockbroker? Or, as some of the wildly positive takes on 0-0 draws seem to suggest, is it for a bet?” – Jon Millard. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Mike Edwards. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS Burnley’s legendary forward Jimmy Robson, who helped the club win the First Division title in 1960, has died at the age of 82. Brentford v Manchester United has been called off after the Premier League announced a record number of 42 positive Covid tests. Meanwhile, United say Victor Lindelöf is recovering well from unrelated breathing difficulties that forced him off in the win over Norwich. “I think he had a collision with another player and he had problems to breathe for more than 10 minutes,” said Ralf Rangnick. “His heart rate was higher than normal and therefore he was a little bit shocked.” Barcelona’s Sergio Agüero is expected to announce his retirement due to a heart condition. Dundee captain Charlie Adam has been arrested and charged in connection with a road traffic offence. Aston Villa might take into consideration a player’s vaccine status when considering transfer targets in January. “We look at everything. So I’m sure it will come up,” tooted manager $tevie Mbe. Leeds have been charged with failing to control their players after a group of them re-enacted Manchester United v Andy D’Urso when referee Chris Kavanagh awarded a late penalty to Chelsea during the 3-2 defeat at Stamford Bridge. And Real Madrid are leading the race to sign Antonio Rüdiger on a freebie next summer. WIN! WIN! WIN! Streltsov – Jonathan Wilson’s novel. Like everybody else at Torpedo Moscow, Vanya loves Eduard Streltsov, the dashing young striker who scores hatfuls of goals. But on the eve of the 1958 World Cup, Streltsov is arrested and Vanya has to reconsider everything. Streltsov is a story of fandom and celebrity, of booze and paranoia, of two men who can only really understand the world through football. The Fiver has three copies to give away to subscribers. To be in with a shout just send an email titled ‘Fiver’ along with your name and postal address to info@theblizzard.co.uk. Streltsov is available in print and digital editions and Fiver readers can get £1 off by entering ‘GSTREL’ at the checkout. STILL WANT MORE? The aforementioned floating football brain in a jar gives his Big Cup last-16 tie-by-tie analysis and verdicts after the bungled tombola. Chelsea’s Jessie Fleming gets her chat on with Suzy Wrack. Atlético Madrid have got identity issues, reckons Jonathan Liew. It was raining goals – and teddy bears – as Real Betis were left dreaming of Big Cup after a fourth La Liga win on the spin, writes Sid Lowe. Is the Premier League jig finally up for Burnley, asks Will Unwin. Chris Armas was a forgettable boss in MLS, so how the hell has he ended up at Manchester United? Graham Ruthven explains. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! HAVING TO LIVE VICARIOUSLY THROUGH THISAt least three Labour frontbenchers including Rachel Reeves are among a string of MPs to have tested positive for Covid this week, amid concerns about parliamentarians crowding into the House of Commons for votes on “plan B” restrictions for England. Ed Davey, the Liberal Democrat leader, is also isolating after developing mild symptoms on Monday morning and receiving a positive PCR test on Tuesday. Reeves, the shadow chancellor, said she was awaiting the result of a PCR test and would miss Tuesday’s votes. Jim McMahon, the shadow environment secretary, and Bridget Phillipson, the shadow education secretary, also revealed they had tested positive. Two more Labour MPs – Emma Hardy and Feryal Clark – are isolating, while two Tory MPs – Darren Henry and Dean Russell – also revealed they would be missing the debate and votes because they had tested positive. The Scottish National party’s Douglas Chapman is also isolating. With so many absences, Peter Grant, an SNP MP, raised concerns about MPs continuing to crowd together through the lobbies in the Commons on Tuesday. “This evening in the parliament that claims to be a shining beacon for all others, the only way to pass regulations to try and get Omicron Covid back under control will be for about 400 people to pack into a room big enough for 100 to record their votes,” he said. “They’ll do this up to four times in succession. In between, they won’t be able to go too far so will pack out the lobbies at either end of the chamber waiting for the next vote to be called. “Several MPs have tested positive for Covid in the last few days so there’s a very high probability that others are carrying the virus but have not yet shown symptoms or given a positive test. What could possibly go wrong?” MPs are not able to vote by proxy if they are unwell, after the cancellation of hybrid proceedings that allowed them to vote remotely earlier this year. Labour opposed the move to get rid of hybrid proceedings but has not recently called for their reinstatement. At least 30 MPs have publicly declared within the past two months that they have had Covid, although the number who have been isolating is said by multiple party sources to be much higher than that. It is not compulsory for MPs to wear masks in the Commons. Most were wearing face coverings in a debate on Covid restrictions on Tuesday, apart from a handful of Conservatives.What’s a worse sign of weakness – going on TV to terrify the nation to distract from your illicit cheese and wine parties, or bombing an aspirin factory to distract from a grand jury investigation into your illicit blowjobs? In strictly limited terms, there are some similarities between Boris Johnson’s address to the nation on Sunday, and Bill Clinton’s 1998 announcement of the bombing of a Sudanese pharmaceutical plant, three days after the then US president had testified – and lied – in the Monica Lewinsky hearings. Both Clinton and Johnson are men of various “appetites”, of course, and Clinton was widely believed to be leaning in to a helpful distraction with his solemn live appearance on America’s TV screens. Given the total cynicism Johnson inspires, some might say the same of the PM, with Sunday’s decision to reannounce his booster drive in the face of the Omicron variant feeling at least conveniently timed to draw attention away from the multiple rule-breaking allegations now dogging his entire No 10 operation. But the key difference is that while the threat of the Omicron is not yet fully quantified, it is certainly real, and could well be disastrous for the already teetering NHS. Clinton’s chemical weapons factory, meanwhile, turned out not to be one at all, but a facility that produced more than half Sudan’s vital medicines, from malaria drugs to TB medication. Other differences? At least Bubba brushed his hair to address his nation. I don’t know about you, but I’m getting a bit tired of having my vital public health messages delivered by someone who looks as if he’s just been forcibly dragged away from a knee-trembler in the stationery cupboard at one of Downing Street’s famous Christmas parties. No matter how many of these addresses we have to sit through, you always sense Johnson’s last words spoken to an aide just before he goes live are the same. “God, you’re a killjoy, mate – I was nearly finished. [FROZEN LOOK] Shit, are we rolling?” The main problem, obviously, is the fact that these deadly serious briefings are fronted by the little prime minister who cried wolf. Johnson is such a noted liar about absolutely everything else that being asked to believe him on matters of life and death seems bizarre. No one could be more miscast; it’s like watching a rice pudding play King Lear. Unsurprisingly, fewer and fewer people seem to be taking him seriously each time – not least, his own backbenchers. Perhaps it’s fitting that someone who was such a nakedly self-interested and irresponsible MP himself is now at the mercy of so many similarly single-minded underlings. In the Conservative parliamentary party, an anything-goes atmosphere certainly seems to be taking hold. Wherever you stand on the actual efficacy of vaccine passports – and testing is a miles better way out – we have to lament the sort of morally bankrupt political culture where Yeovil MP Marcus Fysh feels free to publicly compare their proposed introduction with “Nazi Germany”. Dear dear. Marcus is a person who has had every top-end educational advantage lavished upon him at every stage of his life, but still, somehow, just HAS to bring up the Holocaust because people might need to flash an app get into a mega-Spoons on a busy night. It doesn’t exactly fill one with hope for serious medium-term solutions to our ongoing and recurrent woes. Covid will be endemic, meaning we should invest in the NHS and build back capacity and resilience lost to years of cuts and false efficiencies, along with specialist clinics … The only thing is, guys like Marcus might have to vote for it. So we won’t. For now, Johnson would prefer to frighten people in order to drive them into a system that is not capable of doing what he promised on Sunday. This is not a sophisticated, intelligent or even kind way of doing politics – and it certainly isn’t effective, as will be seen over the coming weeks and probably months. It is, however, a way of making any pending failures someone else’s fault. What a shock that a guy who spent last week insisting there had been no party in Downing Street will now only say he personally didn’t break any rules. It’ll be the same with this million-jabs-a-day promise. As Johnson’s spokesperson insisted yesterday, that’s actually merely a target, and “no one is going to get the blame if that doesn’t happen”. Sure! Sure they won’t. In the meantime, at what once more seems a crucial stage of the pandemic, many are tiring of being told to take responsibility by a guy who never does. I read this morning that the mooted Tory rebellion is causing “yet another headache for the PM”, and wondered what he’ll take to soothe it. Couple of aspirin factories, maybe. Always gets you out of a hole. Marina Hyde is a Guardian columnistSam Hanson has been managing Portsmouth Food bank for two-and-a-half years. The food bank, which runs in three sites across the city, is part of the Trussell Trust’s network of more than 1,300 food bank centres across the UK. How many volunteers do you have? We have around 30 in total, which works out at approximately 10 a session – they generally do different days. We have volunteers who help support people using the food bank, volunteers in our warehouse who help to sort the food, and people who collect food for us from schools and supermarkets. How many people typically come in during the day? It’s quite unpredictable – it can be anywhere from about 20 to 80, so on average probably about 40 a day. Is it the same people each week? We try to help people out of crisis, and the idea is that once they’re out of crisis, they remain out of crisis. However, some people do need support again. We see people more on a monthly basis than a weekly basis. Probably half the people that we serve come back more than once. People don’t want to need our support, but it’s often the only option while they work through their hardship. Do you make food parcels for people, or do you let them choose the food themselves? Because of the volume of people we’re serving, we generally make it up for them. We always take into account religious requirements or allergies. We also tend to add in other things. We get lots of toiletries and pet food, and we have a partnership with FareShare – we pay them a subscription and they bring us enough fruit and veg to last a week. How much food is there in a parcel? It typically lasts three days. That’s based on a packing list, so we pack the same list every time. It’s nutritionally balanced, so there are about 20 or 30 different lines we put in – beans and soup and veg and all that sort of stuff. What kinds of people do you see, and what are the circumstances that have led to them needing a food bank? There’s a whole host of reasons that people come to us, but predominantly it’s around debt or low income, whether that’s because of changes to benefits or they’ve lost a job. People living with a disability or health condition, families with children and single parents are also groups of people who are most likely to need a food bank’s help, as the social security system fails to provide too many people with the income they need to afford food. There are also people who come to us who are homeless or may be fleeing domestic violence. Are you able to help them in other ways? People come to a food bank predominantly because they don’t have enough money to afford food, so that’s the first port of call. We always give them food, but we also have trained advisers who can help with budgeting advice or sourcing childcare support. There are many other services that can be of support to people, but they may just not be aware of it. We want to try to help them, and often we try to get to the root cause of what’s going on while they’re with us. What are the highs of the job? Probably knowing that you’re making a tangible difference to someone’s life. When people arrive, they’re hungry, they’re often uncertain and maybe a bit fearful, so you’re able to bring that immediate relief in the form of a food parcel, but also comfort and maybe peace as well through helping them to connect to other services. What about the lows? We know that the system that these people are in is fundamentally broken, and so you feel that you will be seeing a lot of the same people again and again. We are campaigning for the government to end the need for food banks by providing more local services that can help people in genuine crisis. Are there any individual stories that stand out for you? Just before Covid, a Romanian man came in who didn’t speak very much English, but we were able to get a translator. He had just lost his wife and he had three young children, and didn’t know where to turn. We were able to support him through one of our advisers – provide him with childcare support, with clothes, with budgeting support and of course food, and you could see the tangible difference we were making. And the success of that is that he hasn’t been back to us since. We love to help people, but we don’t really want to see them again – we want them to be able to help themselves. Knowing we made a huge difference in that person’s life was really good. In the time you’ve been doing it has there been any increase or decrease in numbers? We were sending out about 7,000 parcels in 2019. The figure from the start of the pandemic until now is just under 20,000 parcels, which has been a huge change. The two main categories of people we were supporting were small families – maybe one of them had lost their job – and single males. The main reason for that, we figured, was that there’s a lot of casual work with no real support in place. When the furlough scheme came in, they weren’t eligible for that and so they just lost their job. Has anything else changed? Throughout the pandemic, people have donated food to us, and given their time – people we’ve never met who send us an email out of the blue and come in and help, so that’s probably one of the biggest changes. The volume of food we’re giving out has also changed. We were giving out 25 to 30 tonnes of food in a normal year, and then from the start of the pandemic in March till July 2020, we gave out nearly 70 tonnes. Most of that food is donated, and we’re so grateful for people’s kindness.To avoid turning on the heating, Sarah uses a hot water bottle to keep herself warm and tries hard to make the family emergency food parcel from her local food bank in Bristol last longer than a week. She’s run out of jewellery and clothes to sell to raise money to pay essential bills and says it’s been impossible to secure another loan. Sarah has no idea where the extra cash is going to come from to meet higher heating and food costs this winter – let alone Christmas. “We are struggling to pay bills at the moment so how on earth are we going to manage?” Registered disabled because of her epilepsy and a number of mental health conditions, Sarah, 41, and her family have been living below the poverty line since she lost her job in March. She failed her probationary period with the care company she was working for because the side effects of brain surgery to treat her epilepsy meant she could be forgetful. She is in dispute with the Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) over her entitlement to personal independence payment (Pip) – the benefit designed to pay for the extra living costs of being disabled – so in the meantime the family relies on her husband’s supermarket job salary, universal credit (UC) and employment and support allowance (ESA) to survive. “My husband works 33 hours a week but it’s still not enough. And even when he got extra hours the DWP docked my UC so in effect he was working for nothing,” she says. “The food bank has been a lifeline and it’s going to be absolutely critical this winter, but I feel very low that I have to use it – I feel like I’ve failed.” Sarah’s story of debt and despair is not unique. She is among the estimated 14 million people living in poverty in the UK, of which half are either disabled or have somebody in their household living with a disability. That figure is reflected in the number of disabled people who are forced to turn to food banks. The Trussell Trust says 62% of working age people who were referred to a food bank in its network in early 2020 were disabled – 41% of households were affected by multiple disabilities. Households affected by disability had greater levels of debt when compared with non-disabled households. For instance, 32% were in arrears with fuel bills, which is often attributed to having to spend more time at home or keep themselves warm because of their medical condition. And 41% of disabled households owed money to the DWP. Emma Revie, chief executive of the Trussell Trust, says the 62% figure – the number of disabled people who use a food bank – is one of the statistics that keeps her up at night. “When first seeing it in black and white it is horrifying – it’s such a structural injustice,” she says. “In what ways is the system to support disabled people failing if they are three times more likely to be at a food bank [than somebody without a disability]?” The solution, according to Revie, is threefold. There needs to be a change in policy to ensure that disabled people have enough money to pay essential bills, alongside an understanding about what the real additional costs are of living with a disability. And the public should use its voice. “What I have seen more so than ever before in the pandemic, is that when the British people speak out on things they think are unjust and just not right, change is possible.” The link between extreme poverty and disability came as no surprise to the campaigning group Disability Rights UK, but the 62% figure was a shock. Its head of policy Fazilet Hadi says: “That figure did shock me – it’s such a high usage by disabled people – and I think everybody was shocked to be honest.” Look behind the figures and it is clear why such a high number of disabled people are living in poverty and left with no choice but to use a food bank to feed themselves and their families. Although approximately 81% of adults of working age in the UK are in employment, the figure drops to 52% for disabled people – creating a nearly 30% employment gap. “People born with a disability have an educational attainment gap and they probably never catch up,” says Hadi. “Then you have people who become disabled when older, who have to learn to adjust to their disability and often they will fall out of the labour market.” People living with a disability are also more likely to be paid less than a non-disabled person. The Trades Union Congress estimates this pay gap to be around 16.5%. Kept out of employment, disabled people have to rely heavily on the benefits system to keep above the poverty line. Many missed out on the £20 a week uplift to UC because they had opted to stay on ESA instead. And, according to campaigners, the Pip benefit fails to meet the extra living costs of being disabled, such as the need for extra heating or taxi fares to get around. “On the one side you have the employment challenges and on the other the increased costs of being disabled,” says Hadi. “I think the whole thing is shocking in such a rich society like ours. It’s almost like disabled people are back in the 19th century – they are just trapped in a cycle of poverty.” And does she expect their use of food banks to fall in the next 12 months? “I don’t think this position is going to change: there is nothing that the government is doing which will make these Trussell Trust figures any better next year.”More people on social security risk falling into deeper poverty this winter – many will face the impossible decision whether to skip meals or heat their home. Here’s what is behind pushing them further below the poverty line in 2021. Swingeing universal credit cuts The temporary £20 uplift to universal credit (UC), introduced in March last year to provide extra financial help to low income people at the height of the pandemic, was withdrawn on 6 October. The move means an estimated 5.5 million low income families will be about £1,040 a year worse off. Emma Revie, the Trussell Trust chief executive officer, describes the cuts as “the largest cut to social security since the second world war”, which will “unequivocally lead to an increase in the number of people experiencing destitution. We won’t know the full impact until the other side of winter, but having spoken to our food bank managers they are seeing more people coming through the door.” Moreover, chancellor Rishi Sunak’s autumn budget sweetener that the UC taper – the amount of benefit withdrawn from every pound a claimant earns – would fall from 63% to 55% was not the panacea that it may have first appeared. Only UC claimants who are in work will benefit from the move, which means it is unlikely to help the majority of people referred to a food bank. However a survey by the Joseph Rowntree Foundation, found 50% of people on UC are not confident either of finding a job or, perhaps more significantly, being able to work more hours in order to boost their income. People in low-income jobs often work weekend and evening shifts and are unable to take on extra hours, even if available, because they cannot access the affordable and flexible child care they would need or afford the additional transport costs to work more days. Revie says: “We need to have a serious look at how we ensure that work is fair, is secure and is fairly paid and enables people to be held out of destitution.” Household fuel bills and gas prices soar Home fuel bills went up from 1 October – the second time this year – when the energy regulator Ofgem increased the energy price cap from the £1,138 set in April to £1,277. The average rise of 12% puts an extra £153 a year on dual fuel costs for households on a pre-payment tariff or £139 for those who pay by direct debit. The rise is predicted to push a further 500,000 people into fuel poverty. Figures from the Trussell Trust reveal that in mid-2020, 89% of households referred to food banks in its network had some kind of debt and 36% owed money to their energy supplier. Low income households are also likely to be hardest hit by the energy hike as they are more likely to live in less energy-efficient homes. Announcing the rise in August, Ofgem attributed the cap increase to the more than 50% rise in energy costs in the last six months, with gas hitting a record high as the world comes out of lockdown. Inflation on the up In November the Trussell Trust warned that any rise in UK inflation will have a greater impact on people on low incomes compared to those on higher incomes. It predicted more people will have to rely on food aid as they increasingly struggle to pay their essential bills. The comments followed the October announcement that the UK consumer price index, which is based on the value of a basket of goods and services and is used as a measure for inflation, was 4.2% – the highest rate for 10 years. The Bank of England warned in October that the UK could be heading towards 5% by the end of the year – way above its predicted target of 2%. Shoppers are already feeling the pinch as manufacturers are starting to pass on the rise in inflation. Consumer goods giant Unilever, which owns brands such as Marmite, PG Tips and Knorr, admitted its prices had risen by 4.1% in the three months to September – blaming high levels of inflation alongside higher energy and transport costs. Procter &amp; Gamble – which is behind brands such as Tide detergent, Charmin toilet paper and Crest toothpaste – also warned this autumn that prices will go up.It’s not the start in life anyone plans for their child, and yet according to analysis from the Child Poverty Action Group (CPAG), there were 4.3 million children living in poverty in the UK in 2019-20, which equates to 31% of children, or nine in a classroom of 30. For larger families, this number rises to 42%. And for black and minority ethnic groups the figures are even more stark: almost half (46%) are now in poverty, compared with 26% of children in white British families. In 1979, sociologist Peter Townsend, a founding member of CPAG, formulated a definition of poverty still widely accepted as the standard today: “Individuals, families and groups in the population can be said to be in poverty when they lack resources to obtain the type of diet, participate in the activities and have the living conditions and amenities which are customary, or at least widely encouraged and approved, in the societies in which they belong.” Social change charity the Joseph Rowntree Foundation defines relative income poverty more specifically as when households have “less than 60% of contemporary median income”. Cost of living The coronavirus pandemic is, of course, a factor. Between 2018/19 and 2019/20, the Trussell Trust, a charity committed to ending poverty and hunger, noted a 49% increase in the number of children supported by food banks in its network. In total, 370,000 households were supported by food banks in the charity’s network in 2019/20 – and those households included 320,000 children. “We had been seeing disproportionately large numbers of children at food banks over the last few years,” says Emma Revie, chief executive of the Trussell Trust. “It was definitely exacerbated and accelerated during the pandemic, where we saw more and more children coming in at a higher rate.” And while the economic shock produced by the pandemic goes some way to explaining this rise, Revie says it doesn’t explain the whole picture. “There has not really been a change in the reasons why people are going to food banks during the pandemic,” she says, adding that existing issues have just been exacerbated. “We saw more people being unable to work either through ill health or through loss of job, more people coming on to social security, and more people finding that social security was insufficient to keep them out of destitution and therefore coming to the food bank.” The pre-existing conditions Revie refers to are the result of a combination of systemic failures in our social security system, which are making life impossible for many families. Among some of the biggest drivers pushing people deeper into poverty, she says, are the introduction of the two-child limit and the benefits cap, which disproportionately affect larger families. “Even though their benefit calculation states families with children should receive a higher level of benefits to enable them to afford the essentials,” she says, “it’s artificially capped, the result of which is more children finding themselves in families experiencing poverty.” In-work poverty Poverty in working households is also pushing many families over the edge, where a combination of low-paid work, stagnating wages and zero-hours contracts make income precarious. This type of poverty was exacerbated hugely by the pandemic, which forced many in the informal economy into destitution. For these people and many of the self-employed, government support grants to help keep families afloat were either slow to come or not available at all, exposing huge failures in the social support systems designed to help people out of poverty. At the same time, the cost of living continues to rise at a rate higher than we’ve seen in a decade. Inflation, which recently hit 4.2% – and is forecast to hit 5% by the end of the year – is hitting those with the least the hardest when it comes to their purchasing power. This winter, the Trussell Trust expects an acute spike in fuel prices to further exacerbate this pressure, putting parents in the position of choosing between heating their homes and feeding their children; a decision no parent should ever have to make. And that’s before you even take into account the UK’s housing crisis and rising price of rents, and the pressure this is putting on everyone, but especially people who are some of the most deprived in our society. “We know that many times when people go to food banks, it’s because their housing support through the social security system isn’t enough to cover their rent,” says Revie. Of course, she explains, the number one priority for most families is keeping a roof over their head, so when private rental costs rise faster than the social security payments designed to cover those costs, this drives “many, many people into destitution”. A broken system The result of all of this is a gap between the need for help and the level of support available to provide it. In terms of what is needed to remedy the situation, or at the very least improve it, Revie has a few ideas. “We know that the £20 uplift to universal credit that was applied at the start of the pandemic – and that was recently revoked – prevented many people from having to come to food banks, so we need to be looking at the sufficiency of our social security,” she says. Policymakers serious about addressing child poverty must confront the glaring reality of the millions of families who are struggling and think practically about what is actually needed, she adds. “If I had a policy that could be implemented immediately, it would be looking at the value of social security and the accessibility of the support we provide to people to navigate the system to ensure they get their full entitlements,” she says. “We find through some of our services in food banks that we’re providing specialist benefits advice and are aware that many people aren’t getting their full entitlement.” An example she gives is of parents caring for a disabled child, who are entitled to extra allowance. “They’re struggling with Pip [personal independence payment] applications that are being turned down, and then have been turned over on appeal. We need to make the system accessible and we need to be supporting people to get their full entitlements.” Without this, she says, we are failing people most in need. “We need to make sure what is being provided is actually sufficient to hold people out of destitution.”A “cunning and clever” woman has been found guilty of murdering her girlfriend’s toddler daughter after being caught on CCTV “terrorising” the child when she was left to babysit. Savannah Brockhill, 28, an amateur boxer and security guard who called herself the “number one psycho”, punched 16-month Star Hobson to death in Keighley, West Yorkshire, on 22 September 2020. She had been in a “toxic” relationship with Star’s mother, Frankie Smith, for 10 months at the time of the murder. Smith, 20, was acquitted of murder and manslaughter after the jury accepted she had not encouraged Brockhill’s fatal attack. She was found guilty of the lesser charge of causing or allowing the death of a child. Numerous friends and family members called social services to express concerns about Star during her short life. The first referral was made in January 2020. But Smith fobbed off social workers, persuading them the referrals were malicious. Following the unanimous verdicts at Bradford crown court on Tuesday, the Bradford Partnership, which has responsibility for children’s safeguarding, apologised for missing warning signs. “We want to say first and foremost that we’re sorry for the death of Star. This was a child’s life cut cruelly short,” it said in a statement. “We offered support and assistance to Star’s family for what we believed their needs to be, at that given time, but we all deeply regret that not all the warning signs were seen that could have led to firmer statutory enforcement action.” A local child safeguarding practice review into the case is under way and will be published in January. The Department for Education said it would “not hesitate” to remove children’s services control from Bradford council “if necessary”. Outside court on Tuesday, David Fawcett – the partner of Smith’s grandmother, who called social services in May after hearing that Brockhill had been using a wrestling move called a “slam-choke” on Star – said he was disgusted that the authorities did not step in. “It’s disgusting because there were five referrals. Not one of them did anything. It’s just beyond belief, really.” He described Brockhill as “pure evil” and accused her of having “brainwashed” Smith. “We were just a quiet, lovely family and she ascended from the bowels of hell and just completely devastated and wrecked our family,” he said. Fawcett, a postal worker from Baildon, Bradford, said that when his partner, Anita Smith, made her complaint, she told social services: “Look, we don’t want another Baby P on our hands here, do we?.” But he said the council closed the case after concluding the referral was “malicious”. Seventeen-month old Peter Connolly, known in the courts as Baby P, died in 2008 after suffering months of abuse, despite being on the child protection register. The convictions came 11 days after another couple were convicted in a separate case of killing six-year-old Arthur Labinjo-Hughes after a “campaign of appalling cruelty” during lockdown. Arthur died in June 2020 after being deprived of food, force-fed salt and assaulted, in abuse that was filmed and photographed by his stepmother and father. Smith and Brockhill also filmed many acts of cruelty against Star, sending them to friends for their own amusement. Others were caught on CCTV. Brockhill sometimes edited the footage by adding dramatic music and captions. The women could be heard laughing as they filmed Star falling off a chair or down the stairs. Brockhill admitted she found them funny, comparing them to clips on You’ve Been Framed. Halfway through the seven-week trial, Smith pleaded guilty to eight instances of child cruelty against Star between April to September 2020. The court heard Smith was of extremely low intelligence, and “abnormally compliant” when told to do something by an authority figure. Brockhill, eight years Smith’s senior, bossed her around, urging her to implement a strict eating and sleeping routine. She told the court she came from an English Gypsy family and left school when she was 10. She played on her tough image, posting videos online threatening to hurt anyone who flirted with Smith. Brockhill’s barrister, Katherine Goddard QC, told the jury: “To say the relationship between Savannah Brockhill and Frankie Smith was toxic is about the biggest understatement anyone could make. From the start it was riddled with distrust and insecurity from both sides.” A week before Star was killed, Brockhill took the child to her workplace, a recycling plant in Doncaster, overnight so that Smith could go out drinking. CCTV from the site showed her “terrorising” Star, Smith’s barrister, Zafar Ali QC, told the jury. Ali invited the jury to conclude that Brockhill was “cunning and clever” and manipulated Smith to do what she wanted. Smith maintained she was in the toilet when Star suffered the “catastrophic” abdominal injuries that killed her. A pathologist found the main vein carrying blood back to the heart from Star’s legs and organs of the abdomen had been torn, as well as Star’s liver and the fatty attachments of the bowel, called the mesentery. There was also bruising over the lower part of the lungs and over the pancreas, caused by punching, stamping or kicking. Brockhill said Star hurt herself when her back was turned, suggesting the injuries were caused either by one of the two other small children present or by accident. Perhaps Star had fallen off the sofa, she said. Throughout the trial, Smith insisted only Brockhill could have killed Star. Ultimately the jury accepted Brockhill delivered the fatal blow and that Smith was not responsible for killing Star. But they did not exonerate her, finding she had still caused or allowed her daughter’s death. Anita Banerjee, senior crown prosecutor for the Crown Prosecution Service in Yorkshire and Humberside, said: “Throughout her short life Star was subjected to endless physical assaults and psychological harm. Instead of love and protection, she experienced a world of humiliation, cruelty and pain at the hands of those who should have protected her most. “It is impossible to imagine how any parent or carer could inflict this level of pain and suffering on an entirely defenceless little girl. Our thoughts remain with Star’s family, as they have been throughout.” Brockhill and Smith will be sentenced on Wednesday.Access to Covid-19 tests has been beset by problems for a second day running as the availability of lab-processed kits and rapid tests were hit by intermittent shortages, with Downing Street drafting in Amazon to clear delivery hold-ups. Slots for PCR tests – processed in laboratories – at walk-in or drive-through sites in some parts of England for people with coronavirus symptoms were unavailable and briefly there were none available in any part of the country. The booking website was later updated to show slots available in every region, although there were still none available in some counties. Home delivery PCR kits were available, the website said, but for the second day running, rapid lateral flow test kits only intermittently unavailable online. These could still be collected from pharmacies and other in-person sites, although there were reports of shortages at some pharmacies. Downing Street said ministers were working with Royal Mail and Amazon to ensure more of the lateral flow tests could be delivered. The prime minister’s official spokesman said: “We are increasing the capacity, Royal Mail are freeing up additional delivery slots to become available in the next few days and we’re working with a range of businesses including Amazon to further expand capacity.” He said 2.6m lateral flows tests were dispatched between 8pm on Saturday and 8pm on Sunday, compared with 584,000 on 13 November. The spokesman insisted there was significant testing capacity despite suggestions of difficulties finding PCR tests. “In terms of PCR availability, I don’t have the latest but I would envisage further booking possibilities will come online later and, of course, there are in-person opportunities as well,” he said. On Tuesday, new guidance came into force in England for the testing of coronavirus close contacts. Double-jabbed people are being asked to take a lateral flow test every day for seven days if they come into contact with someone with Covid. A UK Health Security Agency spokesperson said: “There is no shortage of lateral flow tests. More tests should become available for home delivery every few hours. “We are issuing record numbers of rapid test kits to people’s homes across the country, with 1.6m tests – 230,000 boxes – distributed just yesterday. We are urgently working to further expand our delivery capacity so more people can order tests. “Everyone who needs a lateral flow test can also collect them at their local pharmacy, some community sites and some schools and colleges.” On PCR tests, the agency said: “Appointments for PCR tests are available, but high demand can lead to temporary reduced availability in some areas. More appointments are made available to book every afternoon.” The health secretary, Sajid Javid, said on Monday limits on ordering tests were linked to delivery capacity, and said new arrangements had been reached with Amazon and others. But his Labourcounterpart, Wes Streeting, described Covid testing as a “shambles”. The shadow health secretary said an increase in demand should have been foreseen, and added: “This is a serious problem. Those coming into contact with positive Omicron cases will not be able to follow the rules and get themselves tested on a daily basis.” There has also been an increased demand for booster vaccines, with many people spending hours in queues at walk-in clinics to get their jabs.Dido Harding personally intervened to add a former Sainsbury’s colleague to the shortlist to be head of Covid testing alongside candidates with a public health or health logistics background, a court has heard. The high court is being asked to rule on whether the government acted unlawfully with respect to the appointments of Harding, a Conservative peer, and Mike Coupe, formerly CEO of Sainsbury’s, to leading roles at NHS test and trace without competition. On Tuesday, the court was told that Harding, who was herself appointed as chair of NHS test and trace within hours of a shortlist being drawn up, added Coupe to a shortlist of candidates that had been created by the Department of Health and Social Care from candidates selected by an agency. In written submissions, Jason Coppel QC, acting for the claimants, Runnymede Trust and the Good Law Project, said: “Baroness Harding intervened to add Mike Coupe to the shortlist of candidates. The recruitment agency had not recommended him. Mr Coupe’s most significant professional experience is as the former CEO of Sainsbury’s … “Mr Coupe has no public health or health logistics background. This should be contrasted with the specialist experience of the other candidates … This evidence should then be contrasted with what is said to have been Baroness Harding’s unevidenced assertion that Mr Coupe had the most ‘transferrable experience’.” Harding alone interviewed two shortlisted candidates as well as Coupe, although he was the only one she interviewed in person, the court heard. Coppel described Harding’s conduct as presenting an “obvious appearance of bias”. As well as bias, the claimants allege indirect discrimination and breach of the public sector equality duty in the appointments that are the subject of the legal challenge. They say that Harding and Coupe’s appointments to NHS test and trace as well as the former’s subsequent appointment to head up what is now the UK Health and Security Agency (UKHSA) were made in such a way that they were only open to a “tight circle” of friends and contacts of Conservative politicians. As well as the individual decisions, they are challenging what they say is an unlawful policy, which they allege disadvantages the unconnected, ethnic minorities and people with disabilities. Coppel said Harding’s appointment to NHS test and trace was decided within three hours of a recruitment agency submitting a list of 21 candidates. “Baroness Harding’s experience is not such that it was obvious, without any selection process, that she was uniquely qualified for the role,” said Coppel. “In 2017, Baroness Harding was appointed as the chair of NHS Improvement … Prior to that role, she had no experience as a public administrator in the public health sector. She is the wife of the former Conservative minister John Penrose, who is the prime minister’s ‘anti-corruption champion’, and she is a personal friend of former prime minister David Cameron. Her most high-profile professional experience was as the former chief executive of the TalkTalk group.” The court heard that, in internal emails, civil servants referred to “two breaches” in the recruitment process at NHS test and trace, and described the process to appoint Harding as “ludicrous”. One said: “I am worried that all of these appointments are being made on the fly.” Another email by a civil servant expressed concern that the process to appoint Harding could ride “roughshod over some very basic principles that underpin our system (eg democratic accountability)“. Coppel said Harding’s appointment to head what would become the UKSHA was taken “with no recruitment process whatsoever”. The case, brought against the health secretary, Sajid Javid, and Boris Johnson, the prime minister, continues.A standoff over the New South Wales government’s asset shuffling to bolster its budget bottomline has the potential to threaten political careers and put the state’s credit rating at risk if it is not resolved. Margaret Crawford, NSW’s auditor general, this week announced she was refusing to sign off on the state’s 2020-21 financial report “due to significant accounting issues”. At the centre of the dispute is the treatment of the innocuously named Transport Asset Holding Entity, or TAHE. It was known as Rail Corporation until its conversion to a state-owned corporation last year. The Audit Office typically signs off on the government’s financial reporting by the end of each September or early October, so the process is months overdue. Awkwardly for the NSW treasurer, Matt Kean, this week’s public declaration of the dispute comes just days before he releases the state’s mid-year review. What is TAHE? Pronounced “tah-hee”, the entity is a statutory state-owned corporation (SOC) that holds rail property assets, rolling stock and infrastructure in the Sydney metro area and limited country locations worth about $40bn. TAHE makes these assets available to Sydney Trains and NSW Trains for their operations, as it has done for decades. It also provides rail infrastructure to other operators under access agreements. In its submissions to a NSW upper house inquiry, the state government – now led by Dominic Perrottet – justified the creation of TAHE as part of a “critical reform” of the state’s transport cluster to “best optimise the use of state funds”. “Appropriate commercial and economic drivers” would deliver a better return for taxpayers than the previous RailCorp, the submission argued. What did it mean for the budget? The auditor general was been wary of the implications for the state finances of such a change for years, not least because assets such as railroads typically need significant injections of government funding and aren’t typically profit making. How these necessary payments are treated, though, has big implications for the budget bottom line being presented to the public. Previously the government paid recurrent grants to RailCorp to deliver its capital program, and these showed up as expenses. As former auditor general Tony Harris noted in his submission, from July 2015 onwards, new funding for capital projects could be treated as equity injections and not expenses once TAHE was born. This shift followed Australian accounting standards for corporations that are set up to generate commercial returns. Big bickies The status change to TAHE was very helpful for the budget. “The reduction in budget expenses (and thus the improvement in the budget result) for the five years from 2015-16 to 2019-20 by classifying RailCorp as a commercial non-financial public corporation was $14,349m comprised of $5,829.4m in operating losses and $8,545.5m of equity injections for capital purposes,” Harris said in his submission. “In none of those years did RailCorp make a profit, notwithstanding its ‘commercial’ characterisations,” he said. Or as he told Guardian Australia: “It’s all a charade.” “It’s a relatively complex issue because it’s so artificial,” Harris said. Why the standoff? The Audit Office had warned in its 2020 report on the state’s finances that “the accounting for further cash injections and the fair value of TAHE’s assets will be a key area of audit focus in 2020–21”. Despite that alert, treasury officials dug in their heels, challenging Crawford to submit a qualified report on the states finances for the year to last 30 June. Kean can sign off on such a report but to do so would raise “some ethical or behaviour issues”, former auditor general Harris says. Kean could call for a review – something the Labor opposition says won’t wash with the public. Or he could reject the treatment of TAHE as a commercial entity, and adjust the budget. That would mean, among other things, that current predictions of a return to an operating surplus by 2024 would probably be pushed back, potentially years. That last path would embarrass Kean’s boss, Dominic Perrottet, who was steering the TAHE transition until his elevation from treasurer to premier following the October exit of Gladys Berejiklian before the Independent Commission Against Corruption hearings. On Tuesday, the Australian reported treasury department chief Michael Pratt was planning to retire. Political fallout The Greens and the Shooters, Fishers and Farmers Party head the upper house public accountability inquiry looking into TAHE, and another hearing is due on Thursday. With the accounts yet to be signed off, the auditor general will skip this week’s event, indicating the committee will last into next year, with lingering fallout. Labor, too, is leading the charge with shadow treasurer Daniel Mookhey aware the wider media is now cottoning on. “It’s hard to make an accounting scandal a front page story,” he said on Tuesday just after the issue led that day’s Sydney Morning Herald print edition. “Why should the public care?” he said. “Well, this government has nominated itself as Australia’s best economic manager and the best manager of the books … but the emperor has no clothes. That’s the moral tale.” Mookhey also tabled in parliament a critical report by accounting giant KPMG that disputed the treatment of TAHE’s accounts to make it appear a commercial entity. The upper house inquiry later revealed how the supposedly independent advisory firm subsequently tried to quash its own negative report to favour the government’s approach. After rail, hospitals and schools could be up for similar asset treatment, Labor warns, while Harris says roads could be added to the list. Is there a safety issue? Labor has warned that the public’s safety is at risk because the attempt to make TAHE a profitable entity would give incentives to managers to, say, develop land over rail stations rather than invest in loss-making and expensive maintenance. The government rejects this. “[O]ver the three decades since the state-owned corporations act was introduced, SOCs have consistently and transparently demonstrated that they can consistently and safely manage public monopolies and partial monopolies such as water and energy”, it said in a submission. The Audit Office, though, plans to find out whether there is an issue. Along with its review of finances, it has launched a performance audit to “examine whether TAHE’s operating model is fit-for-purpose to effectively and efficiently achieve the outcomes intended by government, particularly in relation to rail safety”. Do markets care? Harris argues one motivation for improving the appearance of budgetary health was to increase the chances of NSW retaining its AAA credit rating with agencies such as Moody’s Investors Service and S&amp;P Global. Indeed, such a goal is the sole objective of the state’s Fiscal Responsibility Act 2012 because it implies a lower borrowing cost. That is handy as the Covid pandemic’s impacts include a blowout towards $100bn in net debt for the state. So far, those agencies are not perturbed by the tantrums over TAHE. Still, “we are trying to monitor developments quite closely”, Martin Foo, an associate director at S&amp;P Global said. Similarly, John Manning, a vice-president and senior credit officer at Moody’s, said “the focus is on the whole government” and the treatment of TAHE doesn’t affect the overall debt load. However, Foo noted NSW’s and Australia’s ratings were underpinned by auditing that was “independent, timely and public”, a standard that was now in the spotlight. • This article was amended on 15 December to clarify comments made by Matt Kean’s office. It also incorrectly named Michael Pratt as the transport secretary. He is the treasury secretary.When I meet Om Dhungel in a cafe near his home, he tells me about Merryn Howell. “She is my godmother,” he says, his eyes shining. “Every day I remember her.” Howell (then Jones) was a skilled migrant placement officer. Dhungel was a refugee of Nepalese ancestry from the Himalayan kingdom of Bhutan, where he had been an engineer and a senior public servant at the Department of Telecommunications. In 2001, after three years in Australia, Dhungel completed an MBA. But over the next six months, he applied for 52 jobs in engineering and business administration, and received 52 rejections. Om Dhungel in his home in Blacktown, Western Sydney People, offering sympathy, told him the problem was racism, or the fact that he was a refugee. Dhungel began to despair: the job he had packing shelves at Coles would be his for ever. But Howell refused to believe any of that. Keep going, she insisted. You will get there. After the 52nd rejection, she had an idea. She would conduct a mock job interview with Dhungel, and film it. “I came in the next day and she was jumping up and down,” Dhungel says. “She said, ‘Om, I’ve got it! You are looking down at my feet. Look at my face!’” Dhungel had simply been observing Bhutanese custom, which sees looking directly at a person of higher rank as a mark of great disrespect. Confident now that his problem wasn’t racism or being a refugee, Dhungel returned to the search. In no time he had two good job offers, the second an engineering-related role at Telstra. He stayed at the company for 10 years. He says he will use the lesson Howell gave him for the rest of his life. ‘I’m a Blacktown boy’ Blacktown has traditionally been a working-class community. In the early decades after the second world war, many waves of migrants from other parts of Sydney and the world came to an area that was rich in jobs in small factories, warehouses, building sites, and service centres such as Blacktown hospital. As a growing city deeply divided by socio-economic status, Blacktown depends on its people to hold it together But Blacktown is changing more than any other time since that postwar period. Although its south and west – especially the 11 suburbs of Mount Druitt – hold some of Australia’s poorest urban areas, its northern suburbs and the greenfield developments of the North West Growth Area are at the centre of a housing boom that is creating some of Sydney’s most affluent new areas. Unemployment is rising, especially among young people, yet in the past 50 years there has been huge growth in the proportion of Blacktown residents holding tertiary degrees – from well under 1% in 1971 to nearly 17% today. As a growing city deeply divided by socio-economic status, Blacktown depends on its people to hold it together. People like Dhungel. A small, finely built man, nearly 60, Dhungel runs his own consulting and mentoring practice. He sits on multicultural advisory committees with Blacktown city council and NSW police, and on the board of the Asylum Seeker Centre. He was chair of SydWest Multicultural Services in Blacktown, and lives in an elegant but not exclusive estate near the Blacktown CBD. “I’m a Blacktown boy,” he says with a laugh, and with pride. He was once a boy from Bhutan, from an ethnic Nepalese background. His family lived in a village in the south of the Himalayan kingdom. His parents, Durga and Damanta, ran a grocery at the market, but their son was educated well, and rose into the high ranks of the public service. He had conversations with the king, making sure to keep his eyes down when he did. People of Nepalese ethnicity had lived in Bhutan in large numbers for more than 100 years. But many ethnic Bhutanese thought their numbers were growing too fast, and feared being overtaken. A movement grew: One Nation, One People. The ethnic Nepalese were prohibited from teaching their own language. From the late 1980s, the regime began a campaign to expel them. Durga was accused of supporting insurgents, arrested and tortured till he passed out. When the family left, they lost everything. Family photos of Om Dhungel and his wife, Saroja By 1996, there were 100,000 Nepalese-Bhutanese refugees in camps in Nepal. Dhungel, his wife, Saroja, and young daughter, Smriti, lived in the capital, Kathmandu, so that he could advocate to the Nepalese and international governments on behalf of the refugees. While Saroja taught science in a local school, Dhungel worked as a full-time but unpaid human rights activist, and co-edited a newspaper, The Bhutan Review, that sought to draw the world’s attention to the plight of his people. He and colleagues delivered it by walking to every embassy in Kathmandu; Dhungel often carrying Smriti on his back as he travelled. Those six years in exile, in which he learned to live with virtually nothing, were the most important and formative of his life. The camps that housed the Bhutanese were poor but, unlike those in Kenya and Ethiopia that housed many South Sudanese, they were in the main not violent. There were divisions and some of these were bitter: some people wanted to take up arms to try to regain their land in Bhutan; others said they had to renounce that dream. Most agreed on two things: they would continue to press for their return to Bhutan, and they would do everything to educate their children. They opened schools under palm trees, and they waited. Hemanta Acharya was one of those children, and remembers her hunger to learn. In the camp where she spent the first 15 years of her life, her parents would tell her: “It is time to go to sleep, you don’t have to study so hard.” There was malaria in the camps and Hemanta’s friend died of typhoid. Her father had been a respected educator and community leader in Bhutan, for which he had been imprisoned for 15 months. But Hemanta wanted to be a doctor or a nurse, to prevent the kinds of needless deaths she saw sometimes in the camp. And she would watch aeroplanes making their way lazily across the sky and think. “One day, if I’m lucky, I will be on that plane.” ‘I feel a sense of gratitude to where I came from. It keeps me humble,’ Hemanta Acharya says She already felt lucky, though. The camp’s houses were made of mud, the roofs of bamboo and thatch. Rain would get into the houses and pool on the floor. “We didn’t care,” Hemanta says. “Cousins, neighbours – we all grew up together. We were so happy with what we had. We had dance competitions, quizzes, debates. We didn’t know iPhones, laptops, the developed version of life.” In the late 2000s the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees embarked on a concerted effort to clear the camps with the help of eight western nations. Australia agreed to take 5,500 of the 100,000 refugees. In 2008, Dhungel had been in Sydney for 10 years. The Australian Bhutanese community he belonged to numbered precisely 17 people. To prepare for the newcomers, Dhungel and others formed the Association of Bhutanese in Australia (ABA). Celebrating successes – big and small When Hemanta finally learned that she and her family were going to Australia, she counted every day till departure. As she boarded the flight, she said to herself: “Let this be the last day I am a refugee. As I land on Australian soil, let my refugee tale stay inside the plane.” When the family and others landed in Sydney, Om Dhungel, his wife, Saroja, and other members of the tiny Bhutanese community were waiting at the airport. Most people were taken to townhouses in Blacktown. Om and Saroja showed them how to work the lights and the flush toilets, how not to get burned by the hot tap or trigger the smoke alarm. Learning how to use a stove would take longer, so Om and Saroja gave about 50 families rice cookers. They also left food, especially vegetables such as chokos and rayo saag, a spinach that grows in Bhutan, in the fridge. In that first week, as the family of nine children, parents and grandparents shared three bedrooms, Hemanta would lie awake, wanting to start school but wondering, given her broken English, how she would go. Entering Year 9 at Mitchell high school, she struggled to pronounce “shower” and “sour” differently, but she made friends quickly, even if Jenny, an Anglo name, sounded like Zenny, a Filipino name. Om Dhungel and his wife, Saroja, looking at old photos of their time in Nepal, where Om worked full-time as an unpaid human rights activist Following her older brother, she took up soccer. On Saturday mornings, Om Dhungel would pick up a group of girls in his car and drive them to training. In the camp, kids had played with a ball made of socks and plastic, but girls were not welcomed. Now Hemanta found she had a gift for the game. Her progress was swift, and in June 2010, she represented Australia in the Fifa Football for Hope festival for refugee youth, held during the 2010 World Cup in South Africa. She had been living in her new country for about 18 months. Hemanta’s journey was part of what many government officials regard as the most successful refugee integration program Australia has ever undertaken. Critically, it was not run by external service providers alone but with the close involvement of the Bhutanese community. As people continued to arrive, the ABA developed a plan to identify their skills and put them to use. Many had never been to formal school, and could not read Nepali. In partnership with an employment services provider, MTC Australia, the ABA created a spoken English school in Blacktown, run by community volunteers. Young Bhutanese were engaged to cut hair, do basic repair of computers and phones, or fix a tap. Others ran workshops on résumé writing and interview skills. A group was organised to take part in Blacktown’s Clean Up Australia Day, to “showcase our sincerity and commitment to the nation”. For many people, especially women, gaining a driving licence was the key to independence. Three women, including Hemanta’s mother, set up childcare centres, an opportunity that would not have come their way in Bhutan. Every Friday, the community held a seniors’ get-together with a yoga class at SydWest Multicultural Services in Blacktown. Members of Blacktown’s Bhutanese community gather together after being separated by the pandemic for months All these efforts came together in a monthly event held in a hall in Blacktown. The council provided the hall rent-free for 18 months, until the ABA offered to pay its own way. Jill Gillespie remembers people being brought up on stage to share an achievement. One would hold up a Year 11 certificate, another an L plate, to great applause. Gillespie says “these successes, however little they might seem in the broader sense of life, were all celebrated”. Gillespie says “the amount of time Om gave to the community in those early days was beyond my comprehension. He had a full-time job at Telstra!” She thinks the Bhutanese leaders “were smart cookies. They could see the value of early intervention to minimise problems down the track.” There were episodes of domestic violence and depression. Some people struggled to learn English or find jobs; others regretted a lack of contact with the wider Australian community. Nevertheless, a survey from 2019 showed that very few people who were eligible to work or learn were not doing so. More than 60% of families owned their homes. Those who couldn’t afford to buy left Sydney for more affordable places such as Adelaide, the largest Bhutanese centre, and Albury-Wodonga. In 2015, then home affairs minister Peter Dutton singled out the Bhutanese for “supporting each other to quickly gain employment and independent living”. ‘They don’t need charity, they need inspiration’ Over time, Dhungel has come to feel that Australian policy towards refugees is discouraging that opportunity for independence. He says that settlement services, by being run as a form of social welfare, are not nurturing the strengths of individuals or of their community. Under the current model, large providers compete for lucrative government contracts to deliver services to refugees. The more contracts a provider wins, the more it grows. To deliver the contract, it hires lots of specialist staff. Dhungel says these employees, often young and well-meaning, are required to undertake a “needs analysis” of the community, then to develop programs based on those perceived needs. Providers are not even required to engage with communities, simply to deliver the service. Main Street, Blacktown. The community is ‘definitely coming together’, Om Dhungel says Dhungel says providers are not acting in bad faith; they have to meet government funding requirements and other performance indicators. Yet he says their focus on refugees’ perceived weaknesses and needs, rather than their strengths, is breeding a culture of dependency. And by not engaging with communities, they are spending resources on tasks that communities could do themselves, learning valuable skills along the way. This is one man’s view, yet it is not a lone one. Hazara, Khmer and South Sudanese organisations all testified to the Senate’s Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade References Committee that the move from a community-based funding model to one dominated by large service providers had been damaging. The NSW Service for the Treatment and Rehabilitation of Torture and Trauma Survivors, which works with many communities, told the inquiry that some activities “are much better run by refugee organisations themselves”. Even the constant use of the term “refugee” to denote need frustrates Dhungel. “The sector champions its work with the most vulnerable but refugees are not vulnerable. They have often lived for long times without food, or divided one mango between two families. The service sector could strengthen communities by helping to build an array of champions within them, then step back to let communities do things by themselves. They don’t need charity, they need inspiration.” Dhungel believes the possibility of inspiration is abundant in Australia. Flick a switch, and the light comes on. If a road gets a pothole it is paved. People died in the Snowy Mountains so others could have power. His father, Durga, whose experience of torture made him fear people in uniforms, went on a tour of Blacktown police station. The commander, Mark Wright, invited him to sit in his chair. Sometimes Dhungel cannot believe the blessings of this country. ‘It’s a good problem to have’ I ask him whether he thinks Blacktown is coming together or apart as a community. “Based on my experience, I think it’s definitely coming together,” he says. His evidence? This year, Blacktown mosque invited about 30 non-Muslim leaders to the iftar to celebrate Eid, the end of Ramadan. Community festivals increasingly involve people from other groups. And earlier this year, a group of 10 Bhutanese of different ages got together to discuss how their community was going. A few lamented that the common bond they felt when they arrived in Australia had gone. People were working, studying and staying in their own friendship groups; fewer came to community events, that first rapture had been lost. One person asked: “How do we get back to 2008?” But other people replied: the reason our Bhutanese gatherings are smaller is that people are socialising in the wider community. They play sport with other Australians. Many Bhutanese – more males than females – are nurses, and they are having drinks, joining Facebook groups with workmates, and buying homes. One person said: “This is such a good problem to have.” I say to Dhungel that maintaining such cohesion relies on forces that are bigger than the Bhutanese: above all, the strength of the economy, the guarantee of getting a job. He is reluctant to entirely allow the point. “There is always something you can do,” he says. “What can we as a community do? We can’t always rely on the government to help us.” He has put that idea into practice. During the pandemic, SydWest Multicultural Services in Blacktown brought together a group of leaders from Bhutanese, South Sudanese, Sri Lankan, Indian, Sierra Leone and Afghan backgrounds to discuss what they could do together to combat isolation and loneliness in their communities. That group turned into a community leaders Covid-19 taskforce, hosted by SydWest, that met every month on zoom. When 12 local government areas in Sydney’s western and south-western suburbs were subjected to especially severe restrictions during this year’s lockdown, the taskforce began to meet on zoom every fortnight, and to discuss how communities could work together to get their people vaccinated. Forum members came up with the idea of virtual doorknocks: a volunteer would contact 10 people and ask each to contact another 10, to encourage community members to take the vaccine. These volunteers would also try to clear up misunderstandings – for example, the presence of soldiers, helicopters and more police in the area did not spell political trouble but that the government was trying to ensure people’s health and safety. Government figures from the start of November show that Blacktown’s double-dose vaccination rate of 94.8% was the highest among the 12 “LGAs of concern” and was beaten by only five other LGAs across the state. Such success is unlikely to have occurred without the “community champions” that Dhungel and others created, and without his insistence that “there is always something you can do”. Hemanta Acharya with her grandmother, Menuka Devi Acharya, and her aunt, Devi Maya Acharya Hemanta Acharya has worked as a registered nurse for the past five years and recently completed a Master of Nursing. She looks forward to the opportunities her degree is likely to bring. She also does media interviews for the community, writes for a Bhutanese literature blog and runs an occasional dance academy. She was the youth coordinator of the ABA in Sydney and is one of the community’s most active members. In a cafe overlooking a golf course in the Blacktown suburb of Colebee, she reflects on what she has lost and found in coming to Australia. She admits she feels nostalgia for aspects of the life she had in the camp. “I don’t miss the leaking roof, I miss the human connection. Now we are complaining about this flood [we spoke during a serious flood in Sydney]. It hasn’t even gotten into our houses and we complain. We are on our phones even when we are eating at home. My brother will be watching a football match, I will be watching a dance show, Dad will be watching something in Nepalese. In the camp we were together. My mum would leave us with our neighbours or relatives, we had that trust. They would feed us. That human connection is hard to see when you have everything.” On the other hand, Hemanta knows that if she were still in Nepal she would be a housewife. Even if she were allowed to study, she would have to rely on her husband. Here she has a car, and can go wherever she wants, pursue whatever path she wants. “I feel a sense of gratitude to where I came from. It keeps me humble.” She says that from an early age, watching planes in the sky from that house with water on the floor, she wrote down her dreams and goals. “There is nothing wrong with dreaming, the biggest you want to achieve. Even if you think you can’t achieve it, always dare to dream. The rules change, the opportunities come along – if you keep that dream alive, one day you will get to a point where you say, ‘Ah, it is already fulfilled.’” This article is based on a narrative paper on Blacktown written for the Scanlon Foundation Research Institute.The convener of an organisation supporting independent climate-focused candidates has hit back at the Morrison government’s suggestion MPs and senators should dob the Climate 200 group in to the Australian Electoral Commission under new electoral donation rules. Simon Holmes à Court, the convener of Climate 200, said he can’t see that new donation rules will change its disclosure practices, accusing the Coalition of failing to understand that “Voices of” volunteer organisations don’t collect money for the candidates they promote. Holmes à Court also said it was “crazy” the Liberal party was “impinging on a reasonably held expectation of privacy” by donors to charities so soon after it was “demanding complete privacy” for donors to the Legal Services Trust which part-paid Christian Porter’s legal fees. Climate 200, a company set up as a fundraising vehicle to bankroll campaigns, has raised millions of dollars for a series of independent candidates challenging sitting Liberal MPs in inner-city constituencies. The government, with Labor’s support, this month passed amendments to electoral laws that will force entities to register as “significant third parties” if they spend more than $250,000 on electoral expenditure a year, down from the previous $500,000 threshold, or $14,500 if that is more than a third of their revenue. In an email to all MPs and senators on Monday, the special minister of state, Ben Morton, urged them to dob in the Climate 200 fund and “Voices of” independent advocacy groups, suggesting they may need to register under the new rules and reveal their donors. Climate 200 has already disclosed several thousand donors on its website, although a complete filing to the Australian Electoral Commission will require additional details including the sum donated. Holmes à Court said everyone above the $14,500 disclosure threshold would be disclosed “as per the AEC requirements, months before the Liberals” and a large number had “opted to be disclosed earlier”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Holmes à Court said the independent movement itself would probably be unaffected by the disclosure law because “candidates set up their own campaigning organisations”. “Voices of groups aren’t political organisations receiving disclosable donations. “They’re volunteer organisations helping their candidates with sweat not money.” Holmes à Court said the primary impact would be “a chilling effect on charities” that believed their activities were not electoral expenditure but due to the law’s retrospective effect “will need to go back to donors and say ‘we need to disclose you’”. Holmes à Court said “it’s crazy the [Liberal] party has this instance so close, temporally, where it was demanding complete privacy” in relation to Porter’s legal fees. In September Porter declared that the Legal Services Trust part paid his legal fees for a defamation case against the ABC, with funds from undisclosed sources. Porter denied breaching disclosure rules and was later cleared by the privileges committee but quit the cabinet in September because the issue had become a “distraction” for the government. On the day he resigned, Porter said in a statement he was “not willing to put pressure on the trust to provide me with any further information … to which I am not entitled” because he did not want to expose people who donated to the trust to “become targets of the social media mob”. In his email Morton complained that “new entities have been established with the sole or dominant purpose of acting as political fundraising vehicles”. “Many of these funding vehicles hide in the dark – they were established with the explicit goal of avoiding electoral funding disclosure,” he said. An analysis of recent electoral expenditure suggests the three-year retrospective application will capture about a dozen organisations, including climate activist charities, unions, Universities Australia, and the Master Builders Australia, which said it accepts it will have to register. GetUp is already required to register, while right-of-centre groups including the Institute of Public Affairs, Advance Australia and LibertyWorks believe they aren’t required to because their expenditure is not high enough or they don’t advocate a vote for particular candidates. President of LibertyWorks, Andrew Cooper, accused the major parties of “raising the administrative costs of political campaigning” for competitors while they collect “tens of millions of dollars” through public funding of elections to pay for their campaigns. Liberal MP, Jason Falinski defended the government’s handling of the issue, saying while the new law might not impact how much Climate 200 collects it will affect the political process by “allowing people to see behind what’s going on”. “You might say I’m self-interested because they [Climate 200 and Voices of Mackellar] are running against me – but it’s pretty outrageous it can act as a front group for candidates claiming to be community independents. “How would the media react if Gina Rinehart raised $20m for community independents preselecting coalminers to run in Labor seats and seeking subsidies for coal?” On Tuesday the federal director of the Liberal party, Andrew Hirst, noted reports Holmes à Court had raised $6m and aimed to raise $20m to fund “so-called independents”. Hirst accused “Voices of” groups of pursuing a “left-wing agenda and only targeting government MPs”, urging Liberal supporters to help build the party’s fighting fund to “stop these faux independents”. Guardian Australia also contacted Morton for comment. A spokesperson for Porter said: “Mr Porter’s recent parliamentary declaration regarding the payment of legal fees in a private action was subject to a full consideration and report by the privileges committee of parliament which held unanimously, all Liberal and Labor members agreeing, that the declaration made by Mr Porter was in accordance with the disclosure requirements for the Members Register of Interests.”Australia’s air force chief ticked off on a $16bn Joint Strike Fighter program clearing a major milestone despite acknowledging “deficiencies” with the aircraft and support systems. The defence department has also revealed that a much-trumpeted upgrade to the Jindalee Operational Radar Network is running “several years” behind schedule, a year after the Morrison government announced plans to expand surveillance of Australia’s eastern approaches. The disclosures follow moves by the defence minister, Peter Dutton, to dump the trouble-plagued MH90 Taipan helicopters early and replace them with Black Hawks from the US in coming years. A detailed new report on Australian’s defence acquisitions outlines problems with other major projects, including the Joint Strike Fighter program. Australia is acquiring 72 F-35A JSF aircraft to replace the F/A-18A/B Hornet. Forty have already arrived with the final ones expected to be delivered by late 2023. The then defence minister, Linda Reynolds, announced last December that the F-35A fleet had “accomplished all the required testing and materiel delivery” to declare an “important milestone” known as Initial Operational Capability (IOC). When she announced the “remarkable” achievement on 28 December, Reynolds described them as “the most advanced, multi-role stealth fighter in the world”. However a new major projects report – released by the Australian National Audit Office (ANAO) and which compiles information supplied by the defence department – added a note of caution about known “deficiencies”. “The capability manager declared IOC on schedule acknowledging a number of known acceptable deficiencies with the aircraft and support systems,” said the report, tabled in parliament this week. The chief of the air force, Air Marshal Mel Hupfeld, is listed as the capability manager for the Joint Strike Fighter program. The report said this was “not unusual for capabilities being introduced into service”. It said the joint strike fighter “continues to track toward” achieving another key milestone – final operating capability – in 2023. “Delivery of aircraft remains largely in line with the capability manager’s expectation. Aircraft availability remains a concern, however, the fleet is currently able to generate sufficient flying hours to achieve all essential tasking.” Guardian Australia has asked defence to clarify the nature of the “deficiencies” and how they can be considered “acceptable”. The total approved budget for the Joint Strike Fighter program is $15.6bn, with military giant Lockheed Martin contracted to the US government to develop and produce the aircraft. Australia is one of the JSF’s “partner” members, alongside the United Kingdom, Canada, Italy, Denmark, Norway and the Netherlands. The report describes the program as “large and complex with varying challenges”, including that Australia is reliant on the international JSF arrangements. It notes the Covid-19 pandemic “has increased the uncertainty and complexity of delivery of the F-35 Program”, with travel restrictions “limiting the ability of US-based staff to install specialist equipment in Australia and for Australian and US staff to conduct verification and validation activities”. The major projects report also warns of delays to the $1.1bn upgrade of a long-range “over-the-horizon” radar network. The Jindalee Operational Radar Network (Jorn) supports the Australian defence force’s air and maritime operations, including search and rescue, while also providing “strategic surveillance”. The upgrade includes plans to modernise the command and control system at the Royal Australian Air Force base in Edinburgh, South Australia and three radar sites at Longreach in Queensland, Laverton in Western Australia and Alice Springs in the Northern Territory. The reports says the upgrade project has “experienced persistent lag” in delivering the systems engineering program, mainly due to underestimatng how complex it would be. These delays are “considered unrecoverable”. The upgrade was meant to be complete by 2029, but the dates of all of the key milestones are now listed as “to be advised”. The report said the contractor, BAE Systems Australia, had delivered new plans to the government in April and these were currently being evaluated. “However, the delays are anticipated to be several years,” it said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The government announced last year that it was expanding the Jorn site in Longreach, Queensland “to provide wide area surveillance of Australia’s eastern approaches and enhance Australia’s strategic situational awareness”. Defence has been asked to clarify the length of the expected delays, and whether they would have any implications for the government’s surveillance announcement. The report also confirms delays to the $6bn future frigates program. The ANAO said delivering major projects on schedule continued to “present challenges” for defence. It said $58bn was the total value of the 21 defence major projects covered in this year’s report, with five of those experiencing “slippage” – or delays – in the schedule. “Total schedule slippage for the Major Projects, as at 30 June 2021, was 405 months when compared to the initial schedule. This represents a 23 per cent increase since Second Pass approval,” the ANAO said. Labor defence spokesperson, Brendan O’Connor, and assistant shadow minister, Pat Conroy, blamed the government’s “revolving door” of defence ministers. “With six defence ministers in eight years – and four defence ministers under prime minister Morrison alone – it is clear that the government is comprehensively mismanaging billions of dollars of acquisitions that ADF personnel need to carry out their missions,” O’Connor and Conroy said. Last week’s move to scrap the Taipans was the second major project scrapping on Dutton’s watch, after plans for French-designed conventional submarines were axed in September. A major difference, however, is that these helicopters are already in service.In a glamorous penthouse apartment, rain drumming against the floor-length windows, a chiselled man wearing nothing but a bath towel slowly undresses a beautiful young woman – only to stop when he notices a distinctive red mark on her chest. She has a birthmark – just like the baby he abandoned one rainy night many years ago. “Are you Rachel? Born in 2003 in Bonneville?” he asks urgently. “I’m your father.” At this horrific revelation, lightning crashes across the night sky, and also across Rachel’s face somehow. Inside Rachel’s head, a very disturbing and needless question arises. “He shall be my … ?” Option one – the obvious choice, Rachel! – is “Dad”. Option two is “BF”, meaning boyfriend. So goes the latest Instagram ad for Whispers, an interactive mobile game where players advance their characters through stories by making strategic decisions, like whether their protagonist should have sex with the man she has just discovered is the biological father who left her in a rapidly flooding baby basket. Mildly tamer versions of this ad have been bombarding me on social media for months now. You might have seen them yourself. They’re for an array of different mobile games – Choices, Whispers, Chapters, Episode – which each offer a range of visual interactive stories, usually romantic, in which you control a protagonist and periodically make narrative choices that affect the story’s outcome. Depending which demographic boxes the algorithm has slotted you into, you probably get variations of these ads as well: makeover games, home renovation games, pimple-popping games that are also, inexplicably, about running a restaurant. Against my every instinct for mental self-preservation, morbid curiosity drove me to download as many of these games as I could find to learn more about these deeply chaotic ads and the companies behind them. In the great tradition of Merge Mansion, the Whispers ad promises a scenario the game itself doesn’t actually deliver. I know because I played it, and many games like it. For dozens of hours over several weeks, my free time was given over to seducing princes, being rescued from raging flood waters by dreamy ranch hands, and having torrid affairs with CEOs who hired me to babysit their kids. People who knew me during this period have described me as “possessed”. But the games themselves are the least strange thing about an industry that’s carved out a very specific place for itself. In part, they’re the next logical step for the old bodice-ripper industry. While the quality of the art and storytelling varies widely between apps, many of the stories on offer play to the same conservative tropes and sexual dynamics codified by the likes of Mills &amp; Boon (think titles like Billionaire Daddy, Suddenly Royal, Seducing My Professor and 50 Ways to Ruin a Rake). Storylines are awash in brooding vampires, bad-boy doctors, werewolves with rippling abs and bosses with a total disregard for workplace sexual harassment policies. You meet a truly staggering number of potential love interests when they push you safely out of the way of charging farm animals. The relative freedom of the medium, however, gives the games a little more leeway to break out of the confines that the print-and-ink books were stuck in for so long. Since publishing their first story in 2009, Choices has branched out into stories that grapple with climate change, bullying and eating disorders. Protagonists and love interests are typically customisable by ethnicity, while stories specific to LGBTQ+ people are slowly becoming more prominent. Much of this progress has been driven by the players rather than the industry. The biggest titles, like Choices and Chapters, attract tens of millions of downloads, and have spawned sprawling and dedicated fan communities (the largest Choices subreddit, r/Choices, has nearly 40,000 active users). Besides sharing fanfic, fanart, recaps and theories, fandoms on Reddit, Tumblr, Discord and in-app forums passionately debate the sexual, gender and racial dynamics between characters and within storylines. These games have a compelling financial reason to respect these fandoms: there’s a lot of money to be made from them. The largest interactive narrative apps can pull in up to $9m in revenue in a single month, and besides in-app ad deals, the biggest source of that revenue is in-game purchases. While the apps are free to download and explore, advancing through a story requires spending in-game currency – coins, tickets, gems, keys – that costs real dollars. It’s possible to complete stories without spending anything other than the price of starting new chapters, but the drawcard of games like these – the ability to make choices that affect the outcome – is nearly always paywalled. This was the difficulty I encountered in my first story of choice, The Royal Romance. You play a humble New York City waitress whisked off to Cordonia, a vaguely European microstate, to take part in a national Bachelor-style competition to win the heart of the prince and become the next queen. But whenever an opportunity arose to pursue anyone, up went the paywall. Playing this one story, I spent more than $50 on unlockable options such as subplots, outfits and romantic trysts – many of which did little to advance the overall plot and left me feeling as if I’d been gently mugged. While cheaper subscription options are available, a regular reader could easily spend hundreds of dollars without quite realising it. I wound up gently rejecting my other suitors and making a play for my prince’s hand – only to be blindsided at the last minute by a shocking scandal that could only be resolved in the next book. The grand and tragic love story that no doubt plays out over the seven other instalments in the Royal saga, however, will sadly remain untold – I have bills to pay.It’s a standard feature of TV shows – particularly ones based in far-flung locations – to insert drone shots near the beginning to provide a geographical overview. The exhilaratingly different eight-part vampire series Firebite, co-created by Warwick Thornton and Brendan Fletcher, includes such shots, with the significant caveat that no amount of overhead images can properly contextualise the location where it was filmed: a town on the edge of existence, situated in the “dark heart” of Australia, synonymous by virtue of its own peculiar existence with things that are hidden and concealed. This is the South Australian town of Coober Pedy, a thoroughly unusual neck of the woods – well, stretch of the desert – where residents live beneath the surface to escape the blistering heat, in subterranean abodes built by hollowing out space in the hills. Rebadged as “Opal City” in the show, it looks from above a little like Mars, its barren sunbaked surface pockmarked by crater-like holes. A local Indigenous woman warns a bunch of children in the first episode not to go too close to these holes because they’ll “gobble you up”. More concerning than the holes, however, are the monsters living beneath the surface. As one character puts it: “They’ve been here for centuries, and they finally found the perfect place to live.” By “they” she is of course referring to those with pallid complexions, fanged teeth and rather long life spans, who historically can be killed by wooden stakes. In this refreshingly different take, which combines small reinventions with reframed political perspectives, they can also be taken down by a boomerang to the heart. For Firebite protagonist Tyson (a charmingly curt Rob Collins) and his adopted daughter Shanika (Shantae Barnes-Cowan) the stakes, so to speak, are not just personal but cultural and political, as they are to all Indigenous Australians within the narrative world. We learn that vampires arrived in the country on the first fleet and began murdering Aboriginal people and seizing their land. A war between the blood suckers and black vampire hunters, dubbed “blood hunters”, has raged ever since, the latter having successfully eradicated all of the former bar one. He is “The King” (a seething, creepy Callan Mulvey) who has arrived in Opal City for the obvious reasons – it being the vampire’s equivalent of a postcard paradise or dust-clogged Garden of Eden, conveniently devoid of that annoying phenomenon known as “sunlight”. The King’s arrival upends a relatively comfortable routine – notwithstanding a little blood and carnage – for Tyson and Shanika, who patrol the surface and maintain the job of “keeping this mob safe”, existing on the threshold of two worlds, sort of in the community and sort of not. Directed by Fletcher, Tony Krawitz and Thornton, the show stays above the surface for a while, setting up the human characters with just enough glimpses of the ghouls to remind us they’re around and bearing fangs. Thornton is familiar with filming on this land, having shot a 20-minute short from 2005 there titled The Old Man and the Inland Sea. Thornton et al opt for some big images: the sign for Opal City for instance casts a long shadow over the burnt brown desert, screaming “cinematic”. But mostly Firebite appears to have been designed to avoid looking beautiful, even in a rustic rough-hewn way, and has a boxed-in rather than expansive look. This is not a grand, eye-watering production like Sweet Country or one that finds visual delight in small elements, like Thornton’s previous TV series The Beach. Firebite has a rocky, grungy feel, with dim lighting and a scuzzy junkyard texture reflecting the energy of a show that comes across as effortlessly cool and engaging, and never tries too hard. That effortlessness also comes through in the performances and the dialogue, both at times unexpectedly oscillating into splashes of humour. Take for instance an exchange in the second episode (this review encapsulates the first three) between Tyson and a love interest, who reacts to his presentation of flowers at her door by asking: “Where are these from, servo?” To which he responds: “Nup, cemetery.” Firebite inserts a few of what might loosely be considered a “cliffhanger”, but it also has a habit of taking us to places where the action isn’t, generally more concerned with context and drama than violent confrontation. It’s impossible to know, three episodes in, whether the show will ultimately resolve conventionally or take us someplace unexpected. It has an off-kilter tone and tempo that’s tough to second-guess – as if, like residents of Opal City or Coober Pedy, the circadian rhythm of its creators has been thrown out of whack. At this point, however, two things are certain. One: I’m hooked. And two: when genre storytelling mixes with Indigenous perspectives exciting things happen, as we have seen recently in the neo-western Mystery Road, the superhero sci-fi Cleverman, and – outside Australia – the Oklahoma-set Native American comedy Reservation Dogs. All these productions have a strong sense of place, but Firebite is something else. You wouldn’t want every new show to be shot in Coober Pedy – but damn, it works for this one. • Firebite premieres on 16 December on AMC+.Just half of Australian federal police staff have faith in the agency’s senior leadership and only 61% believe they act with integrity, an internal document shows. Earlier this year, the AFP tasked private consultancy Orima Research to conduct its major yearly survey of staff for 2021. The survey, seen by the Guardian, obtained responses from 4,838 out of 7,188 AFP staff, a response rate of 67%, including sworn and unsworn members, protective services, new recruits, and ACT policing members. Results were strong for commitment, engagement, loyalty, job satisfaction and the performance of immediate supervisors. But the survey contained worrying scores for those higher up in the AFP’s chain of command. In a section asking about the performance of senior leadership, only 55% of staff responded positively to the statement “I have faith in their leadership”. Almost one-quarter responded negatively. Another 22% gave a neutral response. Prompted with the statement “they operate with integrity”, 61% of AFP staff responded positively and 16% responded negatively. Only 37% of staff said the AFP’s senior executive service staff “work as a team”. The survey reveals significant numbers of AFP staff are feeling burnt out by the demands of the job. Almost one-quarter of staff said they were well above capacity in terms of their workload and 37% said they were slightly above capacity. Just half of AFP staff said they felt like the AFP “cares about my health and wellbeing” and 59% said they were satisfied with the recognition they got for doing a good job. About 15% of staff said they had personally experienced bullying and 17% had witnessed it happening to someone else. Scores were also low for the AFP’s administrative processes. Only 20% gave positive responses to a question about the barriers posed by administrative processes. Respondents had significant concerns about having to deal with multiple layers of decision-making. Just 31% gave a positive response when asked about “the technology within the AFP”. The document also highlights significant concerns about the AFP’s recruitment and promotion decisions. Just 26% of AFP staff gave positive responses when asked about whether recruitment and promotion decisions were based on merit. Almost half of AFP staff responded negatively to that question. A spokesperson for the AFP said it was aiming to improve the perception of its leadership, and said cultural change was long-term in nature. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “In late 2020, the AFP introduced a formal SES development program and the senior executive meets regularly to discuss matters including staff survey results,” the spokesperson said. “The AFP is also continuing its efforts to improve productivity and efficiency by reducing red tape and implementing technological enhancements.” The spokesperson said the agency performed relatively well in the three key areas of the survey. “Across the three key outcome indicators of engagement, commitment and loyalty, and staff satisfaction, the AFP is comparable (or scores above) the Australian public service census results,” the spokesperson said.Australian schoolchildren’s basic literacy and numeracy skills were relatively unscathed during first year of the Covid-19 pandemic, but gaps are widening between city students and those in regional and remote areas, the latest Naplan study has found. Analysis of long-term data for the annual National Assessment Program – Literacy and Numeracy (Naplan) National Report 2021 – found significant and growing gaps between some demographics, including along gender lines, between Indigenous and non-Indigenous students, and those in metro and regional areas. The full 360-page report, released on Wednesday, follows high-level data in August which indicated that students in years 3, 5, 7 and 9 in 2021 continued to perform on par with students in 2019, despite lockdowns and periods of remote learning through 2020. The Naplan tests were not conducted in 2020 due to nationwide lockdowns. The 2021 tests were administered in May, before the Delta outbreak in Sydney that resulted in further months-long remote schooling periods in both New South Wales and Victoria. Analysts have said that no statistically significant changes were observed at a national and state or territory level in the data between 2019 and 2021, which encompasses the first major wave of Covid outbreaks across Australia, and Victoria’s extended second lockdown. But they urged caution on interpreting the data based on only two rounds of testing, saying patterns and changes were more likely to become apparent over many years. Guardian Australia previously reported concerns from teachers that the compounded effects of two years of intermittent learning in some areas are only just beginning to become apparent, especially for younger cohorts (up to grade 2) that are not captured by the Naplan dataset. David de Carvalho, chief executive of the Australian Curriculum, Assessment and Reporting Authority (Acara), which runs Naplan, said it was important to resist the temptation to draw conclusions from only two years of data. “You’ve got to be really careful about drawing distinctions based on simply comparing 2019 with 2021,” de Carvalho said. “It would be very tempting to do so but one has to be very cautious. “The changes that you might see between 2019 and 2021 might actually be quite consistent with previous years, and might actually simply be the continuation of a pattern that’s been in place for some time.” Acara’s long term analysis of the Naplan data showed gaps between male and female students in reading, writing and numeracy were growing, with girls increasingly outperforming boys in reading and writing, and boys increasingly doing better in numeracy. The gender gap is larger in secondary school students than primary for writing, the analysis showed. Gaps between metropolitan schools and those in regional and remote areas were also growing, with city-based students increasingly outperforming regional students. The gaps in numeracy and reading have gradually widened since 2016 for most year levels, with metropolitan students just under six months ahead of their regional counterparts in grades 3 and 5, and almost a full year ahead in grades 7 and 9. The gap is even wider between metropolitan and remote students, with those in remote areas behind by an equivalent of approximately three years of schooling, the analysis showed. The gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous students has remained extremely wide since 2016, representing a difference equivalent to two full years of schooling. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Since the tests were first administered in 2008 and 2011 for writing, Australian students nationally have significantly improved in years 3 and 5 reading, year 5 numeracy, and years 3 and 5 spelling, equivalent to a term’s worth of learning, de Carvalho said. But the long-term analysis also suggested that educational disadvantage can be multigenerational, with children whose parents did not complete year 12 comprising the main cohort of those falling behind the national average. Acara reported there were indications in the data that gaps between “high and low socio-educational groups” were widening between 2019 and 2021, but that further analysis was required to determine whether those shifts were related to Covid or not. Approximately 70% of the 5.86m Naplan tests were taken online this year as the program transitions to a completely digital delivery, which will take effect next year. Acara reiterated that Naplan tests are only one aspect of educational assessment and do not replace the extensive, ongoing assessments made by teachers about individual student performance.As someone who loves food and cherishes family, I never quite understood the notion of dreading Christmas – until the year that grief came knocking on our door. That year, my young sister-in-law died in her sleep. Her chronic illness wasn’t meant to be life-threatening, but she was gone before 40. The ensuing days were a blur. Amid the philosophical question of why, there was an enormous amount of actual work – at the house, bank and so many places in between. The grief weaved in and out of all our days, but it weighed most heavily on her broken parents. We figured Christmas would be hard. The easy way out might be to skip the occasion. But that seemed, well, the easy way out, and to my devout Irish Catholic mother-in-law, pure anathema. The food was the easy part: the traditional roasts and puddings to honour Irish heritage and the indispensable naan, butter chicken and prawn masala in a nod to Indian culture. But it was the table setting that gave me heartburn. Should I pair an empty chair with an empty plate and glass? Could a ceremonial photo faithfully represent a life? How formally to acknowledge the glaring loss? In the end, I placed a small statue of an angel surrounded by a tiny wreath in place of a plate. As we sat down to lunch, my father-in-law unfolded a speech. In it, he reminisced about his youngest child and the happiness she had spread. As he recalled her favourite habits and haunts, his voice faltered. My devastated mother-in-law continued – and the loss felt exponentially larger, the air pregnant with sorrow. Earlier one of my children had innocently postulated that if everyone kept crying, the food would grow cold – suppressing a smile, I ventured that that wouldn’t happen if we first made room for their grief. As an oncologist, I am no stranger to grief. Every year I talk to the bereaved about the difficulty of the “first” birthday, anniversary, and holiday. While they scarcely believe it, I know that most people are resilient and will find ways of coping. But this year I feel less sure about recovery, because in another year spent in the shadow of the pandemic, complicated grief is overlaid by guilt. Everywhere you look, there is guilt. During prolonged lockdowns and onerous restrictions, patients with suspicious symptoms declined to seek care because they were afraid. Initially they feared catching the virus, but even after being vaccinated they didn’t want to be trapped in hospital all alone, a special curse for the elderly, confused and non-English speaking. Imagine the guilt of the wife who knew that her husband was bleeding months before she forced him to get a colonoscopy. Or the son who couldn’t have known that his “just tired” mother harboured a neglected breast cancer. While their death could be attributed to “bad biology”, it does nothing to assuage the guilt of those who must live with their regrets. But the worst guilt of all is felt by people who knew that their loved one was terminally ill and who had envisioned a different kind of death when it came: surrounded by love and care, if not peace and quiet. This simply didn’t happen. For most of the year (and even now) visitors were banned from the hospital. With guards stationed everywhere, the entrance to hospitals became a troubling and foreign sight with desperate relatives queuing up to plead their case, mostly denied. A wife was willing to pay any price to see her husband from whom she had never been separated. A frantic father chased the ambulance as his disabled adult son was shuffled across hospitals. Hapless relatives from interstate or abroad faced such an exhausting challenge to see the dying that many never even tried. Last week, the independent Victorian ombudsman criticised the “unjust outcomes” and anguish caused by the narrow exercise of discretion in allowing exemptions. Notably, the public health order always permitted visits to dying patients, but the catch was recognising that the patient was dying. Most doctors are poor at recognising the end of life: a deficit severely exacerbated by the lack of continuity as staff were furloughed, rounds were truncated or worse made “virtual”, and the patient’s staunchest advocates, the family, were kept away from the bedside. On one hand, people suffered from lack of timely care. On the other, the propensity of medicine to keep treating at all costs exacted a toll on the dying. Once, I was called to see one of my elderly patients who had spent days in hospital without my knowledge. I walked in to find ongoing infusions of antibiotics and fluid in a patient with agonal breathing. My first call was to his wife. Starved for news, she raced to the hospital but as she reached the front door her husband took his last breath. Amid the awfulness of the moment, my team was told that since the patient was dead (instead of dying), the wife could no longer come inside and would have to go to the funeral home. Our spontaneous, sheer incredulity won the day, and she was ushered in. She was “lucky” but far too many relatives never got to see their loved one at the end of life for a last caress, a necessary reconciliation, a final goodbye. Psychologists are starting to see a wave of severe bereavement, the kind that impairs daily life and close relationships. In the United States it’s estimated that each Covid death there will leave nine bereaved. This Christmas will bring a different kind of grief to the dinner table: anticipated grief intertwined with unexpected guilt. As a society, we tolerate controlled displays of emotion while balking at anything prolonged. But experts warn that the inability to express or revisit grief can be just as traumatic as the original loss. This is perhaps why in Macbeth, Shakespeare warned to “give sorrow words; the grief that does not speak knits up the o’er wrought heart and bids it break”. The pandemic has changed a lot of things, but more than 400 years later Shakespeare’s advice still rings true. So when we see our friends and family this holiday, the greatest gift we might have for the grieving is to make room for them to reminisce and regret while being fully present in the moment. Ranjana Srivastava is an Australian oncologist, award-winning author and Fulbright scholar.In 2014, Christine Anu released Christmas in Australia, an album that reimagined everything from Silent Night to Paul Kelly’s How to Make Gravy. This year, Anu is helming a different celebration of the silly season – on Tuesday 21 December at 8.30pm she will host Christmas in Australia, an ABC TV special that explores what makes our festive celebrations unique. The show will also see Anu perform songs from that 2014 Christmas album and share stories from her own childhood, which was spent between Cairns and the Torres Strait. Anu’s television special follows almost three-decades working across music, radio, film and TV. It was her 1995 cover of My Island Home that made Anu a national treasure, but her career actually began years before that as a dancer and back-up vocalist. It was on one of her early tours that she met Maori craftsman George Nuku, who gave Anu a necklace that she lost but never forgot. Here, she tells us why that misplaced gift holds such significance to her, as well as the story of two other important belongings. What I’d save from my house in a fire I would have to save the locks of baby hair from both my son and daughter’s first haircuts. It’s a piece of them and now that they are all grown up, those locks of hair are really the last physical connection to them as babies, which brings back many memories. They both had these beautiful gold ringlets and, of course, first haircuts are such monumental moments as a mother. For me, the locks are something irreplaceable – more so than an item of baby clothing or a toy from that time. My most useful object I would have to say my “pen” for an iPad/iPhone, which has a rubber tip similar to a stylus. I find myself constantly using it with my phone. Because it’s fine-pointed it makes anything I am doing a lot quicker as I don’t type with two hands. It’s also helpful in swiping on the surface of my phone or tablet. I’m still old-school and write things down. I remember things easily if I visualise something and write it down, so I tend to have the pen with me at almost all times. I would be heartbroken if I lost it – it actually stays in a special part of my handbag so I can quickly access it at any moment of need. The item I most regret losing The item is something I think about often: a greenstone carving necklace that was given to me and carved by New Zealand artist George Nuku. I met George through friends in Auckland in 1990 at an event coinciding with the Commonwealth Games while I was touring. We were backstage just before a performance when George presented it to me and put it around my neck. I was distraught when later that day I realised it had slipped off. I met up with George later on during the festival. He asked how I was and when I told him I’d lost the necklace he didn’t react, just held my shoulder and said: “It means it was never meant for you.” This just broke my heart. I felt sad yet happy, and I learnt the lesson of the way we need to treasure things. Whenever my kids lose things, I repeat George’s words. It stayed with me. I will always think of that loss because his words have become part of mine and my children’s lives, and I will always be connected to that person that gave it to me. Christmas in Australia airs at 8.30pm on Tuesday 21 December on ABC TVYour editorial (12 December) extols the virtues of the ash tree, sadly under threat from an unintentionally imported fungus. The ash is an important native species for another reason: it is one of our few, fast-growing hardwoods. As a timber, it is famously stable and able to take twisting and bending forces well. It turns well on the lathe and can be polished to a soft sheen. For so many reasons, we are going to miss this lovely tree. Bob Caldwell Badby, Northamptonshire • As a man of 82 looking back at my all-boys’ school education in the 1950s, I am in no doubt that cookery lessons, even Maggie Owen’s (Letters, 12 December), would have served most of us better in life than the Latin lessons we received. George Redman New Eltham, London • Dennis Hawkins felt he had never had a pre-existing illness (Letters, 10 December). I’m always annoyed when asked about having a “heart condition”. Of course I’ve had a heart condition. For most of my life it’s been in very good condition, though less so since passing 70. Peter Perkins Diss, Norfolk • Regarding encouraging guests to leave at the end of a long evening (Your niece is suddenly vegan! How to survive the 12 disasters of Christmas, 14 December), my husband finds that appearing in the doorway in his pyjamas usually does the trick. Alex Percy Winchester • Re responding to a vegan niece at Xmas, as well as finding something for her to eat, how about thanking her for taking action against climate change? Pam Laurance London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Peter Walker’s terrific piece (How a myth about London bike lanes and congestion took off, 13 December) reminds us that the anti-cycling lobby, replete with right-leaning columnists, aggrieved drivers and fossil-fuel interests, is perhaps the most bizarre coalition in modern politics. And it’s certainly the most misguided. The most frustrating aspect of this motley crew is that they vigorously defend interests they imagine they have. The reality is that our historical emphasis on cars has encouraged sedentary and isolated lifestyles. Older people defend a status quo that leads to their own isolation and immiseration. The research is overwhelming: active transport, low-traffic neighbourhoods and green space improve wellbeing. The anti-cycling lobby opposes measures that are not just necessary to meet climate goals, but which can also make the lives of all generations happier and healthier. Those who lament “eco-obsessed” councils are lamenting the possibility that we could encourage sustainability while making people’s lives quantifiably better. Jude Wilkinson Coventry • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.What Dal Babu’s article on policing (The Stephen Port scandal is another betrayal of public trust. The UK deserves better policing, 10 December) demonstrates is how the prevalent cult of “managerialism” blights so much of public life. This is a cult that overvalues “good management” and devalues the task of doing. Managerialism insists everything must be managed in the correct way, as taught by business schools and promoted by politicians as the answer to everything. Neither politicians, auditors nor commentators were aware of the approaching failure of Carillion, the outsourcing giant, because it was “managed” correctly. What Babu describes is the very negative consequence of the adherence to this cult in the police service. What managerialism most values is a stream of good data, demonstrating that an organisation is well managed and performing according to expectations. This is why so many of the scandals in the public sector, such as the indifferent policing of the Stephen Port murders, catch police managers and politicians by surprise. They are managing the wrong things: data not people. Another case that demonstrates this curse all too well was Dominic Raab’s refusal to act on requests for action on Afghanistan because they were either presented on the wrong spreadsheet or formatted incorrectly. Derrick Joad Leeds • Dal Babu refers to UK policing being hit with scandals, but the incidents he cites mostly reflect the incompetence of the Metropolitan police. If this happened elsewhere in England or Wales, the police and crime commissioner, or the metro mayor, would be looking to dismiss the chief constable of that force. Perhaps the job of commissioner of the Metropolitan police is too big for one person. Most countries have several layers of policing, but here the Met commissioner is both the chief constable of a very large city and the head of national police services, such as counter-terrorism and diplomatic and royal protection. Perhaps it’s time to have a separate national commissioner answerable to parliament for national functions including nuclear and transport policing, and a chief constable for London answerable to the London Assembly and mayor. Simon Marlow-Ridley Hinckley, Leicestershire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Prof Devi Sridhar’s solution to the pandemic (Plan B shows Britain is still chasing Covid. Here’s how we can get ahead of it, 9 December) emphasises the importance of vaccines, but fails to mention other essential mitigation measures, without which we will fail. Omicron, like all variants, is airborne, and only airborne protections will stop us from getting infected and end the pandemic. We have the means, in the form of face masks, carbon dioxide monitors, air filters and ventilation systems, to provide clean air in indoor spaces, free of the virus. These measures are readily available, highly effective and will stop transmission wherever they are used. This message needs to be front and centre of every discussion about how to stop the pandemic: the need for FFP2 masks and the importance of mask fit, the ability to easily monitor ventilation using CO2 monitors and identify where improvements are needed, and the remarkable efficiency of indoor air filters. We must stop seeing the solution to the pandemic only through the vaccine lens; while they are essential, Omicron shows vaccine protection is limited, and that we will always be playing catch-up with this highly mutating virus. Vaccines also work after we’ve been infected with the virus; they are literally our last line of defence. Airborne protections will stop us breathing in the virus and it getting into our bodies in the first place. Until we pay serious attention and devote the necessary resources to stopping airborne transmission, we will not end this pandemic. Dr Jonathan Fluxman London • It is unfortunate that the print headline of your otherwise thoughtful piece (Why fighting Omicron should include ramping up HIV prevention, 11 December) served to reinforce, rather than address, the stigma associated with living with HIV. Since the first cases of Aids were reported 40 years ago, people living with HIV have been held personally responsible for the growth of the epidemic, leading to deeply damaging levels of stigma and discrimination that threaten to prolong the HIV epidemic despite medical advances. Had the piece been entitled “Why equal access to HIV treatment and ending vaccine nationalism is essential to tackling the Covid pandemic”, that would have been both accurate and less stigmatising. The fundamental truth is that we will not see an end to either Covid or HIV until there is equitable access to prevention, treatment and care for both viruses across the globe. Deborah Gold Chief executive, National Aids Trust • I am a volunteer at local vaccination centres, which are now putting on a lot more vaccination clinics. Consequently, we are getting asked to do many more shifts. Unfortunately, we are already often short on shifts as many volunteers returned to work. Given that MPs have an extra long holiday from 16 December to 5 January, it would be great to see them help out at the vaccination centres. Perhaps they could show real commitment to their constituents and do three or four shifts a week during the festive season, rather than the odd photo opportunity. This could go some way to help restore faith in them and show us that we are really all in it together. Maybe local media could help by keeping a tally, so we know if our MPs are really there for us in this time of national crisis. Dave Hollis Norwich • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Cinemas are gearing up for their biggest weekend since reopening, and their biggest Wednesday results in history, as Spider-Man: No Way Home hits screens. The Marvel movie, which smashed records for ticket pre-sales and crashed cinema websites in both the UK and US, is expected to bring back audiences that have been avoiding the big screen or replaced it altogether with streaming services. According to Odeon, the UK’s largest cinema chain, more than 400,000 advance tickets have now been sold, with half of those in the first week – surpassing the previous record set by Avengers: Endgame in 2019, and more than three times the advanced sales achieved by Daniel Craig’s final outing as James Bond in No Time to Die. Carol Welch from Odeon Cinemas UK and Ireland said pre-sales for the film, starring Tom Holland as Peter Parker, showed “guests are loving being back at cinemas and are excited about the magic that our big screen experience brings to movies”. At Vue, the film sold more than 150,000 tickets in the first 24 hours of going on sale, five times the first-day sales of No Time to Die – which was viewed as a watershed moment for the industry’s path to recovery after global lockdowns. Vue Cinemas on Tuesday said the film “is expected to deliver our highest Wednesday results for any film in history in terms of admissions”. After a day, it also took the throne as Cineworld’s highest ever pre-sales release. No Way Home, directed by Jon Watts, is Holland’s sixth outing as Spider-Man and his third standalone film. Alongside Zendaya as MJ and Benedict Cumberbatch as Doctor Strange, the film also sees the return of villains from previous franchises which starred Tobey Maguire and Andrew Garfield as Spider-Man, including Alfred Molina’s Doctor Octopus, Willem Dafoe’s Green Goblin, and Jamie Foxx’s Electro. The Guardian awarded the film three stars, calling it “a propulsive, slickly choreographed adventure that will appease a broad fanbase this Christmas”. But it has been clouded in such secrecy that fans still don’t know whether their hopes of cameos from Maguire and Garfield will materialise. After tickets began to sell out, they began appearing on eBay for as much as $25,000 (£18,880). Despite rolling headlines warning of a rise in Covid infections, and speculation that government-enforced restrictions may be just round the corner, on Tuesday morning on the Vue Leicester Square website at least three opening-day showings were sold out, with only a handful of individual tickets available for other times. Phil Clapp, the chief executive of the UK Cinema Association, said cinema operators had been delighted with the excitement and anticipation shown by audiences for the film. “That confirms not just interest in this particular title, but also high levels of confidence in the safety of the cinema experience, particularly amongst those audience segments – teens and young families – which in many ways led the return to the big screen and so have seen for themselves the efforts that all cinemas have made to ensure that the experience is an enjoyable and reassuring one. “Our most recent independent industry survey for example showed that an exceptional 98% of returning cinema-goers rated their experience as ‘good’ or ‘very good’.” Clapp added that cinemas would “remain mindful” of concerns about the new variant and implement any additional measures deemed necessary by government, “for example the reintroduction last week of face coverings in cinemas in England”. David Hancock, a media and entertainment analyst at Omdia, said the film was “keenly anticipated” and predicted that it would continue to “do good business”. “The buzz seems to be mainly generated by the appearance of previous Spider-Man villains as well as a cinematic universe element in Doctor Strange appearing,” he said. “Bond kickstarted cinema back in October and Spider-Man is benefiting from that (the Bond titles got many older and more cautious people back in the cinema).” No Time to Die is currently the third highest-grossing film in the world (after two domestic Chinese titles) with about $780m in box office takings – making it Hollywood’s biggest release since the pandemic. Meanwhile Holland, who has been busy promoting the film, told the BBC on Tuesday that playing Spider-Man felt like “more than just having a job”. “There are kids out there that look up to Spider-Man and they come home from school and the person they want to sit down with is Spider-Man, and I am that person right now,” the British actor said. “So I have a responsibility to be a role model and to give these kids some drive and something to look up to.” The 25-year-old recently said he was considering quitting acting to return to his roots in dancing, having played Billy Elliot in the West End as a child.The Covid pandemic is forcing homeless shelters to shut their doors due to growing fears around social distancing, experts warn, as charities call for action to prevent deaths this winter. Housing Justice, the biggest provider of voluntary sector shelters, said the number of winter shelter beds available UK-wide this year was about 950 compared with 2,100 prior to the pandemic. Another charity, Glass Door, said it had been forced to shut its usual service. A spokesperson, Melissa Kerschen, said it could not open due to ongoing Covid precautions and the difficulty of being able to adhere to social distancing, especially after the rise of the Omicron variant. She said it was “deeply” concerning. “Sleeping on the streets can be deadly in winter, and with so many shelters unable to open, we need to work together to find safe options for people who have nowhere to call home,” she said. Previously charities were able to lean on the support of the government’s Everyone In scheme, they said, but this year most hotels that before had offered support were unable to do so as they were once again being used by guests. Marike van Harskamp, the policy and partnerships manager at New Horizon Youth Centre, said: “With the Covid-19 Everyone In scheme, which provided much-needed additional emergency accommodation during the lockdown periods, now wrapped up, this means that we foresee that this winter fewer bed spaces will be available than needed to help people sleeping rough off the streets.” However, she added that projects were focused on doing things differently and helping people move into longer-term accommodation. Kathy Mohan, the chief executive of Housing Justice, said while there would be “significantly” fewer beds the overwhelming majority would be in “single room accommodation”. Paul Brocklehurst, a senior manager of the Centrepoint charity helpline, said there had been an increase in calls from people seeking help of about a third compared with pre-pandemic times. “Most of our calls are from people saying they have nowhere to stay,” he said, putting the rise in demand down to more people with problems but also a lot of services shutting down face-to-face drop-in centres and councils being harder to contact. “We used to send people down to the housing office but people find it harder to get through to, so we are looking to alternatives.” It comes as concern has also been raised about vaccination rates among those rough sleeping or in temporary accommodation. The only research available, from July, found that about 55% had had a second vaccine dose. Vaccination rates among those experiencing homelessness were “significantly lower” than the general population, charities said, which is concerning as often this group has underlying clinical conditions. Rick Henderson, the chief executive of the charity Homeless Link, said that getting data on vaccination rates among the homeless was hard because the population was so transient. He said that earlier in the pandemic homeless charities had successfully campaigned for people experiencing homelessness to be prioritised in the vaccine rollout, but now there needed to be a “redoubling of this effort”.Stephen Colbert “It has been a crazy and bewildering year,” said Stephen Colbert to kick off his final week of Late Shows for 2021, a year of political chaos, an attempted coup, extreme weather events and the continual bottoming-out of rightwing media. Things have gone so off the rails at Fox, the Late Show host explained, that even Chris Wallace, one of Fox News’s veteran broadcast journalists, announced this weekend that he would leave the network for CNN+ after 18 years. “It’s the end of an era, but luckily Fox has already filled the time slot with the flaming Christmas tree,” Colbert quipped. Wallace, the network’s most decorated down-the-middle journalists, was one of the few anchors at the network willing to ask difficult questions. “There goes Fox News’s last shred of credibility,” said Colbert. “Now they have to change their slogan from ‘Fair and Balanced’ to ‘Horse paste and gun! Argle Bargle! Argle Bargle!’” Wallace hosted his last episode of Fox News Sunday this weekend, with his final guest being Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina. “Wow, what a way to go out,” Colbert deadpanned. “That’s like being able to request anything as your last meal on death row and ordering an interview with Lindsey Graham.” Seth Meyers On Late Night, Seth Meyers delved into a PowerPoint explicating methods for a political coup that circled through Trumpworld in early 2021. “They did everything they could, left no stone unturned, looked for every crack and crevice in our democracy they could possibly find,” Meyers explained of Donald Trump’s efforts to prevent the transition of power. “Trump tried so many different avenues”, he added. “He was like the guy in the grocery store during Christmas rush who keeps switching checkout aisles. “It’s so disorienting for things to be both this dangerous and this dumb at the same time,” he continued, pointing to the “truly insane” PowerPoint. The 38-page presentation included options such as declaring a national emergency; a retired army colonel, Philip Waldron, briefed the then White House chief of staff, Mark Meadows, several times about the PowerPoint. Trump famously never writes things down, but “I guess he forgot to tell his underlings before they started emailing a PowerPoint around detailing their crimes,” said Meyers. “Even the mafia knows to use code words. If the mafia ever made a powerpoint presentation, it would say something vague, like ‘Plan For The Guys At The Place To Do The Thing’.” Trevor Noah On the Daily Show, Trevor Noah explained how California’s governor, Gavin Newsom, plans to use Texas’s restrictive abortion law as a model for gun control in the state. Under Newsom’s plan, California citizens will be able to sue anyone who makes, distributes or sells the assault weapons, citing supreme court rulings that have allowed the Texas anti-abortion law to stay in effect. “The idea is that because the supreme court is allowing this for banning abortion, they’re going to have to allow it for banning guns, too,” Noah said. “But here’s the thing: the problem with this idea is that the supreme court can make up whatever rules they like. If they want to strike down these gun laws, they’ll find a way, you know? “The supreme court is like that annoying kid that your mom made you have play dates with,” he added, mimicking a thwarted game of tag – “‘Tag, I got you!’ ‘Nuh uh, I have a vest that makes me invisible.’ “America has gotten so divided right now”, he continued, “that at this point I think maybe some states should just like … secede? And try to do their own thing. Have they tried that before? What’s the worst that could happen?” Jimmy Kimmel And in Los Angeles, Jimmy Kimmel mocked an event held by Trump and former Fox News host Bill O’Reilly in Orlando that drew disappointing crowd sizes. The event, the first in their planned “history tour”, played to an arena with many empty seats, reported the Sun-Sentinel. “If the place was any emptier, it would be Don Jr’s head,” Kimmel quipped. “It was disappointing, to say the least,” he joked. Though tickets originally sold for upwards of $100, the tour eventually gave away some for free. “This happens a lot with things Trump puts his name on,” Kimmel explained. “First they’re considered to be valuable, and then everyone realizes they are garbage. We’ve seen this with his ties, his steaks, his university, his children.”Like a great big playful un-neutered pitbull, Matthew Vaughn’s new Kingsman movie comes crashing into our cinematic lives this Christmas, overturning the furniture and frantically humping everyone’s leg before rolling over on the carpet for you to tickle its tummy or anything else that comes to hand. The third film in the OTT British spy romp franchise now gives us an epic origin myth, explaining how the Kingsman society came to be located in a posh tailor’s shop in London’s Savile Row, and how it was born in the first world war to battle a certain evil genius whom Vaughn cheerfully makes Scottish. This megalomaniac’s hidden hand is behind historical events you thought you knew all about – such as the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand in 1914, the death of Lord Kitchener in 1916 and the Russian revolution in 1917. Bizarrely, the film also suggests that the famous poem Dulce et Decorum Est was actually written by the son of the Kingsman founder, without explaining how it came to be misattributed to a certain Wilfred Owen. As before, Vaughn’s film-making has a crazy dad-humour energy, or weird-uncle energy, very startling and distinctive queer touches, such as Rasputin the Mad Monk licking Ralph Fiennes’s leg. Is this how Ronnie Kray would have directed a movie? There are spectacular set pieces and genuinely surprising twists: a fanatically maintained two-hour splurge of spectacular and artless bad taste with less of the smirking that made the first film unsupportable. This demands to be seen on the big screen but also on ITV4 on the small screen, with a tub of Quality Street on your Christmas-jumpered gut. Fiennes plays the Duke of Oxford, who goes to South Africa as part of the Red Cross in 1902 during the Boer war to confront Kitchener (Charles Dance) over British military behaviour. He is with his wife Emily, played by the estimable Alexandra Maria Lara. But violence and tragedy are to scar his life and later make him overprotective of his headstrong, grownup son Conrad (Harris Dickinson). But, together with Oxford’s employees – and friends – Shola (Djimon Hounsou) and Polly (Gemma Arterton), he is forced to confront an international conspiracy with a Russian connection, involving the Mad Monk himself, played by Rhys Ifans. Vaughn shows uncharacteristic restraint in not using the classic Boney M song on the soundtrack. Aaron Taylor-Johnson plays Scottish soldier Archie Reid who is drawn into a fateful imposture and Tom Hollander gives an uproarious triple-decker performance, as the similar-looking cousins Tsar Nicholas, Kaiser Wilhelm and George V – a rather clever and acute casting idea. The scenes in the trenches and no man’s land are shot with Vaughn’s reckless, tactless high spirits (as are his solemn anti-war effusions) and there is a specific case of suspected espionage and a certain point-blank gunshot that really will take you by surprise. There’s also, it should be said, a well-crafted bird’s-eye-view tableau sequence showing how the countryside of France morphed into the battlefields of the Great War. However little Vaughn wants you to take his film seriously, and however impossible that, of course, would be, in fact it is directed with great technical dash and ambition that many other British film-makers might well envy. There’s an appetite and a market out there for tongue-in-cheek spy extravaganzas, and this will probably run and run. • The King’s Man is released on 22 December in the US, on 26 December in the UK, and on 6 January in Australia.All 11 countries on England’s travel red list are to be taken off it from 4am on Wednesday, amid diminishing concern about Omicron cases being imported into the country. Given that the variant has already taken hold in the UK – making up a third of new infections in London – the health secretary, Sajid Javid, announced that mandatory hotel quarantine for those arriving from some southern African countries was set to end. Instead, all travellers arriving in England will be able to isolate at home. If double vaccinated, they can be released with a negative PCR test taken within two days of arrival. If not they must stay at home for 10 days and get a test before day two and another on day eight or later. The red list was cleared at the end of October, but after the discovery of the Omicron variant in South Africa, 11 countries were put back on it. They were: Angola, Botswana, Eswatini, Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia, Nigeria, South Africa, Zambia and Zimbabwe. Omicron’s spread through the UK has been swift. The UK Health Security Agency said on Monday that the number of confirmed cases of the variant was 4,700, but estimated daily infection numbers were at about 200,000. Javid announced in parliament on Tuesday that the red list was being emptied, saying it had become “less effective in slowing the incursion of Omicron from abroad”. He said the requirement to get tested before departure would remain in place. He had hinted at the move in a statement to the Commons last week. Under pressure from Tory MPs who raised concerns about the aviation and tourism sectors, Javid said that because Omicron cases would probably spread quickly in the UK, there would be “less need to have any kind of travel restrictions at all”. As health restrictions are devolved, it will be up to the administrations in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland whether to follow suit. The Labour MP Ben Bradshaw called for people “currently incarcerated in so-called quarantine hotels in inhumane conditions” to be immediately released and allowed to complete their isolation at home. The Conservative Andrew Murrison said it was “completely untenable” to “bang people up” in the hotels. Steve Barclay, the Cabinet Office minister, later confirmed people in hotel quarantine would be permitted “early release” and allowed to “follow the relevant rules as if they have arrived from a non-red list country” if they tested negative. Those who tested positive will have to remain in the facility. Gary Lewis, the chief executive of the Travel Network Group, which represents more than 1,200 travel businesses in the UK, welcomed the wiping of the red list, but added: “We are fully behind safe overseas travel but we have to be pragmatic, Covid is here for the long run … There have been too many poorly timed, kneejerk travel impositions.” Last week, EU leaders discussed easing similar curbs. Reuters reported a senior official as saying the travel ban was “a time-limited measure” but there were no immediate plans to lift it. The US has kept up its own travel ban, with the White House’s chief medical adviser saying action was taken when the country was “in the dark” about the variant, to give time to assess its threat. Some political leaders in southern Africa said the restrictions were unfair. Cyril Ramaphosa, the president of South Africa, said he was “deeply disappointed” by the action. According to the BBC, he said: “The only thing the prohibition on travel will do is to further damage the economies of the affected countries and undermine their ability to respond to, and recover from, the pandemic.” Akinwumi Adesina, the president of the African Development Bank Group, tweeted last week: “Now that Omicron has been found in many non-African and developed countries, why are travels from those countries not banned? Singling out African countries is very unfair, non-scientific and discriminatory.”High levels of previous exposure to three previous waves of coronavirus infection in South Africa may explain the relatively low levels of hospitalisation and severe disease in the current outbreak of the Omicron variant, rather than the variant itself being less virulent. The suggestion was made by the vaccine expert Shabir Madhi of the University of the Witwatersrand, who has led vaccine trials in the country. He warned that South Africa’s experience of Omicron might not be a reliable indicator for how the Omicron outbreak unfolds in other countries. The same message was echoed by the head of the World Health Organization (WHO), Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, who said it was “wrong for people to consider Omicron as mild”. Other senior WHO officials, warning that the peak of Omicron could be weeks away as it spread rapidly, added that current evidence suggested vaccines were not failing to protect against Omicron altogether, and did offer some degree of protection. In a lengthy interview with the Global Health Crisis Coordination Center, Madhi cited a recently completed seropositivity survey – the percentage of population who have already been infected – in Gauteng province, which has been at the centre of the Omicron outbreak, that suggested 72% had experienced a previous infection of coronavirus. That is well over three times the rate of previous infections detected by a similar survey during the Beta variant outbreak a year ago where seropositivity was 20%. While Madhi said emerging evidence pointed to the fact that Omicron was both more infectious and more able to evade antibody protection, he suggested other mechanisms at work in acquired immunity through infection could explain the lower levels of hospitalisations and severe illness. While the UK has a seropositivity rate above 90%, South Africa’s experience may be very different to the UK’s in terms of the Omicron, with the UK having an older population and different vulnerabilities to disease. Madhi’s comments came as a second major South African health insurer, Discovery Health, reported fewer cases of severe illness than earlier variants of the coronavirus, reporting that in 211,000 positive coronavirus cases the risk of hospital admissions among adults was 29% lower than in the initial pandemic wave that emerged in March 2020. “The evolution of the Omicron variant is coming at a very different stage of the pandemic,” said Madhi. “That is important to keep at the back of our minds when we see what is unfolding in South Africa and what we might see in other settings, which might have a very different epidemiology.” “In the South African much of the immunity that currently exists is largely because of the prior infection that has taken place during the first three waves,” he added. “In a survey that fortuitously just ended in [Gauteng province] on Friday what we demonstrate is that the seropositivity in Gauteng is about 72%. “That is important to keep in the back of our mind when we see what is unfolding in South Africa and what we might expect in other settings.” Addressing the issue of whether Omicron is “milder” than other previous variants, Madhi said the high levels of previous exposure meant that experts were “simply unable to make a meaningful head-to-head comparison of virulence with Omicron in comparison with the other variants. “[That is] imply because of the underpinning of immunity that currently exists which is different to what existed in the past, and that immunity is going to bring about some change in the clinical course of the infection, including the likelihood of infection progressing to severe disease.” “What is quite fascinating is that taking the rate of infection per 100,000 and comparing that to the hospitalisation rate as well as the death rate, the hospitalisation rate is much more muted compared with what was the equivalent case rate in the first three waves that transpired. “So it tells us something is at play when the high force of infections with Omicron is not materialising in terms of severe disease and deaths in large numbers.” Citing evidence of Omicron’s ability to evade antibody protection he suggested data was “congregating” that immunity from T cells might be driving protection against more severe disease. With global attention closely focused on how South Africa’s Omicron outbreak is unfolding, some media reports have suggested the first evidence that Omicron cases in South Africa might be flattening. The reports, based on daily rather than more reliable weekly figures, appeared to focus on fluctuations on reporting of cases in Gauteng rather than South Africa more widely. Contradicting those claims was reporting from the country’s National Institute for Communicable Diseases, which on Monday suggested Covid infections – both Delta and Omicron – were continuing to gather momentum, with KwaZulu-Natal Department of Health saying the province was recording more than 2,000 new cases a day, while in the Eastern Cape the Covid-19 positivity rate had increased to 17.8%. Madhi’s argument appears to have the support of some other experts. Tulio de Oliveira, who runs two gene-sequencing institutes in South Africa, told CBS over the weekend: “You have large pockets of population immunity … We’re going to have to tease apart if the mild cases are due to young people getting infected or if the previous population immunity from infection and vaccination are responsible for decreasing the number of hospitalised individuals.” According to the WHO other African countries are also contributing to a massive rise in Covid cases over the last week, but the number of deaths, for now at least, is lower than with previous waves. The 83% surge means, however, that the continent will not get 70% of people fully vaccinated – considered essential to halt the pandemic – until August 2024. “We are cautiously optimistic that deaths and severe illness will remain low in the current wave,” said Dr Matshidiso Moeti, WHO’s Regional Director for Africa. “But slow vaccine rollout in Africa means both will be much higher than they should be.”The Premier League’s clubs have agreed to introduce daily Covid testing for players and training‑ground staff as they fight to prevent the postponement of further games and, in the worst-case scenario, a break in the competition. The move was sanctioned on Tuesday at a meeting between the clubs and the league as new legislation to regulate specific commercial deals, conceived in response to the Saudi‑led takeover of Newcastle, was also voted in. The league announced on Monday that 42 players and club officials had tested positive for coronavirus in the seven days that ended on Sunday – a record for a single week since testing began. The increase in cases has severely affected Manchester United, who were forced to seek the postponement of their fixture at Brentford on Tuesday night. It was granted just before midnight on Monday, the league’s board having convened late on once the relevant PCR results had been obtained. The board considered the outbreak at United to be “ongoing” and, with a significant number of positive tests and the club having temporarily closed their training ground, felt they had no option but to agree to the postponement. On the back of the outbreak at Tottenham, which led to the postponement of their matches against Rennes in the Europa Conference League and Brighton in the league and positive tests at other clubs the issue of Covid protocols was prominent at the meeting on Tuesday. There are plenty of worries, the feeling being that the game is at a critical point. It is accepted that with wider society not in lockdown, the players face greater risks with regard to transmission of the virus and that the concept of maintaining “bubbles” is more problematic. The message from the league’s chief executive, Richard Masters, was for clubs to follow the newly beefed‑up safety measures – they are back to the most stringent of the pandemic – and to urge their players to get booster jabs. The vaccine threshold exemption, which had allowed for a relaxing of certain measures such as social distancing if 85% of a club’s staff were vaccinated, has been discontinued. Masters ran through the broad criteria for a postponement – which involve training grounds being shut and clubs having fewer than 14 first‑team players fit, including no goalkeeper – but his direction was that the show must go on, which the clubs support. Many of them would be happy to press on if they had, for example, a handful of positive Covid cases because they are mindful of the potential for horrendous fixture pile-ups. The summer of next year has already been compressed to allow for the World Cup in November and December. The rule change that has come into effect concerns what are called related or associated party transactions – in other words, deals that involve companies with links to a club’s ownership. If a club has a proposal from an entity perceived to be linked to their owners and it is worth more than £1m, they must go before the league’s board to prove that it is of fair market value. To reach a decision, the league will consider evidence from the club and an independent agency – which is expert in the field of market valuation. Finally, it will lean on a data bank, in which all of the commercial deals in the league are recorded anonymously and benchmarked. The vote was passed 18-2, with Newcastle and Manchester City voting against. Previously, the clubs had introduced a temporary ban on related party transactions which was due to expire at 5pm on Tuesday.Donald Trump’s son Donald Trump Jr and three hosts on the Fox News network begged then White House chief of staff Mark Meadows to persuade the former president to stop the 6 January insurrection despite their public efforts to downplay it, newly released text messages show. The sense of panic that enveloped the former president’s inner circle during the attack on the US Capitol was revealed on Monday when Congresswoman Liz Cheney, vice-chair of a House select committee investigating the riot, read aloud texts sent to Meadows. “We need an Oval address,” Trump Jr wrote as his father’s supporters were storming the Capitol, sending members of Congress running for their lives and delaying the certification of Joe Biden’s victory. “He has to lead now. It has gone too far and gotten out of hand.” Trump Jr added: “He’s got to condemn this shit asap.” In response, Meadows texted: “I’m pushing it hard. I agree.” Cheney also made public frantic messages from three Fox News presenters who became notorious as cheerleaders for the Trump administration and for fanning the flames of his lies about voter fraud. Crossing a line from journalists to informal advisers, they urged Meadows to push Trump to act quickly to stop the siege by his supporters. Laura Ingraham, the host of The Ingraham Angle, wrote: “Hey Mark, the president needs to tell people in the Capitol to go home. This is hurting all of us. He is destroying his legacy.” Yet later that night Ingraham went on air baselessly shifting blame from Trump’s supporters to the anti-fascist movement antifa. She told viewers: “From a chaotic Washington tonight, earlier today the Capitol was under siege by people who can only be described as antithetical to the Maga [Make America Great Again] movement. Now, they were likely not all Trump supporters, and there are some reports that antifa sympathisers may have been sprinkled throughout the crowd.” Brian Kilmeade, co-host of the morning show Fox &amp; Friends, on which Trump appeared regularly, wrote to the chief of staff on 6 January: “Please, get him on TV. Destroying everything you have accomplished.” And Sean Hannity, a prime time host who once appeared onstage with Trump at a campaign rally, texted Meadows: “Can he make a statement? Ask people to leave the Capitol.” But later, on his broadcast, Hannity said: “Our election, frankly, was a train wreck. Eighty-three per cent, according to Gallup, of Republicans, and millions of others, do not have faith in these election results. You can’t just snap your finger and hope that goes away.” Trump has been widely condemned for his casual response to insurrection, which had been raging for three hours before he finally released a video urging the mob: “Go home. We love you. You’re very special.” A few hours later he tweeted: “Go home with love &amp; in peace. Remember this day forever!” Since then the ex-president, Trump Jr and rightwing media have spent months seeking to minimise the events of 6 January, which resulted in five deaths and more than 500 arrests. Trump has claimed that rioters were “hugging and kissing” police. Last month another Fox News host, Tucker Carlson, produced a three-part documentary, Patriot Purge, for the Fox Nation streaming platform that pushed the lie that the insurrection was a “false flag” operation designed to hurt Trump’s supporters. “January 6 is being used as a pretext to strip millions of Americans – disfavoured Americans – of their core constitutional rights,” he insisted. But Monday’s fresh insight into the symbiotic relationship between the Trump White House and Fox News show that those close to the president realised the gravity of what was unfolding and how damaging it could be. Cheney said the texts show Trump’s “supreme dereliction” as he refused to strongly condemn the violence of his supporters. “These texts leave no doubt,” Cheney said. “The White House knew exactly what was happening at the Capitol.” Amanda Carpenter, a former communications director to Senator Ted Cruz, wrote on the Bulwark website: “These texts prove something essential. No matter what they say now, Trump’s loyalists knew at the time that what was happening at the Capitol was not a peaceful protest. “They knew that it was a dangerous attack on American democracy. And they knew that Trump was responsible for it. That’s why they sent the texts pleading with him, through his staff, to make it stop.” The texts were among almost 9,000 documents that Meadows turned over to the committee before he ceased cooperation. Cheney disclosed only a tiny fraction, raising the prospect of further embarrassments to come for Trump’s allies. The committee voted 9-0 to recommend that Meadows, himself a former members of the House, be held in contempt of Congress for refusing to comply with a subpoena. The full House is set to vote on Tuesday to refer the charges to the justice department. The hearing was not broadcast on Fox News but Meadows appeared on the network soon after the vote. There was no mention of the revelatory texts. He told Hannity: “This is about Donald Trump and about actually going after him once again.” Two longtime Fox News contributors, Goldberg and Stephen Hayes, resigned last month in protest at Carlson’s Patriot Purge programme. Chris Wallace, host of the network’s flagship Sunday politics programme, resigned on Sunday after 18 years to join CNN’s new streaming platform.The spectacle at a South Dakota hockey match that saw teachers scrambling for dollar bills on their hands and knees, forced an apology and some cash compensation by the bank that organized the stunt. The bank originally allotted $500 for each of the ten teachers involved, which the teachers involved intended to spend on essential school supplies. They have since also issued an additional $500 to those teachers and $500 to 21 other teachers that applied to take part in the event but were not invited to participate. “Although our intent was to provide a positive and fun experience for teachers, we can see how it appears to be degrading and insulting towards the participating teachers and the teaching profession as a whole. We deeply regret and apologize to all teachers for any embarrassment this may have caused,” CU Mortgage Direct bank and Sioux Falls Stampede hockey team said in a joint statement. According to the most recent report by the National Education Association, the average teacher salary in South Dakota is $48,984 – the lowest in the country. Onlookers in the state and online were outraged when teachers were seen fighting in helmets and padded protective gear over $1 bills in an attempt to provide basic resources for their classrooms. The video of the event, posted on Twitter, has been viewed over 19m times since Tuesday. The state’s teachers’ union, South Dakota Education Association, issued a statement condemning the Dash for Cash event and the state’s commitment to educators: “While the Dash for the Cash may have been well-intentioned, it only underscores the fact that educators don’t have the resources necessary to meet the needs of their students. As a state, we shouldn’t be forcing teachers to crawl around on an ice rink to get the money they need to fund their classrooms. We need to do better for our educators, but, more importantly, we must do better for our students.” The governor of South Dakota, Kristi Noem, has said previously that improved funding for schools is a priority. Local paper the Argus Leader reports that as part of her budget address to the state legislature in early December, Noem proposed a 6% increase in state aid to education funding and stated that it should go directly to teachers.Magnus Carlsen says he is ready to shock the chess world by giving up his world championship title – because defending it no longer motivates him. The five-time world champion retained the classical title in emphatic style in Dubai last week, crushing his Russian challenger Ian Nepomniachtchi 7½-3½, but now says he has other priorities. “It’s been clear to me for most of the year that this world championship should be the last,” he said. “It doesn’t mean as much any more as it once did. I haven’t felt that the positive outweighs the negative. “For those who expect me to play the world championship next time, the chance that they will be disappointed is very great.” The 31-year-old said the only thing likely to persuade him to keep defending his title would be if his next opponent was the brilliant 18‑year‑old Alireza Firouzja, who recently broke Carlsen’s record as the youngest 2800-rated player and is now ranked world No 2. However, Firouzja still has to qualify from an eight-man candidates tournament to earn the right to play Carlsen. “It is important for me to say that I do intend to play chess,” said Carlsen, who has hinted before that he is unhappy with the format of the classical world championship, which he thinks should have shorter time controls. “I will continue to play chess, it gives me a lot of joy. But the world championship has not been so pleasurable.” Speaking to the Løperekka podcast for his sponsor Unibet, Carlsen said: “If someone other than Firouzja wins the candidates tournament it’s unlikely I will play the next world championship match.” Instead Carlsen, who is already the highest ranked chess player in history, has set his sights on becoming the first man to break the 2900 barrier. “There is so much more I can try to do,” he said. “I am very motivated to get the rating to 2900. I have never had it as a goal before, because I felt it was difficult. I have raised the rating a bit again now, to 2865, and it is at least a goal you can set. It does not feel completely impossible.”The government has agreed that the taxpayer will foot the substantial compensation bill for former Post Office workers who were wrongly convicted of theft due to the defective Horizon IT system. The Post Office has said it cannot afford the multimillion-pound cleanup bill for the scandal and on Tuesday the government, which is the service’s only shareholder, confirmed its intention to step in. So far, 72 post office operators’ convictions have been quashed. Several other cases are in train, and there are potentially hundreds more operators whose convictions relied on Horizon evidence who may seek to clear their names. In a written ministerial statement, the postal affairs minister, Paul Scully, said he wanted those with quashed convictions to be compensated “fairly and swiftly”. The vast majority of these people had received interim payments of up to £100,000 while they waited for the next step, Scully said. The government was now making cash available so final compensation awards could be made, he said. “We are working with the Post Office to finalise the arrangements that will enable the final settlement negotiations to begin as soon as possible,” he said. The money would enable the Post Office to deliver the “fair compensation postmasters deserve”. Between 2000 and 2014, the Post Office prosecuted 736 post office operators based on information from a recently installed computer system called Horizon. Some of the convicted workers were jailed following convictions for false accounting and theft, and many were financially ruined. However, it was the software, which contained bugs, errors and defects, that had caused the problems, according to the high court judgment that quashed many of the convictions. The government made the announcement just before a business, energy and industrial strategy committee hearing on the matter got under way. Darren Jones, the committee’s chairman, said it was “wholly unacceptable” for the minister’s statement to be published at such short notice. He also said that “more questions need answering” as to whether the 555 people who paid false shortfalls but were not convicted will receive payments. At the hearing, post office operators told MPs they had suffered big financial losses. Paul Harry, who was accused of false accounting, said he had recouped about a fifth of the funds he lost after shortfalls appeared in the Horizon accounting system. Alan Bates, another former operator and founder of the Justice for Subpostmasters Alliance, said operators had paid in the region of £8.5m to the Post Office to cover supposed shortfalls. “That’s before anything else, like the loss of their businesses and all the rest of it, including the financial difficulties they’ve been left in,” said Bates. The group received a near £57m settlement in 2019 but £46m went towards the cost of legal action. That left £11m which averaged about £20,000 per person, he said. Bates suggested it would take payments of £700,000 to put them back in the position they started had the Post Office not done what they did. Harry, who has received an interim compensation payment, is hoping for further payments. “I have received a small amount of just over £20,000, but my losses are in excess of £100,000, so I am nowhere near getting my money.”Today Dominic Raab, the justice secretary, announced plans to “overhaul” the Human Rights Act, bring in a new British bill of rights and, as he put it, “restore common sense” to our laws. In reality, he is making real his long-held dream to weaken vital human rights protections, make justice conditional on good behaviour and insulate the state from accountability. Raab’s plans make for grim reading. They include stripping away the right to family and private life. This is being done under the guise of the deportation of “foreign criminals”, a proposal that goes hand in hand with the government’s determination to use the revoking of citizenship as a punishment, creating instead a tiered system of rights protection based on your immigration status. But human rights are universal – take them from one group and you take them from all of us. And of course the right to a private and family life goes a lot wider than immigration. If the government hollows out these protections, we won’t be able to protect our private data, fight evictions, demand LGBT equality or resist mass surveillance. Raab is also coming after so-called positive obligations. These are the legal obligations on public bodies to protect rights. It was positive obligations that allowed the families of young soldiers at Deepcut barracks to expose the toxic culture that had led to their deaths. It was positive obligations that allowed survivors of the rapist John Worboys to challenge the Metropolitan police for their failure to bring him to justice. And it was these obligations that enabled the Hillsborough families to expose police failings and corruption at a proper inquest. Take away these obligations and you give licence to the police, the army and other state bodies to neglect their duties – with no possibility of justice. Let us not forget that it is these very state bodies that are responsible for some of the gravest human rights abuses that happen in the UK. Raab also claims his reforms will “protect free speech”. Free speech is a vital right that already receives special protection in the Human Rights Act. So it is clear that this government does not want to protect the principle of free speech – it wants instead to protect the kinds of speech it likes to hear and gag those it doesn’t. Just look at another bill going through parliament at the moment – the police, crime, sentencing and courts bill, which attempts to criminalise protest. There are also plans to take away whistleblower protections in the Official Secrets Act. As it attempts this crude power grab, the government is also attempting to put itself above the law by taking away the power of the courts to declare whether laws passed by parliament are compatible with human rights. It wants to tie the hands of judges by stopping them from giving remedies – payment of damages, for example – for human rights abuses if the remedy would be particularly onerous at the time for the public body. If that wasn’t worrying enough, human rights would be conditional on good behaviour, because judges will be required to take account of someone’s past conduct when deciding what remedy to award them. So the state could commit a hideous human rights violation but escape punishment by trawling through someone’s past to argue they do not deserve justice. That is if their case even makes it to court. Raab’s plans include a new “permissions stage” for all human rights cases, requiring people to show that they have faced “significant disadvantage” as a result of the abuse of their human rights before they can even argue their case. Evidence of this disadvantage would need to be shown before a trial, therefore needing you to get evidence of the said abuse from your opponent – the British state. As a human rights lawyer, I have worked on many cases of terrible human rights abuses that became clear only when we cross-examined witnesses or managed to get disclosure of evidence. There was a case about the death of a young woman in psychiatric care, in which the hospital said in witness statements that it had checked on her regularly as she had been assessed as being of high risk of suicide. When we managed to get the CCTV evidence on disclosure we found that this was a lie – she had been left completely alone in her room, and took her own life. Under Raab’s plans, these kinds of cases would never even see the light of day in court. The government has been keen to emphasise that Britain will remain signed up to the European convention on human rights, which the Human Rights Act gives effect to. That, at the very least, seems intended to reassure us that it does not plan to permanently remove all our rights protections. But if the government does go ahead and push through this drastic weakening of rights, we will be on a collision course with Europe for failing to comply with international legal obligations. This is a government that is criminalising protest, making it harder to take the government to court through judicial review and undermining access to the ballot box by introducing voter ID. In court, in parliament and on the streets, it is dismantling the tools we use to hold it to account. Overhauling the Human Rights Act must be seen in this context, and seen for what it is: a rewriting of the rules so only the government can win. Martha Spurrier, a British barrister and human rights campaigner, is the director of LibertyWest End shows including The Lion King have had to cancel performances owing to outbreaks of coronavirus among cast and crew. The festive period is crucial to theatres, generating about a third of their income, but rising case numbers and the spread of the Omicron variant have prompted a number of productions to shut temporarily. The Lion King at the Lyceum theatre cancelled shows on Tuesday and Wednesday, citing “Covid-enforced absences within our cast and crew”. Performances are due to resume on Thursday. Life of Pi, based on the 2002 Booker prize-winning novel by the Canadian author Yann Martel, has scrapped five shows at Wyndham’s theatre but says it will return on Wednesday. Producers said there had been “several cases of Covid in the company” despite “robust measures taken”. The National cancelled a preview of its Christmas show Hex, which is based on Sleeping Beauty, after one of its lead actors caught Covid. On Tuesday the theatre said the rescheduled show and subsequent performances had now been cancelled after further cases were confirmed, and more information was expected in the new year. In a letter to theatre critics, the National’s artistic director, Rufus Norris, wrote: “You will no doubt be aware of the impact that Covid has been having on productions across the industry (none of ours over the last year have escaped entirely) but the impact on Hex has been considerable, with several members of the company including one of our leads being taken ill during the technical and preview period, and fresh bad news on that front again today.” Southwark Playhouse in London announced it was cancelling the remainder of its run of The Rhythmics, described as “Calendar Girls meets The Full Monty”, after having to postpone press night twice. The company blamed positive Covid-19 cases and “the effect of subsequent isolation requirements on the viability of the show”. The Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-Time at the Troubadour theatre in Wembley is cancelled until Friday. The Royal Shakespeare Company’s The Comedy of Errors at the Barbican in London has also been halted, and hopes to restart on Thursday 23 December. Other productions affected include Force Majeure at the Donmar Warehouse, Fair Play at the Bush theatre, Wendy &amp; Peter Pan at Leeds Playhouse, and Beauty and the Beast at Coventry’s Belgrade theatre. Monica Bellucci: Maria Callas Letters and Memoirs at Her Majesty’s theatre has been postponed until April 2022. Moulin Rouge! at the Piccadilly theatre in London restarted on Monday after a Covid-enforced 10-day break. Theatres now have to ask visitors to wear masks after a large rise in cases. John Plews, the chair of the Society of Independent Theatres and artistic director at the Gatehouse in north London, said at the weekend that bookings for Christmas shows had been hit by between 20% and 50% because of Covid concerns.Although his plays were performed regularly at the Royal Court and the Royal Shakespeare Company, and attracted appreciative reviews and admiration from his peers, Robert Holman, who has died aged 69 of cancer, remained a mystery man in the British theatre. An enigmatic, quietly spoken Yorkshireman, Holman was sharp as a knife, but not a serrated one, gently coaxing tenderness, confessions and suffering from his characters. These figures were invariably placed in outdoor, rural locations – by an estuary, near some rocks, on a beach, in a field or in a hut. The plays were often oblique, with a surreal dimension, but they lingered. And they meandered, or undulated, like an untended landscape. Just over 10 years ago, a group of relatively young playwrights, not including Holman, formed an informal club called the Monsterists, demanding they be given access to big stages for large-scale epics. Nothing much happened, but this was an expression of frustration at new work being kept safely hidden away in studio theatres. Studio theatres were Holman’s natural habitat. Temperamentally, he was a genuine miniaturist. Banging drums or sermonising was not his style. He once told an interviewer: “As a playwright, I have absolutely nothing to say.” As a man, he most certainly did, and this emerged sideways in the emotional texture and environmentally concerned atmosphere of plays that murmured while global upheavals – the second world war, the Falklands crisis, industrial meltdown, the Spanish civil war, even the Napoleonic wars – coloured the background. Holman was born in Guisborough, north Yorkshire, the third of four sons, and raised on a farm there by parents who were, respectively, Methodist and Quaker. His father, Philip, a farm manager on a large estate, was a conscientious objector during the war; his mother, Winifred (nee Howard), was a headteacher. A teacher at Guisborough secondary school spotted Robert’s writing talent and sent him off to Teesside youth theatre, where he wrote his first short play. The same teacher then suggested he go to London to write more. So, in 1972, he did. First thing off the bus, he went straight to the Old Vic and bought a ticket for Jumpers by Tom Stoppard at the back of the stalls. He took a job for three years in the bookstall on Paddington station and a small flat in Camden Town. Always writing in longhand, and with the pen he used at school, he would discard two plays out of every three as he let his memory and his imagination flow. Eventually, in 1974, the Royal Court presented his first full-length play, Mud, in their upstairs studio. Two years later, Outside the Whale, about George Orwell in a fictional scenario ranging between a publisher’s warehouse and a hen hut in Essex, was seen at the Traverse in Edinburgh and the Bush theatre in west London. In 1977, German Skerries, at the Bush, a beautifully modulated piece of writing in which disparate members of a bird-watching club on Teesside exchange fears and friendship while the steel industry is threatening the environment, won the George Devine award. His champion and mentor from the start was Chris Parr, who directed 12 Holman plays in all. There was a BBC television Play for Today in 1980, charting the experience of a school-leaver joining the army, produced by Richard Eyre, and the first of several commissions for the RSC, Today (1984), written specifically for 14 of the actors in the Stratford-upon-Avon company at that time. The action (in Holman, this is really “inaction”) acquired an epic timescale, darting between Spain and Cambridge as it went forward from 1936 to 1946 then back to 1920. His best known work is the insinuating, deftly written triptych of encounters in wartime, Making Noise Quietly (1986, at the Bush). The best of them is the first, in which an effete writer with a spinal condition, a portrait of the artist and writer Denton Welch (who was hit by a car while cycling in Surrey), accosts a lounging farmhand in a quiet Kentish meadow bordered by church bells and doodlebugs in 1944; at the end, two men lie naked in the hot sun as the second world war goes on. Social foreplay is followed in the other two pieces by a naval officer starkly informing a woman that her son, his friend, has been killed in action in the Falklands, and then by a firm lesson in suffering given by a Holocaust survivor to an uncouth soldier and his autistic stepson. The whispering gets a bit louder. This triple bill was well revived by the Oxford Playhouse (followed by a short West End season) in 1999, but trumped by an achingly beautiful, poetic Peter Gill production at the Donmar Warehouse in 2012. At the same time, the Donmar issued a 10-minute video full of praise, even love, for Holman from his fellow playwrights. There seemed always to be a campaign for him from within his own industry. Still, the breakthrough to wider recognition remained on mute, though there had been a retrospective of his plays in 2008 at the Royal Exchange, Manchester, around the premiere there of Jonah and Otto, another encounter involving a country lad (Andrew Sheridan), this time with a 62-year-old clergyman played by Ian McDiarmid. Later work included a unique collaboration with David Eldridge and Simon Stephens at the Lyric, Hammersmith: A Thousand Stars Explode in the Sky (2010) was a domestic epic of five brothers burying hatchets and coming together in the shadow of an apocalyptic global disaster. A Breakfast of Eels at the Print Room (relaunched in the old Coronet cinema at Notting Hill, west London) was another fraternal shindig, this time with more mysterious overtones. Were they, in fact, brothers? In his last play, also at the Print Room, The Lodger (2021), two separated middle-class Yorkshire sisters go to Dungeness, then Norway, with a London lodger, to find an old rock star, but meet a young girl in a sari instead. The sisters split their differences and make up. This wasn’t vintage Holman but, as always, the mixture of critical bafflement and appreciation suggested there was something going on, enough at least to counter impatient accusations of obscurity and preciousness. Holman’s private life remained just that, even to his own family. Once he went to London, he stayed there, moving to Belsize Park and, later on, a flat in East Sheen. He usually went home for Christmas but had exchanged the landscape he evoked so poignantly in his plays for life in the metropolis. He is survived by one of his brothers, John. • Robert Holman, playwright, born 25 August 1952; died 3 December 2021Sajid Javid and George Osborne put pressure on the City’s financial regulator to reduce compensation payouts from big banks to small business victims of a mis-selling scandal, an independent review has found. Britain’s biggest banks, including Barclays, HSBC, Lloyds and Royal Bank of Scotland (now NatWest Group), paid £2.2bn in redress payments to small business customers who had been missold complex financial products from 2001-2011. However, a review published on Tuesday by John Swift QC found serious failings in the regulator’s approach. The Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) has admitted there were flaws in City regulation after the review found that its predecessor, the Financial Services Authority (FSA), had changed rules on who would be compensated after intensive lobbying from big banks. The 493-page report revealed for the first time that Osborne, the chancellor at the time, and Javid, who was financial secretary to the Treasury, lobbied the FSA to ease the cost to banks, which were under pressure after the financial crisis – despite the objections of FSA officials. Osborne now works for an investment bank, Robey Warshaw, among other roles. Javid became chancellor and is now the health and social care secretary. The redress scheme was launched in 2013, after 30,000 small businesses were left nursing heavy losses from interest rate hedging products (IRHPs) sold to them by major banks. That year, the regulator introduced a cap which effectively stopped those with swap deals over £10m from claiming on the grounds they were “sophisticated” enough to bear the risk. The cap is thought to have excluded a third of potential claimants and saved banks billions. At the time the compensation scheme was being designed, the government was a shareholder in Lloyds Banking Group and Royal Bank of Scotland, after bailing out the high street banks during the financial crisis. According to minutes of a meeting between the Treasury and the FSA that January, a Treasury official said: “The Treasury had been lobbied hard by the CEOs of the banks, particularly the two state-owned institutions. As a result, the chancellor had come to the opinion that the total redress costs needed to be reduced, and that the purpose of the meeting was for HMT [HM Treasury] to understand the FSA’s proposals in order to find ways to cut the cost.” Clive Adamson, then the FSA’s director of supervision, said in the meeting that it was “inappropriate for HMT to intervene in this manner given the nature of its involvement in the issue”. In other words, the government had a conflict of interest given it was the major shareholder of Lloyds and RBS. In evidence to the review, Adamson said: “What was unusual here was a view clearly expressed about [the] desire of ministers to … question what we were doing and I think it’s fair to say that we were disappointed in that.” Javid personally lobbied to cut the costs for banks, expressing concerns “about where to ‘draw the line’” as to which customers were eligible, and he and a Treasury official pushed for “flexibility”, the review said. Javid is a former investment banker at Deutsche Bank, which was not involved in the mis-selling scandal. A spokesperson for Osborne said: “The report is thorough and self-explanatory and he has nothing to add.” Javid has been approached for comment through the health department. The Treasury has previously denied that Javid was involved, telling the Times in 2019 that the alteration to the redress scheme was solely the responsibility of the Financial Services Authority. In the same report the newspaper cited a Treasury source saying “discussions took place at a ‘higher level’ than Mr Javid”. The review “found no explanation” why the cap was imposed and said there was not a “level playing field” between banks and customers, who were shut out of talks. The changes were made in “last-minute confidential discussions with the banks”. “It was a very simple change – a stroke of the pen […] – but one that ultimately resulted in the exclusion of about a third of all relevant IRHP sales from the scope of the scheme,” the review said.The FCA said on Tuesday that it “acknowledged clear shortfalls in processes, governance and record keeping when decisions about the redress scheme were made, and a lack of transparency”. Ian Lightbody has campaigned for justice on bank mis-selling for almost a decade after his construction company in Glasgow was allegedly mis-sold complex loan products. He welcomed criticisms of the regulator in the review, but told the Guardian that the regulator had “left the banks to it”. “These banks between 2005 and 2008 really ramped up the sale of these products,” he said. “They were incentivised. They pulled the rug out from all sort of businesses nationwide … The umbrella was there when the sun was shining. When we did need it, it was withdrawn.” A Treasury spokesperson said: “Any mis-selling of financial products is completely unacceptable and wrong, which is why we supported the independent FCA’s redress scheme and are confident that it brought closure to the issue.” A spokesperson for UK Finance, the lobby group representing the banks, said: “Lenders are committed to treating customers fairly and ensuring that any disputes are appropriately addressed while following all regulatory requirements.”Plans to overhaul the Human Rights Act are a blatant power grab with the aim of putting the government above the reach of the law, pressure groups and opposition parties have said. Launching a three-month consultation on a new bill of rights in the Commons, Dominic Raab faced a number of calls to row back on plans to strengthen the power of the state against the rights of the individual. The highly controversial changes will introduce a permission stage to “deter spurious human rights claims” and alter the balance between freedom of expression and privacy. Martha Spurrier, the director of the human rights group Liberty, said: “This plan to reform the Human Rights Act is a blatant, unashamed power grab from a government that wants to put themselves above the law. They are quite literally rewriting the rules in their favour so they become untouchable.” Sacha Deshmukh, the chief executive of Amnesty International, said human rights were not “sweets” ministers could pick and choose from and the “aggressive” attempt to “roll back” the laws needed to be stopped. He added: “If ministers move ahead with plans to water down the Human Rights Act and override judgments with which they disagree, they risk aligning themselves with authoritarian regimes around the world.” The Law Society of England and Wales president, I Stephanie Boyce, said: “People from all walks of life rely on the Human Rights Act to uphold and protect their rights. Any reform of this subtle and carefully crafted legal instrument should be led by evidence – not driven by political rhetoric.” Raab told MPs Britain would remain a party to the European convention on human rights (ECHR) before outlining how it wants to change, reform and revise the domestic interpretation and application of the convention by the UK courts. “Following the reforms to the convention system reflected in the 2012 Brighton declaration, we will assert the margin of appreciation as appropriate in the UK’s dialogue with the Strasbourg court,” he said. Raab said the UK government wanted to “prevent the misuse and the distortion” of the convention, noting: “Some of this has arisen because of the Strasbourg case law and some from the UK case law. “Let me just be very clear at the outset: my critique is levelled at the Human Rights Act, the way it operates – it’s not levelled at the UK judiciary, who have quite properly sought to implement legislation passed in this house.” The shadow justice secretary, Steve Reed, called the plans a “dead cat distraction tactic”. “Every time the government’s in trouble politically they wheel out reforming the Human Rights Act,” he said. “It’s a dead cat distraction tactic by a government that doesn’t know how to fix the criminal justice system that they’ve broken and is desperate to divert attention away from the corruption scandals they started. “This is little more than an attempt to wage culture wars because they’ve surrendered from waging war on crime and corruption.” MPs heard that Boris Johnson was leading a party of “growing authoritarianism”. Clive Lewis, the Labour MP for Norwich South, said if parliament was playing “authoritarian bingo” then Raab’s statement had achieved a full house. “Not only have you come for our trade union rights, our rights to vote, our rights to protest – our human rights now are up for grabs. Today’s statement does nothing to strengthen human rights, it does everything to weaken them.” Brendan O’Hara, the Scottish National party’s human rights spokesperson, called on the government to provide evidence for the need for an overhaul of human rights law. Raab replied that the evidence base had been set out “at some length”, adding that a new interpretation of article 8 on the right to private and family life “will allow us to deport more foreign national offenders, which has been hamstrung … under the Human Rights Act”. Raab said the proposals would also reinforce the weight given to freedom of speech, adding it was “a quintessentially British right, the freedom that guards all the others. But one which we have seen eroded of late by a combination of case law introducing continental-style privacy rules and the incremental narrowing of the scope for respectful but rambunctious debate in politically sensitive areas. “Freedom of speech does sometimes mean the freedom to say things which others may not wish to hear.” Raab said the changes would “sharpen” the separation of powers and make the UK supreme court, not Strasbourg, the “ultimate judicial arbiter when it comes to interpreting the ECHR in this country”. The justice secretary said of the UK’s proposals: “We can prevent serious criminals from relying on article 8 – the right to a family life – to frustrate their deportation from this country.” Raab said article 8 claims made up “around 70%” of all successful human rights challenges by foreign national offenders against deportation orders, adding: “Our proposals would enable us to legislate to curtail that abuse of the system.” He said the changes would also help the government deliver its “root-and-branch reform” of parole proceedings, noting this had been raised by MPs from all sides in the aftermath of cases including that of Colin Pitchfork, a double child killer who was recalled to prison in November after approaching young women while on probation. “In these areas and others our reforms will enable parliament to act and where necessary assert the margin of appreciation with respect to Strasbourg whilst remaining party to the convention,” said Raab.Joe Root has told his England players that their harrowing experience in Brisbane is as tough as it gets, leaving “no excuses” as they head into their must-win second Test against Australia in Adelaide. Sitting 1-0 down after an opening-day collapse to 147 all out in Brisbane practically settled the first Test, the tourists now welcome back Jimmy Anderson to their attack for the day-night second Test, while Australia’s David Warner is struggling to overcome a suspected broken rib. Ben Stokes is similarly fit to play as an all-rounder following a knee injury – a full-throttle spell in the nets on Tuesday yesterday saw Root hit on the head – but ultimately England’s hopes of squaring the series may still rest on how the batting lineup fares. “It’s not going to get any harder than that first day in Brisbane,” said Root. “Especially for guys who have not experienced what an Ashes series is like in Australia. We know it’s not going to get more difficult than that, so in that respect there’s no excuses.” Stokes struggled last week following his return from a four-month break, making scores of five and 14 with the bat and sending down 12 wicketless overs that cost 65 runs. These included a reprieve for Warner, bowled off a no-ball for 17 en route to a crucial 94, with the front line repeatedly dogging him thereafter. Root said: “It was a huge ask and I’m probably guilty as much as anyone – I expected too much of him – because I see him almost as a bit of a superhero. Look at what he’s done in the last couple of years when he’s played: at least once a series, maybe twice a series, he’s done something extraordinary which has won you a game on its own. “You do get a little complacent about expecting that. It’s easy to forget that on a big occasion like this, whether that be because he’s not played a huge amount and also what he’s gone through recently, I think there was a little bit too much on him. “But you know the character he is, it’ll have motivated him even more now to put in one of those magical performances, whether that comes this week or further down the line.” Root has reminded his players of their series win in South Africa in early 2020 when they came back from defeat in the first Test, and he has stressed the importance of viewing this Ashes tour as a “marathon not a sprint” given the compact nature of the schedule. History shows that an instant reply is needed this week, however, with Don Bradman’s Australia side in 1936-37 the only team in the history of the sport’s longest-running rivalry to come back from 2-0 down and win an Ashes series. While Anderson looks set to play, albeit with the XI unlikely to be chosen until a final training session under lights on Wednesday evening, Stuart Broad is similarly pushing for a recall. The veteran pair have had extra time to prepare with the pink Kookaburra ball since being overlooked at the Gabba, with Root urging calm if they take the field. “I think the only thing I’d probably say – and it sounds ridiculous – is not to try too hard,” said the captain. “They’ve not played the first game but they’re world-class performers, they know what they’re doing and should trust what they’ve done for so long. Just go and be Jimmy Anderson and Stuart Broad if you get your opportunity.” Australia are confirmed to be without Josh Hazlewood due to a side strain - Jhye Richardson is expected to deputise - and may also have to turn to Usman Khawaja as a stand-in opener. Warner was struck in the ribs by a short ball from Stokes at the Gabba and, after missing the final two days, remained in some discomfort upon his return to the nets on Tuesday.It would be tempting to look up to the heavens for inspiration in the City of Churches but the burden of selection falls chiefly on the shoulders of Joe Root before a day-night Ashes Test that has very quickly taken on paramount importance. Root was referred to as “player” by the crowd during his first Ashes tour, such was his lack of profile at the time, but eight years on he has won more Test matches, 27, than any other man to lead the England team. By his own admission, however, winning back the urn in Australia this winter will still define how history remembers his tenure and so, sitting 1-0 down, the next five days (and nights) appear to be crunch time. For all this talk of legacy and the like, Root wears the pressure remarkably lightly. Speaking two days out from the second Test at the magnificent Adelaide Oval he was certainly in a cheerful, upbeat mood, insisting that while his team may have been royally dusted up at the Gabba last week, this camp felt different to the doomed visits of the recent past. He did not sound like a captain being disingenuous. Less certain, however, was the makeup of a team that need not just to stop the rot, but do so against an Australia team that boast eight wins from eight with the pink ball at home. Root and Chris Silverwood, the head coach, have found themselves wrestling with whether to pick the most balanced attack by way of variety or simply the best four frontline bowlers at their disposal. Bar any last-minute injuries – and the sight of Ollie Pope taking one flush in the box on Tuesday underlined the importance of this caveat – changes to the top seven seem unlikely. It was here where the Brisbane Test was chiefly lost, that harrowing 147 all out on the opening day too damaging to overcome. But while the photographers and TV cameras swarmed when it was the turn of Rory Burns to enter the nets, that first-ball duck likely to haunt him for some time yet, one Test feels too soon for an overhaul. It is in choosing the attack where Root might be hoping for a sign. One certainty at least is that Jimmy Anderson will return. He has a point to prove in Adelaide, his second innings five-wicket haul here four years ago unable to reverse a less impressive first, and having sat out Brisbane as a precaution, the 39-year-old is primed and ready to make his entrance to this series in arguably the grandest of Australian cricket grounds these days. But beyond this comes the issue of variety and perhaps even ability with the bat. Like his old new-ball partner, Stuart Broad is similarly pushing to play after a tactical omission. The question is, which two make way if so? Jack Leach appears the obvious candidate by way of numbers after being repeatedly hit towards Fortitude Valley at the Gabba yet this would leave an all-seam attack (plus Root’s off-breaks). And working on the basis that Ollie Robinson and Mark Wood were the best on show last week, Chris Woakes stepping down would leave a kangaroo’s tail by way of length. “I think you have to trust your batters to score the majority of your runs first and foremost,” said Root. “I think you have to [play your best bowlers]. It’s so important to take 20 wickets. It’s something we’ve not always done very well on previous tours. To win Test matches, you’ve got to take 20 wickets. Of course runs are also very important but you ain’t winning unless you bowl sides out.” As has long been the case in this England team, plenty hinges on Ben Stokes. The all-rounder was clearly undercooked last week, his bowling marred by repeatedly over-stepping and a knee niggle also flaring up. The latter is not a concern, Stokes has since insisted, but rather something that has been managed for a few years. And on Tuesday he charged in to bowl in the nets for a lengthy spell that augured well here. Logically this should give hope to Leach or Dom Bess, the second spinner on tour; so, too, the 22 yards of earth prepared by the curator, Damian Hough. “Patchy” was the word used by Travis Head, who plays his state cricket for South Australia. “Spin plays a huge role. Whenever we played Nathan Lyon here [in the Sheffield Shield] he’s always been near impossible to hit with the bounce and turn he can get from this wicket.” Day-night Test cricket is such a capricious, nascent format though. The early talk that batting would be easy during the day but tricky at night has not always rung true. England were skittled for 58 by New Zealand in Auckland in 2018 and India for 36 by Australia at this ground 12 months ago, yet both collapses occurred in broad daylight. And two years ago David Warner made an unbeaten 335 in a day-night Test against Pakistan during which he treated the evening session as a time to party. Little wonder therefore that, when asked how difficult he finds selection, Root replied: “Can I tell you after the game?”. It was said with the smile of a seasoned cricketer who knows that even the best-laid plans can be still at the mercy of those up above.The Bank of England has said that bitcoin could be “worthless” and people investing in the digital currency should be prepared to lose everything. In a warning over the potential risks for investors, the central bank questioned whether there was any inherent worth in the most prominent digital currency, which has soared in value this year to close to $50,000 (£37,786) a piece. The cryptocurrency peaked above $67,000 in early November, but suffered a sell-off after news first broke of the Omicron variant of coronavirus, before stabilising around its current level in the past week. The deputy governor, Sir Jon Cunliffe, said the Bank had to be ready for risks linked to the rise of the crypto asset following rapid growth in its popularity. “Their price can vary quite considerably and [bitcoins] could theoretically or practically drop to zero,” he told the BBC. The market capitalisation of crypto assets has grown tenfold since early 2020 to about $2.6tn, representing about 1% of global financial assets. About 0.1% of UK households’ wealth is in bitcoin and similar crypto assets, such as ethereum and Binance coin. As many as 2.3 million people hold crypto assets, at an average amount of about £300 each. The Bank’s financial policy committee, set up in the wake of the 2008 financial crisis to monitor risks, said on Monday there was little direct threat to the stability of the UK financial system from crypto assets. However, it warned that, at the current rapid pace of growth, such assets could become more interconnected with traditional financial services and were likely to pose a number of risks. Publishing its regular health check on the financial system, the Bank said major institutions should take a cautious approach to adopting crypto assets and that it would pay close attention to developments in the market. “Enhanced regulatory and law enforcement frameworks, both domestically and at a global level, are needed to influence developments in these fast-growing markets in order to manage risks, encourage sustainable innovation and maintain broader trust and integrity in the financial system,” it said. In a separate blogpost published on its website on Tuesday, a member of the Bank’s staff said bitcoin failed to fulfil many of the features required of a currency and that it risked being inherently volatile. Thomas Belsham, who works in the Bank’s stakeholder and media engagement division, wrote: “The problem is that, unlike traditional forms of money, Bitcoin isn’t used to price things other than itself. As Bitcoiners themselves are fond of saying, ‘one Bitcoin = one Bitcoin’. But a tautology does not a currency make.” He said scarcity of the crypto asset – which is limited to 21m bitcoin – is among the key reasons for its attraction for investors, but this feature embedded into its design “may even, ultimately, render Bitcoin worthless”. About 19m bitcoin is currently in circulation, with new coins added when “miners” validate changes to the blockchain ledger underpinning the cryptocurrency. While the ultimate number of bitcoin in circulation is not expected to be reached until February 2140, it would become harder to sustain this system over time, Belsham said. “Simple game theory tells us that a process of backward induction should, really, at some point, induce the smart money to get out. And were that to happen, investors really should be prepared to lose everything. Eventually.”Britain’s wave of Omicron infections could reach 1m a day by the end of December, the government’s most senior public health adviser has warned amid growing calls to limit Christmas gatherings. Dr Susan Hopkins told MPs on Tuesday the Omicron Covid variant was initially doubling every two to three days in the UK but the pace appeared to have speeded up, driving a surge of disease that risked putting “significant” pressure on the NHS. While confirmed cases of the variant are being tracked through genomic testing, the number of Omicron infections across the country is estimated to be far higher – at an estimated 200,000 daily infections on Monday – due to a time lag and because many cases are never picked up by the testing programme. Hopkins said with so many people expected to contract the virus over the coming weeks, the NHS would come under significant pressure if only a fraction became ill enough to need hospital care. “If we have a million infections a day, even a very small proportion of those individuals requiring hospitalisation will put a significant impact on healthcare,” she told the Commons science and technology committee. There are also concerns about the impact on schools, lorry drivers and shop workers if cases continue to rise rapidly while forcing 10 days’ isolation for anyone who contracts Covid. The warning came as Nicola Sturgeon urged Scots to limit indoor mixing to no more than three households over Christmas and reduce social contacts “as much as possible” in the coming weeks to help slow the spread of the variant. The first minister stressed the restrictions were not a legal requirement and family festive celebrations could go ahead, but said: “We are asking everyone – and we will issue strong guidance to this effect – to cut down as far as possible the number of people outside our own households that we are interacting with just now.” Ahead of MPs voting in the Commons on “plan B” measures, including the requirement for either proof of two vaccine doses or a negative lateral flow test (LFT) to enter some public venues, Hopkins said people should take an LFT beforehand regardless of their jab status. “We’ve advised that the optimal is being vaccinated and that we also recommend people have [LFTs] before they go,” she told MPs. “While certification will talk about vaccine or [LFTs], our strong public health recommendation is that if people are going out to venues to socialise, they should do a lateral flow test before they go to reduce the risk of going into that venue with asymptomatic infection and therefore transmitting to others.” Some restrictions to slow the spread of Omicron would probably be needed for the next four to eight weeks, she said. Speaking at a meeting of the all-party parliamentary group on coronavirus, Prof Wendy Barclay, a member of Sage and a virologist at Imperial College London, said it was too soon to know the severity of disease caused by Omicron. Hospitalisations are rising fast in South Africa, where the variant was first spotted, and while there are reports of hospital stays being short and that intensive care occupancy may be lower, the younger population in South Africa and previous waves of infection there make comparisons with the UK difficult, according to Barclay. New data from the insurer Discovery Health together with the South African Medical Research Council shows protection against severe complications following two jabs is about 70% for Omicron compared with 90-95% for Delta. “That suggests that even for severe disease, there is probably a fall-off in the vaccine protection against Omicron,” Barclay said. Prof Christina Pagel, the director of the clinical operational research unit at University College London (UCL), said early data from Denmark suggested similar proportions of confirmed cases were resulting in hospital admissions with Omicron as with Delta. Stephen Reicher, a member of the Sage subcommittee advising the government on behavioural science and a professor of psychology at the University of St Andrews, warned it would take several weeks to roll out booster jabs and another fortnight before they took effect. “If we were to do nothing now, by then the cases would be catastrophically high. So we need to bring cases down in order to give us time to vaccinate,” he said. “There are two ways you can bring them down. You can bring them down by giving very clear advice, which is don’t socialise. If you do socialise now you won’t be able to socialise at Christmas.” The alternative, he said, was that socialisation could be limited by legislation. “Now, that’s a very real debate. But it seems to me that’s the only debate that should be being had right now, not whether but how we bring down the level of contact.” Hospitals in England are bracing themselves for a “significant” surge in Covid patients from next week because the Omicron variant is spreading so fast, a senior NHS leader said. Omicron’s greater transmissibility means hospitals would again have to treat large numbers of patients despite it apparently inducing milder symptoms than the previously dominant Delta variant, said Chris Hopson, the chief executive of NHS Providers. On Tuesday, the UK’s four chief medical officers approved a temporary suspension of the 15-minute observation period to help speed up the vaccine rollout. Patients normally stay at the vaccination centre for a short time after having their shot in case they experience a serious allergic reaction, which happens with about one in 100,000 doses. The observation period will remain in place for people who have previously experienced anaphylaxis or other allergic reactions.When Savid Javid revealed on Monday that an estimated 200,000 people a day are getting infected with Omicron, it brought understandable concern – especially as just 4,713 cases of the variant had been confirmed in the UK so far – . So where does this figure come from – and what does it tell us about the trajectory of the surge? Confirming a Covid case is caused by the Omicron variant requires a full genetic analysis of that person’s swab. According to Prof Paul Hunter at the University of East Anglia, it can take up to two weeks to return a viral sequence, meaning the figure of 4,713 Omicron cases reported by the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) was already out of date. Another way of estimating the number of Omicron cases is by looking at “S gene target failure”. Some of Omicron’s genetic mutations affect the readout of certain routine PCR tests, providing a quick – although not conclusive – indication of whether Omicron is present in a sample. Not every UK testing lab has the technology to do this, but between a third and half do. This provides another way to estimate what proportion of UK cases are Omicron, and how quickly it is overtaking the Delta variant. According to the latest figures, there were 54,661 new positive Covid-19 cases reported across the UK on Monday – though really this reflects the number who became infected a week ago, as it takes time to develop symptoms and seek a test. Meanwhile, the latest S gene dropout figures suggest 20% of UK cases are now Omicron, translating into approximately 11,000 Omicron cases daily. However, this only represents confirmed cases – people who have tested positive via PCR. Not everyone with Covid gets tested, so the true number of daily infections is unknown. This is why the Office for National Statistics (ONS) survey data is so revealing: by regularly swabbing a random sample of the population, it provides an estimate of the true proportion that has Covid at any given time. The UKHSA says Javid’s 200,000-a-day figure stems from projected ONS infection survey data, which estimated there were about 78,000 Delta infections on 7 December, equating to approximately 23,000 daily Omicron infections on the same day. Assuming Omicron numbers are doubling every two days, as current data suggests, the UKHSA estimated that approximately 207,000 people were infected with Omicron on 13 December. As in the tale of the wheat and chessboard, regular doubling rates quickly add up to very large numbers. The UKHSA has also estimated that if Omicron continues to grow at the present rate, there could be 1m daily Omicron infections by the end of December – and maybe sooner. A staggering figure but one that makes sense when you consider the doubling rate – though the revelation of such a figure may itself prompt the public to take precautions, flattening the curve. As well as the health impact, growing numbers of people could have to isolate – including hospital staff, teachers, supermarket workers and lorry drivers. Whether these predictions come to pass remains to be seen. Huge uncertainties remain regarding the extent to which T-cell immunity from previous infections or vaccination will protect against severe disease and hospitalisations, for example. And of course, at some point so many people may have been exposed to the new variant and/or received a booster jab in the UK that infections will begin to slow – although immunity takes several weeks to develop. A peak in January has been suggested. Prof Matt Keeling, of the University of Warwick, said if cases keep doubling we will effectively hit herd immunity. “Infection cannot keep doubling forever,” he said. “There are only a finite number of people to infect, and eventually the outbreak of Omicron would ‘burn itself out’ – but this isn’t going to happen until a lot of people have been infected, which we clearly want to avoid. “Getting to herd immunity by infecting lots of people is not a good public health strategy. This wasn’t a viable option back in March 2020 – the last time we saw such a rapid invasion – and it’s not a viable option now.” The UKHSA also cautions that the doubling rate is changing all the time and will continue to do so. The data in the days to come should clarify the situation, because if Omicron cases really are doubling every two days, we should expect a rapid increase in cases confirmed by positive PCR tests very soon. What does this mean for acting on the surge? Given these worst-case predictions, experts advocate a cautious approach. If additional measures are brought in, these would take a week or so to prompt any fall in daily cases because of the delay between being exposed to the virus and getting tested for it. The impact on hospitalisations and deaths would take even longer to be realised.Two years ago, empowered by a new 80-seat majority in the House of Commons, Boris Johnson promised on the steps of Downing Street to “level up” the country. Since then, his government has laboured without success to offer definition and substance to a concept that, while giving off an egalitarian vibe, remains amorphous and elusive. The publication of the levelling-up white paper has been delayed until the new year, amid reported arguments over how much money the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, is willing to make available for the prime minister’s flagship political project. While ministers prevaricate, the pandemic has ensured that pre-existing inequalities are deepening to an alarming degree. The latest confirmation of this came in an analysis published this week by the New Economics Foundation, which found that the poorer half of the population has seen its disposable income squeezed since the election of 2019, while the richest 5% are better off by £3,300 a year. The regional disparities which Mr Johnson has pledged to address have also worsened; the NEF found, predictably, that incomes in the south-east have risen far faster than those in the north. In general, white-collar workers easily able to work from home have saved and prospered, and seen the value of their property rise in the sustained house price boom. The continued growth in international stock markets has further benefited the asset-rich. At the other end of the spectrum, employees on fixed-term contracts and in precarious work have not been covered by furlough, while a miserably low level of basic social security support ensures that food bank usage remains well above pre-pandemic levels. Single parents, finds the NEF analysis, have been particularly hard hit. Inflation, rising bills, the cut to universal credit and next year’s scheduled increase in national insurance contributions risk tipping many more stretched household budgets over the edge. Unarguably, Covid has widened Britain’s wealth gap still further, accelerating a divergence already in train for decades. The fortunes of the asset-rich have waxed while those of the asset-poor have waned. Any meaningful consideration of how to level up Britain in the wake of the pandemic must surely take account of this egregious reality. In a report on UK household wealth published in the summer, the Resolution Foundation thinktank noted that successive governments have stubbornly ignored the trend of rising asset prices, allowing tax revenues to stay constant despite more than a doubling in levels of wealth. This, it judged, was “unsustainable”, given the pressures on public finance. Yet Mr Sunak, determined to bolster his low-tax credentials, has just shelved proposals to generate £14bn a year by raising capital gains tax. A national debate regarding fairer taxes on wealth is overdue. The rhetoric informing Mr Johnson’s levelling-up agenda has variously prioritised green investment in the north and the Midlands, the need to develop vocational skills and training, and the rejuvenation of public services. None of this can be done on the cheap. As the Omicron variant threatens the livelihoods and prospects of the economically precarious, it is time to link levelling up to a new fiscal settlement for post-pandemic times.Four years after the unsolved murders of pharmaceutical billionaires Barry and Honey Sherman, police in Toronto have appealed to the public to help identify a possible suspect in the case. At a media briefing on Tuesday, homicide DS Brandon Price said police had studied hours of CCTV footage taken in the couple’s neighbourhood the night of the murders and had identified all people caught on camera – except for one person. “We have been unable to determine what this individual’s purpose was in the neighbourhood,” Price said. “This individual’s actions are highly suspicious.” Police believe the lone figure walking along the street on a snowy night is linked to murders of Barry Sherman, the founder of drug giant Apotex, and his wife Honey. The couple were found dead in the basement pool area of their home in late 2017, with belts looped around their necks and attached to a pool railing. There were no signs of a break-in at the couple’s house, and police initially believed the deaths to be a murder suicide. But investigators later determined the couple were victims of a “targeted” double homicide. The footage released Tuesday marks the first time in nearly four years police have updated the public on the investigation. The poor quality of the video means the the skin colour, weight and gender of the suspect are not known. Police say video analysis suggests the individual is between 5’6 and 5’9 tall. The suspect, who has an unusual gait, walks into an area not captured by any video surveillance, stays for a “suspicious” amount of time, and then leaves. Price said the footage is not the only video they have of the suspect, but chose to released a clip they believe had the “greatest likelihood” of someone being able to identify the person. “If you recognize yourself in this video, please come forward so you can be excluded from our investigation,” said Price. The Shermans were well-known as generous philanthropists, but Barry Sherman was also notoriously litigious in his business dealings. The double murder has gripped the country, not least because so little public progress has been made on the case over the years. The Sherman family have fiercely criticised the Toronto police investigation. Private investigators hired by the family previously claimed police did not quickly fingerprint house staff with access to the family’s home. They also alleged that police ignored possible evidence of forced entry into the house. In 2018, the Sherman family offered a C$10m reward for information on who killed Barry and Honey.British Airways will return to short-haul flying from London Gatwick next year, the airline has said as it confirmed the go-ahead of its planned subsidiary, BA Euroflyer. BA, which stopped flying from the West Sussex airport soon after the Covid pandemic started, will relaunch its short-haul leisure network in late March 2022, ending a break of almost two years. Flights will initially be operated by BA itself, but the airline intends to hive off the business to the subsidiary later next year once it has received regulatory approval. Its parent group, IAG, has said that a new standalone business was needed to make the resumption financially viable, citing years of losses for BA at Gatwick even before Covid hit. Tickets for flights to 35 short-haul destinations went on sale on Tuesday. Three Airbus short-haul planes will start operations in March, with the active fleet growing to 18 by the end of May. BA Euroflyer will – like the BA CityFlyer operation at London City – remain BA-branded. Its launch came after unions initially rejected the plans, which are understood to demand much more flexibility from pilots and crew in seasonal work than permitted under normal BA rostering. Thousands of staff were laid off during the pandemic, and many now could be rehired under inferior terms and conditions. The pilots’ union Balpa said the final agreement would “create up to 160 much needed pilot jobs in 2022” and had been tailored to fit the point-to-point flying model used by other major airlines. BA said fares would start from £39 each way, to be competitive with Gatwick’s no-frills carriers, led by easyJet, but would come with the airline’s usual luggage allowances and basic snacks onboard. The BA chief executive, Sean Doyle, said it was a “landmark moment” for the airline, adding: “The creation of a new British Airways short-haul organisation means Gatwick customers will benefit from access to a premium service from the UK’s flag carrier at competitive prices.” Stewart Wingate, Gatwick’s chief executive, said: “Despite the ongoing public health situation, today’s announcement is a positive signal that consumer confidence is returning as people start thinking about making travel plans for next summer.” While Gatwick and BA were upbeat about the launch, the air and travel industry was left dismayed again after the government chose not to lift the testing regime in a travel announcement on Tuesday. The health secretary, Sajid Javid, confirmed the removal of the last 11 countries from the red list but did not follow through on suggestions that the recently reimposed requirement for expensive PCR testing would be scrapped. Tim Alderslade, the chief executive of Airlines UK, said: “If the red list isn’t necessary given that [the Covid variant] Omicron is established here at home, then neither are the costly emergency testing and isolation measures imposed on even fully vaccinated travellers, which again put us completely at odds with the rest of Europe.” The travel association Abta – which has reported autumn bookings being at less than 30% of normal levels – said the government needed to explain why tests would be retained through the Christmas period, adding that it should give financial support to the sector. Abta’s chief executive, Mark Tanzer, said: “With the industry quickly approaching peak booking season for summer 2022, travel businesses are facing a very serious situation. Consumer confidence in travel has suffered a significant setback, which will outlast these restrictions.” The tourism body UKinbound said tests for vaccinated international arrivals were “stifling businesses across the inbound tourism industry”. Eurostar said it had seen the rate of bookings halve since PCR tests were brought back, with more cancellations or rearranged trips than new bookings for the Christmas period. Its chief executive, Jacques Damas, said the restrictions came “at a heavy price for the industry”.The launch of the UK’s first bottle and can deposit return scheme has been delayed until the summer of 2023 after Scottish ministers bowed to intense lobbying from major retailers and drinks companies. Scotland’s deposit return scheme was due to start in July next year, in an effort to cut plastic waste, boost recycling and reduce littering by introducing a mandatory but refundable 20p deposit on all bottles and cans sold in shops. Lorna Slater, the Scottish Green politician who recently became a minister in a cooperation deal with the Scottish National party, told MSPs that deadline had now been scrapped, as previously reported by the Guardian. Environment campaigners were furious but Slater said introducing a national deposit return scheme was “a massive national undertaking” that had been delayed by the Covid crisis and Brexit. She told MSPs an independent review had concluded the scheme was so extensive – involving 4,000 producers, 10,000 “take back” machines, and 2bn drinks containers – that meeting the current legal launch date of July 2022 would be far too difficult. “It is essential that the scheme is a success and not just in the short term, but for decades to come,” she said. “I’m absolutely committed to introducing the [deposit return scheme] as soon as practicably possible.” Before becoming a minister, Slater publicly endorsed a Scottish Green party manifesto – which helped her party win a record seven MSPs – that backed the July 2022 target date. Nicola Sturgeon, the first minister, promised in 2017 to introduce the scheme in Scotland. Tesco, the UK’s largest retailer, and Coca-Cola are understood to have pressed hard for the scheme to be delayed. Although UK ministers have promised to consult on a scheme for England, the Welsh government has said it cannot implement its scheme yet because the UK’s internal market rules have caused confusion about cross-border sales. John Mayhew, the director of the Association for the Protection of Rural Scotland, said this delay would result in 173,000 tons of avoidable carbon emissions, 55m pieces of litter and £7.3m in avoidable refuse and street cleaning costs for local councils. “This is a sad day for Scotland’s environment,” he said. “The Scottish government’s flagship waste reduction programme lies essentially scuttled beneath the waves, sunk by a combination of intense industry lobbying and a lack of political will.” Maurice Golden of the Scottish Conservatives said Slater was presiding over a “shambolic process”. Its tendering process was secret, there was no information yet on startup costs and it was still not known whether the deposit return machines would be built in Scotland.Bristol had not considered removing the statue of Edward Colston before its toppling by protesters, despite “significant concerns” about its presence among the local black community, the city council’s head of culture has said. Jon Finch spoke at Bristol crown court on day two of the trial of the four people accused of helping to pull down the memorial to the slave trader, roll it to Bristol harbour and dump it in the River Avon. Jake Skuse, 33, Rhian Graham, 30, Milo Ponsford, 26, and Sage Willoughby, 22, all deny criminal damage. Finch gave evidence for the prosecution about the damage caused to the Colston statue and surrounding street furniture when it was toppled during a Black Lives Matter protest attended by 10,000 people on 7 June last year. He said the maintenance and upkeep of the statue was his department’s role, and that no permission had been given by the council for it to be removed or altered. But in cross-examination he said there had been concerns about the presence of the statue in the city, and its veneration of a slave trader, going back to at least the 1920s and growing in intensity towards the end of the 20th century. Despite that the council had taken no action over the statue, he said. Blinne Ní Ghrálaigh, acting for Graham, put it to him that the council had a public sector equality duty that required it to think about the impact of such objects on the city’s various communities. Ní Ghrálaigh asked him: “Is it not your role to be aware of whether something is capable of undermining good relations between different groups in society?” Finch, the head of culture and creative industries at Bristol city council, replied: “It is the council’s responsibility to ensure that heritage and the civic realm encourage communities to work together rather than drive them apart.” Ní Ghrálaigh went on: “The civic realm should be about generating community cohesion and positive relations, yes?” “Yes,” Finch replied. And, Ní Ghrálaigh asked, did the statue do that? “The statue clearly caused significant concerns in certain parts of the community,” Finch said. “And despite recognising that, there were no moves by the council to remove the statue were there?” Ní Ghrálaigh asked. “No, not that I’m aware of,” Finch said. Finch also said the toppled statue now provided an opportunity for “conversation and education”. Since June this year, after almost a year in storage, it has been on display in Bristol’s M Shed museum, along with an exhibit of placards from the protest and comments from Bristolians on their feelings about the statue. Tom Wainwright, for Ponsford, read out Finch’s own words, from the opening of the exhibit, describing the opportunity for the M Shed to demonstrate “the value of what museums could and should be about”. Wainwright said: “The toppling of the statue was in itself an historic event, it was a protest that was heard around the world?” “It was, yes,” Finch said. A police officer at the scene of the protest told the court how the reaction of the crowd was “bordering on mass hysteria” at the moment the Colston statue was pulled to the ground. In a statement read out in court, PC Julie Hayward of Avon and Somerset police said she and colleagues had been briefed to provide a “non-visible style of community policing” on the day of the protest. Hayward said about 3,000 people had gathered around the statue “shouting, with fists clenched: ‘Pull it down, pull it down’”. She said: “although they were not hostile towards us the whole atmosphere changed and it was clear they were intent on pulling the statue down. “As it crashed to the floor the whole ground shook. The crowd were bordering on mass hysteria now: celebrating, jumping on the broken statue on the floor.”The financial crisis of 2008 was the moment which cemented both China’s rise and its growing confidence as the west faltered. But the Olympics held in Beijing a few months earlier was the global symbol of its ascendancy: a coming-out party which proclaimed its return to the forefront of political and economic power, greeted with genuine international enthusiasm, despite the misgivings of dissidents. Fewer will celebrate the Winter Games due to kick off in Beijing in February. Last week, the UK and Canada joined the US and Australia in announcing a diplomatic boycott, and New Zealand has said it will not send anyone of ministerial level – to the wrath of China, which warned that countries will “pay a price” for the decision. (France will participate as usual, with Emmanuel Macron describing the boycott as “insignificant”, and much of Europe remains undecided). Concern for tennis champion and three-time Olympian Peng Shuai, since she alleged that a former senior leader had coerced her into sex, have magnified attention to China’s human rights record – and to the International Olympic Committee’s keenness to reassure the world that there is nothing to worry about, a repeated pattern. But the primary issue is the treatment of the Uyghurs in Xinjiang, up to a million of whom have been held in camps. Last week, an unofficial British-based inquiry’s report described the torture and rape of detainees and concluded that the treatment of Uyghurs constitutes genocide – the deliberate attempt to destroy all or part of the ethnic group. The inquiry’s chair, Sir Geoffrey Nice QC, stressed that there was no evidence of mass killing, with his finding based instead on the suppression of births, including through forced birth control, sterilisation, hysterectomies and abortions; he argued that the “vast apparatus of state repression could not exist if a plan was not authorised at the highest levels.” (Human rights groups say they have yet to document the intent required for a genocide finding, but have evidence of crimes against humanity.) Since the US had already stated that genocide is taking place, it was always hard to see how it could send an official delegation. Others have been clear in condemning grotesque abuses in Xinjiang. Staging the Olympics is always a statement by a government: in a country where dissent is not tolerated, and where a nationalist story of triumph is increasingly central to the party’s legitimacy, it is a propaganda event designed to elicit global applause for a domestic audience. It is no surprise that China, which dismisses genocide claims as “absurd”, portrays all concerns as the “politicisation of sports”, using human rights merely as a pretext. It is domestically useful to depict the boycott as another malign attempt to hurt China; but it is likely that the leadership also believes it, refusing to recognise that the primary cause of growing hostility abroad is not US hegemonic anxiety, but Beijing’s oppression of the Uyghurs and the crushing of Hong Kong’s freedoms at home, and its increasingly aggressive approach internationally. Nor is the IOC’s willingness to play along unexpected. It is, however, reprehensible. Asked about the treatment of Uyghurs last week, IOC member Dick Pound told a German broadcaster that – despite satellite images, leaked documents, eyewitness testimony and campaigners’ briefings – “I don’t know enough of the facts.” He cast doubt on extensive reporting of abuses and suggested that an independent review might be helpful. The UN human rights chief has been asking to visit the region for three years without success. The IOC believes its battered reputation is shielded by its incantation of the mantras of friendship and respect, and the global love of sport. But many countries have rightly thought again about offering their support to this event. Sponsors should now do the same.Another week, yet another terrible case involving the murder of a child after months of abuse, by parents and carers whose casual violence, threats and neglect had led others to raise the alarm with social workers. Yet they slipped through the safeguarding net, with tragic consequences. Less than a fortnight ago we learned of the appalling case of six-year-old Arthur Labinjo-Hughes, who was abused, tortured and beaten to death by his stepmother, Emma Tustin, during the first Covid lockdown. Tustin, 32, of Solihull, was jailed for 29 years; Arthur’s father, Thomas Hughes, received 21 years for manslaughter. On Tuesday came the verdict on another shattering killing: 16-month-old Star Hobson, beaten to death in lockdown by her mother’s partner after months of cruelty and abuse. Savannah Brockhill, 28, of Bradford, was convicted of murder, while Star’s mother, Frankie Smith, 18, was found guilty of causing or allowing the death of a child. After the shock at the inhumanity of the perpetrators – and their brutality, narcissism and sadistic determination to do harm – come inevitable questions about the authorities whose duty is to safeguard vulnerable children. Why were chances missed to intervene to potentially save Arthur and Star? We know that between January 2020, when Star was first visited by a social worker, and her death on 22 September that year, six referrals were made to safeguarding staff by friends or family concerned about her safety. Social workers visited four times and closed the case on three occasions. The police visited once and arranged for Star to be medically examined at a hospital, with seemingly no follow-up. Why were these opportunities missed? The inquiry into the circumstances surrounding Star’s death will consider in detail why officials who visited the family concluded there was no obvious risk. Human error and poor professional judgment is often a factor in these cases, as is the manipulative deceit of the abusers. But it is also clear in the case of Star’s death that errors occurred in a specific context: not just lockdown, with all the confusion and restrictions that entailed, but a social work department that had been struggling for years, was deluged with work and had huge staff turnover. Ofsted inspectors judged Bradford’s children’s services “inadequate” in 2018, two years before Star’s death. They uncovered chaotic child protection services, and social workers leaving in droves, at a time when referrals of children were soaring. There was poor practice, they found, “leaving children at risk of significant harm”. Children at risk were often exposed to neglect for too long before action was taken to protect them, Ofsted found. Social workers were sometimes guilty of “over-optimism” and failed to take swift enough action in some cases where children were living in households where domestic abuse was taking place. Ofsted visited on six subsequent occasions to monitor the department, including during the period in which Star was referred to social services. Improvement was slow. There was “drift” and delay in assessing children. Some individual social workers were overseeing as many as 50 children at a time. The problem with high caseloads, said Ray Jones, an emeritus professor of social work at Kingston University, is that they can quickly overwhelm staff, forcing them to close cases just to keep on top of the constant flow of new ones coming in. “It is likely that if they could find a reason to close work down, they would do,” Jones said. Was there pressure to close down cases? The high reliance on agency staff meant a high degree of organisational instability, Ofsted noted. Such volatility typically leads to the loss of local knowledge, Jones said. “These are workforces that are not getting to know their families.” The detailed answers as to why safeguarding agencies did not do more to try to save Star and Arthur are subject to independent inquiries. The former review is expected to report in January, and the latter as part of a wider national review into “lessons learned”, no doubt triggering wider debate about how children’s social care should be run. But Star’s death is unlikely to be the last of its kind to emerge from lockdown, and Bradford is not the only council struggling to keep its child protection department afloat and working effectively. There will be wider questions too about cuts, about the erosion of family support services, and the legacy of a decade of austerity.Midnight on Monday is an unusual hour to announce a fixture postponement. Manchester United would not be playing Brentford on Tuesday, a Premier League statement with a timestamp of 23:53 said, because of “an ongoing Covid-19 outbreak within Manchester United’s squad”. If the news had to be released under the cover of darkness, it was tempting to wonder, how ongoing might the outbreak actually be? Clubs do not publish data on Covid cases within their squads and the Premier League doesn’t breakdown its division-wide stats, either. But earlier on Monday a record number of positives across the league had been confirmed, 42 in a week, so it was possible to imagine that the United outbreak was indeed substantial. As we head into the week approaching Christmas with a new variant of Covid infecting as many as 200,000 people a day, according to the health secretary, there is a feeling of familiar storm clouds gathering. Perhaps this is last Christmas all over again, where crowds were banned from stadiums, clubs were under emergency measures and players were subject to public scrutiny over whether their goal celebrations were too intimate. Or maybe it’s worse than that. Maybe the sudden outbreaks at a number of top-flight clubs – with positive tests at United, Aston Villa, Tottenham and Brighton to name just a few – are the harbinger of more severe restrictions reminiscent of the spring of 2020 when a suspension of all fixtures was the outcome, a grand shutdown that lasted three months. The latter would be the outcome no one wants and speculation about such a thing is certainly something the Premier League would like to minimise. The truth is, however, that while no one can guarantee what will happen over the next few weeks, never mind months, lessons learned from the past two years mean football is better prepared for what lies ahead. The emergency measures of last winter have been reinstated at Premier League clubs, a decision taken by the league’s board last week and reinforced on Tuesday at a shareholders’ meeting. Some of the limits – 15 minutes in a treatment room, masks when moving – may seem arbitrary, but they have been shown to work. Emergency measures brought case numbers down last year and the league argues they can do so again. It is also interesting to note that, alongside these measures, there has been a request that players cut down their social contacts, perhaps a precursor to tighter regulations yet. The Football League is likely to follow suit this week in strengthening its measures, although under its current system clubs with positive cases must already submit to stringent rules that allow training only by positional group and where non-vaccinated players cannot sit alongside jabbed colleagues on the bus. The reluctance among some players to get vaccinated remains an ongoing thorn in the side of clubs and leagues. The Premier League last published figures on this subject in October, with 68% of players then double-jabbed. Although it insists the numbers have risen, the league will not make figures public and the rise is unlikely to be sizeable. In the EFL there is now a block on making progress with the roughly 30% of players opposed to the jab. With new government rules on contact with Omicron victims requiring non-vaccinated individuals to isolate (the jabbed can test each day and otherwise carry on), this is likely to prove a problem. Having contacts who do not have to isolate is an improvement on this time last year, at least, as well as proof of the transformational effect that vaccines have had on the risks created by Covid. The new rule is also, however, a reminder of another great uncertainty faced by football – the actions of the government. The game, like the rest of us, must try to make sense of regulations that often seem inconsistent and contradictory. But it must be seen to be in line not just with the rules but their spirit, something even more difficult to judge. It was about this time last year that Matt Hancock saw fit to instruct players that they should “act as if they have Covid” when celebrating goals. The bit left unspoken was what would happen if they did not, but the Premier League moved anyway and warned players off leaping on each others’ backs. The precautions taken this year are primarily to keep people safe and keep the show on the road, but they are also intended to head off any possible government intervention. Minimising bad headlines will be a part of that strategy, so perhaps more midnight missives should be expected.Trains will run faster on key routes across Europe and ticket prices and provider costs could be slashed under a Brussels plan to boost faltering efforts to make rail Europe’s default mode of transport. A new speed requirement to ensure trains on a core network of track are able to travel at 160 km/h or faster would be introduced by 2040, the European Commission has proposed. Cross-border travel, including by night trains, would be encouraged by making ticketing easier and potentially through cutting the track access charges faced by rail companies. The commission vice-president Frans Timmermans, who presented the proposals for the bloc’s 27 member states to agree, said the EU’s executive would also look at introducing a VAT exemption for rail tickets. Timmermans, a former Dutch foreign minister, said: “We will speed up travel times and make it easier to build a competitive rail network across Europe. Next year work will start on 15 pilots to improve long-distance rail services across main train corridors – train tickets need to be easier to find, to book and buy at attractive prices. In this context we will also look at a VAT exemption for international rail tickets.” The commission has long spoken about revolutionising European rail travel. The EU has set a target of doubling high-speed rail traffic by 2030, and tripling it by 2050, in an attempt to cut carbon emissions from transport by 90% within the next three decades. But experts say cross-border routes remain expensive and unnecessarily slow. The EU is expected to miss its target of having 31,000km of high-speed rail track in operation in the next eight years. National governments, not the commission, decide on high-speed rail projects and despite the EuropeanCentral Bank (ECB) having provided significant levels of lending, Brussels has struggled to encourage investment in cross-border travel. For long-distance freight rail, trains are often stuck at borders due to inefficient rail safety checks. A 2018 report on EU high-speed rail by the European court of auditors described “a patchwork of national lines built by member states in isolation, without proper coordination across borders”. High track access charges and the takeoff of low-cost flights have long been cited as reasons for the decline of night trains in Europe. When national railway companies owned the rail infrastructure as well as the trains, deals were done between those operating in different countries to keep track access charges low. When management of the railways was separated off, those charges became revenue earners and the previously mutually helpful deals to ease international travel fell away. The commission has proposed that it will issue guidelines in 2023 on the setting of charges in order to boost affordable cross-border travel. The ECB is also launching a lending programme for rail companies who wish to purchase rolling stock. Herwig Schuster, a transport expert at Greenpeace, said: “It’s essential that the EU makes travelling by train easier, faster and more affordable – helping people to take the climate-friendly option and fly less. The commission’s plan includes some really great ideas to better support rail; we now need to see the follow-through. “The EU and national governments have for too long prioritised dirty road and aviation projects – they must stop paying polluters and start funding transport that works for people and doesn’t wreck the climate.”My friend Wendy Rogerson, who has died aged 91 of systemic sclerosis, was a nurse who spent three challenging, dangerous, but hugely rewarding years running a clinic in Borneo. Born Rhoda Grey (but always known as Wendy) in Newcastle to Elsie (nee Gregg) and the Rev Maurice Grey, Wendy grew up in her father’s parishes in Amble and Stannington, Northumberland, attending the Duchess’s school in Alnwick. Her younger brother, Joe, went to boarding school. Wendy trained as a nurse at Charing Cross hospital in London in 1948, did her midwifery back in Newcastle, and enjoyed her job as a health visitor, living in the lively Newcastle suburb of Jesmond. She then read about two men, indigenous Dayaks from Sarawak, Borneo, who had established an Anglican mission amongst the Dusun people in what was then British North Borneo (now part of Malaysia) and needed a teacher and a nurse to complete their team. She spent a year at the College of the Ascension, Selly Oak, founded by the SPG (now the USPG – United Society Partners in the Gospel) before sailing to Borneo in September 1959. It took five days to sail upriver from Sandakan to her new home of Tongod in the remote interior. By now the mission included a school for 60 pupils. Wendy and the teacher Joan Goodricke shared a simple hut – a raised structure with bark walls, a palm-leaf roof and a slatted bamboo floor – and were visited at various times by snakes, rats and scorpions. While medical treatment had been the preserve of the local medicine woman, people were soon flocking to Wendy and, as the only practitioner for hundreds of miles, she worked from dawn to dusk. Dysentery, scabies, ringworm, malaria and a disfiguring disease, yaws, were all rife. On several occasions, Wendy had to become anaesthetist and surgeon to save her patients’ lives. Wendy met Colin Rogerson, a curate, while home on furlough in October 1962. They married the following February and their daughters, Catherine and Jane, were born in 1963 and 1966. Wendy supported her husband in his parishes in the Newcastle and Durham dioceses as well as taking on senior roles in the Mothers’ Union. She was also a prison visitor and a Samaritan. On retiring to Durham, she and Colin attended the city’s lively St Nics church. Wendy returned to Borneo in 1985 and 2003, with each of her daughters, when old friends and patients travelled many miles to see her. In 2018 I helped Wendy to turn her diaries into the book Midwife of Borneo. She is survived by Colin, Catherine and Jane. Joe predeceased her.The government says it is “monitoring the situation carefully” and “will not hesitate to act if required to protect our critical national telecoms infrastructure”. Does this mean Patrick Drahi of Altice, now with 18% of BT in his back pocket, can forget any idea of buying the company outright? Let’s hope so. For the first time in years, BT, if it runs its business well, looks set up to satisfy the demands of all its main constituencies. Customers and the government get £15bn of fibre investment over the next five years. The shareholders, after a (too) long standoff with regulator Ofcom, have the “fair bet” terms, covering future broadband pricing, that successive BT managements have argued are critical to getting the fibre in ducts. Better still from a public policy perspective, regulatory generosity to BT has not been so lavish that it has deterred others from having a run. Mike Fries, the chief executive of Liberty Global, which owns Virgin Media, said last month that wholesale broadband in the UK was “ripe for the picking”. Add the smaller “alt-net” providers and you have what Ofcom and the government have sought for years: something resembling a race in fibre. It is hard to see what a takeover of BT by Drahi would add. Altice has helped to build broadband networks in the US, France and Portugal but control from overseas by a heavily borrowed private company is not what BT needs. The UK company is not on its knees like Telecom Italia, which may be about to succumb to a private equity takeover. BT should have started its fibre rollout earlier but, at this point, a target of reaching 25m premises by 2026 counts as reasonably slick. Distractions would be unhelpful. For the time being, Drahi is smiling sweetly and expressing admiration for BT’s management, and Tuesday’s statement means he’s offside as a bidder anyway for six months unless somebody else has a pop. But Drahi is not usually the type to sit passively in the wings for ever; the “creeping control” theory is the one to focus on. The government should not be afraid to use its powers of intervention under the new National Security and Investment Act. The legislation could almost have been written with BT in mind. How the banks were let off the hook Almost a decade after the event, the story can be told: the Treasury did the big banks an enormous favour by putting pressure on the financial regulator to water down a compensation scheme for small businesses that had been mis-sold interest rate swaps. The 493-page report by John Swift QC is an instructive read on how “independent” financial regulation works in practice. Treasury officials wondered aloud how a potential huge compensation bill might be reduced. Then, miraculously, the Financial Services Authority, as it then was, concluded that “sophisticated” purchasers of the swaps, which became hideously expensive when interest rates fell in the financial crash, shouldn’t be compensated. Result: a potential £10bn bill for the banks became £2.2bn. Naturally, the regulator could offer a justification of sorts: by drawing a line, it secured a settlement and got money quickly to affected businesses. Come on, though, the admission on Tuesday by today’s Financial Conduct Authority of “clear shortfalls in processes, governance and record keeping” and “a lack of transparency” is damning. The banks were let off the hook. Rentokil executes a big deal See, the UK does have world-leading companies that bestride the globe and are capable of buying American rivals in multibillion-dollar deals. Catching rats and destroying termites may not represent the pinnacle of 21st-century advancement but, hey, they all count. Rentokil Initial’s $6.7bn (£5.07bn) purchase of Memphis-based Terminix is also a startling comeback for a company that was a stock market star in the 1990s before getting lost in complexity, taking a misguided detour into parcel deliveries, and dicing with extermination itself. When he took over as chief executive in 2013, Andy Ransom inherited a still-unresolved mess and a Rentokil share price that was 98p. The price now, even after Tuesday’s 12% drop, is 548p. The recovery hasn’t required rat-like cunning; just quiet operational improvement. Therein lies the slight worry about the Terminix purchase. Having made 220 small acquisitions since 2016, Rentokil is now spending a large sum on a big one at a 47% premium to the target’s last share price. It’s a change to a winning formula. Given Ransom’s record, though, Rentokil’s investors should probably swallow any doubts. This is hardly a trip into the unknown. North America is the world’s biggest pest control market and Rentokil already operates there. Shareholders should back a show of ambition.The UK government’s vaccines watchdog is hopeful of approving Covid jabs for younger children before Christmas, with officials saying the wait to do this has been caused in part by a delay in the manufacturer seeking regulatory approval. Before Covid vaccines can be used for five- to 11-year-olds, the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) must give a specific vaccine the green light. So far only Pfizer has applied for its vaccine to be used for this age group. After that, the vaccines watchdog, the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI), would meet to discuss whether the vaccination programme should be expanded to include younger children. The JCVI is holding two meetings this week, one of which will be connected to Covid jabs. Some JCVI sources have said they have been surprised that the MHRA has not yet passed the issue on to them. Prof Wei Shen Lim, who chairs the JCVI’s panel on Covid vaccinations, said on Wednesday that the organisation was already discussing the use of vaccines for children aged five to 11, but was waiting for vaccines to be approved by the MHRA. Appearing before the Commons science committee, Lim was asked if he expected a decision before Christmas. He replied: “I would expect so, we try and keep in step with the approval process.” Lim said he could not say when the MHRA would decide. The medicines regulator does not discuss the timetable for approval, or even whether specific medicines or vaccines have been put forward, as it is market-sensitive information. The MHRA said: “Pfizer has stated that they are applying to the MHRA for an extension to their Covid-19 vaccine authorisation that would allow use in all five- to 11-year-olds. Further details on the timing of this submission would be for Pfizer to provide.” The delay has caused some consternation in government, given the spread of Covid in schools, especially since the arrival of the fast-transmitting Omicron variant. However, some officials have suggested the lag was in part caused by a delay in Pfizer’s application to the MHRA, rather than a slow regulatory process. Pfizer has said it approached the MHRA only after the EU’s European Medicines Agency (EMA) completed its process for the age group. The EMA approved the use of a lower dose of the Pfizer vaccine – a third of the amount used in older children and adults – for those aged five to 11 on 25 November and a number of EU countries have already started vaccination programmes. The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention approved the Pfizer jab for younger children on 2 November. Pfizer said: “We submitted the data package to the MHRA for consideration as the next step in the process after the CHMP [the EMA’s Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use] granted a positive opinion for the use of the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine in five- to 11-year-olds. As with any submission, we can’t comment or speculate on the process or timings.”My friend Steve Neale, who has died aged 71, was a film historian and a well-known figure in the development of film studies in UK universities. Steve began teaching and writing at an opportune moment in the 1970s, when film studies was being established as a discipline in the humanities, and his work helped to shape how the subject was and is taught in the UK. Steve wrote about a wide variety of topics, from film technology to gender representation, politics and film and the history of Hollywood. He is best known for his work on popular film genres, including two books, Genre (1980) and Genre and Hollywood (2000). He was born in Bexleyheath, Kent, to Doreen (nee Molkenthin), who served in the Women’s Royal Naval Service during the second world war, and Ronald Neale, a sales manager at a small engineering firm. From Chislehurst and Sidcup grammar school he went on to study English literature at the University of Exeter, graduating in 1972. After teacher training at Whitelands College (now part of the University of Roehampton), he taught English and film studies at the Little Ilford school in Newham, London (1973-75) before joining the British Film Institute in 1976 as a lecturer. He then moved to the Arnolfini arts centre in Bristol, selecting films for public exhibition (1979-80), and to the Midland Group arts centre in Nottingham (1980-84). Steve taught film studies at the University of Kent (1984-97), and in 1996 moved to Sheffield Hallam University, where he was senior lecturer in film studies. In 1997 he became research professor in film, media and communication studies. He joined the University of Exeter as professor and chair in film studies in 2004 and I met him three years later when he became my PhD supervisor. He was a friendly and unassuming man – on meeting him for the first time, few would guess that he was one of the greatest scholars of motion pictures. He retired in 2014. A collection of his work was published earlier this year in a book, Film, Cinema, Genre: The Steve Neale Reader, edited by Frank Krutnik and Richard Maltby. It attests to the sustained importance of Steve’s work over more than 40 years. In retirement, Steve remained in Exeter and continued researching and writing about film. He met Karen Edwards in 2004 when she was a lecturer in English at Exeter University. They married in 2016. He is survived by Karen, by his brother, David, his nephew, David, and his great-nieces, Lola and Robyn.The most powerful storm yet this season is pummeling California, drenching the northern part of the state on Monday and dumping several feet of snow on the Sierra Nevada mountaintops before sliding south Tuesday. The deluge was a welcome relief from dry conditions, but wreaked havoc on roads, caused power outages, and raised the threats of mudslides in areas scarred by wildfires. The National Weather Service warned that the risk of heavy rainfall would continue in southern California through Wednesday morning. “The associated heavy rain will create mainly localized areas of flash flooding, with urban areas, roads and small streams the most vulnerable,” the agency said, adding that heavy snow in the northern region will create hazardous driving conditions and reduced visibility through Tuesday. California’s snowpack was dismally behind this year, just 19% of normal as of 10 December, but the multi-day storm, a powerful atmospheric river weather system sucking up moisture from the Pacific Ocean, was expected to dump more than eight feet (2.4 meters) of snow on the highest peaks in California and Nevada. “Total snow accumulations will be tremendous,” NWS in Sacramento said, calling it “easily the biggest snowstorm so far this season.” Avalanche warnings were in effect in the Mono and Inyo county areas of eastern Sierra Nevada. Near Lake Tahoe, the Kirkwood Mountain Resort ski area was closed Monday, saying on social media that it was not safe to open with 17in (43cm) of overnight snow and high winds. “It’s just so bad and so thick,” said California highway patrol officer Carlos Perez. “We’re telling people that if they don’t need to be around this area, they probably shouldn’t travel.” A second storm predicted to hit California midweek shortly after the current storm moves on could deliver almost continuous snow in mountainous areas, said Edan Weishahn of the weather service in Reno, which monitors an area straddling the Nevada state line. The heavy rains prompted officials to close highways that were submerged or blocked by fallen debris and trees, including a 40-mile stretch of the iconic Highway 1 in California’s Big Sur area. The scenic coastal route south of the San Francisco Bay is prone to damage during wet weather and CalTrans and the California Highway Patrol said the closure would help ensure local residents could safely evacuate. Drivers caught in the waters had to be rescued from their vehicles in northern California. Downed trees and power lines, bowled over by heavy winds, littered the streets. Officials issued evacuation warnings and orders in several areas across the state affected by wildfires in recent years, including in Monterey county, the Santa Cruz mountains, Santa Barbara and Orange county. Despite the danger and destruction caused by the storm, it delivered much-needed moisture to a region that’s been gripped by drought. The west depends on winter storms for its water supply and last year was severely dry. Most western US reservoirs that deliver water to states, cities, tribes, farmers and utilities rely on melted snow in the springtime. “In the last 73 days, San Francisco, SFO, Oakland Airport and Santa Rosa have now seen more rain than we saw during last year’s entire water year (Oct 2020 - Sep 2021),” Bay Area meteorologist Drew Tuma said on Twitter. The climate crisis has been a driver of the intensifying conditions, as spiking temperatures have limited snow supply and baked more moisture out of the landscape. As of early December, more than 80% of California was still experiencing “extreme drought” according to the US Drought Monitor. Residents and officials alike welcomed the storm with the hopes that this is just the start to a wetter winter in the west. “I decided to stay home today and not go anywhere, which is nice,” Oakland resident Zhenne Wood said, while out walking her neighbor’s dog, a short-legged corgi. “I’m really happy for the rain. I think we needed it a lot.”Six dead giraffes lie in a spiral on the dry earth, their bodies emaciated and interwoven. The aerial shot, taken by the photojournalist Ed Ram, shows the devastation of Kenya’s drought, which has left people and animals struggling for food and water. Already weak, the animals had died after they got stuck in the mud, according to Getty Images. They were trying to reach a nearby reservoir, although it had almost dried up, the agency reported. The carcasses were moved to the outskirts of Eyrib village in Wajir County to prevent contamination of the reservoir water. It is not just animals that are at risk. An estimated 2.1 million Kenyans were facing starvation due to severe drought across half the state, the country’s drought management authority warned in September. On Tuesday, the UN said 2.9 million people were still in urgent need of humanitarian assistance. Some areas of Kenya had recently reported their worst rainfall in decades, it said. “Water sources for both people and livestock have dried up, forcing families to walk longer distances and causing tensions among communities, which has led to an increase in intercommunal conflict,” the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs said in its assessment. Separately, the local Star news website reported that 4,000 giraffes risked being wiped out by the drought. Ibrahim Ali, from the Bour-Algi giraffe sanctuary, told the Star the situation had worsened due to farming along rivers, which blocked wildlife from drinking spots.My husband, Roger Squires, who has died aged 81, was an academic philosopher who studied and taught at the University of St Andrews for more than 35 years. Roger, the son of Minnie (nee Deeming) and Frank Squiresnewsagents, was born and grew up in the little mining village of Polesworth, Warwickshire, and Nuneaton, where he attended grammar school. In 1958 an exhibition took him to Oxford University, where he got a first in philosophy, politics and economics, and where we met. We married in 1962, just after Roger came back from a year spent studying at Brown University in Rhode Island. He then took a BPhil at Oxford under the philosopher Gilbert Ryle. In 1964 Roger became a lecturer at St Andrews University’s department of logic and metaphysics. He was soon promoted to senior lecturer. His main interest lay in the philosophy of mind, influenced by Ryle and Ludwig Wittgenstein, and he published a succession of articles in major British philosophical journals. He spent several years editing the Philosophical Quarterly journal. Roger adhered to the precepts of ordinary language philosophy, which sees traditional philosophical problems as rooted in linguistic misunderstandings brought about by technical vocabulary that distorts or ignores what words mean in ordinary use. Roger analysed Wittgenstein’s writings assiduously, particularly concerning such issues as memory and dreaming – the latter topic was a particular interest. However, his preference was for teaching over research and he enjoyed supervising many students for their doctorates, always generous with his time. He retired from St Andrews in 2000. In retirement Roger pursued his special interest in the puzzling nature of dream experience, culminating in a book finished shortly before his death, Nightmariners and Wideawakes: The Philosophy of Dreaming, soon to be published by Anthem Press. Outside his work, Roger was an enthusiastic hill walker. Together we climbed all the Munros, Corbetts, Grahams and Donalds and all but the five St Kilda sea-stacks of the 1,557 “Marilyns” (hills in the UK with a 150m drop separating them from the next). We climbed the Munro A’Mhaighdean in 2019. Although Roger broke an arm and a hip in April 2020 and caught Covid-19 in hospital, he recovered enough to walk up all but one of his local Marilyns that summer. He also enjoyed birdwatching over St Andrews bay from our house and listening to Fife bands concerts. He is survived by our daughter, Jean, four grandchildren and me.Good morning. Tasmania is reconnecting to the mainland today, reopening borders to all vaccinated Australians just in time for Christmas. Two Liberal backbenchers have thrown their support behind bringing Wikileaks founder Julian Assange home. And Warwick Thornton’s must-see Indigenous vampire hunter series hits the small screen this week. Covid restrictions in New South Wales will ease today, including those for unvaccinated people, despite epidemiologists urging caution amid rising case numbers and the Omicron variant. The NSW health minister, Brad Hazzard, said the government would “look at all options”, but the emergence of the Omicron strain and rising numbers would not affect the relaxing of restrictions. It comes as Tasmania reopens its borders to the rest of the country and two Virgin flights into Queensland are forced into isolation for Christmas after an infected passenger was detected onboard. The convener of an organisation supporting independent climate-focused candidates has hit back at the Morrison government’s suggestion MPs and senators should dob the Climate 200 group in to the Australian Electoral Commission under new electoral donation rules. The government this month passed amendments to electoral laws that will force entities to register as “significant third parties” if they spend more than $250,000 on electoral expenditure a year. Simon Holmes à Court, the convener of Climate 200, said it was “crazy” the Liberal party was “impinging on a reasonably held expectation of privacy” by donors to charities so soon after it was “demanding complete privacy” for donors to the Legal Services Trust which part-paid Christian Porter’s legal fees. Covid’s Omicron variant will probably become the dominant variant in several EU countries within weeks or even days, according to authorities. Denmark and Norway have announced stricter Covid measures to battle soaring infection numbers which are expected to exceed all previous records. Meanwhile Pfizer has said final analysis of its antiviral Covid pill showed near 90% efficacy in preventing hospitalisations and deaths in high-risk patients. Pfizer’s chief scientific officer Mikael Dolsten said he expects authorisation for use in high-risk individuals regulatory agencies soon. Liberal MPs Jason Falinski and Bridget Archer have backed calls for the Australian government to seek Julian Assange’s return to Australia “as quickly as possible”, after Barnaby Joyce said the US extradition request was unfair. The UK’s high court has ruled that Assange can be extradited to the US to face espionage charges, but Joyce said it was unfair that the US wanted to extradite Assange to face prosecution over actions allegedly not committed inside the US. Falinski cautioned against megaphone diplomacy over the case, saying it “requires a level of subtlety to get the best possible deal we can for one of our citizens”. Australia Australian schoolchildren’s basic literacy and numeracy skills were relatively unscathed during the first year of the Covid pandemic, but the latest Naplan results show the gap between city and rural students widening. However education experts urged caution on interpreting the data and said changes were more likely to become apparent over many years. Australia’s air force chief signed off on a $16bn F-35 fighter program despite acknowledging “deficiencies” with the aircraft and support systems, according to a new audit, which also revealed cost blowouts and delays with several major ADF programs. Almost half of Australian federal police staff lack faith in the force’s senior leadership and only 61% believe they act with integrity, according to an internal survey. The world Donald Trump Jr and Fox News hosts begged then White House chief of staff Mark Meadows to persuade Donald Trump to stop the Capitol attack despite their public efforts to downplay it, newly released text messages show. The US Capitol attack was a “coordinated act of domestic terrorism”, according to a lawsuit filed by the DC attorney general against the far-right Proud Boys and Oath Keepers groups. Belarus has sentenced the husband of the opposition leader Sviatlana Tsikhanouskaya to 18 years in prison for challenging the authoritarian ruler Alexander Lukashenko. A freelance photojournalist in Myanmar has died in military custody after being arrested last week while covering protests. Microbes in oceans and soils across the globe are evolving to eat plastic, according to a study. Recommended reads Refugees are not vulnerable, they just need help to play to their strengths, says Om Dhungel, a “Blacktown boy” from Bhutan in Guardian Australia’s latest feature in our series Welcome to Blacktown. As a growing city deeply divided by socio-economic status, Blacktown depends on its people to hold it together. People like Dhungel, who runs his own consulting and mentoring practice. “The service sector could strengthen communities by helping to build an array of champions within them, then step back to let communities do things by themselves. They don’t need charity, they need inspiration,” he says. The sunbaked town of Coober Pedy isn’t necessarily the first place you’d think vampires would be hiding out, but in Warwick Thornton and Brendan Fletcher’s eight-part series Firebite, the creatures get a modern – and Australian – twist. “In this refreshingly different take, which combines small reinventions with reframed political perspectives, [vampires] can also be taken down by a boomerang to the heart,” writes Luke Buckmaster. “Firebite has a rocky, grungy feel, with dim lighting and a scuzzy junkyard texture reflecting the energy of a show that comes across as effortlessly cool and engaging … Two things are certain. One: I’m hooked. And two: when genre storytelling mixes with Indigenous perspectives exciting things happen.” In 2014, Christine Anu released her album Christmas in Australia. This year, Anu is helming a different celebration of the same name, an ABC TV special that explores what makes our festive celebrations unique. In our weekly interview about objects of importance, Christine Anu talks about irreplaceable locks of her babies’ first haircuts, and why some objects are meant to be lost. Listen The Labor party has unveiled their plan to tackle climate change, including an emissions reduction target of 43% by 2030. But is it up to the task of addressing the climate crisis? In today’s Full Story, Environment editor Adam Morton speaks to Laura Murphy-Oates about how Labor’s plan compares to the Coalition’s, and the future of climate policy in Australia. Full Story is Guardian Australia’s daily news podcast. Subscribe for free on Apple Podcasts, Spotify or any other podcasting app. Laramba’s Indigenous residents fear they are at risk of long-term illness due to uranium in their water supply and say they need to know who is responsible for fixing the problem. Features editor, Lucy Clark, introduces this story about contaminated drinking water for today’s episode of Australia Reads. Listen to the best of Guardian Australia’s journalism on Australia Reads podcast on Wednesday, Friday and Sunday. Subscribe for free on Apple Podcasts, Spotify or any other podcasting app. Sport Joe Root has told his England cricketers that their harrowing experience in Brisbane is as tough as it gets, leaving “no excuses” as they head into their must-win second Test against Australia in Adelaide. Media roundup Liberal electorates received three times more taxpayer money than Labor-held seats, according to an analysis of 19,000 grants by the Sydney Morning Herald and The Age. Western Australia could see a pre-Christmas Cabinet reshuffle, with the West Australian reporting that Roger Cook could be replaced as Health Minister “after a year of intense scrutiny of WA’s over-stretched hospital system.” Coming up Federal treasurer Josh Frydenberg will hand down a mid-year budget review. A NSW Bureau of Health Information report is due on impact of Delta outbreak on health system. Sign up If you would like to receive the Guardian Australia morning mail to your email inbox every weekday, sign up here. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com. Discover Australian Weekend Every Saturday at 6am, enjoy early access to the best journalism planned for the weekend in one elegant app, plus a curated selection of the week’s news and analysis from Australia and the world.It is the little things that remind us Christmas is just around the corner. The songs on the radio, the plethora of Christmas jumpers … and the sight of thousands of lager-fuelled darts fans descending upon Alexandra Palace in north London for the start of the PDC World Darts Championship. Few moments on the sporting calendar signify the start of the festive period quite like the darts, and throughout the period of sport being played behind closed doors, few events felt quite as hollow as darts’ biggest tournament of the year did 12 months ago. Sure, there was the usual drama and tension on the oche, culminating in Gerwyn Price winning the Sid Waddell Trophy and the £500,000 winner’s cheque for the first time. But the sight of spectators returning this year and the world’s best players no longer having to awkwardly gesticulate towards an empty arena every time they hit a crucial double feels like the kind of sporting comfort blanket we have longed for over the past two years. It all begins in earnest on Wednesday evening with a compelling opening session that is headlined by Price, the 36-year-old former rugby player from Markham, in south Wales. In truth the reigning world champion should have little trouble in seeing off either Ritchie Edhouse or Peter Hudson in his first match, but no first-time world champion has possibly ever had as tough a field to defend his title against. There are hazards everywhere you look, and while Price rightly pointed out in the run-up to the event he won’t have to face them all due to the nature of the draw, the real hurdles could come as early as his second match of the event. There, he stands to face one of Steve Beaton – the 1996 world champion who is making a record-extending 31st consecutive world championship appearance – the former major finalist Kim Huybrechts or, perhaps most intriguingly of all, Fallon Sherrock. Perhaps it was no bad thing that Sherrock did not qualify for last year’s event when there were no crowds, unlike two years ago when a packed Ally Pally saw her stun Ted Evetts and Mensur Suljovic to put her firmly on the darting map. Sherrock has been at it again this year too. She became the first woman to qualify for the later stages of the Grand Slam of Darts, and although all eyes will be on her attempt to win a tour card at Q School in January, she could actually secure her place on the professional circuit via prize money if she reaches round four here. However, that almost certainly means she would have to eliminate Price but Sherrock is no stranger to an upset or two. There are 11 former world champions in this year’s event including the two-time winner, Adrian Lewis, who is also in action on the opening night. Now outside the world’s top 32 – from where invites to the majors are guaranteed – Lewis will need to rekindle past form to spark a push back up the rankings. He faces Canada’s Matt Campbell on Wednesday while Raymond van Barneveld’s return to the Palace after coming out of retirement is a tie with Lourence Ilagan of the Philippines on Monday. The PDC will certainly hope that the return of full houses at the Palace, which were pretty much guaranteed for every session, come to fruition. Last year, the opening night drew a limited crowd before the government moved London into Tier 3 restrictions, meaning the rest of the tournament was played behind closed doors. With more than 95% of tickets sold already, and the inevitable knock-on in sales of food, drink and merchandise that go with that, any change to restrictions now could have huge ramifications for a sport that ploughed on commendably in the face of such financial adversity last year. Whether it is Price, Michael van Gerwen or anyone else lifting the trophy aloft on 3 January, you can only hope they do so amid a backdrop they and the sport deserve: a full house at darts’ most recognisable venue.Leaders come and go, policies move with the times, but the challenge facing Labour is unchanged for generations: to win an election it must appeal to Conservative voters, which does not come easily to a party that struggles to imagine why anyone in their right mind would be a Tory. Boris Johnson makes that empathic leap trickier still. Those who are unmoved by the magnetism of his character find it more alienating than any disagreement over policy or ideology. The prime minister’s travails in recent weeks, tracked by a slide in poll ratings, help with that problem, but do not solve it. Polls can be volatile. The more encouraging sign for Labour is a collapse of Tory MPs’ faith in their leader. The rebellion over new Covid regulations – vaporising Johnson’s Commons majority – is significant as much for its ideological inflection as its scale. For nearly two years, government has been synonymous with pandemic management. For so many Tory MPs to withdraw their endorsement from Johnson on this of all issues is fatal to his authority. But to do so under the banner of libertarian insurgency against public health precautions – a cause that exercises only a tiny minority of voters – suggests a party in danger of dislocation from reality. It is an affliction to which the Conservative right is historically prone, and to which Brexit has added a hubristic streak. Victory in the crusade against the mythic Brussels Empire has cultivated in some MPs a tendency to hallucinate liberation struggles where really there are just practical choices between imperfect options. That is a good enough reason for Labour not to side with the rebels. It would be satisfying in the moment to force Johnson to the brink of defeat, but propping him up contains a different, more lingering humiliation. No prime minister wants to rely on the opposition to get business done, still less on a question of urgent public safety. Keir Starmer’s constructive opposition on pandemic matters has often been invisible, to the frustration of Labour pugilists who yearn for the contact of political fist on Tory chin. But when Johnson was in his pomp, rallying the nation in self-defence, attacking him looked petty at best; at worst it was effectively siding with the virus. The power dynamic is different with Johnson denuded of any benefit of the doubt. In the pandemic’s early stages, Labour sought credit for doing the right thing in Johnson’s slipstream; following, not leading. Tory dysfunction gives Starmer more control. It is harder for the prime minister to accuse the opposition of failure to get behind a national effort (his favourite line for deflecting criticism) when that national effort would grind to a halt without Labour votes in the Commons. Hence the heavy emphasis in Starmer’s televised address earlier this week on Labour as “a patriotic party” fulfilling its “patriotic duty” to enact the latest regulations. The point was illustrated with a union flag at the Labour leader’s side, as if he always keeps one handy for such occasions. It was not subtle. But in political messaging, subtlety is often no better than silence. Even when lit up in red, white and blue, Labour’s position on Covid regulations is low on most people’s list of things to care about as the Omicron variant threatens to rip up another Christmas. But it registered with Tory MPs, some of whom felt more comfortable rebelling in the knowledge that they could register a protest and salt the prime minister’s wounds without committing the more seditious act of enabling a government defeat. There is a lesson here for Labour that goes beyond the pandemic. Johnson’s support among his MPs is a product of his fabled appeal in places that were traditionally inhospitable to Conservatives, combined with winning ways among more typical Tories. That in turn is a function of the rakish ebullience that transcends policy and ideology. If the spell is broken, it is not immediately obvious what else will bind a disparate coalition of voters. There is a theory that Johnson hit upon a sustainable formula for political realignment; that he has colonised a new centre ground where leftish economics (raising taxes to spend on health and infrastructure) meets a rightward swerve on issues of culture and identity (flag-waving and immigration control). That looks plausible as a way to join dots on a map between economically diverse constituencies, but turning it into a plan for government has not been so easy. That is what “levelling up” is supposed to be, and the Tories are divided as to what it means. The underlying impulse is egalitarian – sharing national wealth more evenly – but the most efficient way to do that is redistribution via taxation, and much of the Conservative party is viscerally and intellectually hostile to such methods. Neither of the frontrunners in a putative Tory leadership contest – Rishi Sunak and Liz Truss – is sold on the full-fat version of “levelling up” when it starts to smell like social democracy. But Labour can be all for it. A debilitated prime minister will not have the strength to lead his party out of its comfort zone on social and economic policy, but that is where it will have to go to fulfil promises made to people who only gave their votes to the Tories on loan. Johnson’s charm, when it worked, was a bridge from his party to the electorate. If it fails, there is a gap into which Starmer can drive a wedge. That might sometimes involve agreeing with the prime minister enough to aggravate division in his party. It is the method that David Cameron once used to good effect, voting for Tony Blair’s education reforms in the Commons. Tory endorsement spared Blair the pain of defeat in parliament, but at the price of confirming his status as a heretic to the left. The symmetrical manoeuvre against Johnson is available to Starmer. Labour voting with the government on Covid restrictions is right in principle, but it has the additional benefit of stoking suspicion on the Tory right that their leader is ideologically impure. Plus, lending stability to a teetering government is a way for the opposition to show readiness for the burdens of office. It would suit Starmer for Johnson to drift in loveless cohabitation with MPs who have forgotten what they ever saw in him. Such prolonged dysfunction would do more to persuade voters that they need regime change than anything the opposition can say. The trap to avoid, as the prime minister’s charm curdles, is the smug, told-you-so piety of people who never succumbed in the first place. Labour’s disdain for the prime minister is not in doubt. The opposition’s job is complaining about the government, and complaining louder doesn’t make the message more compelling. That is why, just occasionally, the smarter move is not to bang on about the ways Johnson is wrong, but to be the lifeline he needs to get things right. Rafael Behr is a Guardian columnistFormer New York governor Andrew Cuomo has been ordered to give up about $5.1m in earnings from a book deal about his response to the coronavirus pandemic, after he was found to have contravened ethics laws by using state resources to write the book. Cuomo was directed to turn over proceeds earned from American Crisis: Leadership Lessons from the Covid-19 Pandemic within 30 days under a resolution approved 12-1 by the Joint Commission on Public Ethics (JCOPE), according to multiple media reports. An attorney for Cuomo immediately called the action unconstitutional and promised a fight. The order came a month after the commission voted to rescind the ethics approval it had given Cuomo before he entered into the $5.1m book deal. American Crisis was published in October 2020, months before Cuomo resigned amid findings he sexually harassed 11 women. The staff of the commission granted approval of the deal in July 2020, when his counsel told the commission that Cuomo agreed to not use any state personnel or resources to produce his book and that he would write it “entirely on his own time”. But complaints later surfaced that state property, resources and personnel were used to prepare, write, edit and publish the book. Cuomo has acknowledged that state employees helped with tasks including editing the manuscript. But he’s claimed that those employees were volunteering. “JCOPE’s actions today are unconstitutional, exceed its own authority and appear to be driven by political interests rather than the facts and the law,” Cuomo attorney Jim McGuire said in a prepared statement. “Should they seek to enforce this action, we’ll see them in court.” There was no immediate comment from the attorney general’s office. A separate state assembly investigation released last month found evidence that Cuomo, who resigned in August, had his staff spend copious amounts of time on the project. Junior and senior staff members told investigators they were asked to perform book tasks during their work day, including transcribing dictations, printing and delivering documents, and attending meetings with agents and publishers. One senior state official sent and received 1,000 emails about the book, the legislative report said. Associated Press contributed to this reportJust hours before the biggest rebellion of his premiership, one of Boris Johnson’s key allies was asked about the possibility of a challenge to the prime minister’s position. “It is a very difficult thing to do, as you may remember with the previous incumbent,” said Jacob Rees-Mogg, speaking on his Moggcast podcast on ConservativeHome. It is indeed a tough hurdle to get more than 50 sitting Conservative MPs to submit no confidence letters in their leader and prime minister. But as in the case of Theresa May, ousted by Rees-Mogg and his allies, it is not insurmountable. Anti-Johnson feeling on the backbenches is running high partly because of his botched handling of sleaze scandals and the furore over lockdown parties in Downing Street. However, an equally sizeable reason for discontent is rightwing, libertarian MPs unhappy with the ideological basis for Covid restrictions. Rees-Mogg remains very loyal to the prime minister but at the same time made no attempt in his podcast to deny the existence of a mutinous mood within the Tory ranks in parliament. The prime minister personally pleaded with the 1922 Committee of Tory backbenchers to back his plan B measures before the vote on Tuesday evening. But nearly 100 Tory MPs directly challenged his authority by voting against Covid passports for entry to nightclubs and other large venues. That means almost a third of all Tory MPs and most backbenchers have now put the prime minister on notice that they are extremely unhappy with the idea of further restrictions. Since Brexit, the Tory party has thrown out its more centre-right, moderate voices. As a direct consequence, the main strain of opinion in the Conservatives is now inherently more lockdown-sceptic, freedom-loving, anti-mask than the party of David Cameron might have been. If Johnson does need to opt for stricter, plan C measures in the face of a rising tide of Omicron, he will find himself in the same position as May did over Brexit – attempting to rely on Labour votes in the face of a revolt on the right. Tory MPs voted through lockdowns over the last two years reluctantly but their patience has clearly run thin and their organisation is increasing under the leadership of Steve Baker and Mark Harper, with their Covid Recovery Group – which has become something of a successor to the European Research Group. As a last-minute concession on Tuesday, they forced a promise out of the prime minister that he would return to parliament to seek the permission of MPs if he wanted to go for further restrictions – and continued to defy him on plan B anyway. Johnson himself might be intellectually of this mindset but ideology is hard to stick to when the UK’s most senior scientists and medics are warning of the human disaster of an NHS potentially overwhelmed and many unnecessary deaths. In contrast, senior cabinet colleagues from Rishi Sunak to Liz Truss may see the attraction of aligning themselves with the rule-sceptic backbenchers if they have one eye on a future leadership vacancy, especially if they sense that Johnson is weakening. Rees-Mogg, who is naturally on that side of the party, on Monday gave a clear signal to backbenchers that he remained one of them. “You have to learn to live with Covid in the end. We cannot switch the economy off and on every few months. Life is about taking risk,” he told the Moggcast. All of that adds up to considerable pressure on Johnson in the months ahead to align himself with those sceptical of Covid rules. If he wants to keep his position and retain the confidence of his parliamentary party, there will be a huge temptation for the prime minister to continue to keep restrictions to the bare minimum. However, pressure from the scientists, public health experts and medics is also increasing for a tougher approach. The question will be whether the public – weary of Covid rules – is ready for a shift towards living with high rates of Covid infections and a certain level of deaths, or will ultimately blame the prime minister and his party for failing to stop that.The statutory body set up to protect the post-Brexit rights of EU citizens settled in the UK has taken the dramatic step of launching legal action against the Home Office, accusing it of breaching their basic rights. The Independent Monitoring Authority has launched judicial review proceedings on the grounds that 2.5 million EU citizens who have been granted pre-settled status have been put at automatic risk of losing rights to live, work or rent, or being deported by the Home Office. EU nationals and their families who have been in the UK for more than five years get settled status under the Home Office immigration scheme set up for Brexit, but those who have been in the country fewer than five years get pre-settled status and must apply again for settled status. However if they do not apply before their pre-settled status expires, they automatically lose their rights and could be liable to removal from the country, something the IMA has said it considers unlawful. The legal action is a rare move that pits a statutory body against a government department. It will be keenly watched by immigration lawyers and campaign groups who have multiple criticisms over the Home Office’s policy under which 5.6 million EU citizens applied for post-Brexit status but only 2.6 million have been granted full settled status. “In taking legal action now we hope to provide clarity for those citizens with pre-settled status of which there are 2.485 million as of 30 November 2021,” said Kathryn Chamberlain, the IMA chief executive. Campaign groups have protested that the Home Office system is a time bomb for the 2.5 million. They fear many may simply forget to apply for settled status when their pre-settled status expires. Others such as elderly people, children in care and vulnerable people including victims of domestic abuse, who had to rely on carers, council workers or charities to make their original application, may fall through the cracks. The IMA will argue that the loss of work and home or right to healthcare is an unjustifiable and direct consequence of Brexit, not of the individual’s making. The withdrawal agreement signed in 2020 was designed to protect the lifetime rights of EU citizens settled in the UK and British citizens settled in the EU. But the IMA argued that the rights agreement only allows for loss of those rights in “limited circumstances”. It therefore considers the blanket policy of the Home Office is “in breach of the agreements”, it said. A Home Office spokesperson said: “We take our citizens’ rights obligations very seriously and have implemented the arrangements we agreed under the withdrawal agreement in good faith. We do not comment on ongoing legal proceedings.”Tehran’s approach to talks on its nuclear programme in Vienna has become so uncompromising according to Israel’s lead diplomat on Iran, Joshua Zarka, that they “have reached the last stretch of diplomacy”. Israeli officials said they were hopeful that the US and European nations would agree to put an emergency motion to the board of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) stating that Iran was in breach of its obligations under the non-proliferation treaty (NPT) and the 2015 nuclear deal. Such a motion, planned for this month, would be the start of a wider process to try to force Iran to change its behaviour on the nuclear question. Israel has long sought to push its allies away from negotiations with its arch-enemy, saying such talks could be fruitless and that Iran would still seek to covertly advance its weapons programme unless forced to abandon it. Zarka was speaking as the director general of the IAEA, Rafael Grossi, said advances made by Iran since the 2015 nuclear deal’s collapse meant there would have to be changes to the original agreement. “The reality is that we are dealing with a very different Iran,” he said. “2022 is so different from 2015 that there will have to be adjustments that take into consideration these new realities so our inspectors can inspect whatever the countries agree at the political table. “There’s no other country other than those making nuclear weapons reaching those high levels” of uranium enrichment, Grossi said of Iran. “I’ve said many times that this doesn’t mean that Iran has a nuclear weapon. But it does mean that this level of enrichment is one that requires an intense verification effort.” Grossi said the restrictions faced by his inspectors in Iran threatened to give the world only a “very blurred image” of Tehran’s programme. “If the international community through us, through the IAEA, is not seeing clearly how many centrifuges or what is the capacity that they may have … what you have is a very blurred image,” he said. “It will give you the illusion of the real image. But not the real image. This is why this is so important.” Russia in particular has, according to Israeli officials, been pressing Iran to allow UN inspectors to operate more freely, and the first crunch point may come before the end of this month at the IAEA board if Grossi declares the inspectors have still not been given the access they need. Zarka said he would not be drawn on the military options available to Israel, which he was not responsible for. But Israel has repeatedly said it would not allow Iran to acquire a nuclear weapons capability. Israel believes it is winning the argument with British and US officials that the new Iranian regime – elected in June and answerable to the supreme leader, Ali Khamenei – has decided it does not need to go back to the joint comprehensive plan of action agreed in 2015, but will instead try to buy time to build its nuclear capabilities. The accumulation of steps taken by Iran means, Israel believes, that the country is weeks away from the point when it will have uranium enriched up to 90%, a position described as the break-out moment in the 2015 nuclear deal. Israel has never admitted to its role in the previous strikes on Iran, including the assassination of the head of Iran’s nuclear programme, Mohsen Fakhrizadeh. The Iranian ambassador to London, Mohsen Baharvand, told a briefing last week it was reasonable for Iran to ask for guarantees, along the lines of an international treaty, that the US would remain in the agreement permanently, and not walk out – as Donald Trump did, with Israel’s support.• If a judge rules that a deceit claim cannot proceed there may ultimately be no compensation, not just “significantly limited” compensation (Dieselgate: UK car buyers’ claim against VW reaches high court, 6 December, p32). • The US dropped the atomic bomb 76 years ago, not the hydrogen bomb as we said (Simon’s stand on China is a welcome revolt against a mush of indifference, 4 December, Sport, p16). • Other recently amended articles include: Rupert Murdoch buys $200m Montana cattle ranch from Koch family Leuven: the small Flemish town with a big (bang) history Best of Enemies review – James Graham’s superb study of media and politics Recently uncovered software flaw ‘most critical vulnerability of the last decade’ Radioactive medicines found in London street by member of the public Why fighting Omicron should include ramping up HIV prevention Quizmaster Johnson leaves Javid to answer the awkward questions Editorial complaints and corrections can be sent to guardian.readers@theguardian.com or The readers’ editor, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. You can also leave a voicemail on +44 (0)20 3353 4736.