An 18th-century windmill in Yorkshire, the wreck of a second world war submarine off Dartmouth and a series of rare mud walls in Cambridgeshire are among 284 historic places added to the National Heritage list for England in 2021. Lelley windmill, in Elstronwick, East Riding, built in 1790 to mill corn, retains a full set of original milling machinery which was adapted for steam power to meet demand for flour from the rapidly growing urban population. Now Grade II listed, it encapsulates the impact of the Industrial Revolution on small-scale rural industry in Yorkshire, Historic England said. HMS/m D1, a prototype for the D-class submarine used in the second world war, was launched in the strictest secrecy in 1908 as the first British submarine used for offensive operations in enemy waters. As well as was being the first diesel-powered submarine, it was the first to be fitted with wireless telephony to transmit and receive signals, before being relegated for training duties. Its remains are almost intact and the vessel is now listed as a scheduled monument. Mud walls at Whittlesey, Cambridgeshire, constructed in local clay as a way to work around government tax on brick and tiles imposed to pay for the American war of independence, are thought to date back to the 18th and 19th centuries. The new listed sections of walls join two others already listed. Also newly listed is a early police telephone box at Bradgate Park in Newtown Linford, Leicestershire. Its design was made famous by Dr Who and dates from around 1931. Its survival is rare especially as it has been repaired on several occasions after being hit by motor vehicles. Four canal tunnels created in 1778 at Selby, North Yorkshire, which were designed to stop Selby canal from flooding have been listed at Grade II. By 1800, Selby canal was handling 369,780 tons of cargo a year, but now pleasure-boat traffic is steadily growing, with more than 2,000 boats using the canal each year. Other significant listings include: the Grade I Skerne railway bridge in Darlington, thought to be the oldest railway bridge carrying regular passenger trains in the world, and built for the opening of the Stockton and Darlington railway in 1825. The remains of a Romano-British villa, which lie under the village green of a modern housing development in Ingleby Barwick, Stockton-on-Tees, and one of the most northern examples of villas known from the Roman empire, dating back to the second half of the second century. The Shoreham Memorial cross, carved into the chalk of the hillside at Sevenoaks, Kent, and the idea of Shoreham resident Samuel Cheeseman who lost two sons in the second world war, is one of only two of its kind in England to still survive. The former Picture Palace at Prescot, Merseyside, which is Grade II listed, was a precursor of the modern cinema and was created in 1912 as a cinema and variety theatre. At its opening it was described as presenting a palatial appearance and “quite luxurious”, with the theatre seating 630, which increased with the addition of a balcony around 1913. Duncan Wilson, the chief executive of Historic England, said: “The additional places protected this year shows the diversity of our country’s shared heritage, from arts and crafts houses and windmills to historic mud walls and 20th-century office blocks. Sites such as Selby’s ingenious canal tunnels – made by a pioneering engineer to address flooding – may also inspire people to find solutions to challenges of today. These wonderful historic sites are now protected for future generations, and we encourage people to apply for listing, or share their photos and videos of listed sites, through our website.”Ministers are relying on an outdated energy security policy, leading academics have warned, as escalating tensions between Russia and western leaders propelled the gas market to record price highs. UK gas reached a record closing price of 322.5 pence per therm on Tuesday, according to data from market price experts at ICIS, vaulting ahead of the previous high of just over 298p/therm set in early October this year. A record was also set in Europe, as the benchmark market in the Netherlands rose to a record €127.45 per megawatt hour, according to ICIS data, breaking through the €116.75/MWh ceiling set in October. The price spike was triggered by concerns over deteriorating relations with Russia, one of the largest suppliers of gas into Europe, which prompted international condemnation after massing 100,000 troops on the Ukrainian border. The market surge came as the UK Energy Research Centre (UKERC), a group of academics funded by the government’s UK Research and Innovation body, called for a review of the country’s energy security policy, warning ministers had been “complacent about the supply of gas for too long”. Government policy, last updated in 2017, is now out of date and homes may face further volatility in the future, the UKERC cautioned, saying the gas crisis was “not just for Christmas”. Mike Bradshaw, the group’s co-director and a professor at Warwick Business School, said government policy was based on a pre-Brexit environment which prioritised securing energy supplies over keeping costs down. The government has treated gas use as a “default” necessity when low-carbon options are unavailable rather than setting a specific gas strategy, Bradshaw said. “Reaching net zero will transform the way we produce and use energy but as we go through this transition we need gas by design, not the assumed position of gas by default,” he said. The new record highs are likely to deepen Europe’s gas crisis which has already forced factories to close and caused scores of energy suppliers to go bust. In the UK, 26 suppliers have gone bust in the last four months, and households face rising energy bills this winter and through 2022. The UK’s energy regulator, Ofgem, is poised to set out a series of new proposals to address the energy supply market crisis on Wednesday morning including tough new financial standards for energy suppliers and changes to the UK’s cap on standard energy tariffs. • This article was amended on 15 December 2021. The academic group is called the UK Energy Research Centre, not Council as stated in an earlier version.I have been in retail for more than four years now, and 2021 was one of the worst in my entire working life. Retail is already not an easy job, but when you add a highly contagious deadly pandemic and people’s lack of care, it really does take a toll. We started off the year with a sense of “normalcy”; masks weren’t required indoors, the virus wasn’t in our state and it seemed all other states were doing well too. Most retail companies got complacent and even lowered some of the restrictions for their stores. In June, cases were going up, and the New South Wales government’s lack of immediate action meant that most people went berserk, shopping before stores closed again. Customers refused to social distance. Many would simply take their masks off to speak to us, and there was massive tension in the air among retail workers, specifically because everything else was closing except shopping centres. You couldn’t go to the pub, you couldn’t go to the movies, but if businesses decided they were “essential” then you just had to go to work and endure the anxiety and dread. Many of us just accepted the fact that eventually we were going to get Covid-19, because the safety precautions were just “strongly suggested” and not enforced. If you had to work in one of the many stores that considered themselves essential, such as entertainment retailers, then you had no choice but to go to work and hope you didn’t catch it, or that your anxiety wasn’t so high you could barely function – all while seeing people browsing DVDs, games and just about everything else without being able to tell them to leave. Browsing was prohibited but many businesses refused to enforce it. Then on 17 July, when I really felt like I couldn’t go any longer, then-NSW premier Gladys Berejiklian announced the strictest lockdown we have had in the state. Every retail worker I know breathed a massive sigh of relief, because at least it meant that we weren’t being forced to have strangers in our immediate proximity at all times. We knew that as retailers who also operated online, we still had to go to work, but at least we had the same faces day in, day out, rather than the whole town. Working primarily this way did lift a massive amount of anxiety off ourselves, and things were fine for the most part. For the first couple of weeks, anyway. People understood you had to buy online if they weren’t buying groceries or medicine and while we had the odd individual who still thought they could walk in, things weren’t that bad. The problem started when the lockdown had no end in sight and customers became agitated. We had customers yelling at us over the phone and many tried to force their way into the store’s front door. All of this took place while we had the NSW government warning the public of workplaces being the biggest infection hubs for the state, with cases going well over the 1,000 daily mark. We went to work just convinced we were eventually going to catch it, just like before lockdown. When it was announced that retail could open up again, we had mixed feelings. We were happy because this meant we could visit friends and family, but also we knew that eventually we would probably have to deal with all the bottled up anger customers had from things they couldn’t say or do. We spent a good amount of time just preparing ourselves for day one of reopening, and it really wasn’t enough. The few first weeks were intense. Stores hit the cap very quickly and we genuinely weren’t in the right headspace to deal with so many people at once. Customers were out of patience and couldn’t understand that we were really trying our hardest and working as fast as we could. This has lasted until now. We are preparing for the busiest period of the year while being in our worst mental health state collectively. Restrictions continue to ease, store customer caps keep increasing and our work just gets busier, harder and more draining the closer we get to Christmas. “We are in this together,” was said everywhere during lockdown, but my experience of lockdown was so much worse than those who got to work from home. Staying inside your house and working from the comfort and safety of your home wasn’t a privilege given to us. I don’t want to invalidate the experience and hardships of those who worked from home, but we still hear how hard it is to work from home and how tired people are, and there’s really nothing we can say that would validate our hardship and our experience. This pandemic made it clear how expendable retail and hospitality workers are, how little our work is appreciated and how much is expected of us. • The author works in retail in SydneyThe House is considering a measure to refer Mark Meadows to the justice department for potential contempt charges. The vote comes one week after Meadows, the former chief of staff to Donald Trump, ended his cooperation with the House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection. The records that Meadows turned over to the committee before ending his cooperation include text messages from Fox News hosts and Donald Trump Jr on 6 January. In the messages, the Trump allies urge Meadows and the president to take action to end the insurrection. In one message, Trump’s eldest son told the chief of staff, “We need an Oval Office address. He has to lead now. It has gone too far and gotten out of hand.” The attorney general of the District of Columbia, Karl Racine, has announced that his office is suing the far right groups the Proud Boys and the Oath Keepers “for conspiring to terrorize the District” in relation to the Capitol insurrection. The lawsuit refers to the Capitol attack as a “coordinated act of domestic terrorism”. Jim McGovern, the Democratic chair of the House rules committee, warned of potential future coups if investigators are not able to uncover all the details of 6 January. “Coups very rarely succeed the first go-around, but they oftentimes do the second time around,” McGovern said during a hearing on the contempt resolution. “If there’s ever a moment to be above politics, it’s now.” The Senate voted to raise the debt ceiling by $2.5tn. The vote occurred via a bipartisan deal that allowed Democrats to approve the measure and Republicans to oppose it in a divided legislature. With the House expected to pass the measure as well, lawmakers will have put off a potential default until after the next election. A federal judge has dismissed Donald Trump’s latest effort to hide his tax returns from the House Ways and Means committee.“This ruling is no surprise, the law is clearly on the committee’s side. I am pleased that we’re now one step closer to being able to conduct more thorough oversight of the IRS’s mandatory presidential audit program,” said Richard Neal, House Ways and Means committee chair, in a statement. The Covid-19 death toll in the US has surpassed 800,000, according to a tally by Johns Hopkins University. It is the highest reported toll of any country. The actual death toll is likely even higher both in the US and around the world. The AP reports: A closely watched forecasting model from the University of Washington projects a total of over 880,000 reported deaths in the U.S. by March 1. Health experts lament that many of the deaths in the United States were especially heartbreaking because they were preventable by way of the vaccine, which became available in mid-December a year ago and was thrown open to all adults by mid-April of this year. About 200 million Americans are fully vaccinated, or just over 60% of the population. That is well short of what scientists say is needed to keep the virus in check. “Almost all the people dying are now dying preventable deaths,” said Dr. Chris Beyrer, an epidemiologist at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health. “And that’s because they’re not immunized. And you know that, God, it’s a terrible tragedy.” When the vaccine was first rolled out, the country’s death toll stood at about 300,000. It hit 600,000 in mid-June and 700,000 on Oct. 1. A federal judge has dismissed Donald Trump’s latest effort to hide his tax returns from the House Ways and Means committee. “This ruling is no surprise, the law is clearly on the committee’s side. I am pleased that we’re now one step closer to being able to conduct more thorough oversight of the IRS’s mandatory presidential audit program,” said Richard Neal, House Ways and Means committee chair, in a statement. Trevor McFadden, a federal district court judge, dismissed the case saying that Trump, who has claimed executive privilege shields him from requests from House Democrats to review his returns, does not have a case. “Even the special solicitude accorded former presidents does not alter the outcome,” McFadden wrote. Trump can still appeal the case. Guardian staff and agencies: Former New York governor Andrew Cuomo has been ordered to give up about $5.1m in earnings from a book deal about his response to the coronavirus pandemic, after he was found to have contravened ethics laws by using state resources to write the book. Cuomo was directed to turn over proceeds earned from American Crisis: Leadership Lessons from the Covid-19 Pandemic within 30 days under a resolution approved 12-1 by the Joint Commission on Public Ethics (JCOPE), according to multiple media reports. An attorney for Cuomo immediately called the action unconstitutional and promised a fight. The order came a month after the commission voted to rescind the ethics approval it had given Cuomo before he entered into the $5.1m book deal. American Crisis was published in October 2020, months before Cuomo resigned amid findings he sexually harassed 11 women. The staff of the commission granted approval of the deal in July 2020, when his counsel told the commission that Cuomo agreed to not use any state personnel or resources to produce his book and that he would write it “entirely on his own time”. But complaints later surfaced that state property, resources and personnel were used to prepare, write, edit and publish the book. Read more: The Senate voted to raise the debt ceiling by $2.5tn, via a bipartisan deal that allowed Democrats to approve the measure and Republicans to oppose it in a divided legislature. With the House expected to pass the measure as well, lawmakers will have put off a potential default until after the next election. The country was at the edge of a catastrophic default several times this year, with lawmakers repeatedly clashing over efforts to suspend the borrowing cap. Republicans demanded that Democrats slash spending on social programs in exchange for support in suspending or increasing the debt ceiling. The current resolutions come after the leaders of both parties reached a deal to adjust Senate rules so that just this once, Democrats could address the debt ceiling issue with a simple majority vote, and Republicans could all cast their votes against it. Peter Stone in Washington: A powerful network of conservative election lawyers and groups with links to Donald Trump have spent millions of dollars promoting new and onerous voting laws that many battleground states such as Georgia and Texas have enacted. The moves have prompted election and voting rights watchdogs in the US to warn about the suppression of non-white voters aimed at providing Republicans an edge in coming elections. The lawyers and groups spearheading self-professed election integrity measures include some figures who pushed Trump’s baseless claims of fraud after the 2020 election. Key advocates include Cleta Mitchell with the Conservative Partnership institute; J Christian Adams of the Public Interest Legal Foundation; Hans von Spakovsky of the Heritage Foundation; Jason Snead of the Honest Elections Project; and J Kenneth Blackwell with the America First Policy Institute. These conservative outfits tout their goal as curbing significant voter fraud, despite the fact that numerous courts, the vast majority of voting experts and even former top Trump officials, such as ex-attorney general Bill Barr, concluded the 2020 elections were without serious problems. Watchdogs say that tightening state voting laws endanger the rights of Black voters and other communities of color who historically back Democrats by creating new rules limiting absentee voting and same day registration, while imposing other voting curbs. Among the election lawyers and groups advocating tougher voting laws, Mitchell, a veteran conservative lawyer , boasts the highest profile and has sparked the most scrutiny. She took part in the 2 January call where Trump prodded Georgia’s secretary of state Brad Raffensperger to “find” about 11,780 votes to overturn Joe Biden’s victory there. After details emerged about Mitchell’s role on the call, Foley &amp; Lardner, where she had worked for nearly 20 years, mounted an internal review, and she resigned. Read more: That’s it from me today. My west coast colleague, Maanvi Singh, will take over the blog for the next few hours. Here’s where the day stands so far: The House is now debating the measure to refer Mark Meadows to the justice department for potential contempt charges. The vote comes one week after Meadows, the former chief of staff to Donald Trump, ended his cooperation with the House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection. The records that Meadows turned over to the committee before ending his cooperation include text messages from Fox News hosts and Donald Trump Jr on 6 January. In the messages, the Trump allies urge Meadows and the president to take action to end the insurrection. In one message, Trump’s eldest son told the chief of staff, “We need an Oval Office address. He has to lead now. It has gone too far and gotten out of hand.” The attorney general of the District of Columbia, Karl Racine, has announced that his office is suing the far right groups the Proud Boys and the Oath Keepers “for conspiring to terrorize the District” in relation to the Capitol insurrection. The lawsuit refers to the Capitol attack as a “coordinated act of domestic terrorism”. Jim McGovern, the Democratic chair of the House rules committee, warned of potential future coups if investigators are not able to uncover all the details of 6 January. “Coups very rarely succeed the first go-around, but they oftentimes do the second time around,” McGovern said during a hearing on the contempt resolution. “If there’s ever a moment to be above politics, it’s now.” Maanvi will have more coming up, so stay tuned. Bennie Thompson, the chair of the select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection, argued that Mark Meadows’ refusal to cooperate with the panel forced investigators to advance this contempt resolution. Meadows’ refusal to testify about the records he has already turned over to the committee amounts to not just obstruction but also an “attack on the rule of law,” Thompson said at the start of the floor debate over the measure. “It’s regrettable that we are back to the floor considering another criminal contempt referral, but our former colleague, Mr Meadows, has left us no choice,” the Democratic congressman said. “The select committee is investigating an attack on our democracy, and it’s essential that witnesses cooperate with our investigation to get answers.” The House is now beginning one hour of debate on the measure to refer Mark Meadows to the justice department for potential contempt charges. The House will then debate two other proposals before moving on to the full-chamber vote on the Meadows contempt resolution. The vote on the contempt resolution is still expected to start in about an hour and a half, so stay tuned. A pill manufactured by the prominent Covid-19 vaccine provider Pfizer is highly effective in protecting against severe disease from coronavirus, the company said on Tuesday. The experimental antiviral pill Paxlovid is also effective against the Omicron variant that is spreading rapidly across the world, the company announced, citing laboratory testing. In clinical trials, Paxlovid showed almost 90% efficacy in preventing hospitalization and death in high-risk patients, Pfizer stated, replicating the results of a smaller-scale trial announced last month. Those results prompted the company to seek authorization from the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the pill to become the first widely available oral medicine to combat coronavirus. Regulators in the UK last month approved the twice-daily pill Molnupiravir, manufactured by Merck/Ridgeback, for use in elderly and at-risk patients, but its approval has stalled in the US amid safety concerns. Pfizer hopes that Tuesday’s announcement will bolster its case with the FDA, allowing for an early US approval and infected Americans having access to the pill by early next year. Programming note: the House is expected to vote later today on the motion to refer Mark Meadows, the former chief of staff to Donald Trump, to the justice department for potential contempt charges. According to the latest update from House majority leader Steny Hoyer’s office, the chamber will likely start voting at about 6 pm ET, roughly two hours from now. If the House passes the contempt resolution, the justice department will need to determine whether to prosecute Meadows over the matter. A federal grand jury has already indicted another Trump ally, Steve Bannon, for defying a subpoena from the House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection. Rev. William Barber II, the prominent North Carolina civil rights leader, accused Senator Joe Manchin of committing “political policy violence” on Tuesday over his blockade of voting rights and infrastructure legislation in the US senate. Barber made the comments as he led a demonstration outside of Manchin’s Washington, DC office with several activists, including some who traveled from West Virginia, demanding a meeting with the senator. The group was denied entry into the office building and wound up leaving signs and 10,000 petitions at the building’s entrance. In fiery remarks, Barber accused Manchin of lying to John Lewis, the civil rights icon who died last year. Manchin, Barber said, had told Lewis he supported two sweeping pieces of voting rights legislation. But Manchin’s support for the filibuster, the senate rule that requires 60 votes to advance legislation, has blocked Democrats from passing either bill. “His delay on voting rights is allowing a political coup d’etat to sweep through our state legislatures,” Barber said. He added Manchin’s actions were directly harming the nation’s poor and most vulnerable communities. The meeting came on the same day Manchin was reportedly meeting with a small group of Democratic senators to try and see if there was a path forward on the filibuster. Barber has been among several activists who have been arrested in Washington recently as they push for voting rights legislation. Senate minority leader Mitch McConnell was asked about the texts that Mark Meadows received from Republican lawmakers as the Capitol insurrection unfolded on January 6. The Republican leader told reporters on Capitol Hill that he was not in contact with Donald Trump’s chief of staff on the day of the insurrection. McConnell also expressed interest in the findings of the House select committee investigating the insurrection, saying, “We’re all watching, as you are, what is unfolding on the House side, and it will be interesting to reveal all the participants who were involved.” It is worth noting that Senate Republicans blocked the bill to create a 9/11-style commission to investigate the insurrection earlier this year. One reporter asked Jen Psaki how Joe Biden plans to mark the one-year anniversary of the Capitol insurrection, which will occur in three weeks on January 6. Psaki said she did not have any specific plans to share about the president honoring the day of the Capitol insurrection, which she described as “one of the darkest days in our democracy”. But the White House press secretary added, “I think there’s no question you’ll see us commemorate that day.” Jen Psaki was asked about the revelation that Republican lawmakers and multiple Fox News hosts sent texts to Mark Meadows on January 6, urging Donald Trump’s chief of staff to take action to end the Capitol insurrection. “It’s disappointing, and unfortunately not surprising, that some of the very same individuals who were willing to warn, condemn and express horror over what happened on January 6 in private were totally silent in public or, even worse, were spreading lies and conspiracy theories and continue to since that time,” the White House press secretary said. Psaki added, “Unfortunately we’ve seen a trend from some of the same individuals.” The House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection held a hearing yesterday to vote on a recommendation that Meadows be held in criminal contempt for defying the panel’s subpoena. At the hearing, Liz Cheney, the Republican vice-chair of the committee, read some of the texts that Meadows received on January 6 as the insurrection unfolded. The texts were included in the documents that Meadows turned over to the committee before ending his cooperation with investigators. In one text, Fox News host Laura Ingraham said, “Mark, the president needs to tell people in the Capitol to go home. This is hurting all of us. He is destroying his legacy.” In another, Donald Trump Jr told the chief of staff, “We need an Oval Office address. He has to lead now. It has gone too far and gotten out of hand.” This is Joan Greve in Washington, taking over the blog from Joanna Walters. The White House press secretary, Jen Psaki, is now holding her daily briefing, and she was asked about Joe Biden’s meeting with centrist Senator Joe Manchin yesterday to discuss the Build Back Better Act. The press secretary said the negotiations overs the $1.75tn spending package continue, but Democrats are “not quite there yet” to get the bill passed. Democratic leaders have been pushing to pass the final bill before the end of the year to ensure families can receive checks from the expanded child tax credit program next month, but it’s unclear whether they will be able to meet that deadline. It’s been a busy morning in political news in Washington and there’s more to come. Reverend William Barber of the Poor People’s Campaign led a press conference a little earlier and we’ll bring you the highlights of that shortly. Please stay tuned. Meanwhile, here’s where things stand so far: The lawsuit filed in federal court in Washington, by the office of the attorney general of the District of Columbia, calls the Capitol attack by Trump fanatics trying to stop the certification of Joe Biden’s election victory a “coordinated act of domestic terrorism”. The attorney general of the District of Columbia, Karl Racine, has announced that his office is suing the far right groups the Proud Boys and the Oath Keepers “for conspiring to terrorize the District” in relation to the insurrection by extremist Donald Trump supporters at the US Capitol on January 6 this year. Jim McGovern, the Democratic chair of the House rules committee, warned of potential future coups if the right wing are allowed to continue to downplay and hide the truth of the attempt to stop the peaceful transition of power from Trump to Biden. The House rules committee met to take up the special House panel’s resolution calling for Trump’s White House chief of staff Mark Meadows to be held in criminal contempt for defying a subpoena from those investigating the Capitol insurrection. The lawsuit from the DC attorney general’s office against the Proud Boys and Oath Keepers hard right groups came as the House rules committee had been discussing this morning the “frantic” texts sent by Republican lawmakers and Fox News star punditry hosts while the Capitol insurrection was underway on January 6. These came up in the closed-door meeting of the special House panel last night over whether to recommend that then-White House chief of staff Mark Meadows should be criminally charged with contempt of Congress for halting his cooperation with the panel’s investigation into the Capitol attack. Congressman Jamie Raskin read some of them out at the rules committee public hearing this morning, recounting how certain Republican lawmakers, Fox hosts and even Donald Trump’s eldest son, Don Trump Jr, contacted Meadows begging him to get the-then president to take decisive action to call on the insurrectionists to cease their riot and invasion. It’s not clear why Don didn’t call his dad directly, nor did Sean Hannity, who has talked to Trump on the phone probably hundreds of times at this point. Raskin cites the texts referring to: “GOP lawmakers and others sending frantic messages, saying ‘we are under siege...Mark, protesters are literally storming the Capitol, breaking windows...our doors, is Trump going to do something?” Raskin says: “Donald Trump Jr - ‘he’s got to condemn this...’ excrement [Jr wrote shit, not excrement, but Raskin is being polite on Capitol Hill] ‘asap. The Capitol Police tweet is not enough.’ Jr saying ‘we need an Oval Office address’.” To go back a little way, prior to today’s lawsuit by the attorney general of the District of Columbia, the House select committee investigating the Capitol attack just last month issued subpoenas to the leaders of the far-right Proud Boys and Oath Keepers groups, with its investigation directly focusing for the first time on the instigators of the violence at the 6 January insurrection. The chair of the select committee, Bennie Thompson, the Democratic representative from Mississippi, said in a statement those subpoenas reflected the panel’s interest in uncovering possible connections between the paramilitary groups, efforts to subvert the results of the 2020 election and the Capitol attack, Hugo Lowell reported at the time. And going a bit further back, in looking at how these groups are powerfully driven by white supremacist beliefs, the Guardian’s Lois Beckett drew a line from January 6 to the groups at the far-right rally in Charlottesville, Virginia, in 2017 that tried to stop the removal of the statue of Confederate General Robert E Lee (which stayed up until July this year), chanted racist slogans and violently attacked anti-racism protesters and liberal activists. As she wrote on January 8: The playbook for the Maga [the Make America Great Again Trump campaign slogan] invasion of the nation’s Capitol building has been developing for years in plain sight, at far-right rallies in cities like Charlottesville, Berkeley and Portland, and then, in the past year, at state capitols across the country, where heavily armed white protesters have forced their way into legislative chambers to accuse politicians of tyranny and treason. “No one should be surprised,” said Sarah Anthony to the Guardian back in January, a Black state lawmaker who was on the legislative floor in Michigan’s Capitol on 30 April 2020, when hundreds of anti-lockdown protesters, including white militia members with guns, tried to force their way inside. “This has been escalating in every corner of our country for months.” Read the report here on: From Charlottesville to the Capitol: how rightwing impunity fueled the pro-Trump mob. The DC lawsuit adds: “In the weeks leading up to the 2020 Presidential Election, the Proud Boys, Oath Keepers, their leadership, and certain members and affiliates of both groups openly advertised their willingness to use violence to support their political agenda, including their efforts to reelect then-President Trump. It also reminds us of Donald Trump’s instruction from the debate podium in the fall of 2020, during the peak final months of the election campaign, that the Proud Boys should “stand by” and notes that: “During and following the debate, the Proud Boys leadership immediately took to the social media application Parler to show support for a violent response following President Trump’s statement.” The Oath Keepers group, the lawsuit notes sought to preserve Trump’s power after he lost the White House by saying: “All he has to do is call us up. We WILL answer the call” and the DC attorney general’s office pointing out that: “Based on past behavior, Oath Keepers members were willing to uphold that pledge using violence” and part of a plan of action should Joe Biden win the 2020 election would be “looking down the sights of a rifle at our fellow Americans.” “Oath Keepers publicly trumpeted the idea that members were standing ready to engage in a civil war, tweeting from the group’s account: ‘We ARE on the verge of a HOT civil war. Like in 1859. That’s where we are’,” the lawsuit states. The lawsuit filed against the far right Proud Boys and Oath Keepers groups says that as a result of those groups’ actions: The January 6th Attack on the Capitol, was not a protest or a rally. It was a coordinated act of domestic terrorism. Would-be insurgents from across the country came to the District, marched through its streets, and ultimately gathered at the United States Capitol, ready and eager to carry out a violent attack on the lawful operation of government. Then, as the Proud Boys, the Oath Keepers, their leadership, and certain of their members and affiliates had planned, Defendants and others rioted, broke through police barricades, and physically forced their way into the Capitol. In doing so, they threatened, assaulted, and injured those who tried to stop them, including officers of the District’s Metropolitan Police Department (MPD), and incited terror among those inside and around the building, including members of Congress who were discharging the official duties of their offices. In the wake of this assault, the Capitol was left in shambles, with the District left to deal with the aftermath of the violent disruption to what should have been the peaceful transition of presidential power. The lawsuit says Proud Boys International “is a US-based group that promotes and engages in political violence, including in service of its hate-motivated agenda”. And it describes the Oath Keepers as “a militia movement group united by baseless conspiracy theories arising from the idea that the federal government has been coopted by a nefarious group that is trying to strip United States citizens of their rights.” It further notes that: “Violence is an inextricable part of both organizations and a common link between them.” Karl Racine, the attorney general of the District of Columbia, in filing federal suit against the Proud Boys and the Oath Keepers, states that: “The District seeks compensatory, statutory and punitive relief and, by filing this action, intends to make clear that it will not countenance the use of violence against the District, including its police officers. The lawsuit filed in federal court moments ago lists as defendants not only the far right, white nationalist groups the Proud Boys (of Aubrey, Texas, per the suit) and Oathkeepers (of Las Vegas, Nevada), but also lists 32 individuals deemed to have associations to those groups, as well as noting there are 50 other unnamed defendants collectively referred to as “John and Jane Does 1 - 50”. Individuals include Henry “Enrique” Tarrio, a Proud Boys leader who is currently in jail in Washington, DC, for stealing a Black Lives Matter flag from a historic Black church in the city, after violently protesting against racial justice demonstrations. he was arrested on January 4 on his way to DC. The list also includes some individuals, such as Ryan Ashlock and William Chrestman, both of Kansas, who were indicted by a grand jury in February over the Capitol attack and cited by the Department of Justice as being members of the self-declared “western chauvinist” Proud Boys organization that has been declared a dangerous hate group by the federal authorities. Today’s lawsuit from DC accuses all of the defendants of conspiracy to terrorize “by planning, promoting and participating in the violent January 6, 2021 attack on the United States Capitol...with the express purpose of preventing members of Congress and then Vice President Michael Pence from discharging their official constitutional duties and declaring Joseph Biden the winner of the 2020 Presidential Election.” The attorney general of the District of Columbia, Karl Racine, has announced that his office is suing the far right groups the Proud Boys and the Oathkeepers “for conspiring to terrorize the District” in relation to the insurrection by extremist Donald Trump supporters at the US Capitol on January 6 this year. The lawsuit has been filed in federal court in Washington, DC, adapts a law used after the US Civil War and known as the Ku Klux Klan Act, chiefly to protect government officials and people’s rights. Jim McGovern, the Democratic chair of the House rules committee, lamented that Fox News hosts privately pushed for an end to the Capitol insurrection on January 6 while publicly downplaying the violence of that day. McGovern noted that Fox News has not mentioned the texts that some of the network’s hosts sent to Mark Meadows, the former chief of staff to Donald Trump, since they were revealed last night. “This would be a good time for these hosts to use their platforms to tell the American people the truth, just like they were privately texting Mark Meadows the truth on that terrible day,” McGovern said. “But I have to say that their silence is deafening.” The Massachusetts congressman expressed concern that Donald Trump and his allies are trying to “run out the clock” to keep the facts of January 6 from coming to light. “The lack of curiosity, the lack of outrage, the rationalizations why we shouldn’t be compelling people to testify -- it’s just stunning to me,” McGovern said. “We’re at a crossroads. Our democracy is being threatened, and this is serious.” McGovern also warned that America may see future attempts to overturn election results if lawmakers do not uncover all the details of January 6. “Coups very rarely succeed the first go-around, but they oftentimes do the second time around,” McGovern said. “If there’s ever a moment to be above politics, it’s now.” During the hearing aimed at taking up the contempt resolution against Mark Meadows, a Republican on the House rules committee, Michael Burgess, attempted to compare the January 6 insurrection to past protests held on Capitol Hill. “We’ve had bad protests here at the Capitol before. I was here when the Affordable Care Act went through the legislative process,” Burgess said. “You don’t think we had some really upset people outside the Capitol during those days? Of course we did. ... It’s what we do here.” Bennie Thompson, the chair of the House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection, vehemently rejected Burgess’ comparison. “I don’t know how you can draw a comparison between the Affordable Care demonstration and what occurred on January 6,” Thompson said. “People broke into this institution. They harmed people. They did all kinds of things. ... This is not the America that we live in.” Jim McGovern, the Democratic chair of the House rules committee, said the texts that Mark Meadows received from Fox News hosts and Donald Trump Jr on January 6 were “nothing short of a bombshell”. “The top personalities on Fox News, who are today trying to cover up the gravity of what happened on January 6, knew who to go to to stop the insurrection that day,” McGovern said at the start of the rules committee hearing to take up the contempt resolution against Meadows. McGovern added, “The president’s son knew who to go to. When Don Jr texted that ‘it has gone too far and gotten out of hand,’ what was ‘it’ that he was referring to? “The ‘it’ was the attempt to overthrow the election. The ‘it’ was the attempted coup in the United States of America. Yet the president did nothing in those critical moments.” It’s also worth noting that the texts messages were among the records that Meadows voluntarily turned over to the select committee before ending his cooperation with investigators, so there are likely even more bombshells in the records he has withheld. The House rules committee is now meeting to take up the resolution calling for Mark Meadows to be held in criminal contempt for defying a subpoena from the select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection. The meeting comes one day after the select committee voted to recommend criminal contempt charges against Meadows, who said last week he would no longer cooperate with investigators. The rules committee meeting will set up a full House vote on the contempt resolution, and the Democratic-controlled chamber is expected to vote to refer the matter to the justice department. The justice department will then determine whether to prosecute Meadows over the matter. A federal grand jury has already indicted former Trump aide Steve Bannon on two counts of contempt of Congress for defying his subpoena. Over the course of a near-hour-long business meeting, the House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection outlined in detail the materials Mark Meadows had turned over to the panel – and how Meadows then promptly refused to testify about those very records. Meadows turned over about 9,000 documents as part of a cooperation deal, the House select committee said, in his effort to engage with the inquiry to a degree in order to avoid an immediate criminal referral that befell other Trump administration aides who defied subpoenas. Among the materials Meadows turned over to the select committee was a PowerPoint presentation titled “Election Fraud, Foreign Interference and Options for 6 JAN”, which recommended Donald Trump declare a national security emergency to unilaterally return himself to office. But his cooperation with the select committee ended with the document production and Meadows informed the panel last week that he would not answer questions because he had learned that House investigators had subpoenaed call detail records for his personal phone. The select committee said Meadows’ refusal to testify constituted noncompliance with his subpoena, which was first issued in September, and initiated proceedings to recommend that the House hold him in contempt of Congress. During the hearing yesterday, Liz Cheney, the Republican vice-chair of the House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection, read text messages that Mark Meadows received on January 6. The texts, which Meadows turned over to the committee before ending his cooperation with investigators, include pleas from Fox News hosts and Donald Trump Jr urging the chief of staff to take action. “Mark, the president needs to tell people in the Capitol to go home. This is hurting all of us. He is destroying his legacy,” Fox News host Laura Ingraham wrote in one message to Meadows. “We need an Oval Office address. He has to lead now,” Trump’s eldest son told Meadows. “It has gone too far and gotten out of hand.” Multiple people inside the Capitol also pleaded with Meadows to convince Trump to deliver a message to his supporters, saying they were “helpless” as the insurrectionists stormed the building. “These text messages leave no doubt,” Cheney said. “The White House knew exactly what was happening here at the Capitol.” Bennie Thompson, the chair of the House select committee investigating the Capitol attack, said in an opening statement before the panel recommended Mark Meadows’ referral to the justice department that Donald Trump’s former White House chief of staff displayed willful noncompliance in his defiance of his subpoena. “It comes down to this,” Thompson said. “Mr Meadows started by doing the right thing: cooperating. He handed over records that he didn’t try to shield behind some excuse. But in an investigation like ours, that’s just a first step. “When the records raise questions – as these most certainly do – you have to come in and answer those questions. And when it was time for him to follow the law, come in, and testify on those questions, he changed his mind and told us to pound sand. He didn’t even show up.” The select committee said in the contempt report they were seeking charges against Meadows after he attempted to obstruct the investigation in myriad ways, from refusing to testify to frustrating their efforts to locate and discover documents relevant to the Capitol attack. The select committee also said Meadows should be prosecuted since he refused to testify even about information he voluntarily provided to the panel through his own document production and conceded were not covered by claims of executive privilege advanced by Trump. Greetings from Washington, live blog readers. The House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection voted last night to recommend holding Mark Meadows in criminal contempt for defying the panel’s subpoena. The vote came one week after Meadows, the former chief of staff to Donald Trump, said he would no longer cooperate with investigators, despite already having turned over some of his personal records to the committee. The recommendation sets up a full House vote on the matter, and the Democratic-controlled chamber is expected to refer the matter to the justice department. The justice department will then have to determine whether to prosecute Meadows over the matter. A federal grand jury has already indicted another former Trump aide, Steve Bannon, on two counts of contempt of Congress. The Meadows vote raises the stakes for other Trump allies who may be considering defying their subpoenas, and it carries significant implications for how much investigators will ultimately be able to learn about what unfolded on January 6. The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned.A federal judge has dismissed Donald Trump’s latest effort to hide his tax returns from a House of Representatives committee, ruling that Congress’ legislative interest outweighed any deference Trump should receive as a former president. The US district judge Trevor McFadden said in his ruling that Trump was “wrong on the law” in seeking to block the House Ways and Means Committee from obtaining his tax returns. McFadden also said it was within the power of the committee’s chairman to publish the returns if he saw fit. Trump was the first president in 40 years to not release his tax returns as he aimed to keep secret the details of his wealth and the activities of his family company, the Trump Organization. The committee sued in 2019 to force disclosure of the tax returns and the dispute lingers nearly 11 months after Trump left office. Patrick Strawbridge, a lawyer for Trump, told McFadden last month the committee had no legitimate reason to see the tax returns and had asked for them in the hope of uncovering information that could hurt Trump politically. House Democrats have said they need Trump’s tax returns to see if the Internal Revenue Service is properly auditing presidential returns in general and to assess whether new legislation is needed. McFadden, a Trump appointee, said the committee would be able to accomplish its stated objective without publishing the returns. He cautioned the panel’s Democratic chairman, Representative Richard Neal, that while he has the right to do so, “anyone can see that publishing confidential tax information of a political rival is the type of move that will return to plague the inventor”. In a statement, Neal said the ruling “is no surprise” and that “the law is clearly on the committee’s side”. Trump can still appeal the case. McFadden has put his ruling on hold for 14 days, allowing time for such an appeal.There were tears of joy, long embraces and sighs of relief, as thousands of New Zealanders boarded flights or hit the road on Wednesday, in what was, for many, the first reunion with friends and family in four months. The wider Auckland region was closed off in August as the city tried to contain an outbreak of Covid-19. In November, the government announced it would relax the border from 15 December to allow people to travel, due to the eligible population nearing the 90% double-vaccination rate. At midnight, the road checkpoints at the edge of the city were removed, and the queues of cars, some with boats and trailers attached, were given the green light to move. On Wednesday morning, airport terminals around the country buzzed with Aucklanders eager to leave and reunite with loved ones. About 12,000 people were expected to fly out of Auckland on Wednesday. It will mark the beginning of a 4000% increase in movement through the airport over the summer period, the airport said. MC Slave, the Fat Freddy’s Drop MC, who was at Auckland Airport en route to Wellington, told Stuff it was like “flying for the first time again”. Simon Giles, who had been separated from his wife, Lynda Thwaites, for the lockdown, waited for her in Queenstown with a bunch of homegrown red roses that he had pruned himself, Stuff said. The pair hugged as they were reunited on Wednesday morning, vowing never to be apart that long again. “He’s done a great job [with the roses],” Thwaites said. Queenstown mayor Jim Boult was at the airport to greet the first cohort of Auckland arrivals. “It is a bit of a watershed for us to see Aucklanders back. [They] are a massive part of our tourism industry. It was a bit of a celebration and nice to see people reconnecting with their families again.” Boult watched as families and couples waved and greeted one another. “Anybody coming into the terminal realised it was a special day.” The mayor hoped the day would mark the beginning of a massive increase in economic activity, while remaining Covid-free. Domestic travel dwindled from 23,000 passengers flying in and out of Auckland airport each day, to about 600 passengers a day while the restrictions were in place. Aucklanders wishing to leave the city must either be double-vaccinated, or if unvaccinated, produce a negative Covid-19 test within 72 hours of leaving. Vaccine passports will be required for boarding flights and ferries. The police will carry out spot-checks on the roads, and anyone caught not adhering to the rules could be pinged with a NZ$1000 (£509) fine. These rules will be in place for the core summer period, until 17 January. In Christchurch, therapy dogs will be on hand from Thursday to greet the influx of Auckland travellers. The period just prior to Christmas was expected to be the airport’s busiest time. “On the 23rd, we’ll have about 19,000 passengers through the domestic terminal,” Justin Watson. “That number doesn’t include travellers’ friends and family, so the terminal will be buzzing! “Travelling to be with loved ones is extra special, but some people will be a little anxious. That’s why we will have New Zealand’s first “airpawt ambassadors” on duty. Our P.A.W.S programme (Pups Assisting With Stress) is working with St John to have therapy dogs in the terminal for pats, cuddles and “paw-fives”. In Northland, there was a slow but steady arrival of Aucklanders, the Te Tai Tokerau border control leader Hone Harawira told TVNZ. Iwi (tribe) checkpoints were set up alongside police, to help protect the community, which has the lowest vaccination rate in the country. “As far as I know, maybe less than half a dozen have been turned around here and we’ve had probably thousands through by now,” Harawira said, speaking from Waipū. Harawira said the checkpoints are not about keeping Aucklanders out, but keeping Northland safe. “It’s about making sure those that do come are not going to impact adversely on our population.” New Zealand has so far reported about 12,698 Covid cases since the start of the pandemic, with 9,890 of those from the current outbreak. There have been 47 deaths of people with Covid-19. Its international borders will probably reopen to the rest of the world in 2022.Holidayers dreaming of summer road trips have been veered off track by a spike in rental car prices up to double pre-pandemic rates. The worldwide car shortage hitting new and used car retailers has jacked up rental prices by hundreds of dollars a week. Affordability is at its worst in Tasmania where rental cars cost tourists an average of $169 a day – more than anywhere else in Australia. There have been reports from around Australia of cars costing up to $400 a day. The shortage of rental cars in Tasmania has become so acute that the state government is offering local residents $1,000 to lend their cars out to visitors. But in place of car rentals, the humble train, bus and bicycle are also making a comeback. And rideshare services are capitalising on the steep prices. This year could be the perfect chance for interstate travellers to make the most of the silly season with nothing but a suitcase and a Covid vaccination certificate. Here’s how to get around without a rental: Train There may be no better way to get to know the countryside of a foreign place than by train. If you’re in the mood for adventure, a quintessential Queensland train journey starts in Cairns and drops you in Forsayth via the wet tropics of the Kuranda range and through the epic grassland of savannah country. From there, it’s an easy bus to Cobbold Gorge. The outback rail experience departs Cairns weekly, with tours included. Or, if Western Australia opens its borders as planned in January, topping the bucket list is the train from Perth to mining town Kalgoorlie. The original train line, which opened in 1971, cut the 653km journey from 14 hours down to eight, making it the fastest service in Australia at the time. The modern Prospector train is a little bit more refined – complete with a buffet, on-demand entertainment systems and air conditioning. Bus The bus can sometimes get a bad rap, and for what? It gets the job done, at its own leisurely pace. Buses have the benefit of covering more routes, and – at their best – can take passengers straight to their destination. They’re also often the cheapest option. A poorly kept secret for Canberrans without a car is Rixons buses – the only door-to-door service to the beach. If you fancy a trip to the south coast of New South Wales, which is notoriously hard to get to by public transport, Rixons offers a multi-day shuttle service from the Australian Capital Territory to your destination, whether you’re looking to stroll Pretty Beach or shuck down oysters in Mollymook. The best part is stopping at Braidwood for a pie on the way. Farther north, if you’re feeling adventurous, take two to three weeks to brave the popular 3,150km bus route from Sydney to Cairns, and discover Australia’s eastern coast. Greyhound buses are a great option for the trip. A hop-on, hop-off pass is valid for up to 90 days, starting in Sydney and meandering through Byron Bay, the Gold Coast, Fraser Island and Rockhampton. You can even stop off and sail the Whitsunday Islands on your way. Bicycle There’s nothing like your means of transport doubling as a form of exercise. Keen cyclists would be hard-pressed to go past Victoria’s high country – Alpine territory of deep ravines, lush vineyards and quaint gold rush towns that boast half of the state’s recognised mountain bike trails. The high country brewing trail is a great way to discover the region’s craft brewers or, for a more leisurely pace, the Murray to Mountains rail trail winds 116km from Wangaratta to Bright, with an offshoot to Beechworth. Be sure to stop off in Milawa’s gourmet region for wine and cheese. Travelling by bike is often easier when combined with trains and buses for longer distances – but be sure to check ahead if they will carry your bike and whether you need to book. Boat Before cars, before trains, before planes, there were boats. Slow, sure. But scenic? Absolutely. Unless you’re prone to sea sickness, the water is a magical way to travel and get to know Tasmania. A quarter of the island’s south-west is off-limits to vehicles, with some of its most beautiful features inaccessible unless by boat. Bruny Island Cruises offer a simple way to reach the island from Hobart, with options for eco-wilderness tours, gourmet sightseeing and day trips. Also starting in Hobart, it’s worth a quick hour-and-a-half bus to Triabunna to board the ferry to Maria Island, a national park boasting incredible views of the bay. Rideshare Rideshare services have been capitalising on eased lockdown restrictions. Uber has received more requests for trips over 30km in traditionally popular summer holiday destinations since August, from Byron Bay to the Mornington Peninsula. Trips over 30km have been up 21% in Cairns and 24% in the Gold Coast, data provided to Guardian Australia showed. The newly launched Uber Reserve is one alternative to the expensive car rental market. It allows riders to reserve an Uber ride up to 30 days in advance in most major cities, complete with a locked-in upfront price. For those desperate to drive, the company has also launched Uber Rent, which allows users to compare car hire options in certain areas. Another notable car-share option includes Coseats, modelled off Europe’s successful BlaBlaCar. The website allows drivers to offer a seat in their car for an agreed price, whether travelling from Lightning Ridge to Lismore or Melbourne to Newcastle.Scott Morrison has travelled to Queensland despite being identified as a casual contact of a person with Covid-19 after his attendance at a Sydney high school graduation. Morrison and a person with Covid-19 were among about 1,000 attendees of the Kincoppal-Rose Bay graduation gala at the International Convention Centre at Darling Harbour on Friday. A spokesperson for the prime minister confirmed he was deemed a casual contact by New South Wales authorities on Tuesday night but he has returned two negative PCR tests since the event. “As such NSW Health and the chief medical officer have advised he is not required to isolate,” the spokesperson said. “As per the NSW Health guidelines, the prime minister will be tested again on day six. The prime minister travelled to Queensland on Wednesday after getting advice from Queensland Health and the state’s chief medical officer who agreed that all the normal requirements have been met. Morrison was pictured at the event with members of the musical act Boys In The Band. In their social media posts the band said they had “performed two amazing 45 minute sets that had the entire dancefloor packed”. On Wednesday morning Morrison confirmed his trip to Queensland because Queensland authorities confirmed it was safe to travel. “That’s what living with the virus is,” he told 4BC Radio in Queensland. “The virus is there, Omicron is in Australia. We’re going to live with this virus not let it drag us back where we’ve been. “We’ve got one of the highest vaccination rates in the world. We’re about to tip over 90% double dose around the country … We’ve got to keep moving forward, we can’t slip back. “It’s great Queensland has opened up, but we need to make sure we’re using better and faster methods to ensure we can get people back in the community.” Queensland is a key election battleground but has been difficult to access because of border restrictions during the pandemic, with Labor leader Anthony Albanese racking up more trips to the sunshine state so far than the prime minister. Morrison has had a busy schedule since the Friday event, including a joint press conference with the South Korean president Moon Jai-in on Monday and dinner with him on Tuesday; and the announcement of mRNA manufacturing in Melbourne on Tuesday. Morrison told 4BC Radio the South Korean delegation were not concerned he was identified as a close contact and “were totally relaxed about it”. “The world’s living with it – so we’ve got to live with it.” Morrison was asked about two plane loads of people in Queensland being forced into quarantine for 14 days. He replied it was a matter for the Queensland government but hoped allowing travellers out by Christmas would be a priority. Morrison argued there was “nothing magical about 14 days”, suggesting that allow passengers out of quarantine if they tested every day would be a more “innovative” solution. Queensland later relaxed the ruling, reclassifying many on the flight as casual contacts, unless they were sitting in close contact with infected passengers. Morrison told reporters in Brisbane he welcomed the “commonsense” approach, but noted in other states including New South Wales close contacts only need to quarantine for seven days, with appropriate testing. On Wednesday, Morrison announced that the government will set up an online safety youth advisory committee to assist the eSafety Commissioner with issues of online privacy and bullying. Morrison told 4BC he would be “meeting with young people talking about the challenges they face with social media” because online safety had been a big focus of the government. “Our kids are growing up in a completely different digital world to the one we did and we need to keep them safe. “And it’s particularly true for women and for girls, the online space is a place they get trolled, they get harassed and they get abused.” Morrison also announced a reduced interest rate in the pension loan scheme to enable people of pension age to draw on the equity in their home to fund their retirement. On Wednesday Albanese will campaign in Braddon, one of two Tasmanian seats Labor hopes to pick up at the 2022 election.The US death toll from Covid-19 has passed 800,000, a once-unimaginable figure seen as doubly tragic given that more than 200,000 of those lives were lost after vaccines became available last spring. The figure represents the highest reported toll of any country in the world, and is likely even higher. The US accounts for approximately 4% of the world’s population but about 15% of the 5.3 million known deaths from the coronavirus since the outbreak began in China two years ago. The grim milestone comes as the world braces for rise in cases of the new Omicron variant, with the World Health Organization (WHO) warning it was spreading at an unprecedented rate. WHO chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus told reporters on Tuesday the variant had been detected in 77 countries and was probably present in most countries worldwide. Omicron, first detected by South Africa and reported to the WHO on 24 November, has a large number of mutations, which has concerned scientists. The new variant is posing a fresh threat as it gains a foothold in the US, though experts are not yet sure how dangerous it is. The number of Covid deaths in the US, compiled and released by Johns Hopkins University on Tuesday, is about equal to the population of Atlanta and St Louis combined, or Minneapolis and Cleveland put together. It is roughly equivalent to how many Americans die each year from heart disease or stroke. A closely watched forecasting model from the University of Washington projects a total of over 880,000 reported deaths in the US by 1 March. The deadly milestone comes as cases and hospitalisations are on the rise again in the US, a spike driven by the highly contagious Delta variant, which arrived in the first half of 2021 and now accounts for nearly all infections. Health experts lament that many of the deaths in the US were especially heartbreaking because the widely available and effective vaccines made them preventable. About 200 million Americans are fully vaccinated, or just over 60% of the population. That is well short of what scientists say is needed to keep the virus in check. “Almost all the people dying are now dying preventable deaths,” said Dr Chris Beyrer, an epidemiologist at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health. “And that’s because they’re not immunized.” When the vaccine was first rolled out, the country’s death toll stood at about 300,000. It hit 600,000 in mid-June and 700,000 on 1 October. Beyrer recalled that in March or April 2020, one of the worst-case scenarios projected upwards of 240,000 American deaths. “And I saw that number, and I thought that is incredible – 240,000 American deaths?” he said. “And we’re now past three times that number.” He added: “And I think it’s fair to say that we’re still not out of the woods.”Thanks for joining us with today’s coronavirus blog. We are now shutting this live feed down but you can follow all the latest Covid developments on our new blog here. Here is a detailed map showing Covid deaths per capita across US states. Map numbers shown below are from Johns Hopkins University. Health experts lament that many of the deaths in the United States were preventable by way of the vaccine, which became available in mid-December a year ago and was open to all adults by mid-April of this year. More than 200,000 lives were lost after the vaccine became practically available, according to the Associated Press. Dr Chris Beyrer, an epidemiologist at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, said: Almost all the people dying are now dying preventable deaths. And that’s because they’re not immunised. And you know that, God, it’s a terrible tragedy.” When the vaccine was first rolled out, the country’s death toll stood at about 300,000. It hit 600,000 in mid-June and 700,000 on 1 October. The number of deaths, as compiled by Johns Hopkins University, is about equal to the population of Atlanta and St. Louis combined, or Minneapolis and Cleveland put together. It is roughly equivalent to how many Americans die each year from heart disease or stroke. About 200 million Americans are fully vaccinated, or just over 60% of the population. That is well short of what scientists say is needed to keep the virus in check. How do US Covid deaths compare? The US has lost more lives to the coronavirus this year than in 2020 due to the more contagious Delta variant and people refusing to get vaccinated. Since the start of the year, over 450,000 people in the United States have died after contracting Covid-19, or 57% of all US deaths from the illness since the pandemic started, according to a Reuters tally. The deaths this year were mostly in unvaccinated patients, health experts say. It took 111 days for US deaths to jump from 600,000 to 700,000 and the next 100,000 deaths took just 73 days. The death rate in the United States was more than three times higher than in neighbouring Canada and 11 times more than Japan. When compared with the European Union, the United States has 1.3 times the per capita deaths reported in the last 11 months than the entire bloc. New infections in the United States are averaging around 120,000 a day, with Michigan contributing the most cases a day. Of the 10 states that reported the most deaths per capita in the last 11 months, eight were from the country’s south – Alabama, Georgia, Florida, Kentucky, Oklahoma, Mississippi, South Carolina and West Virginia. Roughly 60% of the US population has been fully vaccinated against Covid-19, CDC data showed. Here is a detailed Covid-19 map of the US with the latest cases state by state. Older Americans aged over 65 have suffered most from the country’s Covid pandemic with 1 in every 100 succumbing to a Covid-related death. About 75% of people who have died of the virus in the United States — or about 600,000 of the nearly 800,000 who have perished so far — have been 65 or older, according to the New York Times. One in 100 older Americans has died from the virus. For people younger than 65, that ratio is closer to 1 in 1,400. Despite representing a much higher vaccination rate than younger age groups, the demographic accounts for most of the 1,200 deaths from Covid-19 in the nation each day. The United States has surpassed 800,000 coronavirus-related deaths, according to recently updated data from Johns Hopkins University. A total of 800,266 deaths and 50,226,427 coronavirus cases were reported as of 15 December. The United States has the highest number of reported total Covid-19 deaths in the world, followed by Brazil and India. With just 4% of the world’s population, the country accounts for about 14% of all reported Covid-19 deaths and 19% of cases worldwide, according to Reuters. The grim milestone comes as the US reached 50 million confirmed cases of Covid-19 on Monday. The nation is now bracing for a potential surge in infections due to more time spent indoors with colder weather and the highly transmissible Omicron variant of the virus. A potential Omicron superspreader event in Melbourne, Australia, has just been identified According to Victorian health authorities, a person who later tested positive for the Omicron variant of Covid-19 attended two venues in the inner Melbourne suburbs of Fitzroy and Collingwood on Friday, 10 December. Here is a snapshot of all the key Covid developments: The UK has recorded another 59,610 Covid cases, the highest figure since early January. A further 633 confirmed Omicron cases were reported, taking the total to 5,346, according to the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA). In England, MPs have backed Covid passes being required at nightclubs and large venues as dozens of Tories rebelled against the government’s ‘plan B’ winter Covid measures. Face coverings in more indoor public places including museums and galleries in England are set to return as well as allowing fully vaccinated people who come into contact with a Covid case to take daily lateral flow tests for seven days, rather than self-isolating. Germany will exempt people who have had a booster jab from having to take a Covid test before entering some leisure facilities, federal and regional health ministers agreed on Tuesday. Italy has extended a Covid-19 state of emergency to 31 March. Denmark and Norway announced stricter Covid measures to battle soaring infection numbers. Austria is likely to recommend Covid booster shots for children aged 12 and over once four months have passed since their second vaccine dose, putting the country ahead of most European countries in terms of vaccinating children. Moderna’s chief medical officer, Dr Paul Burton, said Omicron “poses a real threat” and cautioned against claims it causes milder disease, warning that Omicron and Delta are likely to circulate together for some time. The UK will need a mini-furlough in the event that the Omicron variant forces the government into closing parts of the economy, the International Monetary Fund has said. Pfizer says its antiviral Covid-19 pill showed near 90% efficacy in preventing hospitalisations and deaths in high-risk patients, and recent lab data suggests the drug retains its effectiveness against the Omicron variant. France detected 130 cases of the Omicron variant but so far has no plans to impose new restrictions. South Korea marked its deadliest day since the start of the pandemic. Israel’s prime minister Naftali Bennett is in quarantine after catching a flight with someone who tested positive for Covid. Billie Eilish revealed that she had Covid-19 in August, and said that she felt sure she “would have died” had she not been vaccinated. China’s economically important Zhejiang province is battling a Covid outbreak that has left half a million people quarantined and some districts under business shutdown. The US air force discharged 27 people for refusing to get the Covid-19 vaccine, making them what officials believe are the first service members to be removed for disobeying the mandate. The US surpassed 50 million coronavirus cases, according to Johns Hopkins University data. Mainland China detected its second imported case of the Omicron variant, this time in its southern Guangdong province, following reports of the first case in the northern city of Tianjin on Monday. Africa is experiencing its fastest surge in Covid cases this year, with the number up 83% in the past week, although deaths remain low. High levels of previous exposure to three previous waves of Covid infection in South Africa may explain the relatively low levels of hospitalisation and severe disease in the current outbreak of the Omicron variant, rather than the variant itself being less virulent. Hello it’s Samantha Lock back with you on the blog as my colleague Leonie Chao-Fong takes a well-deserved break. First up, some Covid numbers out of Australia. The country’s most populous state of NSW has once again seen a significant jump in cases with 1,360 new Covid cases in the latest reporting period. Victoria recorded 1,405 new Covid cases and three deaths. Here’s what we know so far about Omicron’s spread in Australia. A further 633 confirmed Omicron cases were reported across the UK today, taking the total to 5,346, according to the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA). Data processing delays in England may have affected today’s figure, the agency added. We’re going to pause this live blog for now. For more UK Covid news, including reactions to the Commons vote to introduce more restrictions, head over to our UK blog. The World Health Organization (WHO) has warned that the Omicron variant is spreading at an unprecedented rate and is likely already present in most countries. The variant was first detected in southern Africa last month but has already been reported in 77 countries, WHO chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus told reporters. But, he stressed, “the reality is that Omicron is probably in most countries, even if it hasn’t been detected yet.” “Omicron is spreading at a rate we have not seen with any previous variant.” He also cautioned against “dismissing Omicron as mild”. “Surely, we have learned by now that we underestimate this virus at our peril,” he said. “Even if Omicron does cause less severe disease, the sheer number of cases could once again overwhelm unprepared health systems.” MPs have backed Covid passes being required at nightclubs and large venues across England, as dozens of Tories rebelled against the government’s “plan B” winter Covid measures to tackle the spread of the Omicron variant. The prime minister made a last-ditch call for his backbenchers to support the move in a private meeting an hour before the first vote, and managed to win over a few. However many still said they would oppose the move, branding the new rules illiberal, a “fundamental change in the relationship between the citizen and state” and a “knee-jerk” reaction. Labour said that 101 Conservatives voted against the government, by far the largest rebellion of Johnson’s premiership since the 2019 election. During a debate in the Commons on Tuesday, Tory MPs raised concerns over the recent problems some people have reported in ordering lateral flow tests, saying this would hinder some people’s ability to use a Covid pass to access some venues. Some backbenchers also claimed that forcing people to confirm their vaccine status was unethical, and there was no evidence it would avoid them passing Covid on because even those who have been vaccinated could catch and transmit the virus. Here’s the full story: The House of Commons has backed the UK government’s plan to introduce Covid passes for entry to large venues in England. From Wednesday, people in England will have to demonstrate proof of either two Covid-19 jabs or a negative test to gain entry into nightclubs and settings where large crowds gather, including unseated indoor events with more than 500 people. In a second vote, MPs also retrospectively approved the extension of mandatory face coverings for most indoor venues, including cinemas and theatres by 441 to 41 votes. Good evening from London, I’m Léonie Chao-Fong. Health officials in France today reported 63,405 infections, the second-highest number of new cases this year since April. Today’s figure has pushed the seven-day moving average of new cases to 49,506, marking the highest level this year. Earlier today, government spokesperson Gabriel Attal said there were no plans to impose new domestic restrictions but that officials were closely monitoring the situation in the UK in case they may need to impose travel restrictions. Germany will exempt people who have had a booster jab from having to take a Covid test before entering some leisure facilities, federal and regional health ministers agreed on Tuesday. The proposal, agreed by the health minister, Karl Lauterbach, and ministers from Germany’s 16 federal states, is aimed at encouraging people to get a booster shot and relieving testing capacity. However, a negative test result would still be required to enter hospitals and care homes to help protect more vulnerable people, according to the draft, reviewed by Reuters. Some 69.9% of the population has had two vaccinations and 23.8% have received a booster. The Bavarian health minister, Klaus Holetschek, told reporters that Germany was suffering from a vaccination shortage, and urged authorities to use “unconventional methods” - including direct contact with manufacturers - to boost supplies. Germany gets most of its vaccines through a joint EU procurement scheme. Currently, people who have had two vaccine doses or have recovered must show a negative Covid test to enter places with a high risk of spreading infection, such as night clubs or discos. “Scientific evidence suggests that a booster reduces both the risk of infection and the risk of further transmission. In addition, the lifting of the obligation to take a test could relieve the heavily used test capacity,” an earlier draft said. Like other European countries, Germany is struggling to curb a fourth wave of the coronavirus. Some 473 people were reported on Tuesday to have died with Covid. The Robert Koch Institute for infectious diseases also reported 30,823 new cases but the seven-day incidence fell to 375 per 100,000 people from 389.2 on Monday. The document also proposed that travellers who had been in a “virus variant area” 10 days before their arrival in Germany should take a PCR test prior to leaving and carry out a further PCR test upon arrival in Germany at the airport. Italy has extended a Covid-19 state of emergency to 31 March, government officials said, amid concerns over the spread of the Omicron variant. The state of emergency, which was introduced in January last year, gives greater powers to the central government, making it easier for officials to bypass the bureaucracy that smothers much decision-making in Italy. It was set to expire at the end of December. The Health Ministry also ruled that from 16 December to 31 January all visitors to Italy from European Union countries must take a test before departure. This requirement was already in force for many non-EU countries. Those who have not been vaccinated must also undergo a quarantine of five days on arrival. Italy’s daily coronavirus infections are rising steadily, with 20,677 new cases reported on Tuesday, and 120 deaths. Pressure on hospitals remains less acute than in nearby countries such as Austria and Germany, where the rise in cases in the fourth wave of the pandemic began earlier. Italy has so far reported 27 confirmed Omicron cases, the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) said. Italy has registered 135,049 deaths linked to Covid since February 2020, the second-highest toll in Europe after the UK and the ninth-highest in the world. It has reported 5.26 million cases to date. Scotland’s first minister reiterated her earlier plea for Scots to limit their social contacts around Christmas during a televised address to the nation at 6pm. Nicola Sturgeon told viewers: Speaking to you in these terms is the last thing I wanted to be doing a few days before Christmas. We’ve all had enough of this. But the threat from Omicron is severe. And we must respond seriously. Repeating her insistence that she is not asking people to cancel their main festive celebration, she went on: But in the run up to, and in the aftermath of Christmas, I am asking - I am appealing - to everyone to cut down as far as possible our contacts with people in other households. My key request to all of you today is - as far as you can, please minimise your indoor social interactions with other households at this time. She added that she recognised the hospitality trade was already being hard hit as people followed advice from Public Health Scotland to defer Christmas parties, and that her government was putting in place a package of financial support, including isolation payments. But, she added, the UK government were the only ones who could put in place critical support like furlough. Alongside the Welsh and Northern Irish governments, we are hoping they will do more. Public health authorities in Greece announced on Tuesday evening a further 130 Covid-related fatalities over the past 24 hours - the worst death toll the country has recorded since the start of the pandemic, when 134 fatalities were registered on 3 May this year. Greece, which has a population of around 11 million, has recorded 19,475 Covid-linked deaths to date. EODY, the public health body, confirmed a further 5,736 new infections overnight with 700 patients intubated in intensive care. More than 81% of that number were unvaccinated, it said. An estimated 25% of the adult population remains unvaccinated in Greece with infection rates surging. Resistance to immunisation is such that prime minister Kyriakos Mitsotakis recently unveiled a monthly fine for citizens over the age of 60 who refused to have the jab. The 100-euro penalty will come into effect on 16 January. A prominent media commentator, Giorgos Trangas, was among Tuesday’s fatalities. Trangas, who had diabetes, had been vociferously critical of vaccine mandates and lockdown measures. His death at the age of 71 has focused attention on the large demographic of elderly Greeks, who through fear of underlying illness or conviction, have yet to be inoculated against Covid. Access to Covid tests has been beset by problems for a second day running as the availability of lab-processed kits and rapid tests were hit by intermittent shortages, with Downing Street drafting in Amazon to clear delivery hold-ups. Slots for PCR tests – processed in laboratories – at walk-in or drive-through sites in some parts of England for people with coronavirus symptoms were unavailable and briefly there were none available in any part of the country. The booking website was later updated to show slots available in every region, although there were still none available in some counties. Home delivery PCR kits were available, the website said, but for the second day running, rapid lateral flow test kits only intermittently unavailable online. These could still be collected from pharmacies and other in-person sites, although there were reports of shortages at some pharmacies. Downing Street said ministers were working with Royal Mail and Amazon to ensure more of the lateral flow tests could be delivered. The prime minister’s official spokesman said: We are increasing the capacity, Royal Mail are freeing up additional delivery slots to become available in the next few days and we’re working with a range of businesses including Amazon to further expand capacity. He said 2.6m lateral flows tests were dispatched between 8pm on Saturday and 8pm on Sunday, compared with 584,000 on 13 November. The spokesman insisted there was significant testing capacity despite suggestions of difficulties finding PCR tests. He said: In terms of PCR availability, I don’t have the latest but I would envisage further booking possibilities will come online later and, of course, there are in-person opportunities as well. Read the full story here: UK public hit by second day of problems obtaining Covid tests Denmark and Norway have announced stricter Covid measures to battle soaring infection numbers, as authorities said the new Omicron variant was spreading fast and would probably become dominant in several EU countries within weeks or even days. Amid a varied continental picture that includes sharply declining case numbers in many countries, the two Scandinavian governments said they expected daily infections would soon exceed all previous records as the highly transmissible variant combined with and fuelled a wave still largely driven by the previous Delta mutation. Denmark, which like Britain carries out extensive rapid genetic sequencing to detect variants, is second only to the UK in the number of confirmed cases of the mutation, with 3,473 cases identified in a population of 5.8 million of which 80.6% are double jabbed. In the UK, at least three opposition MPs have tested positive for Covid before a crunch vote on coronavirus restrictions later today. You can read the full story here: The UK has recorded another 59,610 Covid cases, the highest figure since early January, as it faces what prime minister Boris Johnson has called a “tidal wave” on infections from the Omicron variant. A further 150 people died within 28 days of a positive test, according to the latest data from the government’s coronavirus dashboard. That is compared to 54,661 infections and 38 fatalities in the 24 hours prior. Austria is likely to soon recommend Covid booster shots for children aged 12 and over once four months have passed since their second vaccine dose, the health minister, Wolfgang Mückstein, said on Tuesday. The move would again put Austria ahead of most European countries in terms of vaccinating children. Some of its nine provinces including Vienna started vaccinating children over the age of five last month shortly before it was approved by the European Medicines Agency (EMA). Austria has accelerated its vaccination efforts since a surge in coronavirus infections last month that prompted a three-week national lockdown, which it began lifting last Sunday. “The National Vaccination Board will likely recommend tomorrow that we recommend the booster shot, i.e. the third vaccine dose, from the age of 12,” Mückstein told a news conference. “That means that four months after their second shot all those as of the age of 12 should also get their booster shot,” he added. That would lower the age at which that recommendation applies from 18 currently. The board is a panel of experts that advises the government. The government generally follows its recommendations. Roughly 69% of Austria’s population is fully vaccinated against Covid, one of the lowest rates in western Europe. The conservative-led government plans to make vaccinations compulsory, with hefty fines for holdouts. Africa is experiencing its fastest surge in Covid cases this year, with the number up 83% in the past week, although deaths remain low, the World Health Organization (WHO) said on Tuesday. The rise in cases is driven by the Delta and Omicron variants, the WHO said in a statement. The number of new Covid cases on the continent is currently doubling every five days, the shortest time frame reported this year. Africa’s low inoculation rates have encouraged viral mutations like the new Omicron variant to spread, according to health experts. The continent struggled to obtain vaccine doses until recently, and is facing challenges to distribute them including lack of funds, staff and equipment. As of Monday, only 20 African countries had vaccinated at least 10% of their population, according to the WHO. Some countries, like Democratic Republic of Congo and Chad, have vaccinated less than 1%, data collected by Reuters shows. “We are cautiously optimistic that deaths and severe illness will remain low in the current wave, but slow vaccine roll-out in Africa means both will be much higher than they should be,” said Dr Matshidiso Moeti, the WHO’s regional director for Africa. Africa recorded more than 196,000 new cases for the week ending on 12 December, up from around 107,000 the previous week, the WHO said. Deaths dropped by 19% in the same period, it said, and have averaged about 1,000 per week in the fourth pandemic wave. At the current pace, it will take until May 2022 before the continent reaches 40% vaccination coverage and August 2024 before it reaches 70%, the WHO said. The Omicron variant was estimated to be 2.9% of the Covid variants circulating in the United States as of 11 December, according to data from the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. For the week ending 4 December, Omicron constituted 0.4% of all the variants in the country, based on the specimens sequenced. The agency also estimated that the fast-spreading variant was 13.1% of circulating variants in New Jersey, New York, Puerto Rico and the US Virgin Islands for the week ending 11 December. Indonesia started vaccinating elementary school children aged 6-11 against Covid on Tuesday, becoming one of the few countries in Asia to start mass inoculations for young children. Vaccinations against the virus for this age group has been a sensitive issue in some countries. Europe has just started vaccinations for younger children, but countries are pursuing different strategies because lack of data has made winning over parents more difficult. Children and young people are seen as unwitting transmitters of the virus to high-risk people and experts say inoculating them is a critical step towards taming the pandemic. Indonesia’s campaign kicked off with 100 children using China’s Sinovac vaccine. They are among 26.5 million targeted for immunisation in Indonesia. Muhammad Avisena, 11, said the pain of the injection was worth it compared with potential suffering from becoming sick. “It will hurt more if exposed to Covid-19 because the lungs would be damaged and infected,” he told Reuters after his injection. His mother, Siti Nuriyah Safitri, said the vaccination would help children get back to school faster after nearly two years of disruption. “I feel bad for the children if the learning system stays this way,” she said. She added that at her son’s school only 50% of the children attend each day, with those not coming to school doing lessons online. Covid has infected 4.2 million people and killed more than 143,000 in Indonesia, where about 38% of the 270 million population have been vaccinated. In Asia, China has already started vaccinating children aged 3 and above, while Cambodia gave its first vaccines for young children in September. Singapore will soon start vaccinating children aged 5-11. The UK health secretary, Sajid Javid, has announced that all 11 countries on England’s coronavirus travel red list will be removed from 4am on Wednesday. Javid said the travel red list is less effective than it was because Omicron is spreading so much in the UK. The changes mean arrivals from those countries will no longer have to go into hotel quarantine. Following the announcement, the transport secretary Grant Shapps said all current testing measures remain in place and will be reviewed in the first week of January. “As always, we keep all our travel measures under review and we may impose new restrictions should there be a need to do so to protect public health,” he added. Scots face renewed limits on social mixing over the festive period in an attempt to slow the spread of the Omicron variant while the vaccine booster programme accelerates across the country. Emphasising that nobody should cancel their Christmas Day plans, Nicola Sturgeon urged people socialising before and immediately after 25 December to limit their indoor socialising to no more than three households. Scotland’s first minister has asked the public to keep festive celebrations “as small as your family circumstances allow”, to make sure all those gathering have been vaccinated and have done a test in advance, to keep rooms ventilated and follow strict hygiene rules. She said: I want to be clear, I am not asking anyone to cancel Christmas but in the run up to and in the aftermath I am asking people to reduce contact. We are not banning household mixing in law… but we are asking everyone to cut down as far as possible the number of people outside their households they are interacting with as of now. Please minimise social mixing with other households as much as possible. We ask that you limit the number of households to three, and make sure you test before you go. We are not asking you to cancel or change your plans and we are not proposing limits on the size of gatherings. But we will issue guidance to make Christmas safer. I would not be doing so if I didn’t believe it was absolutely necessary. Read more on this story here: Nicola Sturgeon announces new Covid advice for Scotland High levels of previous exposure to three previous waves of Covid infection in South Africa may explain the relatively low levels of hospitalisation and severe disease in the current outbreak of the Omicron variant, rather than the variant itself being less virulent. The suggestion was made by vaccine expert Shabir Mahdi of the University of the Witwatersrand, who has led vaccine trials in the country, and warned that South Africa’s experience of Omicron might not be a reliable indicator for how the Omicron outbreak unfolds in other countries. In a lengthy interview with the Global Health Crisis Coordination Center, Mahdi cited a recently completed seropositivity survey – the percentage of population who have already been infected – in Gauteng province, which has been at the centre of the Omicron outbreak, that suggested some 72% had experienced a previous infection of coronavirus. That is well over three times the rate of previous infections detected by a similar survey during the Beta variant outbreak a year ago where seropositivity was some 20%. While Mahdi said that emerging evidence pointed to the fact that Omicron was both more infectious and more able to evade antibody protection, he suggested that other mechanisms at work in acquired immunity through infection could explain the lower levels of hospitalisations and severe illness. While the UK has a seropositivity rate above 90%, South Africa’s experience may be very different to the UK’s in terms of the Omicron, with the UK having an older population and different vulnerabilities to disease. Read the full story here: South Africa: previous infections may explain Omicron hospitalisation rate Two doses of Pfizer/BioNTech’s Covid vaccine appear to have given 70% protection against hospitalisation in South Africa in recent weeks, according to a major real-world study on the potential impact of Omicron. The study released by South Africa’s largest private health insurance administrator, Discovery Health, which co-led the study with the South African Medical Research Council. It was based on more than 211,000 positive Covid test results from 15 November to 7 December, around 78,000 of which were attributed to Omicron. Two doses of the vaccine offered 93% protection against earlier variants, according to Pfizer and BioNTech. It also found two Pfizer doses provide 33% protection against infection. South Africa is using the Pfizer/BioNTech and Johnson &amp; Johnson vaccines in its Covid immunisation campaign, with more than 20 million Pfizer doses administered so far. Ghana’s president has warned EU lawmakers that the bloc’s drive to deliver Covid booster jabs could hamper vaccinations in Africa, as he hit out at travel bans over the Omicron variant. “The unsavoury politics of vaccine nationalism we’re witnessing could … potentially derail global efforts made [to contain] the pandemic to date,” Nana Akufo-Addo said in a speech at the European Parliament on Tuesday. “We, like the World Health Organization, are worried that the phenomenon of hoarding vaccines will worsen even further, as countries begin to administer booster shots,” he said. His comment come as the WHO emergency director, Mike Ryan, said getting an initial course of Covid vaccines to unprotected groups all over the world should remain a top priority before offering booster shots to vulnerable groups. A major study on Tuesday found that two doses of Pfizer/BioNTech’s Covid vaccine appear to have given 70% protection against hospitalisation in South Africa in recent weeks, suggesting weaker efficacy against the Omicron variant. “People are always asking should we be going for a primary vaccination or boosters, the reality is we should be doing both. We should be focusing on getting those who are unvaccinated vaccinated as quickly as possible and then being able to give booster doses to those in vulnerable groups,” Ryan told an online event on Tuesday. Akufo-Addo said the vaccination rate in Africa was lagging at under 10% and that countries were still not able to get vaccines in the “requisite numbers”. Richer nations, including EU members, the US and UK, are scrambling to administer booster doses after the discovery of Omicron. Experts say a third dose of Covid vaccines offer better protection against the variant. The Ghanaian leader also blasted “the decision taken by countries, including those in the EU, to single out African countries for the imposition of travel bans on a variant that has been discovered in over 40 countries”. Several countries, along with the 27-nation European Union, have imposed travel curbs on countries, mainly in southern Africa, after South Africa sounded the alarm about Omicron. “The world should be grateful to the South African scientists whose knowledge and expertise in genomic sequencing, enabled them to identify the new variant,” Akufo-Addo said. “Plaudits, not the condemnation of their peoples, should have been their portion.” Pfizer Inc has said final analysis of its antiviral Covid-19 pill still showed near 90% efficacy in preventing hospitalisations and deaths in high-risk patients, and recent lab data suggests the drug retains its effectiveness against the Omicron variant, Reuters reports. The US drugmaker last month said the oral medicine was about 89% effective in preventing hospitalisations or deaths when compared with placebo based on interim results in about 1,200 people. The data disclosed on Tuesday includes an additional 1,000 people. Nobody in the trial who received the Pfizer treatment died, compared with 12 deaths among placebo recipients. The Pfizer pills are taken with the older antiviral ritonavir every 12 hours for five days beginning shortly after onset of symptoms. If authorised, the treatment will be sold as Paxlovid. Pfizer also released early data from a second clinical trial showing that the treatment reduced hospitalisations by around 70% in about 600 standard-risk adults. “It’s a stunning outcome,” Pfizer chief scientific officer Mikael Dolsten said in an interview. “We’re talking about a staggering number of lives saved and hospitalisations prevented. And of course, if you deploy this quickly after infection, we are likely to reduce transmission dramatically.” Dolsten said he expects authorisation for use in high-risk individuals from the US Food and Drug Administration and other regulatory agencies soon. He does not believe an FDA advisory panel meeting will be needed. “We’re in very advanced regulatory dialogues with both Europe and the UK, and we have dialogues with most of the major regulatory agencies globally,” Dolsten said. There are currently no oral antiviral treatments for Covid-19 authorised in the US. Dolsten said recent laboratory testing showed that activity against the protease of the Omicron variant is as “good as basically any Sars-Cov-2 variant of concern”. The company has said it can have 180,000 treatment courses ready to ship this year and plans to produce at least 80m more in 2022. Dolsten said Pfizer is looking to expand that output further as new variants, like Omicron, could push the need for antivirals substantially higher. Current vaccines appear to be less effective at preventing infection with Omicron. Schools in the Netherlands will close a week early for Christmas this year as coronavirus infections remain high and hospitals struggle with a wave of patients, the Dutch broadcaster RTL said on Tuesday. Schools will close from 21 December at the latest in an effort to stop children from infecting older family members during Christmas, RTL reported citing government sources. The government had said it would consider the early Christmas break at a meeting to discuss coronavirus policies on Tuesday. The prime minister, Mark Rutte, is expected to announce the new measure and likely an extension of restrictions that have been in place since 28 November at a news conference at 7pm on Tuesday. These include the closing of all restaurants, bars, non-essential stores and other public places from 5pm to 5am, the barring of all spectators at sporting events, and advice to work from home as much as possible. Infections in the country of 17.5 million have dropped from record levels following the introduction of the nighttime lockdown, but remain relatively high at around 85 per 100,000 inhabitants. The number of patients in hospital with Covid has remained among the highest levels of the year and hospitals throughout the country have been ordered to postpone all non-emergency operations for weeks to free up beds in intensive care units. As infections remain highest among young children, experts have advised the government to close schools a week earlier than planned, on 17 December, to better protect older family members during Christmas. The government has repeatedly said it would do whatever it could to prevent schools from closing, but on Tuesday acknowledged the option was back on the table. “It’s a tough decision to make”, the education minister, Arie Slob, told reporters before a government meeting to decide on the measure. “We will have to look very closely again at what is necessary.” So far, the Netherlands has registered almost 2.9 million coronavirus infections, with 20,140 related deaths. In the UK, Dr Paul Burton, chief medical officer at Moderna, has been speaking to MPs on the Commons science and technology committee. Burton said he expects data in the coming days to show how well the Moderna booster improves protection against the Omicron variant. He cautioned against claims, largely from South Africa, that the variant is causing milder disease, and warned that Omicron and Delta are likely to circulate together for some time. “I do not think Omicron is a milder, less severe version of the current virus,” he told the committee. He added: The idea it will push Delta out of the way and take over may occur in the future, but I think in the coming months these two viruses are going to co-exist, and Omicron, which I would maintain is actually a severe disease, will now infect people on a background of very, very strong Delta pressure. It will also lead to a situation where individuals will become co-infected … which gives the opportunity for this virus to further evolve and mutate which is a concerning and worrying situation. We certainly don’t have to panic, we have many many tools at our disposal, we’ve learnt so much about this virus over the last two years, and we can continue to fight it, but I think Omicron poses a real threat. When you look at the data in SA about 15% of people who are hospitalised are in the intensive care unit, and while there’s variability, if you look back earlier in the year, at a time of delta surge in August, those numbers are about the same, 15%. So while the mortality rate we are seeing right now is mercifully lower, I think as a disease it is a very fit virus and it’s severe. India is struggling to export its surplus of Covid vaccines as logistical hurdles delay their use in many countries despite low levels of inoculation, vaccine producer the Serum Institute of India (SII) and a government official said on Tuesday. Reuters reports that the SII, the world’s biggest vaccine maker that produces the AstraZeneca, Novavax and Sputnik Covid shots, has already announced plans to temporarily halve output of the AstraZeneca drug until more orders came, including possibly through boosters. “All over the world, there is enough supply but it is getting the jabs in arms, which will take some time,” SII chief executive Adar Poonawalla told a virtual conference organised by the Confederation of India Industry. “Certain countries have only vaccinated to the tune of 10 or 15% of the population, they really need to go to 60-70%. Demand is very much there, but it’s going to be spread out now that the supply has superseded the monthly demand,” he said. Top Indian health official, Vinod Kumar Paul, told the event that current global Covid vaccine production was enough to reach the nearly 3.6 billion who have yet to receive a shot. “India is in a position to offer vaccines, but is there traction [for it]?” he asked. “The debate should be how do we accelerate the delivery, raise the capacity of absorption in many countries, particularly in the African continent.” Africa’s disease control body said late last month many of its nations were struggling with vaccine logistics, as inflows increased suddenly after months of delays. Only some 8% of Africa’s total population of about 1.3 billion is fully immunised. India, with the same population, has fully vaccinated 37%, with the goal to administer two doses in all of its 939 million adults by next month. India’s vaccine demand was only about 252 million doses in the past month, against a domestic production capacity of more than 345 million a month of its three main approved shots alone. The SII’s monthly output of the AstraZeneca vaccine, which it brands Covishield, has nearly quadrupled since April to 250 million doses. The shot dominates India’s immunisation programme but the company has no further orders from the government. The Covax platform that distributes vaccines mainly to low-income countries has sought only about 40 million doses of Covishield from the SII between November and December after New Delhi lifted a ban on exports. Covax, which has an option to buy up to 550 million Covishield doses, is no longer as reliant on the SII as it was before India abruptly stopped vaccine exports in April to inoculate its own as infections surged. Many vaccines have been approved since then. “It is critical that if India is to remain the pharmacy to the world that it continues to supply even during difficult times,” Seth Berkley, CEO of Covax backer Gavi, told the industry event. “Otherwise, countries will need to look at alternate suppliers.” In the UK, the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation is “discussing” vaccinating children from the age of five, the chair of the committee’s Covid-19 panel, Prof Wei Shen Lim, has said. He added that it is waiting for the vaccines to be approved by the UK health regulator, the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency. When asked if the JCVI will make a decision before Christmas, Prof Lim said: “I would expect so, we try and keep in step with the approval process.” Mainland China has detected its second imported case of the Omicron variant, this time in its southern Guangdong province, following reports of the first case in the northern city of Tianjin on Monday. The patient in Guangdong was a returnee from overseas, China’s health authorities said on Tuesday. Curiously, he entered the country on 27 November and has had multiple negative tests prior to the diagnosis. The arrival of the Omicron variant in China comes as the authorities are racing to contain an emerging outbreak of the Delta variant in the country’s eastern Zhejiang province. China’s National Health Commission reported 51 new community infections on Monday, 44 of which were found in Zhejiang. More than 50,000 out of its 64.5 million residents have been placed in mandatory centralised quarantine facilities in a bid to curb the spread of the strain. About 500,000 residents are also being monitored for the virus. Some local governments have urged workers not to travel home during the upcoming lunar new year holidays in response to the rising infections. Meanwhile, the number of Omicron cases in Hong Kong – which runs a separate health system – has risen to eight on Tuesday. The authorities said the patient is 50-year-old who entered the territory from Tanzania, South Africa and Kenya via Qatar last Friday. The Hong Kong authorities also noted that all eight Omicron cases identified in the city were identified at the airport or quarantine premises, therefore there has been no community spread. With additional reporting by Rhoda Kwan At the Commons science committee, Dr Angelique Coetzee, chair of the South African Medical Association has accused the UK of a “knee-jerk response” in bringing in a travel ban within 24 hours of Omicron being announced in South Africa last month. It would have been better to get people to wear masks, socially distance and keep away from large gatherings, she added. While proof of vaccination or a negative lateral flow test for certain events could help reduce the spread of the virus, Dr Coetzee said lockdowns were too restrictive. “What I think is important to do is to get people vaccinated, get people to wear their masks, and get people to stay away from big gatherings. That should be the biggest plan at this stage to have in place,” she told MPs. Dr Coetzee said she agreed with data released in South Africa today that the severity of disease might be 29% lower than in the country’s previous wave. But she added that the numbers were uncertain and that in many cases, doctors did not know which variant patients were hospitalised with. Further data from South Africa suggest that a double dose of Pfizer, without a booster, provides 33% protection against Omicron infection, down from 80% with Delta, and 70% protection against severe illness, down from 93% protection against Delta. In the UK, most older people have received booster shots of Pfizer on top of their original two doses. “They can still get breakthrough infections,” Dr Coetzee said, “however, the breakthrough infections that we are seeing in primary healthcare are mild.” My colleague Andrew Sparrow has more from the committee over on the UK politics live blog: Good morning from London. I’m Lucy Campbell, I’ll be bringing you all the latest global developments on the coronavirus pandemic for the next eight hours. Please feel free to get in touch with me as I work if you have a story or tips to share! Your thoughts are always welcome. Email: lucy.campbell@theguardian.com Twitter: @lucy_campbell_ France has confirmed it has detected 130 cases of the Omicron variant. Government spokesperson Gabriel Attal said there were no plans to impose new domestic restrictions, although they were closely monitoring the situation in the UK in case they may need to impose travel restrictions. South Korea has marked its deadliest day since the start of the pandemic. The country, which had done a comparatively good job at containing the virus – with fewer than 5,000 deaths in total – on Tuesday reported 94 deaths from Covid-19 during the previous 24 hours, while critical cases reached a record high of 906. A person who was on Israel’s prime minister Naftali Bennett’s flight back from the United Arab Emirates has tested positive for Covid-19. Bennett is currently in quarantine in line with Israel’s regulations. Billie Eilish has revealed that she had Covid-19 in August, and said that she felt sure she “would have died” had she not been vaccinated. Norway’s government said it plans to reintroduce loan guarantees for companies facing liquidity shortages as a result of recently introduced lockdown measures. The government on Monday announced a four-week ban on serving alcohol in bars and restaurants, a closing of gyms and swimming pools to most users and mandatory work-from-home for those who can. China’s economically important Zhejiang province is battling a Covid outbreak that has left half a million people quarantined and some districts under business shutdown. The US air force has discharged 27 people for refusing to get the Covid-19 vaccine, making them what officials believe are the first service members to be removed for disobeying the mandate. The US surpassed 50 million coronavirus cases, according to Johns Hopkins University data. Scotland’s first minister Nicola Sturgeon is expected to address parliament in Edinburgh at about 2.05pm today, and announce new measures to try and stave off the spread of the Omicron variant. The UK parliament will vote on a series of anti-Covid measures today. There is expected to be a significant number of rebel Conservative MPs who will vote against their own government and the proposed public health measures. Deputy prime minister Dominic Raab caused confusion in the UK this morning by saying there were 250 people in hospital with the Omicron variant and it had caused “deaths”, before having to confirm the true numbers are one death and ten people in hospital. Andrew Sparrow has a very busy UK politics and Covid live blog today. Lucy Campbell will be here shortly to bring you the rest of the day’s global coronavirus news. This is my last day on the live blog until after Christmas, so from me, Martin Belam, I’d like to say thank you to all the readers who have followed this blog during the year, especially those who have been in touch, or spotted a mistake and helped me correct it. I hope all of you enjoy a great Christmas or however you celebrate during the holiday season. I will see you back here again in a couple of weeks. Take care and stay safe. At the Commons science committee in the UK, Dr Angelique Coetzee, chair of the South African Medical Association, has given evidence about the impact of Omicron in South Africa. She said Omicron was at least as transmissible as the Delta variant. She said it generally produced a mild disease. It was different for people in hospital, she said. Most people in hospital were unvaccinated, she said. She told the MPs that they did not do genomic sequencing for most patients, so the hospital statistics did not differentiate between Delta patients and Omicron patients. But she said intensive care units were “not overwhelmed” with Covid cases. In an article published in UK newspaper the Daily Mail today, Coetzee argues that the UK government is over-reacting. She says: Yesterday there were only 11 Covid-related deaths in South Africa, far fewer than the 578 weekly average reported at Delta’s peak. If Omicron really were such a deadly variant, we would expect the numbers to have shot up, yet that simply isn’t happening here. This makes it all the more peculiar to see what’s happening in the UK. This huge over-reaction is scaring people unnecessarily, and if your government does decide go to for a hard lockdown in the new year, that could end up doing far more harm than good. In our Science Weekly podcast today, Madeleine Finlay speaks to the Guardian’s science editor, Ian Sample, about the spread of Omicron, and what we can do to prevent a tidal wave of cases. Russia’s Sputnik V vaccine has still not been approved by medical regulators for the European Union, which has sparked some terse diplomatic exchanges. Reuters report that Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov told reporters today that the certification process was under way. They quote him saying: There is indeed some information that needs to be provided for certification that we have not yet provided because we had a different understanding of what exactly the information should be and how it should be presented. We have different standards and so on. So we are gradually adapting to these requirements and we hope for a positive result from this work. Anthony Costello is professor of global health at UCL, and a former director at the World Health Organization. He writes today saying the richest countries are vaccine hoarders – try them in the international court: The situation is dire, and yet one year after the discovery of multiple effective vaccines, we still face a vaccine apartheid. Patent-protected vaccines are sold at great profit to wealthy countries by a few pharmaceutical companies. The global vaccine price ranges from $2 (for AstraZeneca) to $37 per dose, with mRNA vaccines such as Pfizer/BioNTech and Moderna the most expensive. Between January 2020 and December 2021 the market capitalisations of Moderna rose from $6.9bn to $134bn; Pfizer from $206bn to $314bn; and BioNTech from $6.6bn to $84bn. It is clear that the existing efforts to distribute vaccines to poorer countries are not working. The Covax Advanced Market Commitment was set up in September 2020 by the Global Alliance Vaccine Initiative, in alliance with the World Health Organization, to accelerate the development and manufacture of Covid-19 vaccines, as well as diagnostics and treatments, and to guarantee rapid, fair and equitable access to them for people in all countries. Donor countries would thereby fund guaranteed volumes of vaccines from manufacturers to supply low- and middle-income countries. The Covax scheme’s target was to deliver 2bn doses by the end of this month. And yet, by 5 December, well over a year since its launch, the Covax scheme had shipped only 669m doses to 144 countries, with just 250m donated to the poorest 95 countries at time of writing. Not only is it way off track, millions of vaccine doses donated to African countries have passed their expiry dates and have either been sent back or destroyed. Read more here: Anthony Costello – The richest countries are vaccine hoarders. Try them in international court A person who was on Israeli prime minister Naftali Bennett’s flight back from the United Arab Emirates has tested positive for Covid-19, the prime minister’s office said on Tuesday. Associated Press reports Bennett returned to Israel on Monday from the two-day trip to the Gulf state, the first by an Israeli leader to the country. He was in a three-day quarantine on Tuesday as per health ministry regulations, which require all returning travellers to Israel, even those vaccinated, to self-isolate. He was expected to take a coronavirus test on Wednesday, also in line with health regulations, and then end his quarantine if he tests negative, the prime minister’s office said. Bennett’s office did not specify who the person was who tested positive. Bennett was meant to be accompanied by Israeli and foreign journalists and a sizeable entourage on the visit. But a day before his departure, journalists were notified that because of concerns over Omicron, they would not be joining and that Bennett’s entourage would be downsized. Andrew Sparrow has launched the combined UK politics and Covid live blog for the day. I expect it is going to be very lively. You can find him here: I’ll be continuing with the latest global coronavirus news on this live blog. Billie Eilish has revealed that she had Covid-19 in August, and said that she felt sure she “would have died” had she not been vaccinated. Appearing on Howard Stern’s US radio show on Monday, Eilish said: “The vaccine is fucking amazing and it also saved [her brother/musical collaborator] Finneas from getting it; it saved my parents from getting it; it saved my friends from getting it.” Eilish said she was unwell with the virus for two months and that she was still experiencing undisclosed side effects. “I want it to be clear that it is because of the vaccine I’m fine,” she said. “I think if I weren’t vaccinated, I would have died, because it was bad. “When I say it was bad, I more just mean that it felt horrible. But really, in the scheme of Covid, it was not bad. You know what I mean? When you’re sick, you feel fucking horrible.” Read more of Laura Snapes’ report here: Billie Eilish – I would have died from Covid-19 if I hadn’t been vaccinated Helen Stokes-Lampard is a GP in Lichfield and the chair of the Academy of Medical Royal Colleges, and she writes for us today, saying we must be frank about this booster campaign – and what it means for NHS waiting lists: But it’s not just the challenge of resources needing to be met that we must be ready for. There will be a need for huge amounts of patience and understanding by patients, many of whom have already waited too long for the tests, treatments and procedures they have been prescribed and promised. We had only just begun to tackle the backlog; with further delays, there will inevitably be a negative impact on the health and wellbeing of those patients waiting. We must also face the harsh fact that the waiting list itself will lengthen. It will also require – and this may be no less challenging for many – everyone to do their bit by going back to proper social distancing, getting ourselves fully vaccinated and appropriately boosted. It is inevitable that tough choices need to be made. But, that doesn’t mean irresponsible choices. If a patient needs to be seen in the NHS, they should be seen, and while it won’t necessarily feel like business as usual for the next few weeks it certainly shouldn’t feel as if no regular business is being done at all. And to be clear, no one is saying that we should “hit the pause button” on urgent care – that really does need to continue as closely as we can come to business as usual. And this is where we can all help: the more beds that are taken up with Covid patients, the fewer beds there are for those with other serious conditions who have been admitted via A&amp;E departments. If that part of the system gets clogged, it makes it harder to bring people in by ambulance. Covid will hit all of us if we aren’t very careful. Read more here: Helen Stokes-Lampard – We must be frank about this booster campaign – and what it means for NHS waiting lists Scotland’s First Minister Nicola Sturgeon is expected to address parliament in Edinburgh at around 2.05pm today, and announce new measures to try and stave off the spread of the Omicron variant. Yesterday health secretary Humza Yousaf refused to be drawn on what might be announced, saying: I think it’s inevitable we will announce additional protective measures. I would be reluctant to get into detail on that because we’re working through that detail. The First Minister will rightly update parliament first tomorrow. It is really important that we try to do this with as much support from the Treasury which hasn’t been forthcoming thus far, because we know that of course there’s been an impact on businesses. There is some speculation here on what might be coming from the BBC’s Nick Eardley. Some of the Conservative MPs who have said they are intending to vote against the concept of vaccine passports for large venues in England have said they are doing so because of fears it is an infringement on civil liberties. Tobias Ellwood, MP for Bournemouth East, has taken a slightly different tack this morning on the BBC Radio 4 Today programme, arguing that he is against them because they will not be effective at curbing Covid. PA Media quotes him telling the programme: Three votes are taking place today, firstly on face masks, I don’t disagree with that, that makes sense, secondly on mandatory vaccinations for NHS staff, I agree with that too. It’s this final one to do with vaccine passports for large events, there are some practical implications as to how this will be enforced. But, more importantly, you can go into a large venue with a recent negative lateral flow test, again that makes sense, but you can also turn up if you had proof of having two jabs, which may have been completed six months ago, so even with a new mutation you could actually be carrying Covid. Leadership is about taking people to where perhaps they didn’t realise they needed to go, but they must understand the plan, and this is illogical at the moment. If you can turn up with just a piece of paper, that documentation you’ve received that says you’ve had two jabs completed six months ago, that will not prevent Covid from entering a large venue. It is 8.35am in the UK, and the government website has already run out of lateral flow testing kits for delivery again today. You can still pick up rapid lateral flow tests from a pharmacy or other collection points today, but you cannot order them online. It looks like my earlier suspicion about Dominic Raab’s command of his numbers was justified. [see 7.44am] Norway’s government said it plans to reintroduce loan guarantees for companies facing liquidity shortages as a result of recently introduced lockdown measures. Reuters report the measure was one of several schemes intended to alleviate the situation, finance minister Trygve Slagsvold Vedum told a news conference. Recipients will in return face limitations on the dividends they can pay to shareholders, he added. The government on Monday announced a four-week ban on serving alcohol in bars and restaurants, a closing of gyms and swimming pools to most users and mandatory work-from-home for those who can. On Sky News, Labour’s shadow culture secretary Lucy Powell had some strong words over prime minister Boris Johnson’s leadership, saying: The prime minister has just become somebody unable to persuade his own party, unable to persuade the country, because people have sort of lost trust in his judgment. Because they don’t feel that he’s putting himself through the same hardship, and to the same rules, that the rest of us are. And that’s been an incredibly unfortunate last few weeks for all of us, really. That the prime minister of the country is no longer trusted on some of these key issues. Asked about Labour’s support for the proposed new Covid measures today when Johnson can’t persuade many members of his own party, Powell said: I don’t see this in party political terms at all. We take our responsibilities as opposition incredibly seriously, and what we will always do is put public health ,we will put the scientific advice, and we will put the national interest first. So we’re not looking at party political calculations. Pressed on whether introducing vaccine passports was an imposition on civil liberties in England, Powell told Kay Burley: This doesn’t come naturally to any of us. These are not measures that any of us came into politics and into parliament to bring in. But what I would say is, I mean, firstly, these are Covid passes, so they’re not vaccine passports. You can take a lateral flow test before going to a large event instead. And what I would say is, whether you’re going to a small gathering or a large gathering, I would encourage everybody to take lateral flow before they do that anyway. But we have to think about the civil liberties of everybody, not just a small few who don’t want to use a vaccine or Covid pass. And all of our civil liberties are potentially at risk if we don’t all behave in a way that can suppress this variant and suppress this virus at this point in time. Because it might affect all of our civil liberties going into into the new year. Unemployment in the UK fell in October despite the end of the furlough scheme, according to official figures, as companies continued to hire amid record numbers of staff vacancies. The Office for National Statistics said the unemployment rate fell to 4.2% in the three months to the end of October, representing about 1.4 million people, down from 4.3% in the three months to the end of September. Reflecting a continued recovery in the labour market after the end of the Treasury’s multibillion-pound job support scheme in September, it said the number of workers on company payrolls rose by 257,000 in November from a month earlier to stand at 29.4 million – almost half a million higher than pre-Covid levels. The ONS said it was likely that some furloughed workers could yet move into unemployment because they might be working out their notice periods, but that the early responses to its business surveys suggest the numbers being made redundant were likely to be small. Read more of Richard Partington’s report here: UK unemployment rate falls despite end of job furlough scheme South Korea has marked its deadliest day since the start of the pandemic, amid warnings from medical experts that hospitals are struggling to cope with a surge in the number of seriously ill patients. The country, which had done a comparatively good job at containing the virus – with fewer than 5,000 deaths in total – on Tuesday reported 94 deaths from Covid-19 during the previous 24 hours, while critical cases reached a record high of 906. The daily caseload fell to below 6,000, according to the Korea Disease Control and Prevention Agency, having topped 7,000 for three days in a row last week. However, the 5,567 new infections were the highest yet for a Tuesday. The daily tally is usually lower at the start of the week because fewer tests are conducted at the weekend. Associated Press quoted Park Hyang, a senior health ministry official, saying that medical resources were quickly running out in Seoul and nearby metropolitan areas, where about 86% of intensive care units designated for Covid-19 patients are already occupied. More than 1,480 patients were still waiting to be admitted to hospitals or treatment shelters, and at least 17 people died last week at home or at facilities while waiting for beds. The strain on medical resources forced the government to introduce modest restrictions, such as caps on social gatherings, last week, while officials are racing to administer booster shots to older South Koreans who have not been vaccinated or who have waning immunity after being inoculated at the start of this year. The interval between the second and third shots was reduced from four or five months to three months starting this week. So far, 81.3% of the country’s 52 million people have been double jabbed, but only 13.9% have received a third dose of a Covid-19 vaccine, the agency said. Medical staff have been sent to schools to increase the vaccination rate among children, while access to a range of venues, including restaurants and cafes, is dependent on proof of double vaccination or a negative test result, the Yonhap news agency said. Social distancing rules that limit private gatherings to six people in the greater Seoul area, the centre of the recent surge, will stay in place until early next month. The government has been criticised for easing social distancing rules and other restrictions too early in an attempt to encourage economic activity. But the president, Moon Jae-in, has resisted a return to strict measures, declaring that the country would not “retreat to the past”. Health experts, however, have called for a more robust response, including financial support for small businesses to ensure that social distancing rules are observed. “What we absolutely need now is an urgent standstill to allow our medical system to restore its ability to respond (to the virus),” a coalition of doctors’ groups said in a statement this week. “We express deep concern that there will be a high possibility of serious fatalities if (the government) fails to employ stronger measures to reverse the crisis before it’s too late.” Tony Danker, director general of the Confederation of British Industry (CBI) has been on the BBC Radio 4 programme this morning, suggesting that the new restrictions in England are having a “chilling effect” on the economy. PA Media quotes him saying: It seems to us that whilst we have measures to keep the economy open, we have messages that have ended up closing much of it down. People should be worried enough to go and get a booster urgently, but not so worried to stop going to shops, restaurants or airports. That’s what’s not working, you have a double whammy for businesses in those sectors, hospitality, retail, leisure or travel, where demand is collapsing and there’s no support to recover. So, whilst we all support the booster campaign, and I urge all employees to get their booster, the unintended consequence has been a really rather chilling effect on demand in a lot of sectors in our economy.” Slightly firmer with his numbers is French government spokesperson Gabriel Attal. Reuters has just snapped that he has confirmed there are 130 Omicron cases in France. He has also suggested that France is closely monitoring the situation across the channel, in regard to whether it will need to impose travel restrictions on visitors from the UK over the spread of the Omicron variant. I can see a lot of journalists and Reuters have picked up on a specific line from UK deputy prime minister Dominic Raab that there are 250 people in hospital in the UK with the Omicron variant. I must confess that I didn’t include that myself because he seemed unclear on his figures. He initially said there have been “deaths” when asked about the impact of Omicron, but when pressed by Sky News interviewer Kay Burley on whether this meant there were multiple deaths rather than the single death mentioned by British prime minister Boris Johnson yesterday, he rowed back, saying: “All I can tell you is the latest that I’ve seen … in terms of plural … I was referring to … we now know we’ve got a significant number in hospital.” He was then asked how many people were in hospital with Omicron and on ventilators and he said: “I don’t know the latest facts.” In the UK, deputy prime minister Dominic Raab has said of concerns over the introduction of vaccine passports in England “some of these concerns about this are overstated in my view”. He said: I think if you’re going into a crowded place, I would personally want to for my own safety, but also for those around me, want to make sure that I either had a lateral flow test, or I was double, and in due course, triple jabbed. I do understand the concerns people have, but I think it’s necessary. I think people want to see us grappling with the Omicron variant in a sensible targeted, proportionate way. You talked about people feeling uneasy. In other interviews, I’ve done this same thing. We want to provide that reassurance. I think this is a proportionate way of doing so. All I would say, as I said before, is you know either you can demonstrate that you’ve been double-jabbed or that you’ve taken a lateral flow test. I don’t think that is a particularly intrusive thing to do, in order that we can all protect not just ourselves, but those around us, in the limited number of crowded situations or venues that this applies to. We’re talking about, I think, it’s over 500 people indoors, over 4,000 outdoors. This is just, I think, a sensible precautionary public health measure that will protect us all. Deputy prime minister Dominic Raab is on Sky News in the UK at the moment. The opening questions have again been along the lines that this is an over-reaction by government as cases are mild, and so far there has only been reported death in the UK with the Omicron variant, and a small number of people hospitalised. Raab said: We don’t know the precise figures, but we do know that there has been an increase. And above all, we are concerned about the rate of transmission. The positive side that we do believe and again, the information on Omicron is still sketchy, but if people get this jab, they’re over 70% protected. We don’t know the full severity. What we do know is that the rate of transmission is so rapid, that even if the severity is relatively low, compared to other variants that we’ve seen, just because of the numbers, we need to take action now, which is what the government is doing today, I believe with a targeted proportionate approach. Political journalists have been identifying some of the quirks written into the proposed legislation on Covid passes in England today. Here’s one example – a pub that is open all day but which stays open beyond 1am with a dance floor and serving alcohol looks like it either has to check people all day (even though it wouldn’t need to for daily trade) or do spot-checks at 1am. Here’s a little snippet from Politico’s London Playbook on how the political calculus might be looking for British prime minister over the next few weeks: In one sense, the Plan B votes are futile because the government will win thanks to Labour’s backing. Opposition leader Keir Starmer said in his address to the nation last night: “We will always support measures designed to protect public health. That includes the measures in Plan B. We are a patriotic party. And it is our patriotic duty to vote for these measures to ensure that they go through.” But seeing a Johnson-Starmer tag team crashing Plan B through will likely only enrage Tory MPs further. The real danger comes if Johnson decides he needs stronger restrictions in the coming weeks. Starmer’s support may not be there forever, and even if it is, it could well be the case that 54 Tory MPs would rather send a letter to Graham Brady [triggering a vote of no confidence in Boris Johnson as Conservative leader] than face Plan C. This raises a vital question of party vs. country: If Johnson and his scientific experts decide more measures are needed to combat Omicron, but implementing them risks triggering a no confidence vote, what does he do? The expected rebellion by backbench Conservative MPs today against further anti-Covid measures has been put into context here by my colleague Jessica Elgot, our chief political correspondent, as she lists the biggest rebellions that prime minister Boris Johnson has faced to date. Hello, it is Martin Belam here in London, taking over from Samantha Lock in Sydney. I’ll bring you the latest lines from the UK morning media round as they come in. Deputy prime minister Dominic Raab is on duty for the government, shadow culture secretary Lucy Powell is on duty for Labour. There’s a lot going on in parliament today in Westminster. As well as the votes on imposing new Covid restrictions in England, there is a 9.30am hearing about Covid, which we will be covering too. Here are the latest official figures in the UK … Over the last seven days there have been 363,682 new coronavirus cases recorded in the UK. Cases have increased by 9.9% week-on-week. There have been 834 deaths recorded in the last week. Deaths have decreased by 0.6% week-on-week. Hospital admissions have increased by 5.1% week-on-week. At the latest count on the UK government’s own dashboard, there were 7,372 people in hospital in total, of whom 901 are in ventilation beds. Having said all of that, yesterday the health secretary said it was estimated that there were 200,000 Omicron infections a day in the UK. China’s economically important Zhejiang province is battling a Covid outbreak that has left half a million people quarantined and some districts under business shutdown. Zhejiang, a major industrial and export hub on the country’s east coast and one of China’s leading provinces in terms of GDP and exports, reported 44 of the country’s 51 domestically transmitted coronavirus cases on Tuesday, Agence France-Presse reports. More than 540,000 people have been put in quarantine in Zhejiang as officials employ mass testing and targeted lockdowns over concerns fresh outbreaks could threaten the Winter Olympics set to be hosted by Beijing in February. In recent days, districts in Ningbo - the province’s main port - and the nearby city of Shaoxing said they also were suspending some business operations. Ningbo’s Zhenhai district, a large petrochemical base, said all enterprises not related to virus control or deemed crucial to the public would be shut down and that petrochemical producers would have to reduce output. A district in Shaoxing had ordered business to halt last Thursday. Several publicly listed companies in Hangzhou, the province’s capital and largest city, have also released statements saying they had suspended production. Zhaopeng Xing, senior China strategist at ANZ Research, told AFP: The shutdown of Zhejiang factories will impact on the supply chains of various sectors, especially fibre and textiles. “The impact will be similar to what happened in September and October, when power rationing was implemented.” Pubs and restaurants throughout the UK predict that Christmas cancellations made following the introduction of measures to limit the spread of the Omicron variant of Covid-19 in England will cut their festive takings by 40%. While hospitality venues have not yet been forced to reimpose measures such as social distancing or mandatory mask-wearing, industry leaders said tougher restrictions had already caused irreparable damage to trade, especially in city centres. Trade body UK Hospitality has forecast that takings will be down by as much as 40% for December, usually the most lucrative month for venues by far, after hard data from last week revealed early signs that customers were staying away. Data from the trade body for Monday to Sunday of last week showed a 13% drop in trade and a 15% increase in cancellations, compared with pre-pandemic levels. In central London, which is particularly affected by office workers following government guidance to stay at home, takings were down 40%, while there was a 25% surge in Christmas bookings being cancelled. Read the full story here. Here is an interesting story from our reporter Zoe Williams, asking whether Covid has stolen our sex lives and examining a surge in ‘virginity anxiety’. Zoe writes that there has been a surge of anxiety among young people who fear they won’t ever get the chance to lose their virginity. Message boards and counselling services are reportedly heaving with gen-Zers who missed all the Rubicon events such as festivals, freshers’ weeks and parties. Read the fully story here. Hong Kong will accept Covid-19 vaccination records issued by Laos, Mexico, Mongolia, Oman and Qatar for residents returning from Group A specified places from Wednesday, 15 December. The city state has so far reported seven cases of the Omicron variant. As all seven cases were detected at the airport restricted area or at a designated quarantine hotel, they are not considered to have been spread in the community. On Monday, the Centre for Health Protection said two more confirmed Covid-19 cases were found to carry the Omicron variant. One involved a 62-year-old man who flew in from the UK on 10 December while the other was a 50-year-old woman who travelled with him. Both of them tested positive upon arrival in Hong Kong. As England moves to plan B, prime minister Boris Johnson has announced that all adults will be offered a booster vaccine by the end of December. But will that be enough to protect the NHS from being overwhelmed? Madeleine Finlay speaks to the Guardian’s science editor, Ian Sample, about the spread of Omicron, and what we can do to prevent a tidal wave of cases. Listen to the latest Science Weekly podcast here. South Korea marked its deadliest day of the pandemic on Tuesday with 94 deaths reported. Health experts warn that hospitals are stretched thin, leaving people dying while waiting for beds and the country’s medical system is quickly approaching its limits. A record 906 Covid patients were in serious or critical condition, the Korea Disease Control and Prevention Agency said in a statement on Tuesday. Park Hyang, a senior Health Ministry official, said medical resources are quickly running out in densely populated capital Seoul and nearby metropolitan areas, where around 86% of intensive care units designated for Covid-19 treatment were already occupied and more than 800 patients were still waiting to be admitted. The KDCA said at least 17 patients died last week at home or at facilities while waiting for beds. Officials have been squeezing hospitals to set aside more beds for Covid patients while scrambling to speed up the administration of booster shots by shortening the interval between second and third shots from four or five months to three months starting this week. As of Tuesday, more than 81% in a population of more than 51 million were fully vaccinated, but only 13% were administered booster shots. Officials may decide to further strengthen restrictions this week, depending on the numbers of infections and hospitalisation, Park said during a briefing. India is reporting an additional 5,784 new coronavirus cases reported in the last 24 hours. The number is the lowest to have been recorded in 571 days, according to a statement from the ministry of health. A further 252 deaths were also reported with the tally of Omicron cases climbing to 41. If you’ve just joined us here is a quick snapshot of all the key Covid developments from the past day. Australia is preparing to open up to live with Covid-19. Prime minister Scott Morrison said the Omicron variant will not “take us back” to more Covid-19 restrictions and the country’s high vaccination rate meant Australia could “continue to move forward”. NSW, Australia, is set to lift restrictions for the unvaccinated despite a sharp rise in case numbers. The US air force has discharged 27 people for refusing to get the Covid-19 vaccine, making them what officials believe are the first service members to be removed for disobeying the mandate. Germany is reporting an additional 30,823 new daily Covid cases and 473 deaths, according to the Robert Koch Institute. South Korea reported another 5,567 confirmed coronavirus cases in the past 24 hours. A further 94 deaths were also recorded. Mainland China reported its first Omicron case in the northern city of Tianjin, as the country’s eastern province of Zhejiang has been battling a rise in new infections. The United States surpassed 50m coronavirus cases, according to Johns Hopkins University data. Australian prime minister, Scott Morrison, says the emergent Omicron variant will not “take us back” to more Covid-19 restrictions, and the country is prepared to open up and live with the virus. Morrison said the country’s high vaccination rate meant Australia could “continue to move forward” as he announced a deal with Moderna and the Victorian government that will see a new manufacturing facility built in Melbourne by as early as 2024. He said: We’re not letting Omicron take us back. We’ve decided as a country to live with this virus and Australians have worked so hard for that. Australia can now open up. This Christmas we’re about to have a gift Australians have given to themselves by the way they’ve worked together with the settings that we’ve put in place.” Morrison also conceded the Coalition had made mistakes during the pandemic, including in the early phases of the vaccination rollout, but said these had been overcome. “When you’re in a crisis, it’s not unusual to have setbacks, [but] the proof of managing a crisis is being able to overcome them, and we did overcome.” United States secretary of state Antony Blinken says by the end of next year, the US will have donated more than 1.2b Covid-19 vaccine doses to the world, Reuters is reporting. The US air force has discharged 27 people for refusing to get the Covid-19 vaccine, making them what officials believe are the first service members to be removed for disobeying the mandate. The air force gave its forces until 2 November to get the vaccine and thousands have either refused or sought an exemption. The air force spokeswoman Ann Stefanek said Monday that these were the first airmen to be administratively discharged for reasons involving the vaccine. She said all of them were in their first term of enlistment, so they were younger, lower-ranking personnel. And while the air force does not disclose what type of discharge a service member gets, legislation working its way through Congress limits the military to giving troops in vaccine refusal cases an honourable discharge or general discharge under honourable conditions. The Pentagon earlier this year required the vaccine for all members of the military, including active duty, national guard and the reserves. Each of the services set its own deadlines and procedures for the mandate. The air force set the earliest deadline. Read the full story here. Germany is reporting an additional 30,823 new daily Covid cases and 473 deaths, according to recently published figures from the Robert Koch Institute. The numbers are a rise on yesterday’s figures but a significant drop from previous days, with 39,585 cases reported on 10 December 45,460 cases on 9 December. Covid infections have been steadily decreasing in the European nation since new lockdowns were introduced. Some Covid numbers from South Korea have just been released. The east Asian nation reported another 5,567 confirmed coronavirus cases in the past 24 hours. A further 94 deaths were also recorded. South Korea has so far recorded a total of 528,652 cumulative confirmed coronavirus cases and 4,387 deaths. A trove of nearly 800 letters recording the lockdown experiences of older New Zealanders has been collected in a University of Auckland research project called Have Our Say. Researchers appealed for written accounts of lockdown to understand how older people coped with enforced isolation, and to amplify elders’ voices. The letter writers were all over 70. Many described the importance of daily routines, their experiences during historical crises and how they stayed involved in their community. The letters will be held by the Auckland War Memorial Museum. Read some excerpts from the collection gathered by our New Zealand reporter, Eva Corlett, here. Speaking of Australia, here are some Covid numbers from Down Under. The country’s most populous state of NSW recorded 804 new Covid-19 cases and one death, a significant jump from previous days and the most infectious day recorded in more than 10 weeks. Victoria recorded 1,189 new cases a six deaths while Queensland reported one Covid-19 case in the community. Domestic border restrictions in Australia have also eased with Western Australia announcing plans to reopen its hard border to the rest of the nation. Prime minister Scott Morrison called on states and territories to ease their last remaining Covid-19 restrictions. Here’s what we know so far about Omicron’s spread in Australia. As Covid cases in Australia’s most populous state of New South Wales continue to rise, the state government has committed to its plan to lift restrictions for unvaccinated residents from Wednesday. On Tuesday, NSW recorded 804 new cases, a significant jump on previous days. However, the government has insisted it had considered all the options and was committed to easing restrictions on Wednesday in order to return the state “back to a full life of normality”, AAP reports. From Wednesday, unvaccinated people will be allowed back in pubs, cafes, gyms and shops and mask mandates will be eased. The NSW health minister Brad Hazzard made the comments as health authorities are battling to contain an outbreak of the Omicron variant, with a total of 85 cases now confirmed in the state. “We’re not about to start backflipping on issues we promised,” Hazzard said. Hazzard also warned: Once the unvaccinated are mixing with the vaccinated, the numbers will increase even further. That’s worrying because that puts pressure on our doctors and nurses and our frontline health system.” Some distressing news for football fans has just come in, as Covid continues to wreck havoc on sporting matches and events. England’s Manchester United game has been called off as the Premier League is hit by a record 42 Covid cases. The Tuesday game at Brentford is now off with the possibility of more postponements to come. Forty-two Premier League players and officials tested positive for the virus in the seven days that ended on Sunday, a record for a single week since testing began and more than three times the 12 of the previous week. Manchester United are among the teams affected, with the club announcing on Monday evening that their away game at Brentford had been called off. “Our Premier League fixture at Brentford on Tuesday 14 December has been postponed and will be rescheduled in due course,” a club statement said. Following PCR confirmation of positive LFT Covid-19 tests among the first-team staff and players, the outbreak requires ongoing surveillance. A decision was taken to close first-team operations at Carrington for 24 hours to help minimise risk of further infection, and individuals who tested positive are isolating in line with Premier League protocols.” “Given cancellation of training and disruption to the squad, and with the health of players and staff the priority, the club requested the match to be rearranged ... The Premier League board took the decision to postpone based on guidance from medical advisors.” Mainland China has reported its first Omicron case in the northern city of Tianjin, as the country’s eastern province of Zhejiang has been battling a rise in new infections of the Delta variant in recent weeks. The Guardian’s China correspondent, Vincent Ni, provides an update on the situation in the country. Chinese authorities reported that the Omicron case was detected from an overseas returnee, who showed no symptoms upon arrival on 9 December. The patient is now being quarantined and treated in a designated hospital. Nearby Beijing is gearing up for the Winter Olympics, which is to be held in February. The Guardian understands the patient is not related to the Games. China’s eastern Zhejiang province – a province with a population of 65 million – is battling against its first domestic Covid cluster outbreak this year. Among the 80 new locally transmitted cases with symptoms in mainland China on 12 December, 74 were identified in Zhejiang. In October, the province reported just one local case. The outbreak in Zhejiang – home to the e-commerce giant Alibaba - has led more than a dozen publicly listed companies to halt production on Monday. Their shares fell sharply as a result. The companies said that they would comply with the anti-virus control measures imposed by the local government, which will decide when production can be resumed. Hello it’s Samantha Lock back with you as we go through all the latest coronavirus developments. In a particularly grim milestone, the United States has just surpassed 50m coronavirus cases, according to Johns Hopkins University data. Infections appeared to be declining across the country over the past two months but daily increases have been reported for the past two weeks with the number of hospitalised Covid patients up 20% since the Thanksgiving holiday States in colder parts of the country are seeing the biggest surge in new infections on a per capita basis, including Vermont, New Hampshire and Michigan. Chinese authorities have reported an Omicron case detected in an overseas returnee who reportedly showed no symptoms upon arrival on 9 December. The patient is now being quarantined and treated in a designated hospital. The arrival of Omicron comes as the eastern Zhejiang province – a province with a population of 65 million – is battling against its first domestic cluster outbreak this year. Here is a snapshot of all the key Covid developments: At least one person in the UK had died with the Omicron variant, Boris Johnson has said as he refused to rule out imposing further restrictions across England in the run-up to Christmas and appealed to members of the public to step forward to assist the Covid booster jab programme. Norway has tightened Covid measures and banned the serving of alcohol in a bid to halt the Omicron outbreak. Protests in Latvia turned violent after a police officer was injured and four demonstrators arrested as several thousand people in the capital Riga protested anti-Covid restrictions. Peru says it is battling a “resurgence” of the pandemic, with infections and deaths rising. The country has the world’s highest coronavirus death rate. China has recorded its first case of the Omicron variant, state media report authorities in the northeastern city of Tianjin as saying. In Denmark, health authorities say a third dose of the Covid-19 vaccine will be offered sooner to everyone over 40 to curb the spread of the Omicron variant. The US Air Force has discharged 27 people for refusing to get the Covid-19 vaccine, making them what officials believe are the first service members to be removed for disobeying the mandate to get the shots. California will impose a statewide mask mandate in all indoor public spaces. Covid-19 cases in Canada may rapidly rise in the coming days due to community spread of the Omicron variant. Nigeria will destroy around one million expired Covid-19 vaccines, Faisal Shuaib, head of the National Primary Health Care Development Agency (NPHCDA), said. At least 200,000 Covid-19 vaccines have expired in Senegal without being used in the past two months and another 200,000 are set to expire at the end of December because demand is too slow, the head of its immunisation programme said. Thailand will halve to three months the time between administering a second Covid-19 vaccine shot and a booster, health officials said.Embattled NSW treasury secretary Mike Pratt has denied he’s planning an imminent exit from the role, telling staff there is still “so much work left to do” to help the state recover from the pandemic. In a message sent to staff on Wednesday, Pratt denied a media report that his resignation and the appointment of a successor were being planned. He said, though, he may leave the public service prior to the March 2023 state election. “I want to let you know that I have been weighing up whether to return to the private sector before the next state election after almost a decade in public service,” Pratt said in his missive to staff. “The timing would enable a smooth transition to a new secretary before the poll.” Pratt said “only a small number of people were aware of my early thinking. Unfortunately, this information has been prematurely leaked to the media, and I am disappointed with this breach of confidentiality.” The statement to staff comes a day before Pratt is scheduled to front a NSW upper house inquiry over the finances of the Transport Asset Holding Entity, or TAHE. The entity, which holds about $40b in rail assets, is at the centre of a standoff between treasury and the state’s auditor general, Margaret Crawford. The state’s audit office this week stated it was refusing to sign off on the state’s 2020-21 financial report “due to significant accounting issues”. The department and audit office are at odds over whether TAHE should be treated as a commercial operation, with funds from the government treated as expenses or equity investments. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The difference potentially translates into creating a shortfall worth at least $1b a year in the state’s budget, an update of which is planned by new treasurer Matt Kean on Thursday. Pratt did not mention the TAHE issues in his statement to staff, concluding: “I have always appreciated your support, and in turn, look forward to continuing to support you all in the challenges we handle every day for the people of NSW.”Queensland has backtracked on public health advice that threw dozens of airline passengers into hotel quarantine, and has caused further flight cancellations, according to a tourism body. All passengers on two Virgin flights – VA1105 from Newcastle to Brisbane and VA375 from Brisbane to Townsville – were declared close contacts of a male traveller with the virus on Tuesday night, and ordered to isolate for 14 days regardless of a negative test result. Two further exposure sites were listed in Townsville and Brisbane Airport. But the health minister, Yvette D’Ath, backflipped on the decision on Wednesday morning, announcing only passengers in the rows behind, in front of and beside the passenger would be required to complete a fortnight quarantine. The rest of the passengers would be deemed casual contacts and would be released from isolation after receiving a negative test result. The passengers were initially facing Christmas in hotel quarantine. D’Ath said it was the first domestic flight into Queensland where there was a potential Omicron case on board and health authorities acted “just as we did” when the new Delta variant arrived. “There’s been a lot of discussions overnight and I know that there’s been contact with other chief health officers and health officials interstate to see how states are dealing with this based on the national guidelines,” D’Ath said. D’Ath said the public health unit acted “cautiously” to declare anyone on the two confirmed flights as close contacts while the chief health officer analysed how to respond to Omicron on flights. “The chief health officer and the deputies have viewed that we can apply the normal rules in relation to these flights and we don’t need to wait until we get the findings of whether it’s Omicron because, if it is, we still will apply these rules,” she said. “We took that same cautious approach when we first started seeing Delta. Omicron is new but I welcome the advice of the Chief Health Officer in relation to these issues. “We know whether it’s Delta or Omicron, they are both highly infectious and we know vaccinations help reduce you getting sick and spreading that virus to other people, ending up in hospital and ICU.” Queensland Tourism Industry Council chief executive Daniel Gschwind said the positive case was “the first step towards living with the virus” and welcomed Queensland health’s easing of isolation regulations. “This was going to happen, we knew this was going to happen and we have to all calm down … it’s going to happen elsewhere as well,” he said. “We knew there were going to be setbacks, it’s unfortunate it’s come so soon and so shortly before Christmas but we hope sanity will prevail and people will recognise this is a measure that will be in place for sometime. “Thankfully people aren’t in quarantine now, and if the vaccination rates are high, confidence will develop, hospitalisations will be low … we have our fingers crossed for a strong summer season.” But Gschwind said since the initial isolation requirements for the two flights were announced, the council had already had reports of trip cancellations. “That’s very unfortunate. People are clearly more hesitant now,” he said. “We’re concerned about that. We’re hoping we can contain the damage once more and the desire of people to enjoy themselves will overwhelm niggling concerns.” Queensland head of the Australian Industry group, Rebecca Andrews, said the “whole situation” should not have happened. “We’re very pleased those people on the flight that are now casual contacts can have a safe Christmas and businesses and communities have some surety,” she said. “There’ll still be some nervousness, though. We don’t want this to happen again … the fact they did it in the first place didn’t fill us with confidence and that’s what businesses and tourists need. “We’ve known the borders have been opening for awhile … they should’ve been better prepared. The fact this occurred is disappointing and I’m glad common sense has prevailed.” Queensland recorded six new cases overnight, all detected in interstate travellers who tested positive upon arrival. It brought active cases in Queensland to 50. The six new cases were spread across a number of sites in Queensland including Goondiwindi, Wide Bay, Townsville, Gold Coast and Brisbane South and had been infectious for up to six days. Another case reported in an overseas traveller from the UK has since been confirmed to be the Omicron variant. The traveller is currently in hotel quarantine. Of the two cases who had been in the community, one was the man who flew from Newcastle to Brisbane, then to Townsville, and had attended another exposure site in Newcastle. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The second case attended the Argyle Hotel in Newcastle and genomic sequencing was under way to confirm if they had the Omicron variant. “We are certainly treating them as if they are Omicron,” D’Ath said. “We know there has been a large number of cases of patrons who had been at the Argyle Hotel in Newcastle.” More than 100 positive cases had been linked to the site.A third booster Covid-19 vaccine dose will be essential to get high protection against symptoms from the Omicron variant and it appears likely the variant will become the dominant strain in Australia, virologists from the Kirby Institute say. The new data from the Kirby Institute comes as Covid-19 case numbers in New South Wales jumped again on Wednesday to 1,360, 25 of them are the Omicron variant. There are now 89 Omicron cases in NSW. The researchers also said Covid boosters may be required every six months to protect against the variant. Virologists from the Kirby Institute presented new data on Wednesday after growing the Omicron variant in a laboratory and testing how it responded to various samples, including from the fully vaccinated, from those who had recovered from the virus but were unvaccinated, and those who had recovered from the virus and also received two vaccine doses. The data has now been sent to all chief health officers across Australia. An associate professor in the institute’s immunovirology and pathogenesis program at the University of NSW, Stuart Turville, said the laboratory obtained samples from the first two people identified with the Omicron variant in Australia. They had arrived into Sydney from Doha and were fully vaccinated. Despite their vaccination status, they were as infectious as unvaccinated people, Turville said. “We knew previously that Beta was the most [vaccine] evasive variant we have come across, in terms of potency at inhibiting infection,” he said. “Omicron was flatline … we saw zero protection with the antibodies from double-vaccinated donors … irrespective of the type of vaccine. We don’t need to talk about AstraZeneca or Pfizer, both of them are zero.” However, he said it was likely those two travellers had a poor vaccine response and this did not mean two doses of the vaccines offered zero protection against any infection from Omicron. Data from South Africa released overnight suggested protection from infection was 33% for those who are double-dosed, similar to the Kirby data which predicts 37%. Group leader in infection epidemiology Dr Deborah Cromer said data had also shown, while the vaccines offered limited protection against symptomatic infection with Omicron, “there is still some protection against severe disease and hospitalisation that is afforded from those vaccines”. Getting a third booster shot with an mRNA vaccine like Pfizer or Moderna “massively increases neutralising antibodies and then results in protection [at] really quite high levels of up to about 85% of protection against symptomatic disease, and about 98% protection against severe disease,” she said. It is too early into the booster rollout to have collected enough samples from people with three doses of the vaccine to see how Omicron behaves against it. The Kirby Institute researchers hope to have ethics approval and enough study participants to begin taking samples from those who have had three doses next week. But the researchers said they had mimicked the impact of a booster shot against Omicron by seeing how samples from people who had the virus and therefore had natural antibodies, and then who had also received a double-dose of the vaccine, responded to the variant. “It does inhibit the virus,” Turville said. “But we do see an average of a 22-fold drop in efficacy of protecting cells against infection.” Cromer added that while it seemed this booster may offer protection for at least one or two years, it was appearing likely that ongoing boosters would be needed against Omicron, as frequently as every six months. “Even with a booster, we will need another booster in six months, with the caveat we don’t know what other variant will emerge,” she said. “We really just have to focus on data we have at the moment.” Turville said it appeared likely that the variant would overtake Delta, based on the way spread is accelerating overseas. The Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, has not ruled out making a third shot compulsory to take part in the ‘“vaccinated economy”. Guardian Australia asked the federal health minister, Greg Hunt, about whether the government is considering mandating a third dose for full vaccination in light of the Kirby Institute data, but is yet to receive a response. Hunt has previously said a third dose won’t be mandatory for activities such as overseas travel, though some countries have made a booster shot required before allowing entry. The president of the Australian Medical Association, Dr Omar Khorshid, warned that the booster program was being rolled out too slowly and that vaccination hubs needed to continue to run. “By the end of this month close to four million people will be eligible for the booster, however, in the last week Australia has only been able to administer just over 210,000 booster doses,” he said. “The latest strain of Covid-19, Omicron, poses a significant potential risk to the population and appears much more transmissible than previous strains, so we have to pick up the pace to protect the community.” The Kirby Institute researchers said they did not want to preempt any advice about boosters. The Australian Technical Advisory Group for Immunisation (Atagi), which advises the government on vaccination, would consider the Kirby data along with data coming from other research groups, including those overseas.The US House of Representatives has approved a measure recommending criminal contempt charges against Mark Meadows, the former chief of staff to Donald Trump, a week after he ended his cooperation with the chamber’s committee investigating the Capitol insurrection. The approval marks the first time the House has voted to hold a former member in contempt since the 1830s, according to the chamber’s records. It is the latest show of force by the 6 January panel, which is leaving no angle unexplored as it investigates the worst attack on the Capitol in more than 200 years. Lawmakers are determined to get answers quickly, and in so doing reassert the congressional authority that Trump eroded while in office. “History will be written about these times, about the work this committee has undertaken,” said Bennie Thompson, the committee’s chairman. Meadows, a former North Carolina congressman, left in March 2020 to join Trump’s administration. Before he left Congress, Meadows “continually insisted that people and high-ranking government officials respect the authority of Congress to do its job, and investigative powers are implicit in and intertwined with our powers to legislate this”, said Jamie Raskin, a member of the committee. Raskin began Tuesday’s debate by reading from newly released, frantic texts from the day of the attack revealing members of Congress, Fox News anchors and even Trump’s son urging Meadows to persuade the outgoing president to act quickly to stop the three-hour assault by his supporters. Tuesday’s vote followed a recommendation by the committee that Meadows be charged. The matter now heads to the justice department, which will decide whether to prosecute. Republicans on Tuesday called the action against Meadows a distraction from the House’s work, with one member calling it “evil” and “un-American”. Trump has also defended Meadows in an interview, calling him “an honorable man”. The committee’s leaders have vowed to punish anyone who doesn’t comply with their investigation, and the justice department has already indicted Trump’s longtime ally Steve Bannon on two counts of contempt after he defied his subpoena. If convicted, Bannon and Meadows could face up to one year behind bars on each charge. However, in a Tuesday statement, Meadows’s attorney George Terwilliger said the former chief of staff had never stopped cooperating but maintained he could not be compelled to appear for an interview. The attorney said Meadows had “fully cooperated” with respect to documents that are in his possession and are not privileged. Meadows himself has sued the panel, asking a court to invalidate two subpoenas that he says are “overly broad and unduly burdensome”. Members of the committee said the text messages sent to Meadows on the day of the insurrection raised fresh questions about what was happening at the White House, and what Trump himself was doing, as the attack was under way. The committee had planned to question Meadows about the communications, including 6,600 pages of records taken from personal email accounts and about 2,000 text messages. The panel has not released any of the communications in full. The Republican congresswoman Liz Cheney of Wyoming, the panel’s vice chairwoman, said at the committee’s Monday evening meeting that an important issue raised by the texts was whether Trump had sought to obstruct the congressional certification by refusing to send a strong message to the rioters to stop. “These texts leave no doubt,” Cheney said. “The White House knew exactly what was happening at the Capitol.” The investigating panel has already interviewed more than 300 witnesses, and subpoenaed more than 40 people, as it seeks to create the most comprehensive record yet of the lead-up to the insurrection and of the violent siege itself.Beaming in satisfaction as Arab rulers arrived in Riyadh on Tuesday, Mohammed bin Salman looked like a man in charge. As a succession of planes disgorged heads of state for a regional summit, the Saudi crown prince was there to receive them – standing in for his father at yet another big event. But as Prince Mohammed ushered leaders of Kuwait, the UAE, Qatar, Oman and Bahrain along a purple carpet to a reception hall, the king’s absence loomed large. If the ailing monarch was to reappear in public – a once every five year gathering under his auspices would have been the time and place. To regional figures, King Salman’s failure to assume his role signalled something more consequential than an heir to the throne being gifted more responsibilities. So significant was the missing monarch that observers in Saudi Arabia say the dynastic shift from father to son has – for all intents and purposes – already taken place. Over the past 20 months, King Salman has made only one public appearance and has stayed for the duration of the Covid pandemic in the new age city of Neom – the pet project of the man who will one day formally take his throne. His only recent visit to the seat of Saudi power, Riyadh, was in August 2020 for a successful gallbladder operation. His last audience with a western official was with former UK foreign secretary, Dominic Raab, five months earlier. When Emmanuel Macron met Mohammed bin Salman in Jeddah recently, the king was again nowhere to be seen. Macron’s visit, the first by a western head of state since the assassination of columnist Jamal Khashoggi three years ago, marked quite a moment for a kingdom anxious to restore standing amid the prolonged global fallout from an extraordinary scandal. King Salman receiving the French president could have been a much-needed kickstart. Several influential former Saudi officials say they cannot recall a precedent of a Saudi head of state being in the country and not receiving counterparts such as Gulf leaders and Macron, particularly at such a critical juncture. For all intents and purposes, Salman is now king in absentia and seems barely to be performing his duties. Prince Mohammed holds all the reins of Saudi power, and does not seem bothered by who knows it. Hanging over the absences have been enduring questions surrounding the king’s health. Due to turn 86 on New Year’s Eve, Salman has slowed down since his own years as crown prince. But he is known, both inside the kingdom and in Washington and London, to suffer from a slow onset form of vascular dementia, the symptoms of which were thought to have been mild. “This has not been a huge factor in recent years, and it is tough to get a read on now with Covid,” said a former western intelligence official. “But it is thought to be more problematic now. It’s certainly a pretext for MbS to keep his father at bay. He is definitely running Saudi Arabia. His father is not.” Announcing the kingdom’s budget on Monday via video, the king spoke slowly and with a slight slur. Guests who had seen him before Covid brought the shutters down in Saudi Arabia say he was already moving and speaking cautiously. But recent video appearances at cabinet sessions have left some participants speculating about his health. Whether King Salman’s quasi exile is of his own volition, or is beyond his control, has become the subject of speculation inside the kingdom and around the Gulf, where leaders in the UAE, Qatar, Bahrain, Kuwait and Oman had been wrestling with the uncertain dynamic between father and son since the latter’s rise to prominence nearly five years ago. As Prince Mohammed consolidated his power by eliminating family and political rivals, shaking down business leaders and clamping down on dissent, the role of King Salman had remained hotly debated. In the aftermath of the Khashoggi assassination, Salman took a more assertive stance, appearing more often and reassembling a sidelined old guard as a veritable “court of the wise”. The Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, thought the “greybeards” were back calling the shots. He sent a message through the king’s trusted relative, Khaled al-Faisal, that he respected the House of Saud, but not what it was becoming – a pointed barb at Prince Mohammed, whom Turkey, the CIA and other western agencies believe directed Khashoggi’s murder and dismemberment inside the Saudi consulate in Istanbul. But if Prince Mohammed ever really was chastened, it was not to be for long. By the second half of 2019, officials who dealt with him in Riyadh say he was directing affairs with confidence, ramping up economic reforms and signing off on cultural changes that would have been unthinkable even several years earlier. King Salman arrived in Neom 15 months ago to sit out Covid. The futuristic Red Sea city has been a viable place to avoid infection and from where to conduct virtual cabinet meetings. But as the crisis has ebbed in Saudi Arabia, so has the plausibility of such a long absence from making in person appearances. The one break from reclusivity came when he received the Sultan of Oman, Prince Haitham bin Tarik in July. The lineup of missed opportunities includes annual appearances in Mecca for the last 10 days of Ramadan and hajj, celebrations for the seventh year of his inauguration, the festival season in Riyadh and weekly royal court receptions. “He has cleared his path to the coronation,” the former intelligence official said of the crown prince. “Covid or not, no one can deny that the king is not just missing in action, but likely out of business.”Rural patients and those living in lower socioeconomic areas are struggling to access Covid booster shots, experts are warning, amid concern the vaccine rollout is “falling behind” as the Omicron variant spreads. General practitioners and pharmacies are reporting a sudden increase in demand for vaccines, after federal health advice changed to allow boosters five months after the second primary dose. Representatives of the aged care sector said the rollout for residents and staff was improved from earlier this year, with more than 1,000 booster clinics conducted in aged care facilities already. But rollout problems are emerging in other areas. Some GPs caught off guard by the weekend’s announcement said they were left without enough supply to meet demand. Demand on pharmacies also increased suddenly and significantly. The Australian Medical Association said it was “extremely concerned” at the lack of support for both GPs and pharmacists, and warned the booster rollout was already falling behind. AMA president Dr Omar Khorshid also warned against scaling back state and territory vaccination hubs. “Whilst we recognise that the state and territory vaccination hubs have taken nurses out of hospitals, aged care, and other health settings, it is critical that state and territory governments continue to run these clinics to ensure adequate access to vaccines for Australians needing their booster shot,” he said. Figures from the Pharmacy Guild of Australia show in the week leading up to the announcement, just under 20,000 vaccinations a day were delivered. On Tuesday, that figure rose to 40,000. At the same time, the guild has warned that vastly fewer pharmacies will be participating in the rollout of boosters, down from 3,400 pharmacies in the initial rollout to 1,900, due to the government’s low level of remuneration. Victorian branch president, Anthony Tassone, said the rate of $16 per booster dose was seen as “not sufficient to cover the true costs of delivery of the program”. Access issues are particularly pronounced in rural areas. Megan Belot, the president of Rural Doctors Association of Australia, said the access to booster shots for rural patients has been disappointing. “We are hearing stories that some state vaccination hubs in regional and rural areas are not getting access to the booster shot in a timely manner,” Belot said. She said the issue was especially concerning for rural and remote frontline healthcare professionals, because booster shots are vital to avoid hospitalisation and putting increased strain on an already burdened system. Belot said there was strain on rural and remote hospitals at the best of times even before the Covid-19 pandemic and that many rural and regional hospitals did not have intensive care units to treat severe Covid-19 cases. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Rebecca McGowan, a rural GP in Albury, says organising booster shots for her patients has been a “shambles.” She said for GPs to only find out on a Sunday evening, at the same time as the public, that booster shots would be pushed forward meant that by Monday morning she was inundated with calls from patients asking to be booked in. McGowan has had difficulty securing booster shot appointments for her patients, because she has had to prove that she has appointments booked for a full clinic two weeks in advance of being able to secure the supply. “We keep being told GPs are partners, but we’re not being treated as equal partners, but more like an afterthought,” McGowan said. She said there was added pressure for rural GPs because of the difficulty of staffing the clinics, especially as the booster shot program will now be running alongside vaccinating children. GPs like McGowan in the Albury-Wodonga area also face the challenge of having patients who straddle two states. Belot said another problem was programs that attempt to vaccinate remote populations in a two-day period often don’t accommodate those who are occupied with farming activities and can’t fit into the allocated window. In Melbourne, Prof Mark Stoove from the Burnet Institute warned of a slower take-up in lower socioeconomic areas if the booster program was again run through pharmacies and GPs. Until October, when there was a targeted campaign from state and local governments, Melbourne’s vaccine rollout ran along socioeconomic lines, with age, disadvantage and access to GPs mixing to create a perfect Covid cocktail. In August, Delta was rapidly spreading through Melbourne’s northern suburbs as some of the state’s lowest socioeconomic LGAs lagged on vaccination rates. “There will still be issues concerning the availability, according to the distribution of GPs and pharmacies,” Stoove said. “Certain areas have a lower density of GPs and pharmacies, so if the booster rollout primarily occurs through those avenues we will come across those problems.” In August the LGA of Hume had one of the lowest vaccination rates and highest daily case numbers. One of the key reasons was the low number of GP clinics per population. As vaccination rates caught up, the state has peeled back its hubs in the area, but councillor Joseph Haweil, who was mayor during the outbreak, says the community can’t rely on a GP-driven model. “Just how little supply and support there was through the GP system, I’m worried that is replicated again,” Haweil said. “I don’t think we can afford to have that happen again.” Cohealth is a not-for-profit on the frontline of the vaccine rollout in Victoria. It targets communities that have access issues and in the last six months, they’ve set up vaccination pop-up clinics in more than 50 separate locations. Cohealth’s community engagement manager Emit Taylor said it was too early to tell what barriers would have to be addressed with the booster rollout. “We’re still not quite in booster town,” Taylor, who uses they/them pronouns said. “We’re not quite sure what the hesitations will be.” Cohealth is tailoring its approach to each community, making sure language and access barriers are broken down. Taylor said there was a lot of work done to make strong community connections before the service will set up a pop-up – which will be essential when the need for boosters becomes more prominent.Almost a century after Bristol zoo’s first gorilla – a young male named Alfred – arrived to huge excitement, his successors are to move to a new woodland home on the edge of the city. As part of the zoo’s transfer from its long-term home in Clifton, the eight-strong gorilla troop will be set up in a “central African forests area”, living alongside a group of endangered cherry-crowned mangabey monkeys and African grey parrots. Rare slender-snouted crocodiles will also be introduced into the “immersive woodland exhibit” – kept separate from the gorillas and the monkeys. Though it will not satisfy those who believe that animals such as gorillas should not be kept in captivity, it is a far cry from when Alfred was led around the zoo on a lead and took part in snowball fights with visitors. When Alfred arrived in 1930 here was only one other gorilla in a zoo in Europe. At the moment, the western lower gorillas live in an enclosure at Bristol Zoo Gardens called Gorilla Island but the idea of the new area is to reflect their natural habitat as closely as possible. Bristol zoo is one of the oldest in the world but by 2024 will have moved from its spot in Clifton for the out-of-town site currently occupied by its Wild Place Project. As well as the central African forests area, a conservation breeding centre will be built to house threatened species of reptiles, amphibians, invertebrates, fish and birds. Among them will be tortoises and turtles, blue-spotted tree monitors, Henkel’s leaf-tailed geckos, Madeiran land snails, tarictic hornbills, bleeding heart doves and Socorro doves, which are extinct in the wild. The new Bristol zoo will retain many of the current exhibits at Wild Place, such as Bear Wood, where bears, lynx, wolverines and wolves live together. Brian Zimmerman, the director of conservation and science at Bristol Zoological Society, said: “Our new Bristol zoo will set the standard for a modern, forward-looking zoo for the 21st century. “We will lead the way in terms of conservation within a zoo, with at least 78% of our animals having a link to conservation when the first phase of development is complete and more than 90% by our bicentenary in 2035.” Public consultation on the plans for the new Bristol zoo will take place in early February 2022 where further plans will be shared, ahead of a planning application in the spring.The NSW government will forge ahead with plans to license flood plain harvesting before the end of the year but will make amendments to address some of the findings in a NSW upper house committee report which warned knowledge around the practice was inadequate. The committee report, issued Wednesday, calls for further scientific work to establish the extent and impact of flood plain harvesting, which involves capturing floods moving across plains using massive dams, levees and channels. The practice, which has grown dramatically in the past 20 years, has been blamed by the Wentworth Group of Concerned Scientists for some of the 20% reduction in flows in the Murray-Darling, along with climate change. Environmental scientists have warned over-licensing could have long-term catastrophic impacts on the ability to achieve improvements in the Murray-Darling basin. The NSW minister for water, Melinda Pavey, confirmed she was looking at bringing forward new regulations before Christmas, particularly as many farmers are harvesting the recent flood waters in a legal limbo. The new regulations are likely to include tougher safeguards including protections for flood waters after a dry spell and a mechanism to allow the state to cancel licences without compensation if overallocation emerges as a problem. “We will look at [the report] overnight but I have been heavily influenced by the advice of Bret Walker SC that we should act quickly to license it,” Pavey said. Whether this will be sufficient to win over Labor and the Greens, who formed the majority on the committee, and other minor parties remains to be seen. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Much of the evidence to the upper house committee highlighted the lack of rigorous scientific data about the extent and impact of flood plain harvesting and issues about transparency of the modelling which will be used to calculate volumes under the new licences. The committee found there were too many inadequacies and uncertainties around harvesting, and “caution and improvement is required before a licensing framework is embedded,” the committee chair, Greens’ Cate Faehrmann, said “In particular, the committee finds that flood plain harvesting significantly impacts on downstream flows and river health, with economic, social, cultural and environmental consequences,” she said in the report. “While the report acknowledges the investment and work completed by the NSW government in this area to date, it finds that deficiencies remain, particularly in relation to volume measurement, illegal structures, water accounting rules, and community engagement and transparency.” The committee made 25 recommendations, including that licences are only issued once the Department of Planning, Industry and Environment is satisfied the report’s recommendations are fully met. Pavey acknowledged that, in order to protect the environment, the amount of flood plain harvesting in the Gwydir and Border rivers catchments would need to be reduced. She said the commonwealth had promised $10m for buying back and decommissioning structures, such as dams and channels, that are not licensed under the scheme. The regulations can be blocked by an upper house vote, but as parliament is not scheduled to sit until February, the vote may not happen until well after the new licensing scheme begins. Many irrigators are now harvesting water from recent floods, without a clear legal framework. The National and Liberal members of the committee did not support the majority report. “It is now 2021 and licences still have not been issued. The government has spent more than $17m and seven years collecting the best available information to estimate current and historical flood plain harvesting, including the volume capable of being taken in 1993/94 – when the cap was agreed to,” National party member Be Franklin said in a dissenting statement. “A significant amount of work and time has been invested into these processes and it is disappointing the inquiry has fundamentally rejected the need for urgency and has demanded changes which would delay the licensing of flood plain harvesting at least five years.” The Shooter, Fishers and Farmers member, Mark Banasiak, largely sided with the government and rejected several of the major recommendations. He said the Natural Resources Commission already did the work on assessing flood plain harvesting models and water sharing plans and an independent panel was unnecessary. However he agreed the commission needed to be properly resourced. His stance is likely to cause a rift within the SSF, as the MP for Murray, Helen Dalton, has been a strong supporter of the southern irrigators, who are concerned about the impact of the government’s proposal on downstream flows. The NSW Irrigators, which largely represents the northern basin irrigators, called on the NSW parliament to “get on with the job and regulate flood plain harvesting”. “More than $56m of federal and state money has been spent on rigorous modelling, analysis and ground-truthing,” NSW Irrigators’ Council CEO Claire Miller said. “It is absurd the committee is now recommending spending millions more of taxpayers’ money setting up new processes to duplicate this work and delay this reform for even longer,” she said.Boris Johnson faces heavy criticism across most newspaper front pages today after a dramatic revolt by Conservative MPs over new measures designed to slow the spread of the Omicron variant. Most papers took a decidedly critical tone and raised questions about the future of his leadership after nearly a third of MPs voted against mandatory Covid passes as the UK battles a surge in Covid cases. The Times splash ran with the headline “Huge Covid rebellion stuns PM,” alongside another a story suggesting more than one million people could be isolating with coronavirus on Christmas Day. The paper said Johnson suffered “the biggest rebellion of his premiership” last night and some MPs “openly questioned his future.” The Guardian took a similar line, suggesting the scale of the Tory rebellion “raises questions” over whether Johnson would in fact implement tougher Covid restrictions in the coming days. The Daily Telegraph continued the same theme with the headline: “Tory Covid rebels deal hammer blow to Johnson’s authority”, describing the rebellion as much bigger than expected. The Daily Mirror included an exclusive photo of 24 Tory aides pictured at a Christmas party last December. The headline reads: “Boris bashed by 99 rebels as Tory quits over THIS party pic.” The paper continues to describe the event as a “raucous” Christmas party thrown in Westminster during coronavirus restrictions. The Daily Express notes the revolt “bruises Boris” but asks whether he will be “proved right” over the need to introduce the latest Covid restrictions. The Financial Times has “Johnson suffers biggest setback of premiership in ‘plan B’ rebellion”, and notes the upcoming byelection in North Shropshire. Metro gives the main picture to the Star Hobson story but the splash headline is: “PM’s Xmas stuffing”. The Daily Mail points to an inside spread with the strapline: “98 Tory rebels: no more curbs, Boris”. While the Sun carries a mention of “Politicians lose heads over Covid” it focuses on the Queen hosting Christmas dinner this year.On my personal memory map of favourite local walks, this tree-lined former railway line is labelled Boulevard of the Bullfinches: they are always here in winter. Storm Arwen blew autumn away in a day. Sub-zero overnight temperatures have left the old track bed iron-hard. Frozen grass and fallen leaves, fringed with ice crystals, crunch underfoot. There is a brutal, eye-watering north wind, so I walk head down, face numb, shoulders hunched, gloved hands thrust into pockets. Glancing up, I’m brought to a halt by a briar rose sprawled across the path, blocking my way, blown down from a birch it had scrambled through. Its long, arching stems flail in the wind, like a wounded animal, flaunting claws of lacerating prickles. The very thought of walking into them hurts. Then, flying towards me, a cock bullfinch settles among the rose thorns. Black mask, dove-grey wings, cerise chest feathers: smooth, perfect plumage without a feather out of place. A gift on a bitterly cold winter morning. Shivering under four layers of clothing, elated with my good fortune, I wonder where this vulnerable bird found shelter through that long night of window-rattling, freezing winds while we lay awake, listening to fences splintering and bins blowing away. Bullfinches seem to like this two-mile stretch of linear woodland, probably because it offers a plentiful mix of food sources and the security of thorny cover. Today’s bird is feeding on stinging nettle seeds, but the winter menu includes dock and rosehip seeds, ash keys and the pips in mummified brambles that no one picked last autumn. As spring approaches they’ll switch to swelling flower buds of blackthorn and wild cherry. When the wind lulls, soft contact calls from the rest of the bullfinch family – the hen bird and two juveniles – drift down from hawthorns overhead. They’ll stay together as a family group all through winter. The parental pair bond may last a lifetime. Frozen fingers fumble with camera settings: there’s time to take a few photographs before they all take flight together, bounding away down the track towards three more months with winter days like this. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryNew Zealand’s cities could be reshaped for decades to come, forcing the long-entrenched dream of the quarter-acre block to the margins, after the government joined forces with the opposition to pass sweeping legislation in favour of housing densification. In a rare display of cross-party collaboration, Labour and National passed the Resource Management (Enabling Housing Supply and Other Matters) bill – a policy that aims to counter urban sprawl and boost supply by up to 105,000 new homes in the next eight years by forcing councils to loosen restrictions on building in urban areas. What is going on with New Zealand housing? The country has been in the midst of a housing crisis for more than a decade, driven by multiple factors including restrictive planning law, a lack of housing supply, an unchecked property investor market, and a widening gulf between income and housing costs. Its large cities of Wellington and Auckland have some of the least affordable property markets in the world; home ownership rates in New Zealand have been falling since the early 1990s across all age brackets, but the drop is especially pronounced for people in their 20s and 30s. Last year, the United Nations’ special rapporteur on the right to adequate housing, Leilani Farha, visited New Zealand and called the housing situation “a human rights crisis” and “a dark shadow that hangs over the country”. The OECD has ranked New Zealand top for unaffordable housing for its poorest families. Planning law has long been criticised for being restrictive, unwieldy and slow. It is blamed in part for slowing down housing development, entrenching single-house dwellings, and creating urban sprawl, which has implications for transport, infrastructure and climate change. How will this law help? Building a standard single-story house in New Zealand comes with a lot of paperwork, but trying to build a multi-storey or multi-dwelling development could tie someone up in regulatory battles for months or years, at great expense. If an area is zoned as a single-family area, the standard residence is a single house with a garden. Anyone wanting to build multiple dwellings, or anything other than a standard house, requires consent from the local council. Councils can reject the application for a whole number of reasons, including, for example, an unhappy neighbour about to lose some sunlight. The law will scrap some of those restrictions, forcing councils to allow up to three three-storey houses on most sites in the country’s major cities, without requiring consent. Building approvals will still be required. There will be exemptions in areas where densification is inappropriate, such as where there is a high risk of natural hazards, or a site has heritage value. The bill is paired with an acceleration of the government’s national policy statement on urban development, which aims to further reduce constraints on urban planning and development. That will come into effect to August 2023, instead of August 2024. Will it bring the country’s sky-high house prices down? Probably not. Modelling by Price Waterhouse Cooper predicted the new rules could result in about 48,200 to 105,500 new homes being built in the next five to eight years across New Zealand’s major cities. The national median price hit an eye-watering high in November – up by 23.8% to $925,000, compared with $747,000 in November last year. The analysis suggests that an increase in supply from this policy could slow down the runaway prices but not cause them to drop. However, if the policy was not in place, the prices would continue to balloon. What can Australia learn from the New Zealand experiment? Australia is facing its own housing affordability crisis, driven in part by record-low interest rates and an increase in household savings. Just 30% of the poorest 25-34 year-olds now own their homes, a 10% decrease since 1981. Grattan Institute program director Brendan Coates said restrictive zoning played a significant role in house prices in Sydney and Melbourne. Research published by the Reserve Bank of Australia in 2018 found restrictive zoning contributed about 40% to the price of houses in the two major cities, and was even higher in wealthy councils including Willoughby, the Northern Beaches and Melbourne’s inner east. “The new legislation attacks one of the key impediments to greater density – the structure of government – which led to too few homes being built,” Coates said. Could similar statewide rezonings help affordability in Australia? It depends. Coates said a similar approach to New Zealand could “help solve” Australia’s housing affordability crisis while boosting lagging productivity growth. “Decisions about development approvals largely sit with local councils,” he said. “People who would like to live there can’t vote, and their interests are left unrepresented. “Unsurprisingly, fewer homes are built than what’s needed.” But research by urban planners Mark Limb and Cameron Murray published this year found repeated zoning changes designed to encourage urban infill didn’t lead to cheaper housing. Instead, while the zoned capacity for housing at the locations doubled, the vast majority weren’t developed within five years, suggesting it was the market price, not planning regulations, that determined if and where development occurred. “I don’t think it’s going to do anything in New Zealand,” Murray said. “People will certainly build apartments where they couldn’t before but they’re not going to flood the market and crash prices. “This argument has been around since the 1960s – we’ve blamed overregulation but if it was true rezoning would reduce house prices, property developers lobbying for it are the worst lobbyists ever or they’re lying.” Murray said the solution in Australia was to provide free government housing to people unable to enter the market. “Rezoning isn’t going to massively reduce prices just as they said in Australia’s housing supply inquiry,” he said. “It’s become a religion, it’s a neat silver bullet.”Stephen Curry never wanted to say it himself, even if others have been saying it for years. He refused to call himself the greatest shooter of them all until the numbers said so. And now? “I got that baby,” Curry said, raising his arms high in the air. He struck the same pose hours earlier Tuesday night after shooting his way to the top of the NBA record book with his 2,974th three-pointer in the first quarter of the Golden State Warriors’ win over the New York Knicks. Curry broke the record set by Ray Allen, who held it for 10 years after passing Reggie Miller. They were both at the game and presented Curry with a jersey with a 2,974 on the back. That number could be 4,000 or more by the time Curry is done playing a game in a way that barely existed before him. “He has totally changed the game of basketball as we know it,” teammate Draymond Green said. Curry hit the record shot from the right wing with 7:33 remaining in the first quarter, waving his arms toward the sky, blowing a kiss and pounding his chest as he jogged backward down court. The Warriors then committed a foul and quickly called timeout to let the celebration begin. Curry went and embraced his father, Dell Curry, who was seated along a baseline, while Bob McKillop, his coach at Davidson, stood in the stands and beamed alongside Larry Riley, who drafted Curry for the Warriors. Then came a hug from Green, among others and, finally, Curry trotted back across the court for a long embrace and a few congratulatory words from Allen. Curry already owns two of the top three seasons for three-pointers – including the only season with 400 threes – and now has the career record. It came at Madison Square Garden, where Curry had one of his early-career highlights on 27 February 2013, when he made 11 three-pointers and scored 54 points. He’s gone on to win two MVP awards and three championships while becoming one of the biggest, most popular stars in the game. Fans waited long afterward while he conducted a postgame interview on the court, chanting “MVP! MVP!” when he finished. “I think fans are attracted to him just because of his humility and his story and how hard he’s had to work, so from that standpoint it transcends sports somewhat,” Golden State coach Steve Kerr said before the game. Curry had been far from his best beyond the arc to start this road trip, going 3 for 14 in Philadelphia and then 5 for 15 in Indiana. But with his ability to go from slumping to surging in a hurry, Kerr predicted a breakout would be coming soon. It came quickly Tuesday. Curry hit from straightaway on his first attempt, and fans around the arena stood as he was dribbling the ball across center court on the next possession. He launched an ugly attempt that he missed. The record-breaker came on his next shot and was vintage Curry. He gave the ball up and eventually raced back to the outside, getting the ball back and seemingly launching it in the same motion before a defender could get out to him. Not an easy shot, but Curry has made it so many times he knew this one was pure. “Oh, for sure,” he said. It’s that quick shot – whether after catching it or on the dribble – and the ability to release from so far behind the arc that’s made him a shooter unlike any before him. “He’s the best shooter I’ve ever seen, and I think it’s clear he is the best catch-and-shoot player,” former Dallas superstar Dirk Nowitzki recently said. “But where he’s so good is off the dribble, and I think that’s something that he added, the quick three off the dribble. It’s one motion and his shot is gone.” None of Curry’s stardom was guaranteed when he entered the league in 2009 as the No 7 pick from Davidson, far from one of the basketball powerhouses that usually produce the top players. But with perhaps an unmatched combination of dribbling and shooting accuracy, he led a long-distance revolution that has turned the three-pointer from an afterthought in NBA offenses into a weapon. He has led the league in three-pointers six times and is well on his way to a seventh for a resurgent Warriors team that again has the league’s best record at 23-5. “He has revolutionized the way the game is played and continues to leave fans in awe with his amazing artistry and extraordinary shooting ability,” NBA commissioner Adam Silver said in a statement. “We congratulate him on this historic achievement.” Curry could put the record well out of reach at his current pace: He entered the night making 5.4 three-pointers per game this season, best of his career. Curry, 33, has now played 789 games, with perhaps a few more seasons at the top. At the same point in his career, Allen had 1,918 threes.The cabinet has been told that rising Covid-19 infections as a result of Omicron are likely to mean staff shortages across industries and sectors, similar to the pingdemic that was set off by millions self-isolating over the summer. Schools and healthcare setting are also likely to face a significant challenge. Here’s a look at each sector. Healthcare Senior NHS leaders have said they expect staff sickness and self-isolation to have a significant impact. Dave Bramley, clinical director of emergency care at Sunderland Royal, told the Newcastle Chronicle that staff were already working extra shifts to cover colleagues who were self-isolating. Hospitals in England have been told to discharge as many patients as possible as staff gear up for an increase in Covid admissions while struggling with staff illness. Downing Street dismissed reports that there were concerns hospitals would have to close because of lack of staff. Schools One in every 30 primary school pupils in England was absent from the classroom last week for Covid-related reasons, according to government statistics. The figures released by the Department for Education showed that a record 146,000 primary school pupils were absent from 9 December, or 3.3%, with the total including a record 65,900 off with confirmed cases of Covid-19. A further 56,700 were off with suspected cases. The data also revealed that increasing numbers of teachers are absent for Covid-related reasons, with 2.4% off across all state schools in England, compared with 2% two weeks previously. The greatest share of those off were from primary schools. Industry Business groups, including the Confederation of British Industry and British Retail Consortium, say current staff shortages are manageable. But there are significant concerns that the exponential surge in cases is likely to hit warehouses and supermarkets, as well as industries like aviation and haulage. Royal Mail has said it is facing high levels of sickness that mean almost double the number of employees are absent compared with 2018, before Covid-19 was identified. The chief medical officer Chris Whitty is understood to have told cabinet that staff shortages are likely across all industries – because of the surging infections and isolation while waiting on test results. Transport Rail and bus services and tube lines were hit by the summer’s pingdemic of self-isolation but only a few services are seeing any significant disruption so far, but several trade union sources said they expected that to change within days. West Midlands Railway said there had been an increase in Covid-19 cases among its train crews and that it was already experiencing a shortage of drivers. The exception is ScotRail, which has axed services because of an outbreak among staff. The company said it had “a large number of staff testing positive for Covid, awaiting test results, or self-isolating.” Passenger numbers are also dropping as rising cases add to public caution. Transport for London experienced a 12% decrease in tube passenger numbers on Tuesday, just 52% of pre-pandemic levels. Hospitality Hospitality groups have already warned of lockdown-by-stealth as concern keeps many customers away from pubs, restaurants and bars. Businesses in Scotland will be required to introduce “reasonably practical” measures to minimise the risk of Covid-19 transmission, but in England there is no similar requirement. It means hospitality is likely to face a double-whammy of customers staying away but with no financial compensation – and staff shortages due to Covid outbreaks. Trade body UKHospitality has forecast that takings will be down by as much as 40% for December, usually the most lucrative month for venues by far.The broadleaf trees are now standing bare without their leaves and they look fairly lifeless, but appearances can be surprisingly deceptive. The aspen has striking white bark but that of the younger trees tends to have a greenish tinge thanks to chloroplasts buried in the inner layer. When sunlight penetrates the thin outer bark it can be enough for photosynthesis, aided by tiny pores in the bark that let carbon dioxide and oxygen gases pass in and out. And so, even in winter, the tree can supplement its food reserves. Sunlight can also penetrate the thin outer bark of beech or silver birch, or the bark of tender saplings of other trees where there is enough chlorophyll for photosynthesis. Trees such as silver birch have bark that also peels away and may let in more light, but even in the thicker bark of other trees light can still penetrate through cracks, whether the bark is craggy or smooth. And the leaf buds and twigs of many trees can also make food by photosynthesis, even if only for a week or two before the buds open, a welcome boost just as spring gets going.Neil Patrick Harris may be approaching 50, but to a generation he will always be the child prodigy Doogie Howser, the 14-year-old doctor he played as a teenager. “It’s a little bizarre that people – what is it, 30 years later? – still refer to me as that. People say: ‘Hey, Doogie, I like your new show!’ But hey, better than anonymity, I suppose.” It is a long time since Harris, 48, has been anonymous. He made his acting debut at 15, starring opposite Whoopi Goldberg as a disillusioned teen in Clara’s Heart, a drama about a Jamaican woman who moves to Baltimore to become the housekeeper for a rich family. Since then, he has established himself as a versatile actor in musical theatre, film and TV (most notably the sitcom How I Met Your Mother) and a host and presenter of high-profile awards shows such as the Oscars. His CV is particularly impressive when you consider how often child actors struggle to establish adult careers, or find themselves traumatised by their formative experiences. So, how did he succeed where so many have failed? The way he tells it, being a teenage actor was exciting enough on its own to stop him from being distracted by the worst excesses of fame. “I love process,” he says, emphatically. “I’ve always really been most excited about learning how things work. Fame is a bit of an ether fog and you can get overwhelmed by the treatment, as opposed to the work. “I loved being in an apartment building I’d never been in, in a town I’d never been in, and meeting people. I don’t think I was ever really caught up in the size of my dressing room or my salary or getting free sweaters from Adidas. When you get lost into that world, fame fleets, right?” Harris is video calling from his farmhouse in East Hampton, on Long Island in New York. He lives with his husband, the actor and chef David Burtka (they have been together since 2004 and married in 2014), and their twins, Gideon and Harper, who were born to a surrogate in 2010. His day has been spent “dealing with kids in schools and parent-teacher conferences and dad life”. Harris embraces domesticity, sharing snippets of home life on his Instagram – so much so that his 1,000th post featured self-aware mocking from his twins (telling him to “stop staring at your phone all the time!”). He came out publicly as gay in 2006, after the second series of How I Met Your Mother, immediately making him one of the most high-profile out actors. In a 2008 interview with the LGBTQ+ magazine Out, he described himself as “striving to be an example of normalcy”, because of the relatively conventional family life he and Burtka led. Nonetheless, it caused a backlash. “People were bothered by that use of the word ‘normal’,” he says. It is a topic he talks about carefully – not defensively, just with consideration. “I think one of the most exciting parts about queer culture is being able to live your most fabulous life. But I’m about to go down and fix things with superglue and build stuff in workshops and organise and fix. That’s my happy place. But there’s no one that loves the extreme more than myself.” We are speaking before the release of The Matrix Resurrections, in which Harris plays a mysterious character called the Analyst. Such is the secrecy, there is little he can say about his role, but he says he was blown away by the original film’s technical accomplishments and remains “blissfully unaware” about its convoluted meaning; he isn’t especially paranoid that we are living in a Matrix-style simulation. (That said, he knows which pill he would take: “Oh, red pill, for sure.”) “I have an insatiable desire to accomplish and do more things. I love bungee jumping and fire eating and travelling and white-water rafting – my bucket list is long. I think that’s kind of what life is about: experiential education. I figure that’s my red pill.” Harris may seem an incongruous choice for a serious sci-fi franchise, but his career has been full of zags, which he puts down to being an extroverted, curious child. He spent his younger years trying desperately to find a creative outlet in Ruidoso, his small home town in the mountains of New Mexico. “There were not a lot of artistic outlets aside from howling coyote paintings and making bolo ties,” he says, drily. Harris grew up with his parents, who were lawyers, and his older brother. He sang in a church choir and played various instruments in a band; by 10, he was directing plays at his local theatre. “But there was really no opportunity to act on any level except at the country club, where they would put up a weird play twice a year.” His choir director encouraged him to attend a drama summer camp run by the playwright Mark Medoff at New Mexico State University. Medoff took a shine to Harris and encouraged the teenager to audition for Clara’s Heart, which Medoff wrote. When Harris landed the role, he was delighted – despite the pressure of being in the public eye. “I think every kid develops insecurities around what it is that they are doing, right?” he says. “If you’re a jock, then you’ll have insecurities about not being brainy and if you’re a Dungeons &amp; Dragons player then you’re insecure because you’re not physical enough. So, I did have a little bit of a spotlight put on me. But, simultaneously, I was getting to do these very interesting bucket-listy things that everyone would love to do.” He was nominated for a Golden Globe for his performance in Clara’s Heart. Doogie Howser, MD followed shortly after. His affection for the show, for which he earned another Golden Globe nod, is clear. “I’m very proud of that role,” he says. “That was my formative college years, even though I was barely in high school.” But, as with college years, there are some scenes that are best left in the past. Earlier this year, a cringe-inducing clip of the show went viral on Twitter. In it, Doogie is led into a dark room by an adult nurse; she says she likes younger men, then pushes herself against him and undoes his trousers (it turns out to be an uncomfortable birthday prank). “I remember the scene and I remember filming it,” says Harris, who had not heard it had resurfaced. “I appreciate that you shouldn’t be doing certain creative things like you used to. But I also was in Cabaret on Broadway, where the Emcee was encouraged to wander through the audience and sit on anyone’s laps and grope the ensemble. [But] we do live in a world where you have to be much more cognisant of everyone being OK with everything. So I applaud that.” After Doogie came TV shows and a few films (including Starship Troopers), but the gamechanger was his role as an obscene, fictionalised version of himself in 2004’s Harold &amp; Kumar Get the Munchies. He played a womaniser high on ecstasy who steals the title characters’ car. He says he enjoyed parodying himself. “The fact that they were [fans] and that they enjoyed my company made it feel like we were all doing it together. And I thought that was a pretty badass version of myself.” It secured him the role for which he is best known, How I Met Your Mother’s commitment-phobic lothario Barney Stinson. Harris spent the best part of a decade on the show, which first aired in 2005, and received four Emmy nominations. But his character’s attitude to women and his elaborate pickup artist schemes haven’t aged well. “Well, my take on How I Met Your Mother is that it was not all real,” he says. “The structure of the show is future Ted [Mosby, the central character] telling his children the story. In doing so, he’s fictionalising the narrative and he’s talking about his friend who was the wing man, the buddy, the guy that was always wanting to party and have fun and make any experience an event. So, I think of Barney as this weird anti‑superhero, who when he failed would just make up a story to make him succeed.” As for the practice of re-analysing past shows with a modern lens, critiquing their supposed insensitivities, Harris is unsure. “Some people will be offended by it in retrospect – and there’s not much one can do in retrospect. But the experience of making that show for nine seasons was very good energy … and there was never a sense of doing things with bad intent.” Harris has taken on more serious projects, such as Downsizing and Gone Girl – not to mention his devastating role in this year’s critically acclaimed It’s a Sin, in which he played one of the first victims of the Aids epidemic in the UK – but more often starred in family films and TV shows. He has done voice work, too, and performed regularly on stage, from his first role as Mark Cohen in a 1997 tour of Rent to a Tony‑winning turn in 2014’s Hedwig and the Angry Inch. He also appeared in the Stephen Sondheim musicals Sweeney Todd, Assassins and Company. “Every single time I worked with him, I made sure to really try to recognise the fact that it was actually Stephen Sondheim and I was actually talking to him,” he says. “I think he’s one of the absolute greats. To get to interact with him was just phenomenal.” They shared a passion, too. “He was also a games and theory guy and did crossword puzzles. So, we would email each other often about: ‘Did you see this?’ or: ‘You should try this puzzle,’ or: ‘What do you think of this escape room?’” he says, laughing. “I know that, for someone whose mind was as sharp as Steve’s, I guess I can take a little bit of happiness in knowing that he maintained sharpness until the end.” His work as a presenter – from the Oscars (he was the first openly gay man to present them) to the Emmys and Tonys – allows him to channel the work of one of his idols, Jim Henson, the only person to whom he has written a fan letter. If Henson is a hero, he sees himself in a more surprising form. “I consider myself very sort of Kermit the Frog/PT Barnum/circus carnival sideshow barker,” he says. “What I’m skilled at is setting the tone. I don’t need the spotlight. But I’m good at telling everyone the game we’re about to play. That’s the Kermit the Frogging. Plus, I move my arms wildly, so I guess I took that from the frog.” Partiality for Kermit, the circus, escape rooms, puzzles and a CV packed with children’s films and TV – it is almost as if a part of him hasn’t quite grown up. “Have you seen my office?” responds Harris, gesturing behind himself to a walnut-panelled attic featuring a steampunk lamp, a stuffed white rabbit leaping out from the wall and a framed portrait of the magician Chung Ling Soo. “I’ve always loved entertaining and entertainment,” he says. “Jim Henson was one of my idols, because he was an adult who chose to try to educate kids and entertain adults through puppetry, which many feel is so childish. But I love magic, I love circus and I love games.” As well as The Matrix Resurrections, Harris will star in the Netflix series Uncoupled, written by Sex and the City’s Darren Star. The show follows the life of Michael, played by Harris, whose husband walks out on their 17-year marriage. The show provoked controversy in November when the actor Ada Maris published an open letter criticising what she viewed as egregious stereotyping, after reading for the role of a Latina housekeeper. “I valued what she was saying – and I heard her,” says Harris, who wasn’t involved in writing the show. “I would not have wanted to be made to feel uncomfortable as an actor auditioning. So, they made the decision to just eliminate the role. And I applaud them for making that decision.” After such an eclectic career, are there any roles, scenes or characters he regrets doing? He considers the question for half a minute. Not really, he says. “I don’t want to sound pollyannaish about it, but I’m often appreciative that the choices that I have made were pretty net positive – and I mean that not as how it was received, but how it was to create. I do feel like failures give us the greater opportunity to learn. If I’m too concerned about doing something wrong, then I’m not going to push my boundaries.” Is there anything he wants to try his hand at that he hasn’t yet? After a long pause, he says: “I’ve never been able to ride a unicycle. I’ve got to figure that one out.” The Matrix Resurrections is in cinemas from 22 December“Any country’s present,” says Robert Harris, “is shaped by its interpretation of its past.” Harris, whose bestselling second world war novel Munich is now coming to the big screen courtesy of Netflix, adds: “We have a very strong image of this island standing alone, weak, defenceless – pulled back together by an effort of will. Well, none of it’s really true.” The big stories Britain creates from its history require heroes, but they also require cowards, failures and villains. How else could we be sure that our heroes were truly heroic, if we didn’t have comparable figures who fell short? This has been the fate of prewar prime minister Neville Chamberlain, remembered for his policy of trying to appease and contain Hitler. Munich: The Edge of War is a bold attempt to change the story. But can this fictionalised film shift public perceptions of history? “Chamberlain is a tragic hero to me,” says Harris. “He fails, but there’s something noble in the attempt – not squalid, which is the way it’s normally written.” Harris was thinking about putting the book on screen before he had even finished writing it – partly because he was convinced his friend Jeremy Irons should play Chamberlain. The two discussed it in 2016, a year before the book came out. Now, in a London hotel, Harris turns to Irons, who is sitting next to him, smoking languidly. “You’re at the right age,” says the writer, “with a certain aquiline look, and an imposing physical presence. He was prime minister, the dominant political figure, so it needed someone with that sort of stature.” Irons replies: “I only knew him as history has sent him down to us, as the appeaser, the man who was fooled by Hitler.” Playing Chamberlain changed his view. “I got into the mindset of a man who only 20 years ago had witnessed a war where a lot of his colleagues and friends had died. An appalling war. I was very excited to be part of what I thought was a real re-evaluation of this historical figure – a great man.” In September 1938, Hitler wanted to invade Czechoslovakia and annex the Sudetenland. Chamberlain flew to Germany three times to try to persuade the Führer out of war. His third visit was for the Munich Conference, the subject of this film. On screen, the negotiations become a tense thriller driven by a fictional plot: a German official tries to convince one of Chamberlain’s staff, a former friend, that the British must stop Hitler. “I did toy with whether there might be a way of writing the novel with Chamberlain as the central character,” says Harris. “But I think that’d be a pretty tough ask.” The film focuses instead on the younger cast who have, it must be said, a sexier story. Paul von Hartmann (played by Jannis Niewöhner) is the German official, who befriends Hugh Legat (George MacKay) at Oxford University in the early 1930s. The two disagree politically – Hartmann initially supports Hitler – but the spark between them is powerful. There’s a subplot involving their rivalry over a woman but the film doesn’t give any of its female characters much depth – the far more interesting sexual energy is between the two men. When Legat accompanies Chamberlain to Munich, Hartmann is desperate to give him secret documents showing Hitler’s plans to conquer Europe. If Chamberlain won’t stop Hitler, Hartmann wants to – whatever that takes. Though Hartmann and Legat are fictional, Harris confirms that they are partially inspired by the diplomat Adam von Trott zu Solz and the scholar AL Rowse. The latter, who was gay, wrote about his intense platonic attachment to Trott at Oxford. Trott, though a considerably less amiable character than the fictional Hartmann, went on to join Claus von Stauffenberg’s 1944 plot to assassinate Hitler. It failed and Trott was executed. “The film-makers saw the thrust as being the attempt by the youngsters,” says Irons, “but I said we had to care about the political situation. While the script was being developed, I kept fighting Chamberlain’s corner. I said, ‘You have to know where these people who are negotiating are coming from.’ We can’t just be wallpaper.” Harris agrees: “You were crucial in all that, much more so than any actor in any film I’ve been involved in.” One of the scenes Irons fought for is set in the garden of 10 Downing Street. Chamberlain is with his wife and Legat joins them. The PM speaks movingly of the first world war and his responsibility to help the nation avoid another trauma. “He believed the country would have a spiritual crisis if the people didn’t see their leaders doing everything possible to avoid another war,” says Harris. “It’s a very interesting line and one that he did actually say.” “One could say,” adds Irons, “that the country is in a spiritual crisis at the moment, because our leaders don’t seem to be dealing with the things we care about: the national health, global warming, balancing up between the rich and the poor. We’re going through a moment where we don’t trust our politicians – and to portray a politician who is honest and truthful and has real problems and is trying to deal with them is very important.” Munich has a German director, Christian Schwochow, who has directed episodes of The Crown. Everyone in the cast and crew seems to have been excited by the opportunity to create an Anglo-German version of this moment in history that set both nations on a path to war. “At the first reading rehearsal,” says Jannis Niewöhner, who plays Hartmann, “we were sitting with all the English actors and the German actors and you could see the difference in the cultures, the ways they would say their lines. You could sense this is going to be a great movie.” Chamberlain and Hitler both signed the Munich Agreement, allowing Germany to annex the Sudetenland. That was the appeasement: giving Hitler what he wanted in the hope it might satisfy him. But in an intriguing twist – given prominence in the film – the next morning Chamberlain persuaded Hitler to sign a separate declaration in which Britain and Germany promised never to go to war again. This was the famous piece of paper that Chamberlain waved triumphantly on his return, claiming that he had secured “peace for our time”. Hitler was not appeased and, 11 months later, invaded Poland, precipitating the second world war. Munich makes the case that Chamberlain’s avoidance of war in 1938 was a boon to the allies, allowing Britain time to rearm. By then, says Harris: “We had the world’s most powerful navy. We had an integrated air force, all of which was bequeathed by the loathed Chamberlain – who was spending 50% of the government’s tax revenue on rearmament.” Among those who benefited from the vilification of Chamberlain was his rival, Winston Churchill. He doesn’t appear in Munich, but in a sense the whole movie is a riposte to his version of history. “I don’t seek to denigrate Churchill in any way,” says Harris. “He clearly was a brilliant war leader and an inspiring person. But he certainly went out to denigrate Chamberlain, and his memoirs really are a great counterfactual. ‘If only that, if only this – then Hitler could have been stopped.’ None of it seems to really address the things Chamberlain had to deal with. And if we’d followed Churchill’s advice, the army would have bought a lot of biplanes.” Churchill’s portrait of Chamberlain in his memoir The Gathering Storm isn’t entirely negative: he emphasises that Chamberlain was able and forceful. Yet overall he portrays him as “opinionated and self-confident in a very high degree”. The sneer is audible in some of Churchill’s lines: “Mr Chamberlain continued to believe that he had only to form a personal contact with the dictators to effect a marked improvement in the world situation.” Chamberlain died six months after leaving office in 1940. By the time The Gathering Storm was published in 1948, no one had much interest in defending the man who had tried to make peace with Hitler. “Chamberlain,” says Harris, “was a very convenient scapegoat both for the Conservative party and for the Labour party, who had opposed all the measures of rearmament that he had reintroduced.” Munich is an ambitious film, aiming not only to thrill but to shift British – and possibly German – views of their national story. “It has a slight polemical intent,” says Harris, “because I’m arguing against a tidal wave of 80 years of the other view.” Still, as many have found in the past, challenging the national story can be dangerous. Is Harris worried about the reaction? His eyes twinkle. “All my life, right from when I was a schoolboy, I’ve liked to cause trouble and stir things up. I couldn’t be happier.” • Munich: The Edge of War is in UK cinemas from 7 January and on Netflix from 21 January.Britain’s highest earners have been donating less to charity despite soaring incomes, according to a probe of tax records that found society’s wealthiest are getting richer but meaner. Charities have missed out on more than £2bn as a result of a widening “generosity gap” as the nation’s top 1% of earners reduced their average declared giving by a fifth in real terms from 2012 to 2019. Over the same period donations from the rest of the population rose. Approximately 344,000 highest earners who received more than £175,000 before tax accounted for 17% of the UK’s pre-tax income, including capital gains, over that period but made just 6% of all charitable donations. Charities are facing a fresh fundraising crisis sparked by the new Covid wave after a plunge in donors last year, with 1.6 million fewer people donating as thousands of fundraising events from fun runs to gala dinners were cancelled. Charities received £4.6bn in donations in the first half of this year, according to the Charities Aid Foundation (CAF). If that rate continues it would mean the lowest annual receipt in five years. Gus O’Donnell, the former cabinet secretary who led the research by the Law Family Commission on Civil Society, urged the wealthy to “think about what you could be spending your money on this Christmas – if it’s buying a bigger yacht or giving it to people who really need it and via charities that can really make a difference”. He said: “Those with the deepest pockets can afford to reach a little further. Among the top 1% in Britain, there is a generosity gap between a handful who give very significant amounts and the majority who give substantially less.” The study found that the UK’s very richest 1,700 people made close to two-thirds of the donations made by the top 1%. Janet de Botton, an art collector, is among those who have stepped up their donations, giving £54m in 2019 and £68m in 2021, according to the Giving List compiled by the Sunday Times and CAF. Alisher Usmanov, an Uzbek-born metals and mining magnate who has been Britain’s most generous donor of the last two decades, increased his charitable spending from £137m to £507m. Lord O’Donnell’s research found that the typical income of someone in the top 1% rose 10% between 2012 and 2019, to £271,000, but their typical donation fell by more than a fifth. The top 1% typically gave 0.2% of their income, while separate figures suggest that typical donations across the whole population in 2019 amounted to about 0.8% of average incomes. But rather than a simple case of growing miserliness among the rich, experts said charities needed to do more to win back the trust of donors after a series of scandals over the use of funds, including by Oxfam and Kids Company. And O’Donnell called on the government to appoint a senior civil servant to drive donations back up. “In America they celebrate philanthropy,” he said. “Buildings are named after them and entrepreneurs are proud of what they give. Here we do it anonymously and one of the results is that we don’t, as a society, value [philanthropy] enough.” If the rich increased their donations to 1% of income, charities could be getting an extra £1.4bn more in annual donations, the commission found. There are signs the rich may be stepping up donations since the pandemic. CAF, which helps place donations for people giving £25,000 to £100m, said it saw such large donations rise by 26% between 2020 and 2021. “Covid has highlighted that charities have a huge value to society,” said Edward Garrett, the head of private clients at CAF. “It’s an opportunity and it has generated momentum. It is up to the charities to seize on that and make sure it continues.” Sam Mercadante, the policy manager at the National Council for Voluntary Organisations, said: “We want to see those with the most dig the deepest and support communities, those accessing charity services and taking action on causes they believe in.”Soaring Covid cases could cause major shortages across industry, hospitality and healthcare, ministers have been told, as rail companies cancelled services and Royal Mail said it was experiencing high staff absences. According to cabinet sources, Boris Johnson and England’s chief medical officer, Chris Whitty, said at a briefing that rising cases would be likely to affect businesses with mass worker absences. Whitty also told ministers to expect a “significant increase” in hospital admissions. West End shows have been cancelled because of the surge in suspected Omicron cases, while waste collections, deliveries and schools are all under threat from shortages. No 10 emphasised there had not been “any discussion or any warning about hospitals or clinical settings having to close as a result of this variant”. Johnson’s spokesperson said public services should be able to continue to operate without disruption. “We have strong measures in place and robust, and now tested, procedures to ensure they can continue.” Asked if modelling had been done on the impact on staffing essential services, he said: “I think given the lack of hard data on things like severity, transmissibility and its impact on different vaccines and boosters etc, I think that would be hard to model.” The leader of Britain’s A&amp;E doctors said on Tuesday that Omicron could lead to high numbers of hospital staff having to take time off ill just as the NHS was grappling with winter pressures. “The biggest challenge to staff at the moment is going to be the numbers going off sick,” said Dr Katherine Henderson, president of the Royal College of Emergency Medicine. “I was on a shift yesterday and during my day shift four doctors went off Covid-positive,” she told an all-party parliamentary group coronavirus evidence session. Elaine Thorpe, a matron in the intensive care unit at University College London hospitals NHS trust, said: “We’ve got a lot of staff really going down with Covid and that’s really impacting the number of nurses, doctors, admin staff – everyone behind the scenes. It’s not just the staff who work in the coalface in A&amp;E and critical care. It’s throughout the NHS that’s really going to be impacted on this and we’re really worried.” The Guardian understands about 100 Tube drivers are on Covid-related absences. ScotRail and West Midlands said there had been an increase in Covid cases among its train crews, while ScotRail axed services because of an outbreak among staff. Manuel Cortes, general secretary of the TSSA union, representing transport workers, said furlough should be urgently reintroduced and that essential transport services were under threat. “We know that Omicron has a higher attack rate than any previous variant of Covid-19. It will soon be the dominant form across Britain, putting essential services at risk, and straining our NHS,” he said. “In Scotland, hundreds of ScotRail trains have been cancelled due to illness. We need to take action now to break the chains of transmission.” Essential services could also come under pressure similar to the summer’s “pingdemic”, which forced millions of people to self-isolate. Greenwich council in south London has told residents that staff shortages will cause disruption to waste collection this week. The mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, urged more support for businesses as it emerged there was a 25% increase in Christmas booking cancellations, in part by sick or wary customers. The trade body UK Hospitality has forecast that takings will be down by as much as 40% for December, usually the most lucrative month for venues. Increasing numbers of teachers are absent because of Covid, according to the latest Department for Education data, with 2.4% off across all state schools in England, compared with 2% two weeks before. Most of those were from primary schools, with one in 30 primary pupils in England absent from the classroom last week for Covid-related reasons.This is the century in which humanitarian and environmental disasters converge. Climate breakdown has driven many millions from their homes, and is likely to evict hundreds of millions more. The famine harrowing Madagascar at the moment is the first to have been named by the UN as likely to have been caused by the climate emergency. It will not be the last. Great cities find themselves dangerously short of water as aquifers are drained. Air pollution kills 10 million a year. Synthetic chemicals in soil, air and water impose untold effects on both ecologies and people. But it also works the other way round. Humanitarian catastrophes or, to be more precise, governments’ cruel and irrational responses to them, are triggering ecological disaster. Nowhere is this more obvious than in the construction of border walls. At the moment, with the help of 140 British military engineers, Poland is starting to build a steel wall 5.5 metres high, along 180km of its border with Belarus. The assistance from British troops will help secure a new arms deal between the UK and Poland worth around £3bn. The wall is described as a “security” measure, but it’s securing Europe not from a threat but against the desperate needs of some of the most vulnerable people on Earth: particularly refugees from Syria, Iraq and Afghanistan escaping persecution, torture and mass killing. They have been cruelly exploited by the government of Belarus, which has used them as political weapons. Now, in the depths of winter, they are trapped at the border, freezing and starving, with nowhere to go. When the Berlin Wall fell, we were promised that this marked the beginning of a new era of freedom. Instead, far more walls have risen than fallen. Since 1990, Europe has built border walls six times longer than the barrier in Berlin. Worldwide, the number of fenced borders has risen from 15 to 70 since the end of the cold war: there are now 47,000 kilometres of hard frontier. For those trapped at these borders, the cruelties of capitalism are scarcely distinguishable from the cruelties of communism. The humanitarian effects of these walls are well documented. But their ecological impacts are also devastating. Roads and farmland isolate wildlife, but nothing cuts off some species as effectively as border walls. Just as we understand better than ever before the importance of ecological connectivity, we are carving up and separating habitats at unprecedented speed. We now know that, even in large reserves, wildlife species can decline towards extinction if they cannot disperse and mix with populations from elsewhere. Their genetic diversity narrows, reducing their breeding success and making them more susceptible to disease. Barriers prevent them from moving as conditions change. Conditions are now changing very quickly, as a result of climate breakdown. A trapped population, in many cases, is a doomed one. The new wall between Poland and Belarus will, among other grim impacts, slice the Białowieża Forest, the largest ancient woodland in lowland Europe, in two. Already, a temporary barrier of coiled razor wire has been strung through the middle of the forest, blocking the movement of its celebrated populations of bison, wolves, boar, lynx, deer, moose and other wildlife, and preventing bears, which have just started to return, from recolonising the woods. Yet, despite the best efforts of scientists like Dr Katarzyna Nowak of the Białowieża Geobotanical Station, the massive ecological consequences are widely ignored. There has been no environmental impact assessment of Poland’s wall, in breach of both the EU Habitats Directive and international treaties. Similar disasters are happening around the world. The border fence erected between Slovenia and Croatia in 2015 could cause the gradual extinction of the lynx in the Dinaric Mountains. The carcasses of deer that died horribly after becoming snagged on its cruel barbs have been found along its length. The barrier between India and Pakistan has caused a collapse in the population of Kashmir markhor (a rare and remarkable corkscrew-horned wild goat). The longest border fences in the world divide China, Mongolia and Russia from each other. They have isolated remnant populations of wild asses, Mongolian gazelles and other endangered species of the steppes. Trump’s wall, dividing the United States from Mexico, is a threat to several rare mammal species, as well as the pygmy owl, which flies too low to cross the barrier. In the boom-and-bust ecology of the desert, populations survive by recolonising areas after they have been driven out by drought. The wall, in many cases, will make this impossible. There is a strain of rightwing environmentalism, going back at least 100 years, that equates immigration with pollution. Madison Grant was one of the founders of the US conservation movement, who helped establish its network of national parks. He was also the author of a book called The Passing of the Great Race, published in 1916, which Adolf Hitler described as “my bible”. Grant believed that in conserving the ecosystems of North America, he was protecting the domain of the Nordic “master race”, that was being “overtaken” in the US by “worthless race types”. As secretary of the Zoological Society, he helped ensure that a kidnapped Congolese man, Ota Benga, was caged with the apes on display at the Bronx Zoo. In 2018, the Fox News host Tucker Carlson proclaimed: “I actually hate litter, which is one of the reasons I’m so against illegal immigration.” The European far right has suddenly switched from denying the environmental crisis to using it as an argument for excluding immigrants. It claims that people from elsewhere don’t share “our” environmental ethics. This slur is easily repudiated: surveys have long shown stronger environmental concerns among the public in poorer nations. Not only do these attitudes conflict with all that is best about environmentalism – its empathy and consideration towards all people and all non-human life – but the policies of separation and containment they promote are ecologically disastrous. Though border walls cause a great deal of death and suffering, and are only partially effective at their stated purpose of excluding people, they are wholly effective in excluding many other species. It’s not as if anyone who cares about people needs more arguments against the vicious policies that separate us from each other. But there are more arguments, and they are powerful. Border walls are accelerating the extinction crisis and making ecosystems inviable. Just as humanity knows no boundaries, nor does wildlife. There is no conflict between caring about the planet and caring about its people. In fact, you can’t have one without the other. George Monbiot is a Guardian columnistNever Mind the Buzzcocks Christmas Special 9pm, Sky Max Presented with infectious relish by the busiest man on television, Greg Davies, this reboot of the pop quiz has just about justified its return. This special sees Holly Johnson and Lauren Laverne join the gang for owl-related Paul McCartney revelations, Davies’s school disco Holly Johnson dance (it didn’t bring the ladies flocking, apparently) and a Grange Hill lineup that will be instantly evocative for viewers of a certain age. Phil Harrison Between the Covers 7pm, BBC Two Sara Cox’s cosy book club wraps up its run with a look at Chibundu Onuzo’s third novel, Sankofa, and Sebastian Barry’s 2008 Booker nominee, The Secret Scripture. Actor Imogen Stubbs, DJ Greg James, musician Fleur East and comic Lloyd Griffith also recommend personal favourites. Graeme Virtue Kirstie and Phil’s Love It Or List It 8pm, Channel 4 The bickering property experts return for series seven of the show in which a couple choose between renovating or moving house. Tonight: a four-bed 1940s bungalow in Poole has been left half finished by its builder owner for more than 20 years. Alexi Duggins Christmas at Castle Howard 9pm, Channel 4 The national fascination for stately homes goes seasonal in this new series in which country piles are decked out with tinsel and opened to the public. Tonight, Castle Howard; already popular, but now also of interest as a location for Bridgerton. Gratuitous levels of festive lavishness. PH The Lie: Murder in Suburbia 9pm, Channel 5 This two-part series explores the investigation into the murder of Rachel O’Reilly, who was killed by her husband in 2004 at their home in County Dublin. The story of how Joe O’Reilly was eventually brought to justice is testimony to his brutish arrogance and the persistence of the police. PH Positive 9pm, Sky Documentaries The third and final part of this series exploring the history of HIV in the UK. It’s not easy watching – 1980s media coverage is particularly bleak – but personal testimonies keep things engaging, such as the Rev Richard Coles, who compares nightclub Heaven to the Heathrow of London’s gay scene: “Everyone went through.” Henry Wong Film choice The Hand of God (Paolo Sorrentino, 2021), Netflix The arrival of Maradona at Napoli in 1984 is the peg on which writer-director Paolo Sorrentino hangs his zesty, autobiographical coming-of-age tale. Filippo Scotti plays 17-year-old Fabietto who, amid the loves and betrayals, jokes and tragedies of his extended Naples family, tries to figure out his future. Influences include Sorrentino regular Toni Servillo as his flawed father, Ciro Capano’s challenging film-maker and his glamorous Aunt Patrizia (Luisa Ranieri), whose mental health problems add an unsettling note to a mostly sun-soaked dose of adolescent angst. Simon WardellNo artist gets to a fourth album these days without having a pretty good sense of who they are. Over the past 11 years, Little Simz has proven herself to be one of the UK’s finest rap exports, flawlessly consistent across various media including a role in Netflix’s Black British drama Top Boy. Despite her evident successes, she can’t seem to escape perceptions of being “underrated” – of paddling steadily as her male peers rocket to international recognition. That was, until April 2021, when her comeback single Introvert announced itself with blazing military drums and a spectacular video set in the National History Museum. “I study humans, that makes me an anthropologist,” she rapped. “I’m not into politics but I know it’s dark times … But if I don’t take this winner’s flight that’s career suicide.” Introversion is considered synonymous with shyness, but on Sometimes I Might Be Introvert (an acronym of her nickname), Simbiatu Ajikawo demonstrates that she has no shortage of bold, cinematic vision. She makes up for a lack of travel during the pandemic by stamping her musical passport with the influences of a wide diasporic sound. Her Nigerian heritage is in fine hip-winding display on Point and Kill (featuring Obongjayar), while Protect My Energy layers motivational mantras over 80s Miami drums, balancing out the record’s heavier moments with a keen sense of play. She keeps samples and features to a minimum. We get a hint of Smokey Robinson on the loose Two Worlds Apart, and are reunited with old collaborator Cleo Sol on the silky-smooth Woman (think Drake’s Nice for What divorced from the male gaze), but for the most part, she sticks with regular collaborator Inflo, a London producer whose deft, subtle touch has seen Simz right since 2017’s Mercury-nominated Grey Area. (Given that he recently produced the best bits of Adele’s 30, Simz is not this album’s only star on the rise.) Simz is a private person, and yet Introvert is impressively wide-reaching. She is newly generous here with her vignettes of family life, driven by the desire to recalibrate her post-pandemic priorities as an aunt and sibling. On Little Q, she reconnects with a cousin on the other side of the Thames to learn more about his near-death brush with knife crime, while I Love You, I Hate You sees her attempting to find peace with a father who has disappointed her and to ensure she does not carry that fear of rejection into a new relationship. It seems to be working: I See You’s old-school R&amp;B is blissful with sleepy Sunday morning vulnerability, while How Did You Get Here is a tear-jerking stocktake of the artist’s journey so far. A gospel choir frames her determination and gratitude: “I’m the version of me I always imagined when I was younger.” A narrative journey in the truest sense, Sometimes I Might Be Introvert is upfront about the sharp sense of self-doubt that so often chases the sweet intoxication of success. Throughout the record, The Crown’s Emma Corrin appears as a plummy voiced narrator, both guardian angel and chiding presence. The character serves to poke and prod at Simbi’s worst fears: “One foot out of line and you will be ridiculed.” It’s a relatable pressure. After the resurgence of Black Lives Matter last year sparked a renewed commitment to diversity, the experience of finally feeling “seen” as a Black creative often falls somewhere between flattery and self-doubt, wondering when the rug might be pulled out from under you. But what magic can occur when you actually back yourself to try? “Instead of sayin ‘simz is underrated’ why don’t you stop being sheep and change the narrative?” the artist tweeted on the album’s release. If 2020 was the year that made introverts of us all, maybe 2021 was an opportunity to recognise that some of those private energies are not only worth protecting, but celebrating. Call her underrated if you wish, but it seems to have paid off: Little Simz’s unabashed self-ownership made for the year’s best rap album.Amazon’s plastic packaging waste soared by almost a third, to 270,000 tonnes, during the pandemic last year, according to a report from marine conservation group Oceana. Oceana estimates up to 10,700 tonnes of this plastic, including air pillows, bubble wrap and plastic-lined paper envelopes, equivalent to a delivery van’s worth every 67 minutes, is likely to end up in the sea. Amazon, the western world’s largest retailer, rejected Oceana’s figures and said it had overestimated the plastic waste by 300%. It also questioned the model used to estimate the percentage likely to enter the sea. It did not provide alternative figures. The retailer saw a boom in sales of 38%, to $386bn (£290bn) in 2020, when much of the world was in lockdown and online sales increased. Oceana’s report challenges the company’s recycling pledges, using interviews with local municipal waste officials, stores linked to by Amazon’s Second Chance recycling website and surveys of Amazon Prime customers. It concluded that the company’s recycling efforts “will not significantly reduce its enormous (and growing) plastic footprint”. Matt Littlejohn, Oceana’s senior vice-president, said: “We are using the best data available to us. If Amazon was transparent, we would gladly use their data. Yes, they are using more non-plastic packaging, but they are also selling a ton more product. “We understand people need Amazon. And so we’re hoping Amazon can fix this problem and become a leader in reducing plastic, which is really important for the oceans.” Plastic film used by Amazon in its packaging has little or no value to the recycling market and is not generally accepted by municipal recycling schemes in the US, UK and Canada, the report said. Oceana found that nearly 75% of Amazon Prime customers surveyed in 25 cities in the UK and US sent the plastic, knowingly or not, to landfill. Almost 40% put it in recycling bins, where the presence of plastic film would result in it going to the dump, and 35% disposed of the plastic in the bin. A little under 20% of 1,400 customers said they reused the plastic, while 5% said they placed the packaging in drop-off bins in stores on Amazon’s customer-driven recycling programme on the company’s Second Chance website. Further, representatives at more than 40% of the stores that Amazon suggests as alternative recycling drop-offs for plastic film told secret shoppers that Amazon’s plastic film was not accepted. Only 9% of all plastic waste has ever been recycled. Almost all goes to landfill, is burned, or enters and pollutes the environment, including waterways and oceans. Rachel Johnson Greer, a former programme manager at Amazon, who worked for the company for eight years, said the company would only take action on plastics if governments or a majority of customers demanded it. In May, more than a third of Amazon shareholders voted for a resolution calling on it to quantify its single-use plastic and provide recommendations on how to reduce its plastic footprint by the end of the year. Oceana has highlighted the action taken by the retailer in India, where it has eliminated single-use plastic packaging by using paper alternatives, after India’s prime minister, Narendra Modi, and its central government pledged to ban single-use plastics by 2022. The ban was delayed, but a tribunal ruled that packaging was the responsibility of producers, importers and brand owners. Amazon also announced it would move away from single-use plastic packaging in Germany. “If the company can do this in India and Germany, they can move away from single-use plastic packaging on a worldwide basis,” Littlejohn said. An Amazon spokesperson said: “Amazon shares Oceana’s ambition to protect the world’s oceans and respects their work but, for a second year, their calculations are seriously flawed. They have overestimated our plastics usage by more than 300%, and use outdated assumptions about the sources of plastic waste entering our oceans.” “Amazon is making rapid progress in reducing or removing single-use plastics from packaging materials in the UK and around the world.” Among its initiatives to reduce plastic waste, Amazon is looking to double fully recyclable cushioned plastic in North America, replace single-use pillows in Australia with fully recyclable paper ones, and expand its packaging-free initiative to 100 cities across India, it said.If love was the drug fuelling the first series of Mae Martin’s exquisite semi-autobiographical romcom, the substance elbowing it out of the way to take top billing in series two was trauma. It’s a sign of Feel Good’s greatness that it still managed to make you feel warm inside. In the second series, Mae – the Canadian comedian who co-wrote, starred and played a version of themselves that is basically them – grew up. As in, regressed. She was back home in Toronto, which meant plenty of comedic gold with her parents, played to repressed liberal perfection by Lisa Kudrow and Adrian Lukis, who can passively aggressively recite Gerard Manley Hopkins like no one else on Earth. Mae went to rehab, where she started hiding under the bed though she didn’t know why. “I forgot that I’m a Vietnam war vet,” she deadpanned to the doctor who gently suggested that she may have post-traumatic stress disorder. She ran away to stay with a friend from her past – an older male – who may be the reason for her trauma. She also realised her memory had wiped out an entire decade of her youth, during which she was a vulnerable teenager becoming addicted to drugs on the comedy circuit. She attempted a platonic relationship with George (Charlotte Ritchie), which didn’t even last an episode. She remained waggish, impulsive, self-obsessed but also frightened, sad, and possibly transgender. On all life’s matters, Feel Good played in the grey areas. Mae’s gender identity quest was handled with a grace, humour and truth seen nowhere else in mainstream culture, let alone on TV. Like when her vampiric agent, Donna – driven equally by the trendiness of trauma and her own untold history of abuse – said with a thrill, “You’re an addict! You’re anxious! You’re trans!” And Mae hesitantly replied “am I?”. Or in the final episode, when – while eating wieners late at night in Toronto – George asked Mae: “How do you see you?” Mae replied: “Just me really, I think, but that feels like … not really a thing.” Except that is a thing, George said. It’s non-binary, and maybe Mae should Google it. “You tell me, and I’ll use the right words,” George concluded. They embraced. It might have been the most lovely, heartwarming two minutes of telly of 2021 about an intensely politicised subject. Then Mae’s old drug dealers showed up and chased them down the street for money. Meanwhile, George was having crises of her own. She wanted to save the bees and she was sleeping with a “bi poly cis man” called Elliot, a study in secretly controlling, self-righteous woke gone bad. The type who enjoys nothing more than responding to his girlfriend’s sexual fantasies about priests and nuns with a chapter from a book on feminist sexuality about the link between the male orgasm and war crimes. Yet these were not the self-congratulatory laughs of the right. Feel Good was itself a show about what woke really means, ie the pursuit of kindness, and how hard a credo it is to live by. Even when this gloriously funny show poked fun at its own brand of on-message, anxiety-laden wokeness, it did so with love. Its laughs were so sincerely pitched and aimed that they landed less like skewers and more like back rubs administered by Mae’s lovable flatmate, Phil – the sweet cis heterosexual male bearded friend every queer girl wants. Series two dug deeper than the first. It was funnier, darker, more prescient. The Channel 4 executives who unfathomably chose not to pick it up must be kicking themselves. Like the second series of Fleabag, with which Feel Good shares more in common than you might think, each of its six episodes were mini-masterpieces – as taut, atmospheric and perfectly paced as short stories. At the end of each one, you could not believe that only half an hour had passed. Episode three was a painfully hilarious deep dive into the horrors of “exploiting and commodifying pain for giggles” as Mae was pressured by Donna to out a possible abuser on live TV. “You’ll be John Wick,” she promised, “in John Wick: Chapter 3.” But even though Mae had always wanted to be John Wick, she couldn’t do it. Compassion and humility won the day, and episode six, the finale, brimmed with love more than tears. There was a hug between Mae and her absurd parents over a box of ornamental pears buried in the forest. There was a reconciliation of sorts with the friend who abused her. And, ultimately, Feel Good ended with two people in love, bored of themselves but not each other, at the start of everything (again), talking about photosynthesis. How romantic.Céline Sciamma’s beautiful fairytale reverie is occasioned by the dual mysteries of memory and the future: simple, elegant and very moving. Joséphine Sanz plays Nelly, the eight-year-old daughter of Marion (Nina Meurisse); Marion’s mother has just died in a care home. Marion and her partner (Stéphane Varupenne) take Nelly on a difficult journey to her late mother’s home, where she grew up, and the memories come flooding back – particularly that of a secret hut she built in the woods adjoining the house. Marion is overwhelmed with grief and leaves Nelly alone with her dad. Playing in the woods she comes across what appears to be a half-finished hut in a clearing. A girl waves happily to her, asking for help making it. She is the mirror image of Nelly (played by Gabrielle Sanz, evidently Joséphine’s twin sister) and announces that her name is … Marion. They go back to Marion’s house, an eerie mirror-image of Nelly’s mother’s childhood home. And there Nelly meets Marion’s kindly, withdrawn, thirtysomething mum, who walks painfully with a cane. It is a ghost story, or a parable, played with realist calm. The girls talk about the future and the past as casually as they would about anything else. I found myself holding my breath for long stretches, as the young stars insouciantly saunter in single file along the narrative tightrope. I’m not being facetious when I say that this meeting of the two girls reminded me of Marty McFly’s first encounter with his dad in Back to the Future, another brilliant film of a very different type. There is something eternally strange about the fact that your parents were once the same age as you, had the same worries and fears and thoughts as you; and crucially, the same inability to see into the future – the future which is you. Making these two characters vulnerable and delicate children is an artistic masterstroke on Sciamma’s part. What a superb movie.Medieval monks’ cheese and pre-second world war wensleydales should take the place of brie and Gorgonzola on our Christmas dining tables this year, according to English Heritage. The charity is encouraging people to turn to traditional cheeses with a historical flavour to beat predicted holiday season shortages at supermarkets as well as to support local cheesemakers. UK shoppers spent just under £3.5bn on cheese over the past year but the country’s supply chain meltdown, coupled with the full impact of Brexit on festive demands, has led to retailer warnings to expect gaps on supermarket shelves in the run-up to Christmas. As a result, cheeses originating outside the UK such as camembert and manchego may be in short supply. Cheese-lovers could instead consider opting for a slice of rollright, a washed-rind cheese that was produced by monks at medieval monasteries in the 14th century. A soft, buttery cheese wrapped in a band of spruce bark, washed-rinds likely disappeared from the English cheeseboard after the dissolution of the monasteries by Henry VIII between 1536 and 1540. Stretching further back, the Spenwood can be traced back to Roman legionaries who, as part of their daily ration, received an ounce of the hard sheep’s milk cheese. Evidence of cheese making has been discovered during excavations at both Corbridge Roman Town on Hadrian’s Wall in Northumberland and Wroxeter Roman City in Shropshire. As a result of the government’s controls on cheesemaking during the second world war, wensleydale – once considered a gourmet cheese – became hard and lost some of its flavour to become easily portionable for rationing and more affordable for the wartime economy. The prewar recipe ranges from lactic and yoghurty through to mellow and buttery with a delicate hint of mushroom. Dr Michael Carter, an English Heritage historian and turophile, said a historical cheeseboard would inspire people to continue ancient traditions and keep history alive. “Throughout the ages it’s clear that cheese has been a popular and coveted commodity, usually enjoyed at times of feasting and celebration,” he said. “From our neolithic predecessors feasting at winter solstice at Stonehenge to the medieval faithful making offerings of cheese to an esteemed saint, England was and still is a nation of cheese lovers.”The Tasmanian salmon industry is facing calls for independent nutritional testing after an analysis by activist groups found far more fat in farmed fish than wild-caught salmon and industry-reported figures. Environment groups concerned about the impact of salmon farming bought two salmon fillets from a Coles supermarket, an IGA supermarket and a fishmonger in Melbourne to have them tested. The results suggested farmed salmon has higher total saturated and trans fats than figures available for each of the three Tasmanian salmon companies and those known for wild-caught salmon. Of the three farmed salmon companies, Tassal is the only company to publish nutritional information directly on its website. It says that its fish contain 16.1g total fats and 3.1g saturated fats per 100g. Similar data was not readily available for Huon Aquaculture and Petuna but independent nutrition website MyNetDiary lists the total fat content of fresh fillets of Huon salmon per 100g as 17.9g with 3.5g of saturated fat. Total fats for Petuna salmon were 12g with 3g of saturated fat per 100g. But tests on the fillets bought from the supermarket or fishmonger revealed the total fat content in Tassal salmon was 28.5g, and 21.2g of saturated fat per 100g. Huon’s two fillets recorded fat content of 24.2g and 23.7g, while Petuna logged 16.3g and 19.8g. Wild caught salmon, by comparison, contains total fats of 6.3g and 1g of saturated fat per 100g, due to the difference in diet and habitat the fish were raised in. A spokesperson for the Tasmanian Salmonid Growers Association dismissed the results citing in a statement the small sample size and variations in fat levels in fish between seasons. “Due to this natural variation of the fish, the companies use an average of the past three years nutritional testing results for our nutritional information panels (NIP) on the labels of our products,” the association said. “The data in the nutrition panel also states that all results are ‘averages’ and not absolute values.” They also rejected calls for independent testing, saying the industry already complied with all existing regulations set by Food Standards Australia New Zealand. “Australia has some of the most robust food safety and production regulations on the planet,” they said. “Nutritional information is widely available on product packaging so consumers can make informed decisions from assured sources versus an unknown methodology and politically motivated consumer spot testing.” Environment Tasmania said the tests called into question the reliability of the companies’ own figures and called for an independent government body such as the CSIRO to conduct its own testing. “It needs to be truly independent,” ET campaigner Jilly Middleton said. “And it would need to be run from a consumer perspective rather than having the salmon samples chosen and handed over by the industry.” “Consumers trust the Australian government to give them honest information about food. When you look at a nutrition panel, you expect to get the truth. It shouldn’t be up to Environment Tasmania and others to go digging.” Michael Skilton, a professor of nutrition and cardio-metabolic health, was given the chance to review the results and said that it raised questions that should be investigated further. “All that evidence [about salmon’s health benefits] is based on the samples and the nutritional data for what it used to look like and not necessarily what it looks like now,” Skilton said. Skilton said the testing showed that healthy omega-3 fats had increased, as had fats overall. He also said the saturated fat levels should be a focus as they can have an effect on cholesterol levels and is a major risk factor for heart disease. “The implication here is that farming practices of the salmon led to these changes, and I think that’s reasonable,” he said. “A comparable comparison would be the difference between grass fed and grain fed beef.”Top story: Starmer denounces ‘worst possible leader’ Hello this Wednesday – I’m Warren Murray, welcome to your briefing. Boris Johnson has suffered a humiliating rebellion over measures to slow the spread of the Omicron variant, with 99 Conservative MPs rejecting plans for vaccine certificates. It underlines the PM’s increasingly shaky grip over his party after the damaging Owen Paterson affair and revelations about lockdown-busting parties in Downing Street. The measure passed by 369 votes to 126 but only with the backing of Labour, whose leader, Keir Starmer, called Johnson the “worst possible leader at the worst possible time”. Given the rebellion, Starmer said, “the prime minister needs to ask himself the question whether he has the authority to lead this country through this pandemic”. Votes on all four plan B measures for England passed on Tuesday night. MPs also voted to make vaccinations compulsory for NHS workers, with 61 Conservative MPs voting against, joined by 22 Labour MPs. A plan to replace self-isolation with daily testing for contacts of people testing positive for the Omicron variant passed without a division. Britain’s wave of Omicron infections could reach 1m a day by the end of December, the government’s most senior public health adviser, Dr Susan Hopkins, has warned amid growing calls to limit Christmas gatherings. In Scotland, families have already been warned not to socialise in groups of more than three households in the run-up to Christmas. Ministers are being warned that soaring Covid cases could cause major shortages across industry, hospitality and healthcare, as rail companies cancelled services and Royal Mail said it was experiencing high staff absences. From healthcare to hospitality, these are the areas of work and life that could face a pingdemic-style problem, writes Jessica Elgot. * * * Bailey caught on camera – Shaun Bailey, the Conservative candidate for London mayor, has stood down from an official role in the London assembly after a photograph emerged of him joining a throng of people for a “raucous” party amid the Covid lockdown in December last year. Bailey’s team had sought to present blame for the party as being with Conservative campaign headquarters (CCHQ) staff, saying that he had only attended briefly. Bailey has not commented since the reports emerged. The Mirror on Tuesday also reported that prior to a Downing Street quiz party hosted by Johnson last December, an email was sent to staff that told them to leave the building via a back entrance once it was over. No 10 has argued the quiz was virtual, with staff who were in the office attending from their desks. * * * Midweek catch-up &gt; The Grammy-winning singer Billie Eilish has told how starting to watch pornography at age 11 “really destroyed my brain … I think porn is a disgrace”. Eilish said she suffered nightmares because of the sometimes violent and abusive content. Eilish said she is now angry at herself for thinking it was OK. “The first few times I, you know, had sex, I was not saying no to things that were not good. It was because I thought that’s what I was supposed to be attracted to.” &gt; The biggest taxi firm in Paris said it was suspending the use of Model 3 Teslas after a crash that killed one person and injured 20 others including three people who were left in intensive care. &gt; A federal judge has dismissed Donald Trump’s latest effort to hide his tax returns from Congress, ruling that its legislative interest outweighs any deference Trump should receive as a former president. &gt; Amazon’s plastic packaging waste soared by almost a third to 270,000 tonnes during 2020, according the marine conservation group Oceana. Amazon says that calculation is flawed and it is making “rapid progress” cutting back on single-use plastics. &gt; The Parker space probe has officially “touched” the sun, plunging through the unexplored solar atmosphere known as the corona, Nasa has announced. It happened in April but confirming all the data has taken since then. * * * Reach deeper, rich told – Britain’s highest earners have been donating less to charity despite their soaring incomes, while donations from everyone else have risen, according to a probe of tax records. Charities have missed out on more than £2bn as a result of the widening “generosity gap”. Last year 1.6 million fewer people donated as thousands of fundraising events from fun runs to gala dinners were cancelled. Gus O’Donnell, the former cabinet secretary who led the research by the Law Family Commission on Civil Society, urged the wealthy to “think about what you could be spending your money on this Christmas … those with the deepest pockets can afford to reach a little further”. If the rich increased their donations to 1% of income, charities could be getting an extra £1.4bn in annual donations, the commission found. * * * The little-lauded cheeses – Medieval monks’ cheese like rollright and pre-second world war wensleydales should take the place of brie and gorgonzola on our Christmas dining tables this year, according to English Heritage. The supply chain meltdown and impact of Brexit on festive demands points to cheeses originating outside the UK being in short supply. Dr Michael Carter, an English Heritage historian and turophile, said a historical English cheeseboard would inspire people to continue ancient traditions and keep history alive. Today in Focus podcast: To mandate or not? In Australia, where employment-related mandates on the coronavirus vaccine were introduced months ago, the stories of two women demonstrate how such measures can work – and how they can backfire. Nicola Davis reports on the considerations governments must make when introducing vaccine mandates. Lunchtime read: The crown prince’s gambit Beaming in satisfaction, Mohammed bin Salman looked like a man in charge as Arab rulers arrived in Riyadh on Tuesday for a regional summit, Martin Chulov writes. With King Salman barely seen for 20 months, the crown prince is holding the reins of power in Saudi Arabia. The king is known to suffer from a slow onset form of vascular dementia, and whether his quasi-exile in the new age city of Neom is of his own volition is speculated upon inside the kingdom and around the Gulf. Meanwhile the prince has consolidated his power, ramped up reforms and sought to restore the kingdom’s standing after the grisly Saudi assassination of the journalist Jamal Khashoggi in Turkey. “He has cleared his path to the coronation,” said a former US intelligence official of the crown prince. “Covid or not, no one can deny that the king is not just missing in action, but likely out of business.” Sport Joe Root has told his England players that their harrowing experience in Brisbane is as tough as it gets, leaving “no excuses” as they head into their must-win second Test against Australia in Adelaide. Kevin De Bruyne called the shots in Manchester City’s 7-0 rout of Leeds that stretched their lead at the top of the Premier League to four points, while Marcelo Bielsa offered no excuses for the joint heaviest defeat in his club’s 102-year history. At Carrow Road, Jacob Ramsey’s superb individual goal and a late Ollie Watkins tap-in clinched a 2-0 win for Aston Villa over struggling Norwich. Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang has been stripped of Arsenal’s captaincy and dropped from the squad after failing to demonstrate the “commitment and passion” to play for the club, according to Mikel Arteta. The Premier League’s clubs have agreed to introduce daily Covid testing for players and training‑ground staff as they fight to prevent the postponement of further games and, in the worst-case scenario, a break in the competition. Valtteri Bottas believes Lewis Hamilton deserved to be crowned Formula One world champion and was “gutted” his Mercedes teammate was pipped to the title by Red Bull’s Max Verstappen. After restrictions at Alexandra Palace in 2020, defending champion Gerwyn Price could face Fallon Sherrock in a tough PDC darts draw. Bryony Frost has revealed she considered relocating to France in her first interview since an independent panel of the British Horseracing Authority ruled she had been bullied and harassed by fellow rider Robbie Dunne. And Magnus Carlsen says he is ready to shock the chess world by giving up his world championship title – because defending it no longer motivates him. Business The deputy governor of the Bank of England has said that bitcoin could be “worthless” and people investing in the digital currency should be prepared to lose everything. Although bitcoin has risen in value to almost $50,000, it suffers from large swings and Sir Jon Cunliffe said: “Their price can vary quite considerably and [bitcoins] could theoretically or practically drop to zero.” The money in your non-digital wallet is flat at $1.324 and €1.175 today, however, and the FTSE100 also looks like opening level today. The papers Most front pages take a decidedly critical tone and raise questions about the future of Boris Johnson’s leadership after nearly a third of MPs voted against mandatory Covid passes as the UK battles a surge in Covid cases. The Times splashes with “Huge Covid rebellion stuns PM” while the Guardian suggests the scale of the Tory revolt “raises questions” over whether Johnson will in fact implement tougher restrictions in the coming days. The Telegraph rates it a “hammer blow to Johnson’s authority”. The Daily Mirror has a photo of 24 Tory aides at a Christmas party last December. The headline reads: “Boris bashed by 99 rebels as Tory quits over THIS party pic”. The Daily Express notes the revolt “bruises Boris” but asks whether he will be “proved right” over the need to introduce the latest Covid restrictions. The Financial Times has “Johnson suffers biggest setback of premiership in ‘plan B’ rebellion”. The Daily Mail points to an inside spread with the strapline: “98 Tory rebels: no more curbs, Boris”. The Sun carries a mention of it all – “Politicians lose heads over Covid” – but focuses on the Queen hosting Christmas dinner this year. Sign up The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekend.Michaelia Cash appears to have reneged on a deal with Liberal moderates on religious discrimination, revealing broad protections for LGBTQ+ students will have to wait for 12 months. Banning the expulsion of LGBTQ+ students could be enacted immediately, but reforms preventing students being punished in other ways will have to wait for the Australian Law Reform Commission (ALRC) review, the attorney general said in a webinar to Christian lobby group FamilyVoice on Wednesday. The comments appear to contradict a deal struck in the last days of parliament with four Liberal MPs – Katie Allen, Fiona Martin, Angie Bell and Dave Sharma – to amend the Sex Discrimination Act to protect students against all forms of discrimination. In response, Allen sought a meeting with the attorney-general to clarify the deal. Sharma told Guardian Australia: “I’ve made clear that my support of the bill is contingent upon dealing with students.” Cash had offered the concession as the government was struggling to win votes from its own MPs to pass the bill in the lower house, but it prompted furious reaction from the Australian Christian Lobby and Christian Schools Australia, which threatened to withdraw their support over the deal. On Wednesday, Cash was asked how the religious discrimination bill would protect schools against litigation if they attempted to discipline a transgender student who wants “to wear a dress, or use a female bathroom although he’s biologically a male, or be called Steve instead of Eve” in breach of religious teachings. Cash replied: “The bill does not change the existing status quo for this issue … Because those exemptions already exist in the Sex Discrimination Act, they’re longstanding.” The deal with the moderates included removing section 38(3) of the SDA which allows religious schools to discriminate against another person on the grounds of sexual orientation, gender identity, marital or relationship status or pregnancy. In a statement on 1 December, the moderates described this as a “consequential” amendment, while Martin argued it would mitigate “unintended consequences” of the religious discrimination bill. But on Wednesday Cash said “they are two very separate issues and they should not be confused”. “This bill is all about discrimination on religious belief or activity. When people raise those, they’re talking about the wrong act, they’re in the realm of the Sex Discrimination Act.” Asked specifically about removing section 38(3), Cash said exemptions “have always been intended to be considered separately” to the religious discrimination bill. “I really wanted to make that distinction clear: this is a bill to protect against religious discrimination.” “In relation to the Sex Discrimination Act, that is an ALRC referral … They will report back to the government 12 months after the passage of the bill.” Cash noted that Labor had raised the issue of making an amendment at the same time, and conceded that the prime minister, Scott Morrison, had agreed gay students should not be expelled and “we all agree with that”. But the broader issue of removing the religious exemption was “squarely within the ALRC review”, she said. A spokesman for Cash insisted there had been no change of approach and amendments would be considered “through appropriate parliamentary processes” after two inquiries. Despite the deal with the four moderates, the Morrison government failed to win enough lower house support due to another trio of its own MPs – Trent Zimmerman, Warren Entsch and Bridget Archer – holding out, and Labor first insisting on an inquiry. The bill faces an uncertain future, with two inquiries by parliamentary committee to consider it over summer before reporting back on 4 February. On Wednesday, Cash heaped pressure on Labor to support the bill describing it as “very sensible” and saying it “should command support of both major parties”. Cash also suggested that further amendments could be made to appease religious groups that want to bolster protection against discrimination by reversing the onus of proving allegedly discriminatory conduct was reasonable. The New South Wales state director of FamilyVoice, Greg Bondar, said the bill currently requires a religious person to prove they have been discriminated against and the conduct was unreasonable, rather than “the original clause for the discriminator to prove they were being reasonable”. Cash said this was a change that she was “more than inclined to accept”, urging FamilyVoice to make submissions which she would be “very minded to accept” if recommended by the inquiries. Cash also suggested that despite removing a clause allowing medical practitioners to conscientiously object to performing certain procedures, the bill could nevertheless protect them by allowing them to argue punishing them for doing so could constitute “indirect discrimination”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning This would allow a “health practitioner who believes they are subject of discriminatory conduct by their employer” to make a claim if they objected to providing a treatment and doing so was consistent with the relevant code of conduct, she said. “We’re not saying there is no claim. What we’re saying is we’re not shortcutting it – you are still able to make a claim, but on the basis that the relevant professional codes of conduct already provide for it [conscientious objection].”China’s giant housing market has continued to decline in the past month and another major developer showed signs of financial distress as state-owned enterprises began carving up the carcass of the failing property giant Evergrande. House prices, sales, investment and construction data released on Wednesday all showed renewed signs of the crisis in the market, which accounts up to 30% of the country’s output and which appears certain to drag on the world’s second biggest economy. It comes a day after shares in one of China’s largest developers, Shimao Group, fell 20% on concerns that it was offloading assets to manage its spiralling debts. New home prices fell 0.3% month-on-month in November, the biggest decline since February 2015, according to Reuters calculations. The figure was worse than the 0.2% drop in October and only nine of 70 cities tracked by the Chinese statistics bureau saw monthly price gains in November, the fewest since February 2015. The actual value of home sales plunged by 16.31% in what was a fifth straight month of decline, official data showed. New construction starts as measured by floor area fell 21.03% on year in November, down for the eighth month, while property investment by developers fell 4.3%. “Cities of all classes are under pressure,” said Yan Yuejin, director of Shanghai-based E-house China Research and Development Institution. “The current scale of market supply is large and demand is weak. The key is to accelerate inventory de-stocking to stabilise home prices.” However, more data released on Wednesday showed that weak demand for houses was in line with other metrics across the whole Chinese economy. Real retail sales increased by just 0.5% on an annual basis – down from 1.9% in October – to give the weakest outcome since August 2020, and far below pre-Covid levels as consumers remained cautious and Covid outbreaks continued to cause snap lockdowns. Passenger traffic data suggested that people were not travelling and spending as much, and sales during the annual November 1-11 shopping festival – China’s answer to the US “Black Friday” consumer spree – slowed compared with the previous year. Industrial output picked up last month after power shortages eased from the previous months but economists said the overall picture was becoming more bleak. Gerard Burg of Westpac in Australia said there was little sign of improvement in underlying economic conditions in November and was cutting the bank’s forecast for China’s economy. “Overall, growth in industrial production was only marginally stronger, investment trends remained extremely weak and retail sales data point to minimal consumption growth,” he said. China unveiled a package of measures earlier this month in order to bolster the struggling economy, including freeing up banks to lend more money to targeted businesses. Many economists expect the central bank to reduce the main interest rate from its current 3.85% – very high compared with every major western economy – and more fiscal measures to boost economic activity are also seen as likely in the new year. However, the crisis engulfing the property market looms over the economy in the wake of the default last week of China Evergrande, once the country’s second-biggest property developer. It finally succumbed to its $300bn debt mountain when it failed to come up with $82m owed to offshore creditors, and analysts have said a huge restructuring effort is now underway. Reports on Wednesday said that a working party sent by the government to Guangdong, Evergrande’s home province, had arrived at the company’s headquarters in order to start work on carving up the once-all conquering empire built by former steel executive Xu Jiayin. The working party comprises of representatives of state-owned monoliths such as Guangdong Holdings and the government-owned investment bank, China Cinda Asset Management. But while the state seems set to absorb Evergrande’s debts and to carry out the huge task of delivering around 1.6m as-yet unfinished homes to buyers who have already paid upfront for the properties, the developers that were previously thought secure are running into financial trouble. Shares in Shimao Group, which was one of China’s top-10 developers last year and investment grade-rated until a month ago, fell a record 20% on Tuesday after it sold assets between different parts of the company and cancelled apartment sales. Its bonds also fell in price and yields rocketed in a reflection of the risk to investors of lending money to the company. A Bloomberg index of property developer stocks in China fell to its lowest since early 2017, and Evergrande’s shares dropped almost 10% to a record low. A report by S&amp;P warned in November that up to one-third of Chinese developers could experience financial distress in the next 12 months because of the weak deamnd for housing and the crackdown by Xi Jinping’s government on what it regards as the industry’s reckless “borrow and build” model.Pace will be off the menu for Australia’s batsmen during the day-night second Test that begins on Thursday after England named a 12-player match day squad with Mark Wood surprisingly stood down for rest. Wood was among the tourists’ few standouts during an otherwise disappointing nine-wicket defeat at the Gabba last week, with his 25.3 overs of sustained 90mph speeds returning the prized wicket of Steve Smith on 12 amid figures of three for 85 in Australia’s first innings. But despite Australia’s batsmen being visibly hurried by the 31-year-old – and David Warner, down to play, expected to be impeded by a rib injury – Joe Root and Chris Silverwood, the head coach, have opted to save him for the Boxing Day Test. With neither country having come back to win from a 2-0 deficit in an overseas Ashes tour, looking that far ahead appears a high-risk strategy, not least with England confirming that Wood, though admittedly prone to injury in the past, was passed fit to play and the decision is simply “tactical”. Instead Jimmy Anderson and Stuart Broad are in contention for a return to the XI after missing the Brisbane Test, but with Jack Leach also retained should Root decide that conditions at the Adelaide Oval demand a frontline spinner. Certainly the head groundsman, Damian Hough, sees this being the case, telling reporters on Wednesday: “History says that the pitch will spin.” If Chris Woakes were the seamer to miss out in this scenario it would mean England going into the match with a lengthy tail. It may be that Broad is once again competing for a spot with Leach, the left-armer who was mercilessly targeted by Australia in Brisbane to the tune of 102 runs from just 13 overs. Root said: “With four Tests coming up in the next four weeks, it is important that we keep our bowling group fresh and ready for each Test. Jimmy [Anderson] and Stuart [Broad] have prepped well leading into this Test. They worked hard at Brisbane and have been in good rhythm in the sessions we have had in Adelaide. “Mark [Wood] will play a pivotal role in this series and we have to ensure he is fresh and able to perform at his fullest capability. With three Tests coming up after this one, he will be ready to play his part in the rest of the series. “The bowling unit are in a good place. They performed well in Brisbane and to have two of our most experienced pairing ready to go for Adelaide, that is a real boost for us especially with the pink ball in play and the match under lights.” England are clearly putting much stock in the pink Kookaburra ball moving laterally for their fast-medium seamers, not least Anderson on his return to a ground that saw him record his first five-wicket haul in Australia during the 2017-18 tour. Speaking before England trained on Wednesday, Anderson said: “You always feel expectation. Since I knew I wasn’t playing in Brisbane, I’ve just been working hard with the pink ball trying to figure out what works and what doesn’t, whether it swings at certain times of the day just trying to get an edge on this week. “I’m preparing the same as I would for a red-ball game. It’s still a Test. We’ve got to work really hard as a bowling unit. I’m just preparing for some hard work.”I am 14 years old, scarf wrapped to show just half of the club’s crest through my zipped jacket, standing a third of the way up the terrace of the Hammersmith End at Craven Cottage. With every passing season, I’ve been creeping back a few more rows of concrete terracing. On each step, I get a little bit closer to the depths of the stand from where the sound of singing – I have occasionally given myself permission to join in – is coming. In between my half-whispered attempts (I am over-analytical of my efforts to find the exact pitch of Fulham fans’ reworked versions of Hey Jude), I notice a strange, recurring sensation. Every time the ball approaches our goal, giddy excitement overcomes me. It tingles, as if a metal detector is finding its range. The nearer the opposition gets to our net, the stronger the feeling becomes, before subsiding as we snuff out the attack and launch the ball away from danger. Every week, this feeling grows, until it becomes too hard to quell completely and I am letting out involuntarily hopeful sounds whenever my team is under threat. Afraid of being caught out, and my passage up the steps towards the massed congregation thwarted, I turn each of these noises into a pained grunt. Who me? Nah, I definitely want us to win, mate. Just nervous they were going to score then, that’s all. I am, of course, outwardly supporting my team. I spend all week dreaming of the game, before turning up two hours early on the day to watch the players warm up, collecting autographs, living every second of the rhythms of a match day. It’s a lot of effort for someone who is praying that the ground be momentarily engulfed in communal hurt. I eventually admit it, very privately. I do want us to lose. And I solemnly swear never to share this unforgivable feeling simmering beneath the surface. It’s not just at the football. I find myself passionately and painfully attached to an England cricket team who are losing in ways that haven’t been invented yet. I watch them all day, four inches from the television screen, the real world around me blurred into nothingness. I practise the look each of the men makes as they walk off at the loss of their wicket; dejected, sullenly tucking their bat under their arm, eventually disappearing out of sight. The same giddy swell reappears. I take to music, too, with a similar private conflict. Towards I Am Kloot, especially. The three-piece from Manchester are perfect and nowhere near as big as they should be. They introduce me and my brothers to the Barfly and the Half Moon venues in London, drenching each dark, boozy space in a sudden sense of melancholy and specific, knowing drama. Every time the singer, Johnny Bramwell, introduces a song, he pauses, before adding what it’s actually about, “disaster”. All the songs are about disaster. That secret little metal detector sensation, as if the ball is heading towards our goal, lights up again. I gravitate to each sporting loss or song about disaster, but I haven’t yet associated them with my mother’s illness. She has been suffering from multiple sclerosis for a long time and, with every year that I work myself slowly towards the back of the Hammersmith End, becoming a little more entwined with England’s cricket team and a little further in love with music, the disease is deeper entrenched. It has taken away her ability to write, then to walk, then all her movement generally, before she is finally unable to speak, too. As I witness this, with every day slightly worse, I do not feel anywhere near the sense of loss that strikes me when England lose. It does not occur to me that when each heartbreaking wicket falls, in that tiny fraction of time, it is acceptable, suddenly, to show pain, to practise it, to express it; it is a magic little window of relief opened by the world, before it closes again. It does not occur to me that the feeling could belong to anything but cricket. Nearly 20 years on from her death I am at the cricket World Cup final in London, to watch England. Tailenders, the radio show I co-present, has begun the broadcast for BBC Radio 5 live, and I’m genuinely inside the game. England are chasing down the runs in a thrilling sequence of unthinkable drama. I am shouting and screaming, barely able to watch, hiding occasionally from the action only to peep back through my fingers, when I feel something shift. It’s like a pair of hands that have been quietly gripping at the inside of my throat for two decades have just gently, without any fuss, let go. There is no metal detector glow, no hoping for loss. No secret quelling of involuntary noises. No satisfying disaster in waiting. I just want us to win. And we do. I leave the ground with tens of thousands of strangers, all remembering ourselves again, back into the same complex, dark, layered and mean London we had entered from. And somehow I feel lighter – my inside and outside more aligned – with a grief that, decades on, I have some tangible evidence is finally being processed. Sport and music are helpful like that.The House select committee investigating the Capitol attack has amassed a huge trove of evidence as it seeks to connect the Trump White House to the 6 January insurrection, three months after it issued its first subpoenas to the former president’s most senior administration officials. The select committee revealed on Monday that members had reviewed thousands of documents turned over by Trump’s former White House chief of staff Mark Meadows, which showed the White House played a far more substantial role in attempting to overturn the 2020 election than previously known. But those communications and other documents that Meadows turned over represent just a small sample of evidence potentially incriminating the Trump White House collected since September. The committee expects this week to depose more top aides, including the Trump justice department official Jeffrey Clark, from whom they hope to learn more about Trump’s efforts to reinstall himself as president – even if Clark invokes his fifth amendment right against self-incrimination. That hope stems from the fact that Clark agreed to appear for a deposition just moments before the select committee would have recommended his prosecution for defying a subpoena – a circumstance that members believe means he will cooperate. Bennie Thompson, the panel chair, said on Monday that after depositions this week, the panel was on track to interview more than 300 witnesses and add to the more than 30,000 documents already turned over. The select committee also obtained about 6,000 documents from Meadows as part of a delicate cooperation agreement requiring the production of non-privileged material, before Meadows abruptly broke off the deal last week. Part of the reason Meadows ended the cooperation deal was that he had learned from his personal cellphone carrier – believed to be Verizon – that the committee had started pursuing his call detail records, his attorney George Terwilliger said in a letter. The select committee has in recent weeks issued subpoenas for the call detail records of several hundred phone numbers, which typically reveal the date, time, duration and target numbers of calls, according to a source close to the investigation. Such records are expected to prove a boon for the inquiry, the source said, since it enables House investigators to map a pattern of which phone numbers were being dialed, and to connect key phone numbers to others on 6 January and the days and weeks before. The release of Meadows’ cellphone records could come around the same time the committee potentially gains access to the several hundred pages of documents from the Trump White House held by the National Archives. The select committee is on track to obtain those records, which Trump has claimed are subject to executive privilege and cannot be given to Congress, after the US court of appeals for the District of Columbia last week upheld a lower court ruling approving their release. In a unanimous decision, the federal appeals court denied Trump’s request for an injunction, saying in a blunt ruling that in a dispute between a current and former president over whether to release White House records, the sitting president’s view must prevail. Those records, so aggressively defended by Trump, the select committee believes, might help members make the case that the former president interfered with Biden’s certification with corrupt intent, a potential crime, the source said. In the cache of communications Meadows furnished, the select committee said, were text messages he received from Republican members of Congress, in the days before the Capitol attack and on 6 January, from Fox News hosts and Donald Trump’s eldest son, Donald Jr. Among the messages to Meadows that the committee disclosed was one from an unidentified Republican lawmaker, who apologized to Meadows after the Capitol attack for not succeeding in stopping Joe Biden from being pronounced president. “Yesterday was a terrible day,” the text message from the Republican lawmaker read, referring to the Capitol attack, before saying of the attempt to prevent Biden’s certification: “We tried everything we could in our objection to the 6 states. I’m sorry nothing worked.”City allotments have the ability to rival the productivity of conventional farms, according to new research. A two-year pilot study by the University of Sussex found that volunteer urban growers in Brighton and Hove were able to harvest 1kg of insect-pollinated fruit and vegetables per sq metre in a season – which researchers said put their yields within the range of conventional farms. The project, which analysed the yields of 34 “citizen scientists” growing fruit and vegetables on their allotments, gardens and balconies, found that despite limited pesticide use they were each able to grow an average of £550 worth of produce between March and October. Of the total figure, £380 of it was from insect-pollinated produce - such as squash, courgettes, blackberries, tomatoes, apples and beans – weighing an average of 70kg. Berries were the most attractive crop to pollinators, the study found. Across the two-year period, volunteers recorded more than 2,000 pollinating insects among their crops. The most common were bees, which accounted for 43% of all flower visits. Dr Beth Nicholls, who led the study, which is as yet unpublished and yet to be peer-reviewed, is due to present her findings at Ecology Across Borders conference on Wednesday. She said: “The growing was surprisingly productive. And some people were harvesting a lot more than that – up to 10kg per sq metre. And this is just in insect-pollinated crops, so it’s an underestimation really.” Participants were provided with calculators which told them how much it would cost them to buy the food they were growing at the supermarket and how dependent their yield was on insect pollination. Nicholls, who is a pollination ecologist, said the growers used less pesticides than conventional farming techniques – they were used in under 10% of pest cases – and that the most common pests were slugs, snails and aphids. The worst-affected produce was soft fruit and beans. She said the study demonstrated the value of urban food production and how it could be used to reduce food deserts by growing food “closer to where people are” while also reducing food miles and transportation costs. There are 10,435 allotments in the UK, spanning 7,920 hectares, according to 2019 figures from the Office for National Statistics. A recent survey by the Association for Public Service Excellence, due to be published next week, found that 37% of councils report more than 1,000 people on waiting lists for allotments and over a third of councils are looking to increase their allotment provision amid a huge rise in demand during the coronavirus pandemic. Following fears over food insecurity after Brexit, Nicholls said more could be done in the UK to use urban spaces to produce food and incorporate shared plots into new housing developments. “The UK imports approximately £8bn of fruit and vegetables each year, but our results show that green spaces in cities, such as allotments and community gardens, could play an important role in meeting that demand at a local scale.” Nicholls is also collaborating with researchers at the University of Calcutta in Kolkata who are looking at urban food production in India. “In a world of increasing urbanisation in both the developing and developed worlds, producing food in and around cities has the potential to improve both nutritional and health outcomes, alleviate poverty and simultaneously provide habitat for wildlife and create sustainable cities.”A moment of silence, so we can all appreciate how gracious the Sackler family is. Yes, the family business, Purdue Pharma, is infamous for aggressively marketing the prescription painkiller OxyContin and aiding an opioid epidemic that has killed half a million Americans. And it’s true that nobody in the family has offered an explicit apology for their role in this crisis or suffered meaningful consequences for their actions: the Sacklers are still billionaires and have even won immunity from lawsuits. But that doesn’t mean we should think badly of them. You see, the family has been terribly kind and allowed New York’s Metropolitan Museum of Art to remove the Sackler name from its galleries. In a statement last week, the Met praised the Sacklers for “this gracious gesture” and gushed about the family’s generous support. There was no mention of the human suffering that precipitated the removal. The Met cutting public ties with the Sacklers – the result of a long direct action campaign by the artist Nan Goldin – has been widely celebrated. There’s an expectation that other public institutions will now follow suit. But I’m not sure erasing the family name from museums is right. I was at Tate Britain last week, and seeing the Sackler name had a visceral impact on me: it was more thought-provoking than a lot of the art. Keep the name in museums, I say. Just add a prominent plaque explaining exactly how the family earned the money it donated. Explain how the chronic underfunding of the arts means that cultural institutes are forced to suck up to dodgy philanthropists. Let everyone who sees the name leave with the realisation that greed is a hell of a drug. Arwa Mahdawi is a Guardian columnistI’ve been paying off my student loan since 2010 in monthly instalments of more than £200 via PAYE, yet the balance keeps growing and interest charges are ballooning. The problem seems to have begun when I changed jobs in 2012. Three years later, I discovered that none of my payments had been applied to my account. The Student Loans Company (SLC) told me that, according to HM Revenue and Customs’s records, I don’t exist. HMRC insisted it was an issue for SLC. I sent four years’ worth of payslips to SLC twice (it lost the first lot) and, after 12 months, £12,366 was deducted from my debt. That didn’t include the cumulative interest charges. SLC insisted I was liable for these even though they were applied to an erroneously inflated balance. That was in 2019. Since then, I’ve been unable to log in to view my account. SLC has variously told me there’s a block on it, that it’s being investigated by HMRC, or, more recently, that it isn’t authorised to discuss the account over the phone. It also insists it is not authorised to send paper statements, so can’t establish what I owe. EK, London SLC passed me on to HMRC, which promised an urgent investigation. It appears that when you changed jobs your national insurance number was merged with a stranger’s, so repayments were sitting in limbo for nine years with interest accumulating on the balance that, but for the error, should have been paid off. What’s truly alarming is that SLC and HMRC tried to offload you on to each other for the six years that you’ve tried to resolve the problem, and action was only taken when I got involved. HMRC says: “We apologise and have updated our records to reflect the student loan repayments made to date. We have also arranged a £400 redress payment, and put measures in place to prevent a recurrence of this issue.” SLC, which did not provide a comment, has meanwhile decided that you owe £1,800, but has yet to explain whether this includes the unfairly applied interest. Obviously, you want the unsubstantiated sum written off. Your plight would be troubling enough if it was a one-off. However, other graduates have complained to me that they’re being charged for debts they’ve already paid, or blocked from checking their balance. Londoner CE received confirmation from SLC that his loan was paid up in 2019. However, deductions from his salary resumed without explanation in June of this year. Again, SLC and HMRC blamed each other. “HMRC told me it had received notification from SLC in May to deduct student loan repayments,” he writes. “SLC said this must have been an error and that they would notify HMRC to stop taking payments and I would receive a refund from my employer. “By September the payments were still being deducted, and SLC claimed that a ‘mortgage-style’ loan, from Thesis Servicing on my account, was to blame. But it confirmed it had no record of anyone with my name.” “In my final call with SLC, it said it could not provide any more details about this mysterious loan and that all it could do was notify HMRC again, but this would take up to two months. HMRC says it hasn’t heard from SLC. So I’m stuck in a bureaucratic nightmare which has, so far, cost me £2,000 that I can ill afford.” Meanwhile, EW of London has been trying since 2018 to find out how much she still owes. “Every time I am told there is a balance error so there is suppression on my account, which means they can’t provide me with an accurate statement, or an estimate of when this will be resolved,” she writes. It took media involvement to get SLC to acknowledge an error in CE’s case. Infuriatingly, after ignoring and misleading him for three months, it notified HMRC to stop the payments and promised a refund the day I contacted it. It says “He fully repaid his loan in 2019; the additional repayment deductions, taken from his salary, were the result of an administrative error by SLC. We wholly apologise for any inconvenience.” In EW’s case it claimed that when there is a discrepancy between a customer’s repayments and their balance, access to the accounts are “temporarily” restricted, and statements suspended to protect customers from getting misleading figures. It didn’t say what this discrepancy was and miraculously, this three-year “temporary” restriction was ended as soon as I questioned it. SLC says: “We have apologised for any inconvenience caused as a result of the restriction placed on the account, and can confirm that she is now able to access her balance and statements online, following an update to her account.” Online reviewers report similarly troubling shambles with their student loan accounts. Customers who exhaust SLC’s formal complaints process without a satisfactory resolution can ask to be escalated to an independent assessor, although they have to rely on SLC to do this for them. Email your.problems@observer.co.uk. Include an address and phone number. Submission and publication are subject to our terms and conditionsOn a fine weekend evening, locals gather at the harbour in Watchet, west Somerset. Town crier David Milton, dressed in a gilt-trimmed green jacket and tricorn hat, leads the singing: lusty accounts of drunken and lovelorn sailors and maritime glories past. Kids bob on parents’ shoulders and seagulls cast figures-of-eight against the blue-grey horizons of the Bristol Channel, and soft outlines of Wales’s Barry island beyond. Rather than a nod to the pandemic’s TikTok fad, Watchet’s monthly shanty singalongs are an expression of a proud maritime identity for a town that’s often overlooked by the craft cider quaffers and luxury country cottage-bookers on the West Country holiday circuit. A few steps east along the harbourfront, a new symbol of Watchet’s pride rises against the coastal blues: a cubist jungle of brightly coloured boxes overlooking the dry dock. Designed by Invisible Studio architect Piers Taylor and realised by a determined collective of local women, East Quay is a £6.3m cultural venue with a gallery, restaurant, studios and rooms, all funded, in part, by the Coastal Communities fund and Arts Council England. It proposes a model for how tourism can be put to work for good in our struggling coastal communities. The writer of a 1927 Somerset guidebook, Mrs Osborn Hann, said of Watchet that it was “more like a foreign quay than any place I know of … a quaint and higgledy-piggledy town [where] houses seem to have dropped willy-nilly from the skies”. “It hasn’t much changed,” smiles Georgie Grant, one of the co-directors of project founders the Onion Collective (or “Onions” as the five-woman team call themselves). “Watchet has a character all its own,” she says, as she takes me on a tour of the town’s High Street, with its 16th-century inns and sloping, ice-cream-coloured facades. Despite this civic spirit, Watchet was in a rough place in the mid 2010s, when its largest employer, a paper mill dating back to the mid-17th century and known locally as “the family”, shut its doors for good. In 2013, when plans fell through for a controversial development of luxury flats on the marina quayside, Georgie and her fellow Onions – Jess Prendergrast, Rachel Kelly, Sally Lowndes and Naomi Griffith – decided to pool their skills in local politics, charity and arts management and ask fellow Watchet residents what they wanted for their town. Many Watcheters, Georgie recalls, were keen to restore the town’s Boat Museum, dedicated to the traditional boats – known as “flatties” – that used to sail the shallow mudflats at low tide; others wanted to perk up the visitor centre to attract more outsiders to a town that lures 70,000 tourists a year (compared with the million that decant in nearby Minehead). Most of these arrive as daytrippers on the heritage West Somerset railway which puffs the eight-mile route to Watchet from Minehead four times a day in summer (and for festive fish-and-chip and steam-and-cream themed itineraries in colder months). “We just listened to the locals,” says Georgie. “And eight years down the line, with some sweat and tears, Watchet has its Boat Museum, its visitors’ centre and this” – she gestures around the East Quay site from the courtyard that will also serve as a theatre performance space. Opened in October and commanding a third of Watchet’s harbour front, East Quay features a double-storey immersive art gallery run by arts charity Contains Art; 14 studio/workshops for local artists; a geology and ecology workshop; an alternative education space designed by local schoolchildren; a bistro and five self-catering accommodation pods, with interiors designed by Hereforshire maker-architects Pearce+Fægen (available to book from early 2022). Crucially, in an area with England’s lowest social mobility and an average household income of £16,000 a year, East Quay delivers 37 decent new jobs, including five apprenticeships, and it will support 109 jobs indirectly from visitors’ spending on local businesses. The five pods (which sleep between two and four) are multi-level metal boxes inspired by Watchet’s industrial and maritime history with, as Jess puts it, “a bit of graffiti and steampunk thrown in”. Each pod is individually themed – Playful Architecture, for example, has adaptive furniture (chairs that transform into tables and chaise longues) and a cargo net to kip in, and Industrial Heritage features a ship’s ladder and a bespoke iron bathtub with a view. The pods are tucked between artists’ studios, to encourage visitors to pop in for a cuppa and check out the artists’ collaborative productions. With brilliant light glancing off the Bristol Channel and the harbour fringed by moored boats, Pod One, Object Exchange, feels a bit like being a guest on a luxury yacht. As in the other pods, there’s a ground-floor bathroom and a kitchen with hob, microwave and grill, kettle, fridge and toaster. On a mezzanine level, a two-seat sea viewing platform has floor-to-ceiling glass offering 180-degree waterfront views. A “lost and found” feature arranged across its floor-to-ceiling shelves, lets visitors leave behind something that reminds them of their trip as they pick up a souvenir: maybe a piece of handmade paper or a fossil mudlarked from the coastline, where Jurassic and Triassic sediments meet in riot of striated limestone and ochre. In keeping with East Quay’s stance on supporting local labour markets, the pods’ bedding is made by a Devonshire company that stitches mattresses by hand, and packs of seasonal local produce greet arrivals, while freshly baked bread is on offer each morning from the on-site bistro, East Quay Kitchen, delivered to your door on request. At the heart of the ground-floor level of East Quay there’s another nod to Watchet’s heritage: a working paper mill. Local papermaker Jim Patterson was an apprentice at Wansbrough Paper Mill in the early 1970s, before setting up his own specialist watercolour paper factory, Two Rivers Paper in 1976. The 74-year-old was planning to retire, but has been lured back into artisan papermaking to train a new generation at East Quay. “Watching Jim at work will be a highlight for visitors,” Georgie says. From late 2022, East Quay will also be home to a factory that produces living construction materials from the mycelium fungus, a cutting-edge post-carbon technology. East Quay follows a wave of social enterprises that channel tourist revenue into local community renewal. They include Foxes Hotel in Minehead, which offers apprenticeships to young people with disabilities, and London’s Good Hotel, which trains long-term unemployed Londoners. In an era in which many locals in popular coastal spots rail against overtourism, there’s also a win-win, Jess believes, in spreading footfall to under-visited destinations. “We want to widen the holiday season here to reduce job seasonality,” she says, “and we’re providing new accommodation pods, rather than seeing local property converted to holiday lets, or sold as second homes.” As the afternoon sun gilds the sea, I climb with Jess and Georgie to one of two viewing platforms above the site, where locals and visitors will be able to come for views over old and new Watchet, and the hubbub of East Quay below. The development has already encouraged new marina owners the Marine Group to dredge Watchet’s silted-up dry dock; the Onions hope that leisure boat moorings will increase and that one day the pleasure ferries that used to ply the route from Watchet to the Welsh coast in the 1950s and 60s will return. We walk up the harbourside from East Quay as a steam train wheezes into the station. As we climb the bridge over the rail tracks, a teenager in a logo sweatshirt stops and stares at Jess. “Are you one of them Onion women who’s doing East Quay?” he enquires. Jess nods, uncertainly. The teenager pumps his fist in the air. “Big up the Onion Collective!” he cries. East Quay’s pods cost from £100 a night, eastquaywatchet.co.uk • This article was amended on 23 December 2021 to date Mrs Osborn Hann’s Somerset guidebook to 1927 rather than the Edwardian period, and to give the rail distance between Minehead and Watchet as eight miles, not 20. Tourism social enterprises across the UK Jubilee Pool, Penzance One of Europe’s last remaining seawater lidos, Jubilee was threatened with closure following storm damage, but in 2017 was taken over by a community benefit society. The group has restored the pool to its art deco glory and runs the pool – now a major tourist attraction – for the community. South Tynedale Railway, Cumbria Volunteers at South Tynedale Railway Preservation Society have created a tourist attraction straddling two of the UK’s most deprived rural areas: a narrow-gauge railway winding from Alston through the picturesque South Tyne Valley. It attracts hundreds of thousands of visitors a year. Art B&amp;B, Blackpool This classic Victorian seafront hotel, renovated by 30 contemporary artists, reinvests its profits in local arts and community projects and stages events, talks and workshops for locals. Good Hotel, London Set on a boat in London’s Docklands, the Good Hotel provides jobs and career training for long-term unemployed Londoners. Profits from the project go to educate children through the hotel’s global foundation, including in Guatemala, where the original Good Hotel was founded in 2007. Bristol Ferry Boats Bristol harbour’s iconic yellow-and-blue boat fleet has been run for community benefit since 2013, with the group who run the boats staging interactive tours, wildlife spotting and storytelling trips for Bristolians. Tower House, Oxford This guesthouse supports the charity Student Hubs, which helps the city’s students tackle local social challenges and works to keep students from less-privileged backgrounds in the higher education system.UK consumers could be eating Australian beef linked to deforestation on the back of a new post-Brexit free trade deal signed in the summer, an investigation has found. Satellite analysis has identified an area of deforestation over the past three years that is more than twice the size of Manhattan across farms in Queensland, the largest beef-producing state in Australia. The deforestation includes the habitats of threatened species such as koalas, flying foxes, quolls, and several endangered species of bird and frog. “Millions of native animals, including Australia’s iconic koala are killed or left homeless when bulldozes destroy their habitat,” said Gemma Plesman, Queensland campaign manager for the Wilderness Society, who carried out the satellite analysis with Unearthed, the investigative arm of Greenpeace. . Australia is the only country in the developed world in WWF’s list of global deforestation hotspots. About 3% of the forest area in eastern Australia, which includes Queensland, was lost between 2004 and 2017. Under the terms of the trade deal signed this year, Australia’s beef producers will be given tariff-free access to the UK market. But campaigners argue that beef is the number one driver of the country’s deforestation crisis, and particularly in Queensland. The Queensland government introduced new laws aimed at curbing deforestation in 2018, yet the analysis says loopholes are allowing clearing to continue. The analysis found more than 13,500 hectares (33,359 acres) of deforestation across 57 properties, with more than half of the cleared area (56%) across 54 beef properties categorised as where habitats for threatened species are “likely to occur”. The loophole identified by Unearthed exempts vast tracts of hectares of forests that have previously been cleared even if they are over 15 years old and supposed to be classified as “high-value regrowth”. More than two-thirds of the deforestation identified in the analysis is forest or woodland mapped as exempt from all clearing restrictions despite being over 15 years old and having grown back to maturity. Regrowth forests can often be vital habitats for threatened species. A Queensland civil servant who has worked on the subject, speaking on condition of anonymity, said they “can represent a significant fraction of the remaining extent of endangered ecosystems”. Dr April Reside, a lecturer in wildlife science at the University of Queensland, said the level of clearing identified by the study was “really substantial”, adding that deforestation risked fragmenting and degrading species habitats, leaving them exposed to invasive species. Among the 82 species found to be losing habitat was the Southern black-throated finch, an endangered bird which was found to be losing 364 ha. Reside said: “That’s definitely something to be concerned about … they’ve already lost 88% of their original extent. So they’ve got a very small proportion of habitat left, and what they do have left is highly degraded and is not about finch conservation. And it’s still being cleared.” “There are ways of growing beef that don’t destroy the environment. Broad-scale land clearing is just lazy … you don’t have to clear habitats and drive species to extinction in order to get your food,” said Prof Brendan Wintle, a conservation ecologist at the University of Melbourne. The environment bill which became law last month tackles only deforestation in the supply chain that is illegal under local laws. “Nobody wants to be responsible for deforestation,” said Dustin Benton, policy director for thinktank Green Alliance. “If the rules can’t guarantee that, or we can’t even get a rider in the UK-Australia trade deal, then they simply don’t work.” The National Farmers’ Union said: “The NFU has been clear about its concerns over the agreement in principle with Australia, which could see increased imports of Australian goods, produced at much lower costs and at vast scales of production. There has also been no clarity about how the deal works in tandem with the UK’s environmental and climate ambitions. “We believe that the UK’s trade policy should champion the climate-friendly food we produce in this country, where we make the most of our maritime climate. Food produced in this way is a far cry from food produced in areas of deforestation or suffering from extreme drought.” A spokesperson for the Queensland Department of Resources said the 2018 laws provided greater protection to high-value remnant and regrowth vegetation and important habitats, including essential habitat for near-threatened wildlife. “Our responsible vegetation management laws continue protect our valuable environment, habitats and the Great Barrier Reef while allowing landholders to manage and grow farm operations that are fundamental to jobs and our economic recovery post-Covid.” Australia’s Red Meat Advisory Council, the Cattle Council of Australia, AgForce Queensland were all approached for comment. A spokesperson for the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs said: “With our world-leading Environment Act now law, the UK is committed to go further than ever before to clamp down on illegal deforestation and protect forests. Following the COP26 summit, we will maintain the trajectory set by the Glasgow Leaders’ Declaration and the Forest, Agriculture and Commodity Trade Dialogue on halting and reversing forest loss and greening global supply chains.”Reader, I am here to inform you that dreams do come true. You really can have anything your heart desires, with the proviso that you’re prepared to aggressively and repeatedly abuse your position in order to get it. What I’m trying to say is this: my year-long campaign to get Tom Cruise to send me a cake has ended in success. Roughly a year ago, I wrote a short piece about Cruise’s habit of sending $50 (£38) white chocolate coconut bundts to his closest friends at Christmas. Kirsten Dunst, Henry Cavill, Angela Bassett, Jimmy Fallon, Graham Norton and scores of other high-profile figures all receive a cake, lovingly made by Doan’s Bakery in California and shipped out by Cruise’s staff. I finished my article by hoping that I would one day be important enough to receive such a wonderful gift. Then, in April, Cruise went on record to announce that, as a young actor, he once spent three days eating so much chocolate cake that he threw up. Naturally, I responded by stating in print that I deserved a cake from Cruise, and that I was better at eating cake than he was – something I would prove by eating his cake on the toilet in one go. Anyway, Cruise sent me a cake this week. The box – apparently brought to the UK on his private jet – arrived wrapped in a cream and gold bow, alongside a bejewelled reindeer and a note reading: “To Stuart Heritage, warmest wishes to you this holiday season, Tom Cruise.” At first, I hesitated to open the box, because the rational response to behaviour as obnoxious as mine would have been to put a spring-loaded custard pie inside, perhaps one doused with anthrax. But then the smell of it hit me. Oh God, the wonderful smell. The story goes that Cruise first encountered the cake when Diane Keaton and Katie Holmes had a competition to find the best cake. Cruise tried Keaton’s offering and was immediately transformed. “This miraculous cake must be shared,” he thought, and spent several years shipping hundreds of them to famous people all around the world. It’s true that his marriage to Holmes sadly ended in divorce. But, look, the main thing is that I got some cake out of it. I already had some idea what the cake would be like because, when I first wrote about it, a curious reader ordered one from Doan’s and then composed a long email to me describing it. “It’s genuinely delicious,” he wrote, adding that the sponge is “perfectly light and moist. Not too heavy, not too airy.” The description was spot on. Given the nature of the cake and the distance it had travelled, I was expecting it to be a little on the dry side. Not so. This is a soft, silky, luxurious thing, so impossibly rich that it almost defies description. Is it the best cake I have ever eaten? Very possibly. And take a look at me, for God’s sake. I clearly know my way around a cake. Wait, I’m forgetting something. In August, when Cruise made the news for eating two identical curries in a row in Birmingham, for reasons none of us may ever fully comprehend, I threw down the gauntlet yet again. I still wanted Cruise to send me a cake, I said. In fact, “If you had any guts, you’d send me two.” And this is why Cruise actually sent me two cakes this week. One next to the other, delivered at the same time, like a baller. So, thank you Tom Cruise. Truly, your generosity knows no bounds. Please believe me when I tell you that I will take both of these incredible gifts, and I will eat both of them sitting on the toilet until I vomit all down myself. This, it seems, is the only way I can begin to repay your generosity. Merry Christmas!I am an Afghan female journalist and I have been on the run for more than four months. I have lived in numerous safe houses and the homes of people who’ve offered me refuge. I am constantly moving to avoid being caught, from province to province, city to city. The Taliban insurgents have been threatening to kill me and my colleagues for two years, for our reports exposing their crimes in our province. But when they seized control of our provincial capital, they started to hunt for those who had spoken out against them. I decided to escape, for my own and my family’s safety. I left my childhood home and my family with no idea when I would return or what fate awaited me. But, on 15 August, after President Ashraf Ghani fled the country, Taliban fighters marched into Kabul and took control of the capital, leaving many of us vulnerable to the whims of this vengeful, violent group. The first time I saw my mother in three months was in a market, a crowded public space. We were both wearing our long blue burqa; not just because it is now a requirement for women in my province, but also to avoid being recognised and caught by the Taliban, who now control my country. In early August, she had helped me pack so I could escape the advancing Taliban forces that had captured my home province. She gave me the courage to leave so I wouldn’t get caught by the fighters who have been known to be unforgiving towards those, like me, who are critical of them. When I first saw her in the market, I wanted to pull away our chaderis and just give her a hug. She nudged me to be quiet, held my hand and led me into a nearby store. She knew it would have been too risky for me to be recognised. Inside the shop, which belonged to a relative, she held me tight and kissed my face. I held her for such a long time; we talked and cried. It felt so good. It felt as if I had found something very precious after a very long time. I am exhausted. I am tired of running and hiding. I am tired of begging friends and relatives to hide me in their homes. For four months, I have been thrown around the country like a football. I am tired of my life. My mental state is very bad. I can’t sleep at night. I get nightmares when I close my eyes. I don’t find value in my own life. I can’t work to support myself. I used to be the breadwinner of my family, and now they are starving, while I am dependent on other people for survival. I also feel bad for the people who open their homes for me. Many of them are out of work and can barely feed their families. How can I expect them to feed me? But I can’t return to my house or to my old life without risking the safety of everyone I love and care about. In the days after the fall of Kabul, the Taliban paid several visits to my parent’s house looking for me. Even in the months before the fall of Kabul, we had received threats at the media organisation where I used to work demanding that the female employees stop working. We didn’t give in to their intimidations and instead published their letter on social media saying our female employees were not going anywhere. We told them we would continue our work despite their threats. In response, we received more threats. Even the noneditorial newsroom staff had calls from Taliban fighters asking them to resign. But we remained determined to continue. That was, of course, until our city fell to the Taliban, and it became physically impossible to persist. My parents told the Taliban that I left the country during the August evacuations. But they didn’t believe them and keep calling me. They tell me they will kill me if they find me. I block the numbers they call me from, but they just call me from a different number or they call me on WhatsApp and other messaging platforms. I have blocked more than a hundred numbers so far, but they just keep calling from new numbers. They send me voice messages with terrible threats, telling me the awful things they will do to me. A colleague told me that they can locate me using the GPS through these calls. One of our former colleagues was recently found by the Taliban and they claim they tracked him using the GPS on his phone. I don’t know if that is true, but I am terrified they will find me. They have also been harassing my parents, telling them they know I am still in the country because my phone is active. They tell my father that if they catch me, they will punish my parents as well for lying to them. Women who were previously a big part of the political and social life of my city are now jailed in their homes. Others are in actual prisons for speaking against the Taliban. Teachers and civil society members who were previously an active part of our public life are now absent, struggling to survive. I have never been a refugee. I never had any wish to live anywhere other than my own country, with my family and friends, serving my people. But the last four months have been the most difficult and horrifying of my life. My only reprieve was when I met my mother, who gave me the strength and the motivation to continue. It breaks my heart to say that I have been forced to consider leaving Afghanistan. I have been seeking refuge from countries that were our allies, so I can survive and continue my work. I cannot live a nomadic life like this. I need to work, to support myself, my family. I need to contribute to society, to correct the mistakes made by the many men in power. I need to survive. As told to Hikmat Noori Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:Anthony Albanese has “put the prime minister on notice” that Labor will establish an anti-corruption commission that will examine the alleged pork-barrelling of federal government grant programs. On Wednesday, Nine newspapers reported an analysis of more than 19,000 grants across 11 programs had found Coalition seats received $1.9bn in three years while Labor electorates got less than $530m. A similar analysis undertaken by the Australia Institute last month found 71% of $3.9bn in grant funding had gone to government-held electorates since the Coalition came to power in 2013. Campaigning in Queensland in the marginal seat of Ryan, prime minister Scott Morrison defended the government against allegations of pork-barrelling, saying a large proportion of the grants had gone to electorates affected by drought. He also said the “predictively selective analysis” had looked at just 11 programs out of 1700 administered by the commonwealth. “Others may want to criticise us for the support we’ve given to drought- and flood-affected communities, but when I make a commitment I carry it through,” Morrison said. “When we make a commitment we keep it, that’s what we do as a government.” When asked about the amount of discretionary grant funding that the Nine analysis found went to Peter Dutton’s seat of Dickson in Queensland – $43.6m compared to the $900,000 that went to the nearby Labor-held seat of Lilley – Morrison dismissed the criticism. “Dickson must have a very good local member,” Morrison said. “They’re doing great jobs and they’re advocating for their communities and what Queenslanders can know is when I tell them that we’re going to get something done in their electorates, they’re getting it done.” But Albanese, who was campaigning in the marginal Tasmanian seats of Bass and Braddon, said the discrepancies highlighted in the most recent analysis indicated the government had distorted the granting process and was “determined to brush it off”. “The fact is that we’ve never seen before a prime minister who was so determined to treat honesty and integrity as an optional measure,” Albanese said. “I put the prime minister on notice that a national anti-corruption commission will be able to look at the sports rorts program and these rorted programs of taxpayer funds. “Taxpayers … deserve better than to have their funds, their taxpayer funds from their hard work, funnelled into marginal electorates on the basis of a political whim.” Albanese also suggested that one of the key reasons independent candidates were running against incumbent government MPs was the “endemic” rorting that had undermined faith in our political system. “No wonder there are so many independent candidates jumping up and running in safe Coalition seats, because there is real concern about the prime minister’s actions on this.” The push for a national integrity commission is one of the key issues being pursued by independent candidates in inner city seats under the banner of the “Voices Of” movement. Morrison, who has been under pressure from within his ranks to progress the government’s stalled legislation for a national integrity commission, dismissed the push by independents, saying they were a front for Labor. “I’ve heard about the ‘Voices Of’ movement. It’s the voices of Labor at the end of the day because they’re only running against government candidates,” Morrison said. “Their intention is to remove the government and put in Anthony Albanese. They’re the voices of Labor and if you vote for an independent from that movement, you may as well vote Labor.”A four-year-old boy left his Sydney family gobsmacked after ordering more than $1,000 worth of gelato on a food delivery app, including a personalised birthday cake and tubs of his favourite flavours. Christian King used his father’s phone to order $1,139 worth of gelato and cakes from Gelato Messina on UberEats on Monday. His father, Kris King, had given his son his phone to keep him distracted while his sister’s touch football match was happening. He said his son warned him he had “something on the way”, but he didn’t believe him until an UberEats delivery driver called his wife. It was at that moment he realised what was going on. “First of all I thought it was $139. And then I really looked at it and it was $1,139 and we almost had a bloody heart attack. “I flicked through the screen about 30 times. That’s how long the order was, it was like 99 cakes.” “He actually told me he ordered a birthday cake for himself, and I didn’t even believe it. “I had steam coming out of my ears first of all, screaming his name down the street. He ran to his room before I told him so.” King said the order included multiple cakes and tubs of Christian’s favourite flavours from Messina. “He ordered two of the tiramisu, two of the mushroom cake, the chocolate log, he chose the ones he wanted. He didn’t just choose randomly. “He also ordered eight or nine 1.5 litre tubs of strawberries and cream and double dolche gelato. It’s a little cheeky boy just ordering what he liked.” Christian’s birthday is in January, but his father believed he was planning ahead. “We order stuff off UberEats every day, and he’s obviously seen us do it all the time, but he’s never done it and submitted it. $1,200 later, it was a big shock to the system.” The enormous order was delivered to Newtown Fire Station where King works as a firefighter and had last made an order. The firefighters on duty accepted the order and removed everything they had in the fridge to accommodate it. UberEats agreed to refund the order when King and his wife explained what had happened. “[UberEats] weren’t aware of anything wrong, but really we thought there should have been something in place. It was a very unusual order. “We thought someone would question a $1,000 order of random things, and a personalised birthday cake that said happy birthday.” King initially told his son Santa wasn’t coming this year as a result of the order, but it appears the situation has changed. “The icing on the cake was when UberEats said we’ll give you your money back. He’s back in the good books and Santa is coming again.”For all its whizz-bang caper-gone-wrong energy, and for all its subsequent emotional troughs, this week’s Succession finale might have been the most important in its entire run. Because, unless I am very much wrong, Succession – a show about people trying to forcefully mount a succession – just had its succession. And now everything has to change. The episode ended with Logan Roy defying his children by selling Waystar Royco to idiosyncratic Swedish tech bro Lukas Matsson. It’s an unexpected twist, like if King Lear contained a weird new beat where Lear hands the British crown to Jack Dorsey for a laugh, but it sets up a bold new future for the show. What will happen in season four? Here are some theories. Everything stays the same Season three of Succession picked up seconds after season two ended. It was a smart move, showing the immediate swirl of confusion that followed Kendall Roy’s decision to undo his father, and something similar could happen here. This week’s episode ended with three of the Roy siblings heartbroken and angry at their father’s grand betrayal. Perhaps season four could pick up at that precise moment, and show their efforts to reorganise their rebellion against him. This is something that Succession undoubtedly does very well – for the most part, its greatest moments have been those heart-thumping scenes where Kendall scraps for support to unseat his dad – and Jesse Armstrong has more than enough dramatic clout to centre the entire season around the battle to stop the Matsson deal dead in its tracks. Logan sells up, part one That said, we’ve seen that scenario, or versions like it, play out countless times before. Perhaps it would be more dramatically satisfying to start season four a little down the line. Logan has sold Waystar to Matsson and is now a (moderately) powerless figurehead. Matsson, meanwhile, has the reins and is set upon disruption. And then there are the Roy kids, all fighting to earn their spots in the company. There’s a contingent of Succession fans – I confess to being one of them, from time to time – that has long been desperate to see how the kids would cope without the entitlement that comes from having their dad as their boss. If all the excruciating psychodrama of being in the family business fell away, would they thrive? Would they sink? Would they spend their lives fruitlessly plotting to overthrow their new boss, just as they did with their dad? Logan sells up, part two The alternative, and one that runs the risk of alienating the audience, is to just pretend that Waystar Royco doesn’t exist. Matsson has breezed in and sacked everyone, and is now running it as his own little dictatorship without the participation of any of the Roy family. Suddenly the central theme is the total absence of the family company. Is Logan Roy capable of being a contented retiree, or would his hunger for professional violence send him mad? Would Shiv re-enter the world of politics? Kendall has experience of existing outside of Waystar, so could this new environment be his path to rebuilding his fractured self-esteem? What in the world would Roman do? All the all-time great shows have a season like this, where the lead characters find themselves ripped from the comfort of their surroundings – Mad Men broke Sterling Cooper, Tony Soprano separated from Carmela, Lost hit a nuclear bomb with a rock and everyone went back in time – and there has never been a better chance for Succession to follow the pattern. The ascent of Wambsgans Really, though, I suspect that all anyone really wants to see from Succession is the continued dominance of Tom Wambsgans. For years, Tom has been a figure of ridicule – his wife doesn’t love him, and her family views him as nothing but a socially climbing freeloader – and so his late-stage betrayal in the season three finale was an air-punching moment of true elation. The nod from Logan in the dying moments appeared to signal a new period of triumph for Tom. Perhaps, with Logan out of the picture, Tom could be Succession’s primary antagonist; a figure who has taken everything the Roy kids felt entitled to, and is eager to rub it in their faces at every turn. Would Tom do well in the upper echelons of power? No, of course not, he’d be a disaster. But try telling me you wouldn’t want to watch that. • This article was amended on 5 January 2022. An earlier version incorrectly said that Tony and Carmela Soprano divorced.Alisha Muzvite was out playing when she was caught short and went behind a bush to go to the toilet. But as the eight-year-old crouched down, the ground beneath her shifted, pulling her into one of the underground fires which burn all around her home in Hwange in north-west Zimbabwe. An aunt pulled her to safety, but Alisha’s legs were so badly burned that they had to be amputated. More than a month after the accident, the little girl died of her injuries. “It is painful what has befallen us,” says Andy Muzvite, Alisha’s father. With only one public toilet for more than 500 people living at Number 3 settlement, a housing area for Hwange Colliery Company employees, bushy areas have become convenient for open defecation. But, impossible to see on the surface, coal has been burning under the earth here for years, injuring unsuspecting people, often children. According to Global Forest Watch, coal seam fires, which happen when a layer of coal ignites, are hard to detect and even harder to extinguish. There are thousands of them burning around the world in coal-mining countries, estimated to cause 40 tonnes of mercury to enter the atmosphere each year and representing 3% of the world’s annual CO2 emissions. Before Alisha’s death, the Hwange Colliery Company workers had sacrificed the little they had to help with her medical bills. “Her mother went door to door asking for whatever amount. She struggled to get money for her medical bills. That woman suffered,” says Anita Muyere, 32, a neighbour. “The entire community is in shock after the death of Alisha. We have become more careful with our children. Anything can happen now, and it is very unfortunate that it only takes a fence to avoid these accidents,” she says. “The president should come here and see the danger that our children are facing. They should force the colliery to act,” she adds. About 500 metres from the Muzvite’s family home, Preside Sibanda, 16, is lucky to be alive after he was almost swallowed by the underground fires. Preside was playing with his friends when he stepped on to a heap of coal, already burning underground. “He was looking for mango and was burnt on both legs. He survived by holding on to a tree. Otherwise, the fire could have swallowed him,” says Clement Dube, his stepfather. “He is now OK, but the heat burns are still troubling him. He is always scratching his legs. He even stopped going to school because of that, because his friends always laugh at him. He cannot even wear his school shoes. Whenever he stands, water comes out of burnt wounds,” he adds. “The company did not help us at all. They never sent a representative to visit us. We thought they would help but we got nothing. There are no barricades near these places,” says Dube. His mother, Future Mwembe, also laments the lack of care from the authorities. “When my son was burnt, I was pregnant. I would walk for hours just to see him in hospital. I suffered because he spent a month in the hospital. We had no money, so he had to return home,” Mwembe says. Parents here have called on the authorities to fence off the bushy areas, which are near a school, saying the underground fires have been burning for years. “That place is not just near playing areas for children, but there is also a school which is more dangerous. They should just seal off that place. This is not a recent phenomenon; these fires have been troublesome since I was young. People used to get burnt then. Why are they not barricading the place?” asks Dube. The blistering sun beats mercilessly on Hwange and suffocating heat emanates from huge piles of dumped coal, filling the air with choking humidity. Zondiwe Dube, no relation to Clement, lives in the Number 2 settlement. Her son, Obedient, 20, is disabled after he was burnt by underground fires when he was 13. “My son was burnt on both legs but the left one severely … He got some help, but it was not enough. I was told to buy plastic, salt and vinegar. The plastic worked as a bandage; the experts say it removed the heat trapped inside the leg,” says Dube. “He stayed in the hospital for over three months, but he recovered soon after because of the prayers.” She says Hwange Colliery Company did not help with medical care. “The company did not show us love. I used to walk in the wee hours of the morning [to visit Obedient in hospital]. I really suffered taking care of my son. There was a day I woke up at 3am on a road notorious for marauding elephants,” Dube says. Dube’s husband says there should be mechanisms to fight the fires. “This area is not safe; the company should put a fence because these signposts are unreadable. These fires are moving in the roads. The colliery should put its community first. It is not just my child, but many others. Even people’s cattle are being roasted by the fires,” he says. A report by the Centre for Natural Resource Governance (CNRG) says coal seam fires ruin lives in Hwange. “Some of the victims who are now adults were injured while young and had their future ruined by the permanent injuries, lengthy periods spent in hospitals and unending excruciating pain that has become a permanent experience in their lives, largely due to inadequate therapy they received,” reads the report. “Dangerous sites must be properly secured to ensure children do not gain access. In places with underground fires such as Hwange, the company, and the Environmental Management Agency have a duty to keep watch over these fires and warn the community accordingly,” CNRG says. Hwange Colliery spokesperson Beauty Mutombe says the company is not liable to compensate trespassers. “People are trespassing to those areas which have clear signs. We have thousands of hectares in concessions and have sealed off the dangerous areas, but people steal the fence,” Mutombe says. “Do you know coal has spontaneous fires and we will need to seal off every square metre?” Mutombe says the company bought a drone to locate fires and that awareness campaigns are already under way in the community, but that it will not compensate those injured. The company, however, says it did assist the Muzvite family with medical bills after Alisha’s death. Daniel Molokeli, MP for Hwange, says he wants a solution. “We have called for an all stakeholders meeting with the Hwange Colliery Company to agree on a permanent solution. We also want to work together to raise awareness. We are concerned about the number of cases of people getting burnt and some dying,” Molokeli says. Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:At the beginning of all this, when the lucky ones were hiding out at home disinfecting their groceries and baking bread, some wondered what impact the pandemic would have on fiction. Would people write Covid novels? Or would this be the kind of thing fiction ignored, the way it neglected to include mobile phones or the internet or climate change for such a long time? Now, 18 months on and with no end in sight, it seems ever more important that fiction acknowledge the truths the pandemic has revealed to us: how connected we all are, and how much we fear one another. Enter Sarah Moss’s eighth novel, The Fell. Set in the Peak District over one night in November 2020, like Moss’s previous novel, Summerwater, The Fell explores isolation and claustrophobia through the various perspectives of a group of geographically proximate people. Alice is a retiree, classified as “vulnerable” because of her recent cancer treatment; she is brought groceries by her teenage neighbour Matt and his mother Kate (his father is nowhere in sight). Rob is a local volunteer with search and rescue efforts; it’s his night with his daughter, and he wants to look after her, but is called out to an emergency on the fell. Kate, after contact with a Covid-infected person in the cafe where she waitresses, has been unable to abide a 10-day quarantine; she takes off at dusk into the nearby hills without a mobile phone. At first the outing is invigorating – Kate sings folk songs and carols to herself as she walks. But at some point she falls, and then night falls, and it’s unclear how she is going to survive. Moss, who throughout her body of work has been keenly interested in medicine and society, wrote about a pandemic in her 2009 debut Cold Earth: there, archaeologists on a dig in Greenland are trying to figure out what happened to some Norse settlers who mysteriously disappeared – wiped out by a plague? – while a pandemic rages back home. But where that novel’s protagonists are trapped away from home, in The Fell the pandemic has confined Moss’s characters indoors. Home is not always a refuge: it can be a place of violence, boredom, infantilisation and isolation. The enclosing walls of the house are the physical manifestations of the government’s failure to guide and protect the nation. Soon after his mother goes out, Matt can feel that the house is empty; it has a “sense of space” and a “stillness” he hasn’t felt in weeks, and his teenager’s heart flutters between the freedom to do as he likes and a fear of being left to fend for himself. At first it’s not clear how long his mother will be out, but as the night wears on, with the search helicopters overhead, the emptiness becomes unbearable. Where has Kate gone, and why? Is there some trauma in her past that might have led her to bolt from the house this way? “He wonders, sometimes, if his dad, or maybe her dad who died before he was born, some earlier man, taught her to fear those doors and curtains – so maybe this was always going to happen, her running away from quarantine and lockdown and the whole global project of confinement”. Meanwhile, on the other side of the wall, Alice lies awake worrying about Matt, thinking of how her own children would have come apart if she had vanished like that. And Rob, who doesn’t know Kate at all, is wondering if they are dealing with someone who meant to come home, or someone who didn’t. Before the fall, as she walks and sings, Kate dares herself to go ever higher, to be able to look down at the city below to gain some perspective. “There’s no point in thinking about how this will ever end,” she thinks. “All the other plagues ended, sooner or later […] and people lived and loved and built houses and planted trees and made food and clothes – and stained glass, travelled, even made music and put on plays. Ring a ring of roses. […] And of course life won’t go back to the way it was, it never does and rarely should.” Moss is nodding at novelistic convention by building suspense – what will happen to Kate? – but Kate’s interior monologues work against the form, suggesting that the outcome is not the point. If anything, her walkabout appears to be an allegory for the pandemic itself: we’ve set out on this path, but we have no idea where we are on the mountain. One way of coping with this knowledge is to wax apocalyptic. Another is to find fair and just ways to live together – while we’re going through it, and after. Kate removes herself from the daily hum of pandemic life, and can see more clearly. Achieving this kind of perspective is precisely what fiction sets out to do, and what Moss does with great sensitivity. “There will be holes in the children’s education, a generation that’s forgotten or never learnt how to go to a party, people of all ages who won’t forget to be afraid to leave the house, to be afraid of other people, afraid to touch or dance or sing, to travel, to try on clothes – whisht, she thinks again, hush now. Walk.” • The Fell is published by Picador (£14.99). To support the Guardian and the Observer buy a copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.UK inflation jumped to 5.1% in November as the price of petrol reached a record high and a computer chip shortage continued to push up the cost of cars. The Office for National Statistics (ONS) said the increase, which exceeded City forecasts of a rise to 4.8%, took the consumer prices annual rate to its highest level since September 2011, when it stood at 5.2%. Analysts said the increase in inflation from 4.2% in October is expected to put further pressure on the Bank of England to raise interest rates when it meets on Thursday, although the spread of the Omicron variant may deter policymakers from taking such action until the new year. Last month, Bank officials were predicting that inflation would rise more gradually and exceed 5% by next April, when a price cap on gas bills is expected to be lifted by the energy regulator Ofgem. Unions and anti-poverty campaigners said the jump in prices would hit household living standards without further action from the Treasury. Labour market figures on Tuesday showed wage increases moderated in October to below 4%, indicating that despite rising employment and a widespread vacancies, workers are likely to see a fall in disposable incomes in the run-up to Christmas. The TUC said the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, must fully fund real pay rises for public sector workers and the minimum wage should increase immediately to £10 an hour. Jack Leslie, a senior economist at the Resolution Foundation thinktank, referring to the combined impact of the Omicron variant and inflation, said: “Next year is likely to be marked by acute economic pain for some parts of the economy alongside a nationwide living standards squeeze.” Sunak said the government had provided £4.2bn of support through the winter from “freezes to alcohol and fuel duty and the reduction of the universal credit taper and increase in work allowances”. He added: “The most important thing we can do to safeguard the economic recovery is for everyone to get boosted now.” Petrol was one of the main drivers of inflation after it rose to an average 145.8p a litre in November compared with 112.6p a litre a year earlier. The November 2021 price is the highest recorded. Used car prices increased by 3.1% from October to November 2021, leading to a cumulative increase of 31.3% since April 2021, the ONS said. The other parts of the inflation basket of goods and services to increase in price were food and non-alcoholic beverages, clothing and footwear, and furniture and household goods, the ONS added. The central bank’s rate-setting monetary policy committee faces a dilemma after figures on Tuesday showed that the labour market had recovered without a significant rise in the jobless total. In more normal times, low unemployment and record levels of vacancies during a period of high inflation would trigger high pay demands, putting further pressure on prices. However, the economy had already begun to slow ahead of concerns about the Omicron variant and there are fears that a fourth lockdown in the new year will force the economy into reverse gear. Brent crude oil prices have fallen by $10 a barrel since October, which should lead to a fall in prices at the pumps over the coming months. Bank of England officials are expected to say the increase in average prices will prove to be temporary, although they are likely to persist for longer than the central bank predicted only a few months ago. Core inflation, which strips out volatile prices such as petrol, increased from 3.4% in October to 4% in November, its highest level since 1992, when core inflation peaked at 4.1%. Janine Boshoff, an economist at the National Institute of Economic and Social Research, said inflation was likely to be persistent and stay above 5% throughout the first half of 2022. Kitty Ussher, the chief economist at the Institute of Directors, said businesses expected prices to rise in the new year and accused the government of “making matters worse” by raising national insurance contributions next April. “The government’s decision to raise employers’ national insurance in April 2022 will add further fuel to the inflationary fire,” she said.With that, we’ll end our live coverage for today. Here’s a recap of today’s major news developments: New South Wales announced 1,360 new Covid cases on Wednesday as mask requirements and bans for unvaccinated people were dropped, with the state’s health minister revealing that modelling predicts daily case numbers could reach 25,000 by the end of January. The Australian Medical Association has warned that the Covid vaccine booster program is “already falling behind”, risking more infections and “a repeat of mistakes seen overseas where we are seeing the rapid spread of Omicron”. Western Australia further tightened its already strict border rules for travellers from New South Wales in response to spiralling case numbers in the state. WA also announced it would halve its weekly international arrival cap from 530 to 265 in response to the Omicron variant. Victoria recorded 1.405 new Covid cases, the Northern Territory recorded four, while South Australia recorded 26 new Covid cases – the state’s highest daily total since last April. Tasmania reopened to fully vaccinated travellers from hotspot areas. Have a great evening. We’ll be back tomorrow to do it all over again. New Zealand’s cities could be reshaped for decades to come, forcing the long-entrenched dream of the quarter-acre block to the margins, after the government joined forces with the opposition to pass sweeping legislation in favour of housing densification. In a rare display of cross-party collaboration, Labour and National passed the Resource Management (Enabling Housing Supply and Other Matters) bill – a policy that aims to counter urban sprawl and boost supply by up to 105,000 new homes in the next eight years by forcing councils to loosen restrictions on building in urban areas. Councils won’t be able to block townhouses or apartments under a sweeping reform aimed at improving affordability – but will it work? And could the idea cross the Tasman? My colleagues Eva Corlett and Caitlin Cassidy have this very interesting read: Allowing Australians to use their superannuation to buy a home would cause another “price explosion”, property economists have warned. The $3.3tn savings pool is an attractive target for politicians wanting to boost home ownership, fund infrastructure or wean people off government pensions in the decades ahead. A McKell Institute report released on Wednesday models the effect on the housing market should Australians be given access to super for a home deposit, as advocated by federal government MPs such as assistant minister Tim Wilson. Housing prices have increased significantly during the pandemic, helped by record low interest rates. Rental costs have also risen. A standard 20% deposit for a house in Sydney – where one-fifth of Australia’s population lives – is now around $300,000, or close to five times the median annual earnings for an individual. Read more: Western Australia will halve its weekly international arrival cap to 265 in response to the Omicron variant. The WA government announced it would cut its hotel quarantine intake on Wednesday, as premier Michael McGowan announced a reclassification of New South Wales as “extreme risk” and a further tightening of the already strict entry rules for travellers from the state. The halving of the arrival cap comes as WA has recorded its first known Omicron cases in hotel quarantine. Two returned overseas travellers are confirmed to have the Omicron strain of the virus and are being monitored in state-run hotels, reports AAP. WA currently receives 530 international arrivals per week but the government will halve the cap from next Thursday. It comes after a number of breaches involving ventilation issues at Perth’s quarantine hotels, two of which prompted short lockdowns earlier this year. “Halving the arrivals cap will ensure capacity in hotel quarantine and safeguard models are maintained given the heightened Omicron risk and addition of NSW approved travellers in hotel quarantine,” a state government spokesman said on Wednesday. The NSW government will forge ahead with plans to license flood plain harvesting before the end of the year but will make amendments to address some of the findings in a NSW upper house committee report which warned knowledge around the practice was inadequate. The committee report, issued Wednesday, calls for further scientific work to establish the extent and impact of flood plain harvesting, which involves capturing floods moving across plains using massive dams, levees and channels. The practice, which has grown dramatically in the past 20 years, has been blamed by the Wentworth Group of Concerned Scientists for some of the 20% reduction in flows in the Murray-Darling, along with climate change. Environmental scientists have warned over-licensing could have long-term catastrophic impacts on the ability to achieve improvements in the Murray-Darling basin. Read more: Western Australia’s premier Mark McGowan has urged all Western Australians in New South Wales to return to the state immediately ahead of already strict border rules tightening even further from Saturday. In a post on Facebook, McGowan said the situation in NSW – where 1,360 Covid cases were announced on Wednesday – is “very concerning”. McGowan said: I urge all Western Australians currently in New South Wales with an approved G2G Pass to come home immediately, because once the reclassification takes effect on Saturday, they will not be able to do so, except for the most extraordinary circumstances.” Residents returning to WA will have to navigate a complex set of rules and gain specific approval to enter from Saturday. McGowan said exemptions for approved travellers will be restricted to certain government and specialist workers or extraordinary circumstances determined by the state emergency coordinator or the chief health officer. Additionally, to gain approval to enter the state, travellers in those categories must have had at least two doses of a Covid-19 vaccine (if eligible) and return a negative test prior to travel, and will be subject to the following conditions on arrival unless otherwise advised: Undertake mandatory hotel quarantine at a state quarantine facility for 14 days at their expense. Undergo Covid-19 testing on days 1, 5 and 13. McGowan noted that arrivals from NSW were already required to do 14 days of quarantine at home under current border settings, but the move to extreme will mean it must be done in hotel quarantine, and the number of eligible travellers is restricted further. He added: We want Western Australia to remain Covid-free until we safely ease our borders on 5 February. New South Wales will be classified as an “extreme risk” in Western Australia’s Covid border controls, bringing it into the same travel rule category as Victoria. The classification will come into effect from 12:01am on Saturday, and follows a spike in Covid cases in NSW. On Wednesday, 1,360 new cases were announced. Western Australia’s premier Mark McGowan also noted the NSW government’s eased rules for unvaccinated residents when announcing the reclassification on Twitter. McGowan said: Ahead of our safe transition, we need to do everything we can to protect our State, while we continue to get Western Australians vaccinated. Under this category, the exemptions for approved travellers will be restricted to certain Government and specialist workers or extraordinary circumstances determined by the State Emergency Coordinator or the Chief Health Officer.” Rural patients and those living in lower socio-economic areas are struggling to access Covid booster shots, experts are warning, amid concern the vaccine rollout is “falling behind” as the Omicron variant spreads. General practitioners and pharmacies are reporting a sudden increase in demand for vaccines, after federal health advice changed to allow boosters five months after the second primary dose. Representatives of the aged care sector said the rollout for residents and staff was improved from earlier this year, with more than 1,000 booster clinics conducted in aged care facilities already. But rollout problems are emerging in other areas. Some GPs caught off guard by the weekend’s announcement said they were left without enough supply to meet demand. Demand on pharmacies also increased suddenly and significantly. The Australian Medical Association said it was “extremely concerned” at the lack of support for both GPs and pharmacists, and warned the booster rollout was already falling behind. My colleagues Christopher Knaus, Natasha May, and Cait Kelly have more on this: Just when is the right time to signal your exit from a senior position in the government (or elsewhere)? Mike Pratt, the secretary of the NSW Treasury, is clearly not happy that his intention to leave before the next state election in March 2023 made it into the media. So he’s sent an all-staff memo to tell everyone he was “weighing up” whether to return to the private sector. (The Australian described him as “sensationally” sending it to the department staff, but we opted for a more sober take.) Pratt said “only a small number of people were aware of my early thinking. Unfortunately, this information has been prematurely leaked to the media, and I am disappointed with this breach of confidentiality.” That’s usually a cue for more leaking. (Please note: I’m open to Wickr, Telegram, Signal, you name it, even peter.hannam@theguardian.com). Anyway, Pratt will probably face more questions about his future tomorrow when he is due to front a NSW upper house committee looking into the accounting treatment given to $40b of state rail assets. It’s a complex tale but if you want to understand more on what the fuss is all about, there is this handy explainer. Embattled NSW treasury secretary, Mike Pratt, has denied he’s planning an imminent exit from the role, telling staff there is still “so much work left to do” to help the state recover from the pandemic. In a message sent to staff on Wednesday, Pratt denied a media report that his resignation and the appointment of a successor were being planned. He said, though, he may leave the public service prior to the March 2023 state election. “I want to let you know that I have been weighing up whether to return to the private sector before the next state election after almost a decade in public service,” Pratt said in his missive to staff. “The timing would enable a smooth transition to a new secretary before the poll.” Pratt said “only a small number of people were aware of my early thinking. Unfortunately, this information has been prematurely leaked to the media, and I am disappointed with this breach of confidentiality.” The statement to staff comes a day before Pratt is scheduled to front a NSW upper house inquiry over the finances of the Transport Asset Holding Entity, or TAHE. The entity, which holds about $40bn in rail assets, is at the centre of a standoff between treasury and the state’s auditor general, Margaret Crawford. The state’s audit office this week stated it was refusing to sign off on the state’s 2020-21 financial report “due to significant accounting issues”. Read more: Queensland has backtracked on public health advice that threw dozens of airline passengers into hotel quarantine, and has caused further flight cancellations, according to a tourism body. All passengers on two Virgin flights – VA1105 from Newcastle to Brisbane and VA375 from Brisbane to Townsville – were declared close contacts of a male traveller with the virus on Tuesday night, and ordered to isolate for 14 days regardless of a negative test result. Two further exposure sites were listed in Townsville and Brisbane Airport. But the health minister, Yvette D’Ath, backflipped on the decision on Wednesday morning, announcing only passengers in the rows behind, in front of and beside the passenger would be required to complete a fortnight quarantine. The rest of the passengers would be deemed casual contacts and would be released from isolation after receiving a negative test result. The passengers were initially facing Christmas in hotel quarantine. D’Ath said it was the first domestic flight into Queensland where there was a potential Omicron case on board and health authorities acted “just as we did” when the new Delta variant arrived. Read more: Thanks for bringing us the news Mostafa. You have Elias Visontay with you now. I’ll be taking you through rest of the afternoon. If you see anything you think I should be aware of, you contact at me at elias.visontay@theguardian.com or via Twitter @EliasVisontay. And with that, I’ll hand over the blog to the writer of the previous post, Elias Visontay. Thanks for reading. The New South Wales Labor opposition has called on the Perrottet government to release the health advice that it relied on when deciding to ease Covid rules from today. The call from opposition health spokesman Ryan Park followed the NSW Covid update on Wednesday, where the state’s chief health officer, Kerry Chant, pleaded with residents to continue wearing masks in indoor settings despite the government dropping the requirement from Wednesday. Chant said “my clear advice is in indoor settings, wear a mask”, and did not directly answer a question about why mask rules were being wound back on a day when NSW announced 1360 new Covid-19 cases – up from 804 on Tuesday. Shortly after the NSW Covid update, Park said “obviously Kerry Chant made recommendations about masks and they are important”. He said: We trust Kerry Chant and her team. All we’re asking the government to do is to release that advice and to ensure that they are making decisions based on that advice We want the health advice made public because we want to make sure that the government is following that advice and the decisions it makes, not for us, but for the community who’s naturally somewhat concerned at the moment. There is a heightened sense of anxiety in the community. I understand that. What we’re saying to the government in the spirit of bipartisanship is please release the advice because that will go a long way in keeping people calm.” Throughout the pandemic, the NSW opposition has largely supported the government’s Covid rules in line with health advice, and Park echoed premier Dominic Perrottet’s comments that hospital system strain, and not daily case numbers, is the more appropriate metric for concern. New Zealand has recorded 74 new cases of Covid, and one death. Health authorities said another 15 new cases were also detected late yesterday, so will be added to tomorrow’s numbers. The NZ Ministry of Health offered their condolences to the family of the deceased: A patient with Covid-19 has passed away at Tauranga hospital. The family has requested that no further details be released and, out of respect for those wishes, we will be making no further comment. Of the 9,963 cases in the current outbreak, 84% (8,353) are not fully immunised. Of the 508 hospitalised cases in the current outbreak, 93% (474) are not fully immunised. The Northern Territory has recorded four new locally acquired cases overnight, all linked to the Katherine cluster. The NT recorded 11 overall cases, with five being international arrivals, and another case in an aircrew member from a flight from London. There was also a case in home quarantine in Darwin. Two of the new locally acquired cases are in the Royal Darwin hospital precinct, including a woman in her 30s and her young son, both from Timber Creek. They had stopped in Katherine before going to Dawrin for surgery for the child. The other cases are a woman in her 20s and a teenager from Katherine East. Earlier today, it was announced that South Australia has recorded 26 new cases, the highest daily total since last April. Two cases are health workers who had attended a number of aged care facilities, with six sites identified as sites of concern. It comes as premier, Steven Marshall, defended the state’s contact tracing resources, after they were delayed in naming exposure sites: A lot of the information does come in late because you’re speaking to people and then they recall where else they may have been or could have been an actual transmission that wasn’t there previously. So look, I’m absolutely 100% convinced we have provided the adequate resources, we’ve been asked for more resources, we’ve provided more resources, I think our contact tracing is the best in the world. But what we do need to understand is it’s a changed environment from where we were even just two months ago. So it is important to list exposure sites so people have got some information, but we are at a different level of stress with regards to this disease from where we were two to three weeks ago and certainly where we were two to three months ago. Marshall also announced changes to restrictions for international arrivals, who will see their quarantine periods cut to seven days. But the premier added that testing requirements pre-departure wouldn’t be changing “anytime soon.” The Australian Medical Association has warned that the booster program is “already falling behind,” risking more infections and “a repeat of mistakes seen overseas where we are seeing the rapid spread of Omicron.” In a statement, the AMA’s president, Dr Omar Khorshid, says there are concerns at the lack of support for the booster program: GPs and pharmacists are not being properly supported to implement this critical booster program. By the end of this month close to four million people will be eligible for the booster, however, in the last week Australia has only been able to administer just over 210,000 booster doses. The commonwealth has cut vaccination funding for GPs delivering boosters. This is making it very difficult for GPs to run clinics at the volume and scale required, including running extra vaccination clinics or extra sessions. GPs, for example, need to hire extra staff and make hundreds of telephone calls to encourage patients to get their boosters. Unless primary care is supported, the booster program will fall further behind, and millions of Australians will be put at greater risk of the significant complications associated with Covid-19. The return of stringent public health restrictions will once again be inevitable. Dr Khorshid also said the new variant “poses a significant risk” and that it was essential that the public are encouraged to take up the booster: The latest strain of Covid-19, Omicron, poses a significant potential risk to the population and appears much more transmissible than previous strains, so we have to pick up the pace to protect the community. We need to urgently reach out to the public to encourage them to come forward for their booster, and GPs are best placed to do this for many in the population. The Australian Capital Territory has updated its restrictions on domestic arrivals, with fully vaccinated close contacts of Omicron cases no longer needing to quarantine for 14 days. They’ll have to isolate for seven days instead, with all other restrictions on domestic arrivals lifted. A statement from minister for health, Rachel Stephen-Smith, outlines the new changes: People will no longer need to fill out a declaration or exemption form to travel to the ACT, and all remaining high risk geographical areas will be removed. The three-day quarantine requirement for fully vaccinated overseas arrivals will be retained, and this is likely to remain over the Christmas and New Year period. The ACT also removed special restrictions on fully vaccinated arrivals from South Africa, Lesotho, Botswana, Zimbabwe, Mozambique, Namibia, Eswatini and/or Malawi, who will only need to quarantine for three days. NSW Chief Health Officer Dr Kerry Chant, just earlier told reporters it was still too early to judge the severity of the Omicron variant. Speaking at today’s health update, Chant said authorities believe the reason for NSW’s growing cases was the new variant, and warned people to be vigilant. We still don’t have enough information to inform our assessment about the severity profile, but we believe that that information will be emerging over the next two weeks. We have seen a rapid uptick in cases and what we believe is that Omicron is driving that uptick. A little bit of it is driven by Delta as we are getting out and about ... but, primarily, we believe that Omicron is certainly driving the uptick in cases – particularly in the Newcastle area. No vehicle? No worries – it shouldn’t mean you have to hit the brakes on your getaway plans, writes Caitlin Cassidy. Westpac will stop funding fossil fuel projects but Australia is not ready to rely on renewables immediately, chairman John McFarlane says. McFarlane gave a lengthy defence of continued lending to coal and gas projects in response to environmentally-concerned shareholders at an annual general meeting on Wednesday, AAP reports. Investors calling into the virtual meeting pleaded with executives to stop lending to companies such as Whitehaven Coal and Woodside for new coal and gas projects. McFarlane said the easy decision would be to stop financing all fossil fuels projects. “But given this is Australia, it’s not the right answer,” he said. “This country does need us to finance various sectors, including electricity generation. “We know gas will be with us for some time. We’re not going to be able to deal with renewables immediately.” We’ve got some mixed messaging coming out of NSW - on masks and Covid numbers. Here’s a little more on the Covid situation in Victoria, where 1,405 new cases and three deaths were announced today. There are currently 86 people in the ICU in Victoria and of those 46 are ventilated. The issue is of course Victoria’s case numbers have not dropped since the state hit 90% vaccination, so the concern is Omicron is circulating and may create a surge in cases. Thank you, Matilda. We’re going to go to NSW where premier Dominic Perrottet was just speaking about how there will be a change around who is a close Covid contact – and that some will no longer need to isolate for seven days and will only need to get a PCR test. He said close contacts would now be focused on household contacts, and that even household contacts may not have to isolate for seven days. “A close contact will be a member from your household ... there may be occasions where Health may determine outside of that definition that you would be a close contact. “In those circumstances, rather than isolating for seven days, you’ll just need to get a negative PCR test.” It’s not entirely clear what the new rules mean but we’ll bring you more when we know. With that, I shall hand you over to the amazing Cait Kelly who will bring you all the updates from this NSW press conference. Modelling has predicted that New South Wales could see up to 25,000 new Covid cases a day by the end of January. The University of NSW modelling estimate was revealed by NSW health minister Brad Hazzard on Wednesday, as Covid restrictions eased in the state. From today, unvaccinated residents can enter most settings and mask mandates in shops, hospitality and other settings have been scrapped. Hazzard also urged people to minimise their gatherings in high density settings, and to wear a mask even though it is not a requirement, as thousands of people in the state who become close contacts in coming days face isolation orders over Christmas. NSW recorded 1,360 new Covid cases on Wednesday. The Victorian ombudsman and Independent Broad-based Anti-corruption Commission have asked the state’s political parties how laws can be changed to deter the misuse of public funds. The integrity bodies have written to leaders of Victorian political parties seeking recommendations for legislative changes as they continue to investigate the alleged widespread misuse of ministerial and parliamentary entitlements as part of a branch stacking operation within the Labor party. According to a statement from the agencies, it is hoped the legal reforms will strengthen the frameworks for parliamentary accountability, particularly in relation to breaches of the members of parliament code of conduct. Evidence heard during recent public hearings regarding alleged branch stacking suggested that some Victorian MPs misused public resources by directing electorate officers and ministerial staff to engage in work that furthers their political objectives. The Victorian ombudsman, Deborah Glass, said reforms introduced in the wake of the so-called red shirts scandal appeared not to have done enough to protect against the misuse of public funds. She said: The evidence indicates that despite a package of reforms enacted by Parliament in 2019 in response to my Red Shirts report in 2018, existing laws and rules around the legitimate use of public resources are not robust enough to prevent their misuse. The Ibac commissioner, Robert Redlich QC, who has overseen the public hearings, said: Much of the evidence heard at the public hearings spoke about how taxpayer funds were directed to ministerial and electorate office staff to perform party‐political during work hours, rather than the job they were hired to do in performing ministerial or electorate work. According to the Ibac and Ombudsman statement, Victorian MPs are also being asked to provide clarity about the process they use to appoint staff for electoral or ministerial work, and whether reducing the staffing allocation and electorate office budget should be considered. The public hearings have heard from MPs and staffers that factional tasks were often done by publicly funded workers when there was not enough “legitimate” work to do. The feedback from MPs will help form the recommendations in the final public report, which will be handed down next year. Ummmmmmmmmm... I’ll bring you more on this soon, but the rules in NSW has once again relaxed, with household close contacts of Covid-19 cases (those who live in the same home) no longer need to isolate for seven days, just return a negative PRC test. Morrison has been asked if he thinks the Queensland premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk’s success in limiting Covid-19 deaths in her state will benefit her federal Labor candidate Anthony Albanese. I tell you what, after the next federal election, Annastacia Palaszczuk will be the premier of Queensland. How you vote will not change that. In Victoria, Dan Andrews will still be the Premier of Victoria. Mark McGowan will still be the Premier of Western Australia. However, you vote at the next federal election. But I can tell you one thing, if you don’t vote for the Liberal-National parties then Anthony Albanese will be the prime minister of Australia and not myself and that’s what this election is about. Ultimately it’s a choice between those alternatives. Others will have their view. But if Anthony Albanese needs to be propped up by premiers, take that as a vote of no confidence in him because they don’t think he knows how to do the job. Here is what Morrison had to say about the allegations of “pork barrelling” that have arisen following this nine newspaper analysis of how much federal grant funding each electorate received. It’s selectively looked at. People can make their own judgements about that. When we make a commitment, we keep it. When we commit to support local community organisations, when we commit to bust congestion in urban areas, whether it’s here in Ryan or any other parts of the country, when we make that commitment, Australians know that we’ll keep it. In addition to that, when Australians are facing tough times - the grants you’re talking about have predominantly gone into rural and regional areas, particularly here in Queensland, because they were dealing with drought-affected communities and grants going into drought-affected communities. S o people in rural and regional Australia understand that when they’re doing it tough, they know the Liberals and Nationals, the LNP in Queensland, will be here to support them. Others might want to criticise us for keeping our commitments. They might want to criticise us for the support we’ve given to drought-affected and flood-affected communities but when I make a commitment to do those things, I carry it through. Morrison says he “welcomes the common sense” decision by the Queensland government to let most passengers on the Virgin hot spot flights to leave isolation after they return a negative test. He urged the state not to go backwards, to keep moving towards living with Covid-19, and it a not so subtle swipe at the Queensland government noted how “shattered” those on the flight must have felt during the period where they believed they would be in isolation over Christmas. Morrison has been asked about the Nine newspaper analysis which appears to show Coalition and marginal electorates were given significantly more in grants from the federal government than their federal counterparts. I’m just working to bring you the full transcript, but the prime minister has suggested that the funding data was “selective” and tried to drive home the point that when the Coalition commits to a project, it delivers on it. Morrison has been asked about him recently being declared a casual Covid contact: I did get that advice. I was there at that event. I’ve been double PCR tested since and both negative. I think I’m one of the most tested-for-Covid prime ministers anywhere in the world and probably the most quarantined as well. And so we always take that health advice seriously and we fully comply. Before we came up here today, we ensured we were fully compliant with the Queensland rules for coming into Queensland and so, of course, we’ve done that. Bruce Saunders, the assistant minister for trade, has laid out what this new proposal would mean more clearly: Perhaps 13- to 24-year-olds that have lived a life with a tablet a mobile phone for most of their young lives. They know the tricks. They know the loopholes, the anxiety, the difficult times that are out there and it’s really important that we listen to the youth of Australia and be guided by their decisions and make an impact on the new youngsters coming through to really make a difference to make sure the predators know we are fair dinkum. Don’t touch our kids. Our kids are well-skilled, well-tooled, well-analysed and, importantly, recognise potential danger, know how to react, and, most importantly, will report any dangers that exist both in the online world and also the real world. So there is no place to hide. And the youth advisory group will provide a structure that provides initial skills and tips to keep our youngsters safe online. OK, so now we have moved on to the main meat of this press conference. The newly proposed online safety act that the Coalition wants to bring in. Morrison: We need to make sure this is continually informed by young people, because they are living with it. They know what is going on. They understand the technology better. They understand the tricks that these monsters will use to try and trick them. And we need their feedback and we need help from them to guide us in this area. And help parents by giving them the right tools. That is why we are setting up reporting with the e-safety commissioner Julie Inman Grant, the first to listen directly to young people about how we can even more successfully and effectively keep their world safe online. This is a great passion of mine and Jenny’s, it is a great passion of parents all around the country. Morrison is really hitting all the talking points in the first minute or two of this press conference: What we can say is a country is no country got everything right, but it is important to get the balance right. And we made the big calls and we have got the balance right. And as a result, Australia has one of the lowest fatalities rates [anywhere] in the world. We have one of the strongest economies is of an advanced economy is in the world. Scott Morrison is back in Queensland today for the first time in a long time after borders reopened this week. It is great to be back in Queensland. It is so great to be back in Queensland. I have been looking forward to this and it is wonderful to be here. It is wonderful to see the country connecting again, it is wonderful to see Tasmania open, it is wonderful to see, as I flew in today, there was a Japan Airlines plane on the tarmac here in Brisbane, as we note that Japan, Korea, students and of course skilled migrants being able to come into Australia. We are living with this virus and the opening up, the national plan which we lead as a federal government*, that set the targets for vaccines to ensure that we could connect again, it has been put in place and that has led to the opening of these borders. * It’s REALLY stretching the outer limits of the truth by suggesting the federal government is in any way in control of the national reopening plan. Oh my good lord! We are going straight from the Victorian press conference to the prime minister. Lord help me! An important update on that PM cricket photo opp: Sutton has laid out some fairly stark statistics on which demographics are still getting seriously ill from Covid-19. Those in hospital yesterday, 73% were not fully vaccinated. And 58% did not even have their first dose. Of those in intensive care, 91% were not fully vaccinated and 88% had not had their first dose. No vaccine at all. We’re talking about the eligible population in ICU, so if vaccines did nothing, you would expect 92% or 93% of people to be fully vaccinated. But we are seeing a tiny proportion who are fully vaccinated. Everyone else is not fully vaccinated or has just one dose. If that is not a story of the protection of vaccines, I do not know what is. Chief health officer Brett Sutton says Victorian now has 10 confirmed cases of the Omicron Covid-19 variant. You would have seen a media release this morning although we have an additional four cases of Omicron variant detected in the community. That brings the total cases to 10. That went out early this morning to advise people who had been attending the Sircuit or Peel Hotel, if they were at those venues on the 10 December. They are all required to be fully vaccinated and checked in via the QR codes. We don’t expect there are unvaccinated individuals though, they have been provided advice on the 14-day requirement for unvaccinated individuals nonetheless, we thank everyone for the assistance. Really, thanks to that QR check-in we have been able to check in with all of those 850 plus patrons who checked in and have been directly messaged through the course of today. Foley has confirmed that no one currently in hospital with Covid-19 in Victoria has received a booster jab. It’s important to know that of those people in hospital with the virus at the moment, none have received a booster, and while sadly they continue to be overrepresented in the non-vaccinated as well. We will continue on with these efforts to make sure that Victorians can get those out over the holiday period. I am WEEPING as I type. Foley: Elective surgery rules will also be updated, with health services and regional services able to step up and resume to 75% of normal elective surgery activity. Foley: Workplaces exposed to a positive coronavirus case will no longer need to undertake the same level of extensive deep cleaning they had historically. Now international evidence into the coronavirus is an evolving the airborne or droplet borne disease, and the likelihood of becoming infected by touching a surface is increasingly seen as a low risk. Having said that, normal cleaning arrangements will continue to apply, among the benefits we have seen it is just the lifting and hygiene as a result of the increased arrangements we have had through the pandemic. Foley: Secondly, the mandatory vaccination requirement when it comes to non-essential retail and retail more broadly. It will be lifted, except for hair and beauty services. The vaccination requirement will also be lifted when it comes to real estate, as long as people are not hanging around for long. As well as places of worship and weddings and funerals. Masks will still be required in retail settings. Having said that, face masks in those religious settings such as weddings and funerals or ceremonial settings will not be required. If an event is held at a place of worship, there will not be any vaccination requirements or limits of participation. If that same ceremony is under way at a hospitality setting, then vaccination requirements will continue to apply as they will continue to apply in all hospitality services. Victoria’s health minister, Martin Foley, says that, as the state’s newly minted pandemic powers come into effect from midnight tonight, several Covid-19 rules in the state will be tweaked. Firstly, people who are under 18 will no longer be required to show proof of vaccination status at hospitality venues, the current arrangement is 12 and above. In terms of these arrangements, particularly for families at Christmas, moving up to 18 make sense. Here are the new Victorian Covid-19 rules: The main change seems to be that those under 18 will no longer need to have proof of vaccination in order to enter venues. Someone who knows more about sport than I do, is this a good or bad throw from the PM? Albanese has been asked how he intends to swing marginal Tasmanian seats back into the red during the upcoming election. By putting a message to Tasmanians that they need to hear and that that they want and that message is very clear – that here in Tasmania, they want jobs. They want secure work. They want to see companies like this backed with high-value manufacturing. They want a government that actually looks after their interests and the whole of ... not just marginal electorates. This government have been in office now for almost a decade. They’re asking for a second decade in office. Do Tasmanians think that this is as good as it gets? Because a fourth-term government, can you imagine the rorting of taxpayer funds that will occur in a fourth term if this government gets its way? Albanese: When I was the minister, we funded projects like Gold Coast light rail in safe Coalition seats, because it was the right thing to do. We put $7.6bn into the Pacific Highway when we were in office, a highway that didn’t cross a Labor electorate from the north shore of Sydney right up to the Queensland border for most of that area. The truth is that this government have been involved, and they’re addicted to it and they just dismiss it and in the last budget, they established a range of funds where they allocated billions of dollars in decisions taken but not announced. It’s not on! Albanese: We need a national anti-corruption commission and we need it now and I put the prime minister on notice that a national anti-corruption commission will be able to look at the sports rorts program and these rorted programs of taxpayer funds. Taxpayer funds are ones that are paid for by the hard workers such as at this company here. They deserve better than to have their funds, their taxpayer funds from their hard work funnelled into marginal electorates on the basis of a political whim. They deserve for funding to be allocated as well for major infrastructure projects. Reporter: Well, what would you do? Albanese: What we did. What we did was to have grants based upon integrity. What we did was to have a grants system [going] through local government where every local government in the country benefited, and where we took advice from departments. We didn’t have is the sort of system that this government has – and we will not have in government – is a few ministers sitting around with colour-coded sheets and the prime minister’s office sitting down with colour-coded seats based upon the marginality of electorates and determining funding that way. Funding should be based upon objective criteria and should be based upon need. Now that the Tasmanian border is open, Anthony Albanese is down there talking about how bad the Liberals are. No surprises there. Let’s have a little listen to what he has to say about this research done by Nine newspapers, showing the distribution of grant funding by the government by the electorate: Well, this is just a disgrace. Today, we have found through the research that has been done by Nine newspapers that $4 has gone to Coalition electorates for every dollar that has gone to a Labor electorate. In my electorate of Grayndler, they’ve received $700,000 of commonwealth grants funding at the same time as the electorate just next door, that has a very similar composition, Reid, has received $15m and Cook $8m. Taxpayers don’t pay different rates of tax according to what electorate they’re in but what we know is that unless you’re in a marginal National or Liberal party seat you won’t receive the same support as those voters do. And the pork-barrelling is just out of control. This government have set up a number of funds – sports rorts, commuter car park rorts, regional grants, a whole range of programs. They’ve even politicised the community safety program. The community safety program should be above partisan political interests. What we see from this government is rort after rort. Queensland’s chief health minister, Dr John Gerrard, says that Omicron spreading throughout Queensland is inevitable and the state will not be changing its approach to reopening. He said the Virgin flights were pretty with extreme caution simply because it was the first time they were confronted with the possibility of an Omicron carrying flight. (We don’t actually know if it was Omicron yet, but it could be.) We took an extremely cautious approach. This is the first domestic flight on which a likely Omicron case has been diagnosed. But moving forward, following these discussions, we believe it will be safe to use our more usual infection control measures whereby we isolate or we quarantine those people two rows in front of and behind the person involved, even if it is Omicron, as we expected. As I’ve said, this virus is going to continue to spread. It is clear now that Omicron is very contagious and most of us now believe that the speed with which we will reach a peak is probably faster than we anticipated. It’s more in the weeks than the months, from what we’re seeing in New South Wales and the United Kingdom. It’s very much faster and much more contagious than we’ve seen previously with Delta. We’ll see that in the coming days and weeks and I think we can reasonably expect that Omicron will spread in Queensland in the coming weeks. It won’t be a surprise. We are not going to change our plans as a result of that. D’Ath has confirmed that – with the exception of the infected person’s travel group, and those sitting in close proximity – all the passengers of those two hotspot Virgin flights will be allowed out of isolation once they return a negative PCR test. The health unit and chief health officer and deputy chief health officers analysed overnight what should be our approach when we have Omicron on these flights. Do we need to take a different approach to quarantine? Or can we apply our normal rules? So there’s been a lot of discussions overnight and I know that there’s been contact with other chief health officers and health officials interstate to see how states are dealing with this based on the national guidelines. I’ve been advised this morning that the chief health officer and the deputies have viewed that we can apply the normal rules in relation to these flights and we don’t need to wait until we get the findings of whether it’s Omicron because, if it is, we still will apply these rules. That means that other than those people who will be directly advised they are close contacts ... the remainder of the passengers will be deemed to be casual contact. What that means for those people will be that they have to get tested, isolate until they get a negative result, and then just watch for symptoms over the next 14 days. D’Ath: Now, in relation to two of these particular positive cases in the community, we can advise that one person was at the Argyle hotel in Newcastle and although, in both of these cases we are waiting on the genomic sequencing to come back, we are certainly treating them as if they are Omicron. We know there has been a large number of cases of patrons who had been at the Argyle hotel in Newcastle. Secondly, there was the gentleman who flew from Newcastle to Brisbane, then Brisbane to Townsville. This person had attended another exposure site in Newcastle. We are, at this stage, treating it as if it was Omicron. It was this gentleman who was on the two flights we put up as exposure sites yesterday afternoon. Queensland’s health minister, Yvette D’Ath, is speaking now and confirms that the state has recorded six new Covid-19 cases, all from interstate travellers who tested positive in Queensland. In relation to these cases, they are in a number of places across Queensland and have been infectious for up to six days. So places such as Goondiwindi, Wide Bay, Townsville, Gold Coast and Brisbane South have all reported these cases. In addition, we can report that one of our previously reported overseas positive cases who have arrived from the UK has now been tested positive for Omicron. So that is in hotel quarantine. Here are the details of the Covid-19 positive woman who died in the latest NSW reporting period. She had received three doses of the vaccine but, NSW Health says, had underlying health conditions. This is the third death linked to an outbreak at this facility. So we are just standing by now to hear from the Queensland health authorities when they step up at 11am (AEDT), but looks like we will be hearing from the Victorian crew shortly after that at 11.30am. Then we’ve got NSW at 12! I’m going to need a coffee. News Corp is reporting that most passengers on board the two Queensland flights that have been caught up in a Covid-19 scare will be released from isolation after testing negative. According to News.com.au: News.com.au has confirmed the vast majority will now be deemed casual contacts by the Queensland government. That means they will be tested and released from quarantine. Reportedly those seated in close proximity to the infected passenger will still be required to do the full isolation period. I’ll follow this up and see if we confirm it for you guys. I know this doesn’t start until June but it still feels like a weird vibe to be promoting the new international flight route you’ve helped organise, while many people can’t enter or leave WA to see family for Christmas. This is a great point (although worth remembering that hospitalisations are generally delayed by one or two weeks, so naturally when numbers are declining hospitalisations will be higher than when they are inclining). Scott Morrison will travel to Queensland despite being identified as a casual contact of a person with Covid-19 after his attendance at a Sydney high school graduation. Morrison and a person with Covid-19 were among about 1,000 attendees of the Kincoppal-Rose Bay graduation gala at the International Convention Centre at Darling Harbour on Friday. A spokesperson for the prime minister confirmed he was deemed a casual contact by New South Wales authorities on Tuesday night but he has returned two negative PCR tests since the event. You can read our full coverage of this story below: OK, we will be hearing from the Queensland health authorities at 10am and will hopefully get some clarity on whether a Covid case onboard flights to the state will always mean the entire plane needs to isolate for two weeks. There is an update from the ongoing inquest into the Melbourne aged care home St Basil’s, which had a deadly Covid-19 outbreak last year. AAP is reporting that former chairman Konstantinos Kontis has requested to be excused from giving evidence, believing this could incriminate him legally. Criticism is coming in this morning after the Western Australia’s upper house passed the Labor government’s contentious Aboriginal heritage legislation last night despite protests by Indigenous groups, AAP reports. In a statement on Wednesday, Nyikina Warrwa Traditional Custodian and academic Anne Poelina said Labor had squandered the opportunity to right wrongs and scrap racist laws. Our power to speak for our Country and self-determine how it is protected has been disregarded... McGowan has failed us. The National Native Title Council also condemned the passage of the bills, noting they were not co-designed with the input of traditional owners. NNTC chief executive and Gundjitmara Djabwurrung man Jamie Lowe said: “As we have stated repeatedly, the bill does not make traditional owners the decision-makers in the protection and management of their cultural heritage,” If you want to change a history of heritage destruction to a future of heritage protection, Aboriginal people must have an independent right of review for ministerial decisions, with genuine power to make decisions about heritage sites. Federal Liberal MP Warren Entsch, who chaired a parliamentary inquiry into the destruction of the Juukan Gorge, warned while speaking to ABC that the laws don’t give Indigenous people an avenue to stop abuses of ministerial power. The reality is while it certainly goes some way to addressing the deficiencies in the current [law] it falls far short of the reforms that were advocated in our [inquiry] recommendations. Australia’s air force chief ticked off on a $16bn Joint Strike Fighter program clearing a major milestone despite acknowledging “deficiencies” with the aircraft and support systems. The defence department has also revealed that a much-trumpeted upgrade to the Jindalee Operational Radar Network is running “several years” behind schedule, a year after the Morrison government announced plans to expand surveillance of Australia’s eastern approaches. The disclosures follow moves by the defence minister, Peter Dutton, to dump the trouble-plagued MH90 Taipan helicopters early and replace them with Black Hawks from the US in coming years. A detailed new report on Australian’s defence acquisitions outlines problems with other major projects, including the Joint Strike Fighter program. You can read the full report below: The ABC is reporting that the Covid-19 positive man who travelled from Newcastle to Townsville, triggering two flights full of passengers into isolation over Christmas, was an Australian defence force officer. He was alerted that he was a close contact when he landed in Townsville, went to get a test, and subsequently came back positive. Victoria is still slightly ahead of NSW in the daily case number with 1,405 new infections, but that gap is narrowing. Sadly three people infected with Covid-19 have also died in the latest reporting period. NSW has once again seen a significant jump in cases with 1,360 new Covid-19 cases in the latest reporting period. We will have a breakdown of where in the state those cases are later this morning. Sadly one person infected with Covid-19 has died. Labor senator Pat Dodson has blasted the Western Australian government for failing its one opportunity to protect Aboriginal heritage and stop the “tyranny of cultural genocide” after the state’s controversial new heritage bill was passed into law. The new law, introduced after Rio Tinto destroyed a 46,000-year-old cultural site at Juukan Gorge, has drawn anger from Aboriginal traditional owners, shareholder groups and even federal MPs. After months of asking, the bill was finally released to the public on 16 November. Critics had called on the WA government to halt its passage and conduct further consultation with traditional owners. “It’s a discredit to the legislators and particularly those who advise the legislators,” Dodson said. “If you look back at the history of Western Australia, it hasn’t been so advanced in this space for a very long time and this was the one opportunity it had to be a bit advanced, and it has failed.” You can read the full report below: This funniest part of Josh’s chat. We will be hearing from the NSW premier, health minister and chief officer at midday today (AEDT). Speaking of the huge Omicron exposure in Melbourne, the Guardian’s very own reporter Josh Taylor has been caught up in it, which means we will be one team member down at the Christmas party tonight. Here he is chatting with ABC News Breakfast: I got a text message at 11pm, saying I had been identified as a close contact of an Omicron case. That was all the information I had last night. I got up early, went and got tested and saw the press release this morning, identifying the club I was at on Friday night as one of the exposure venues for Omicron. I’m actually not surprised that they have done this ... As you have just reported, what we are seeing in Newcastle with the amount of cases that have spread within that one nightclub, I’m not surprised they are working fast to stop a repeat of that here. Scott Morrison has spoken to 4BC Radio ahead of his trip to Queensland, confirming that he is still coming to the state despite being a casual contact of someone with Covid-19. Morrison said that both the chief medical officer and Queensland authorities have confirmed it is safe to travel, citing his two negative PCR tests since the Friday night event he attended. Morrison said: That’s what living with the virus is. The virus is there, Omicron is in Australia. We’re going to live with this virus not let it drag us back where we’ve been. We’ve got one of the highest vaccination rates in the world. We’re about to tip over 90% double dose around the country. Yesterday we had another bumper day in terms of our booster program ... We’ve got to keep moving forward, we can’t slip back. It’s great Queensland has opened up, but we need better and faster methods to get back in the community. Morrison then hedged on a number of Covid measures: On the Covid contacts having to quarantine for 14 days in Queensland, Morrison said he hoped allowing people to be out by Christmas would be a high priority and there is “nothing magical about 14 days”. He argued governments have to be more “innovative” with solutions like allowing people out earlier if they test every day. On cruises, Morrison said it was “terribly frustrating” P&amp;O had pushed back the start date for cruises, and the federal government is “keen to move”. But “we’re still being patient about it” while state authorities give necessary approvals. Morrison also spruiked two other announcements: A youth advisory committee on online safety; Easier access to the pension loan scheme through a more attractive interest rate for people of pension age to draw down on equity in their homes. Looks like we might get some clarity on what the Queensland flight situation will be when Queensland authorities step up to chat to media later this morning. Stay tuned to the blog for all the updates. Australian schoolchildren’s basic literacy and numeracy skills were relatively unscathed during first year of the Covid-19 pandemic, but gaps are widening between city students and those in regional and remote areas, the latest Naplan study has found. Analysis of long-term data for the annual National Assessment Program – Literacy and Numeracy (Naplan) National Report 2021 – found significant and growing gaps between some demographics, including along gender lines, between Indigenous and non-Indigenous students, and those in metro and regional areas. The full 360-page report, released on Wednesday, follows high-level data in August which indicated that students in years 3, 5, 7 and 9 in 2021 continued to perform on par with students in 2019, despite lockdowns and periods of remote learning through 2020. The Naplan tests were not conducted in 2020 due to nationwide lockdowns. You can read the full report below: The New South Wales government has picked Kerry Schott to chair its net zero emissions and clean economy board, hoping for a happier outcome than its first attempt. Earlier this year, the energy and environment minister Matt Kean chose former prime minister and mentor of sorts Malcolm Turnbull to lead that role. Within days, though, right-wing media stirred into action, demanding Turnbull be dumped. The then premier Gladys Berejiklian complied, with the ex-PM decrying the “thuggery” involved. Schott, a seasoned official, was Turnbull’s choice to head the energy security board but her appointment is unlikely to stir such animosity. Kean said: Dr Schott is one of the most outstanding public servants in the country and brings with her a wealth of knowledge and experience which will be invaluable as NSW drives towards halving our emissions by 2030 and reaching net zero by 2050. The board’s role includes providing advice on the design of net zero programs, opportunities for low-emissions research and industries in NSW, and strategies to support existing industries to adopt low or zero emissions technologies. We had a reminder of the challenges this week, with the NSW government’s own natural resources commission warning that trapping carbon in the soil as a way of reaching emissions goals won’t be easy with warming temperatures likely to result in a rise in soil carbon emissions. Kean, meanwhile, has a busy week with plans to release the state’s mid-year budget update tomorrow morning. Now also the NSW treasurer, Kean has inherited a growing scandal over the accounts of $40bn in assets of what was RailCorp. The NSW auditor general Margaret Crawford is not satisfied with how the government has used the assets to make the overall budget look better than it is, and is refusing to sign off the government’s accounts. Read this explainer for more detail on this odd affair. Unvaccinated people are now free to shop and socialise in New South Wales and travellers arriving from southern African countries no longer have to quarantine, AAP reports. The NSW government is honouring its pledge to significantly ease Covid-19 restrictions despite a sharp rise in Covid case numbers amid super-spreading events in the festive season. For the first time in three months, the same set of rules now applies to the vaccinated and the unvaccinated in NSW. QR code check-ins will be scaled back and masks are only required only in high-risk settings like public transport and planes. There’s no cap on visitors in homes, hospitality venues, or on numbers at outdoor public gatherings. Meanwhile, NSW Health says fully-vaccinated arrivals from eight southern African countries of concern where the Omicron variant emerged will no longer have to enter 14 days of hotel quarantine, bringing all international arrivals under the same requirements. Chief health officer Dr Kerry Chant said all fully-vaccinated international arrivals must self-isolate for 72-hours and have a negative result within the first 24 hours of arrival and avoid high-risk settings for a week. The lifting of restrictions - long-planned for December 15 - comes just as case numbers spike to a two-month high. Some 804 people tested positive for Covid-19 in NSW in the 24 hours to 8pm on Monday and infection numbers have quadrupled in the past two weeks. They included 224 people in Newcastle, where super-spreading events at a nightclub and a pub have been identified. The big question today seems to be will every flight to Queensland positive person on board lead to all passengers quarantining for two weeks? I ask this partially as a journalist and partially as a person who has a holiday booked in for Noosa in January. According to the Australian, the event Morrison attended on Friday was Kincoppal-Rose Bay’s school graduation gala at the International Convention Centre in Sydney’s Darling Harbour. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, has been tested for Covid-19 after being deemed a casual contact, but is not required to isolate. It’s understood that the PM’s office sought advice from NSW prior to meeting the Korean president at Kirribilli House on Tuesday night. Here is the statement from his spokesperson: Last night the Prime Minister was deemed a casual contact by NSW Health following attendance at an event last Friday night. Since the event, the Prime Minister has received two negative PCR tests and as such NSW Health and the Chief Medical Officer has advised he is not required to isolate. As per the NSW Health guidelines, the Prime Minister will be tested again on day 6. The PM will still travel to Queensland today after getting advice from Queensland Health and the state’s chief medical officer who agreed that all the normal requirements have been met. On a lighter note, here is Gutwein’s reaction when asked about Tasmania hosting its first ever Ashes test match in January (after WA failed to open its borders in time). I can’t get the smile off my face. When we were discussing this with Cricket Australia, I made the point that this wasn’t just about money, this was about making history. And Tasmania has never had an Ashes test. I expect that Tasmanians will turn up in droves. I hope it’s a decider, if not, it makes no difference. We still have got an Ashes test and I know it’s something that all Tasmanians are very proud of. Speaking of Tasmania, the premier Peter Gutwein has told ABC News Breakfast that Covid-19 cases arriving in the state is inevitable as the borders open to all of Australia this morning. Well, I’m excited. It’s been nearly two years that we’ve had to have border controls in place. I’ve been up-front with Tasmanians. At some stage, Covid will arrive here. We’ve got our business community well prepared, our broader community well prepared and our health system is well prepared. We’re going into this slightly differently. We’ve largely been Covid free. We’ll be one of the few places in the world who are going into a reopening like this, with such a high rate of vaccination, and no Covid in our community currently. That will stand us in good stead. The other breaking news this morning is two possible Omicron superspreader events in the inner Melbourne suburbs of Fitzroy and Collingwood. According to Victorian health authorities, a person who later tested positive for the Omicron variant of Covid-19 attended two venues on Friday, 10 December. (Last Friday). Everyone who attended Sircuit Bar on Smith Street in Fitzroy between 9pm and midnight, and the Peel Hotel on Peel Street in Collingwood between 11.30pm and 3am (Saturday), are now considered close contacts. Health authorities predict that 320 people were at the Peel Hotel and more than 410 people were at Sircuit. Those who are fully vaccinated must quarantine for seven days and those not fully vaccinated must isolate for 14 days. I’ll bring you updates on this throughout the morning as well. Good morning everyone – it’s only ten days until Christmas and the news just won’t stop! It’s Matilda Boseley here with you this morning and please know that I am wearing a Father Christmas hat this morning, and will be every day till the 25th. Speaking of Christmas, I have some bad Christmas news to start the day. Two planeloads full of passengers will be forced into quarantine in Queensland for 14 days (including Christmas). It comes after an unknowingly Covid-19 positive person flew on a Virgin Australia flight from Brisbane to Townsville on Monday. The other affected flight, also a Virgin Australia service, was to Brisbane from Newcastle, where there has been a recent superspreader event at a nightclub. The flights are: VA1105 Newcastle to Brisbane; and VA375 Brisbane to Townsville. Queensland Health confirmed the case in a tweet on Tuesday night. All passengers on both of the flights were designated as close contacts, while those who were in the parts of Brisbane airport around the time have been listed as casual contacts. I’ll bring you more updates on that throughout the morning. And further south, Tasmania is throwing open its borders to all fully vaccinated travellers this morning, after closures spanning the best part of two years. Under the reopening plan, people coming from designated high-risk areas must return a negative test in the 72 hours before they arrive and present proof at the border. The state government released border reopening modelling a few months ago, which predicts 87 deaths in the six months from December and 50,000 cases. The health department said the system is prepared although several unions have raised concerns about staff levels.Thea-Mai Baumann’s Instagram profile is an eclectic mix of pink-lipped selfies, David Bowie memes, colorful recordings of her hologram artwork, shots of skyscrapers in Shanghai and portraits of friends tinted in Valencia, Amaro and Toaster, all filters from Instagram’s early days. Baumann’s account, which operates under the handle @metaverse, features 10 years of her life and work. All that became inaccessible to her when she suddenly found herself disabled from her account on 2 November, days after Facebook, which owns Instagram, changed its umbrella corporate name to Meta. A message flashed on her screen: “Your account has been blocked for pretending to be someone else.” As Facebook’s corporate name change attempts to reflect the virtual world that the tech company considers the future of the internet, Baumann found herself suddenly excluded from it. “I guess I was pretty surprised but I kind of had a feeling something was going to go down,” the Sydney-based artist and technologist told the Guardian in a phone interview. “A couple of days before my account was disabled, I was getting a lot of people reaching out to me, asking to buy my handle and also other people saying that they wanted my account,” she said. Baumann did what she thought would protect her ownership over her Instagram handle. Days before her account was disabled, she minted an NFT of the first picture that she took under her @metaverse handle, an image of a fake flamingo inspecting a plant. “I just had a feeling that the @metaverse digital real estate was going to become quite pervasive in the media landscape,” Baumann said, adding, “I wanted to create a digital record of my account and prove my ownership over that @metaverse handle.” Instagram still disabled her account. In the following weeks, Baumann tried to get her account reinstated, contacting Instagram’s help center to no avail. When she finally reached out to the New York Times, which contacted Meta on 2 December asking why her account had been shut down, Baumann received a response. An Instagram spokesperson said the account had been “incorrectly removed for impersonation” and would be restored, which it was, two days later. “We’re sorry this error occurred,” the company added. “I feel like if I hadn’t reached out to the media … I think I probably would have been forgotten in the whole process, just completely ignored. I would have disappeared. I would have disappeared in the whole metaverse, Meta rebrand,” said Baumann. Baumann’s experience reflects growing concerns from artists who worry about becoming left out as tech companies such as Meta pave the way towards the metaverse, a still mostly hypothetical virtual world accessed by virtual reality (VR) and augmented reality (AR) technology. “I kind of feel like the metaverse is a pretty exciting concept. I mean, we’re kind of entering this web 3.0 space or the next evolution of the internet. And unfortunately from my perspective, artists and women aren’t really centered in that design process and that engineering process,” said Baumann. “In fact, we’re … deeply marginalized and often co-opted and not part of the whole creation process of web 3.0 or the metaverse,” she added. “I didn’t want to have my work in that space erased by big tech.” Over the years, Baumann has created several brands under the @metaverse handle. “I use it as part of many creative entities that I’ve founded, so I feel like I have ownership over that handle in that social media space, the tech ecosystem and in the metaverse.” One of Baumann’s brands is an augmented reality company called Metaverse Makeovers. According to its website, which describes wearable “appcessories”, the company’s Metaverse Nails “is the only product in the world that allows you to adorn your digital and physical self with customisable holograms. It’s glam wearable tech.” To Baumann, one step towards metaverse inclusivity is for tech firms to invest in artists, “not just creating the platforms, but actually investing … and collaborating with artists to design the new infrastructure around web 3.0 and the metaverse.” Baumann plans to integrate the whole Instagram saga into P∞st_Lyfe, an art project that she started last year which is about the death of one’s digital identity in the metaverse. “Ironically, in this kind of meta moment, I experienced my own kind of digital extinguishing,” Baumann said. “It’s kind of a little bit of a weird meta experience,” she added after a pause.The Football Association and Barclays have agreed a new three-year £30m sponsorship deal that will double the bank’s investment in women’s and girls’ football. In addition to extending the title sponsorship of the Women’s Super League, Barclays will become title sponsor of the women’s Championship as part of the deal and increase its support for the development of the grassroots game. The agreement sets a record for investment in women’s sport in the UK, having already done so in 2019 when Barclays became the first title sponsor of the then newly professional WSL. It has since signed a multimillion-pound broadcast deal with Sky Sports and BBC Sport. The FA’s director of women’s professional game, Kelly Simmons, said: “Barclays have played a crucial role in the growth of women’s and girls’ football, so it is excellent news that they are committing to a new record investment in the women’s and girls’ pyramid until 2025.” Since Barclays became title sponsor of the WSL and backed the FA Girls’ Football School Partnership, which aims to give girls equal access to football in schools, 9,700 schools have joined the scheme taking the total over 12,000 and the ambition is to reach girls at 90% of primary and secondary schools in the UK. In addition to the support for women’s football, the bank has extended its tenure as official banking partner of the Premier League until 2025 and is launching a new “community fund” to offer grants and resources to grassroots groups, primarily those supporting young people in deprived or underrepresented areas who are not yet benefiting from the football pyramid. Barclays’ group head of public policy and corporate responsibility, Sasha Wiggins, said: “Collectively we have been through extraordinarily difficult times over the last 18 months and over that time football has done much to help raise spirits and bring people together. Yet we are also aware that this is an important time to drive equity across the game. “The doubling of our investment in women’s and girls’ football, whilst continuing to support men’s football, and providing finance to the smallest football organisations through the new community fund, is the right way to support the future of the game for everyone’s benefit.”“Reading the obituary of Colin Flatt in the latest issue of Backpass reminded me that, back in 1967, he paid his own transfer fee (£200) to join Romford from Wisbech,” writes Chris Grant. “Unusual, but does anyone know of any others who’ve done that?” We should start by saying that there is always a certain element of negotiation in most transfer deals and they have become more complex over time, meaning the structure of them is often unknown. But we can find some that have been written about publicly. James Jennett points us towards Fernandinho, who dug into his own pockets to smooth his move to Manchester City from Shakhtar Donetsk in 2013. The Manchester Evening News reported at the time: “Fernandinho was so desperate to join City that he paid a £4m chunk of his own [£34m] transfer fee … when it looked like the move might stall over the Ukrainian club’s demands, Fernandinho offered to forgo £4m he was owed by Shakhtar in order to push the move through, meaning City ended up paying £30m.” The move hasn’t worked out badly for him or City. It was widely reported that Philippe Coutinho paid somewhere between £9m and £11.5m to reduce the fee Barcelona paid Liverpool for him to £142m so he could live the dream at Camp Nou in 2018. Ouch. “Philippe, welcome. We know that you have made a personal and economic effort [to be here],” said Barça’s then vice-president, Jordi Mestre, hinting at the player’s monetary assistance. Will Hughes informs us that the former Croatia winger/full-back Danijel Pranjic “was so desperate to join Bayern Munich from Heerenveen in 2009 that he covered the €700,000 shortfall between what Bayern were willing to pay (around €7m) and what Heerenveen were demanding.” Pranjic told Voetbal International: “I got a phone call that Heerenveen’s asking price was still a problem for Bayern. That’s when I made the decision to pay the difference. The transfer has cost me a serious amount of money, but I’m happy that it’s official now.” And in February 2020, the former Scotland defender Kirk Broadfoot claimed that he stumped up to push through a move from St Mirren to Kilmarnock. “I decided to pay the fee because that is how much I wanted to come back and play for Alex [Dyer] and the club again,” he said, though this was disputed by St Mirren manager Jimi Goodwin. “I’m not aware Kirk paid the transfer fee,” he said. “I don’t think there’s been any fee agreed.” Not even top scorers at your own ground “Doncaster Rovers play at the Keepmoat Stadium, and have scored eight league goals there this season (plus two in the EFL Trophy),” reported Joe Reaney, before Donny added a couple more in successive home games. “England Women scored 20 in the same venue. Has it ever happened that a season’s top scorers in a stadium were not the home team?” In terms of players, Jason Maxwell has this: “Austin FC is an MLS expansion team that started in 2021 and opened their new stadium, Q2. This year they had multiple players top-score with four home goals. But Ricardo Pepi, a striker for FC Dallas, scored twice in their match at Q2 stadium. He also scored twice in the USA’s 2-0 win over Jamaica in World Cup qualifying, played at Q2 stadium. So he ties Austin’s top home scorers for most goals in the stadium this year.” But Michael Haughey has us covered on the team front. “An example would be when another team has to share their ground for various reasons,” he begins. “Manchester United scored more league goals at Maine Road than Manchester City in each of the three seasons they shared a ground after the second world war. And Charlton Athletic scored more goals at Selhurst Park than Palace in 1985-86 and 1990-91, the first and last seasons that they shared a ground.” The nitty gritty (2) Last week we asked if you had any more stories of gravel pitches being used for high-level matches … Craig Turp got in touch with this example: “Probably the last gravel pitch to be used at a high level (at least in Europe) was Malta’s Empire Stadium in Gzira, which was still hosting international matches in the 1980s. There is footage here of a match between Malta and Poland from 1980 (a World Cup qualifier) which shows just how difficult the pitch was to play on (Malta were rarely beaten heavily on it). That particular game ended early due to crowd trouble, and Malta only played once more at Gzira, in 1981 against the GDR (some scratchy footage here). In 1982 – after a brief exile in Sicily as a consequence of the repeated crowd trouble – the Maltese national team (and Maltese clubs – most had hosted their home matches at Gzira) moved to the grass pitch at the newly-built Ta’ Qali Stadium. Only part of the Empire Stadium survives, mainly its exterior walls. Little is left of its stands and terracing.” Knowledge archive “What is the longest transfer, in miles, in the UK,” asked Fraser Thomas in November 2011. “I’m thinking of an InverCaly to Truro City kind of thing.” First, there was a player who has made this trip a couple of times. “Aberdeen have fairly recently re-signed Chris Clark from Plymouth,” noted Steve Dickie. “It’s 620.8 miles from Home Park, Plymouth, to Pittodrie Stadium, Aberdeen, according to the AA Route Planner. If it’s not the longest (in distance) UK to UK transfer single transfer then it’s surely the furthest back-to-back round trip.” But ToffeeDan1 went 2.9 miles better – it’s 623.7 miles between Bournemouth’s Dean Court and Ross County’s Victoria Park. “First John O’Neill left Bournemouth for Ross in 2001 and then Derek Holmes made the reverse journey in 2002.” Can you help? “Who is the all-time Boxing Day top scorer?” wonders Stephen Grassley. “And which footballer has scored the most goals between Christmas Day and 1 January in a single season?” “Do any clubs have festive-themed mascots?” enquires Sarah Bliss. “With the ‘packed Christmas fixture list’ coming up, what’s the dullest series of Christmas games we’ve ever had?” tweets Toby Scott. “Fewest goals overall or most 0-0 draws.” Mail us your questions or tweet @TheKnowledge_GU. And it’s the Christmas special next week.Juice WRLD: Into the Abyss, the HBO documentary on one of Gen Z’s biggest music stars, opens with the late poster child of “SoundCloud rap” freestyling straight to camera nudged only by a woozy, hymned beat. A 19-year-old Juice, real name Jarad Anthony Higgins, appears at ease toggling between disconsolation and winking bravado off the cuff: “I gotta admit myself, I’m on these drugs, feel like I can’t save myself,” he says, pausing for a cigarette pull. “Nobody’s ever felt the pain I’ve felt / so I share it / put it out to the whole world, I ain’t embarrassed.” The five-minute freestyle is an arresting introduction to Juice’s prodigious talent for rhyming “from the dome” that now doubles as an elegy. In the early hours of 8 December 2019, less than a week after his 21st birthday, Juice WRLD died of an accidental overdose of oxycodone and codeine shortly after landing at Chicago’s Midway airport. Two years later, he remains one of the most popular music artists in the world – according to Spotify, the third most streamed in the US of 2021, behind Drake and Taylor Swift – and a beloved icon of a genre whose stars burned bright and too fast. The brief life and career of Juice WRLD was one of mind-boggling singularity: one of the most vertiginous rockets to superstardom, even by internet standards; one of the most ubiquitous and influential artists of his generation, with streams in the billions for a career that lasted barely two years. And as Into the Abyss, the final instalment of HBO’s Music Box series (which also includes Jagged and Woodstock 99: Peace, Love, and Rage) illustrates, through archival footage of his near-ceaseless freestyling and testaments from collaborators, Juice was a singular talent, both in the prolificness of his output and the rawness of his lyrics. “He was both willing and able to discuss the things that he was going through without a filter and without shame or regard for how it was received,” Tommy Oliver, the film’s director, told the Guardian. “For so many people who tend to bottle things up or don’t have the language to discuss something … to be able to see somebody who is willing to do that and can make incredible music with that, I think that was something really special.” Oliver never got the chance to meet Juice; he came aboard the project after the singer’s death, distilling behind the scenes footage shot by videographers Steve Cannon and Chris Long into a loose, unvarnished portrait of the superstar in the final year and a half of his life – his creative powers turbocharged, his demons dissembling into full-blown addiction. The person Oliver and co-editor Joe Kehoe got to know through hundreds of hours of footage was sweet, goofy, anxious about losing himself to superstardom. He was a virtual spigot of rhymes, in love with and committed to his girlfriend, the influencer Ally Lotti, a near constant presence at his side. He was an enthusiastic artist on the vanguard of blending drug-infused rap with the pop-punk influences of Fall Out Boy, Panic! at the Disco and Blink-182. In both the hyperbolic stakes of his lyrics and his signature aching delivery, Juice’s music embodied ripping your heart open and throwing blood on the wall. To quote Lucid Dreams, his breakout teenage breakup anthem from 2018: “You were my everything / Thoughts of a wedding ring / Now I’m just better off dead.” He was also a kid struggling with longstanding depression and anxiety exacerbated by the hyper-onset of fame. Raised in the south suburbs of Chicago by a single mother, Juice posted an EP, JuiceWRLD 9 9 9, on SoundCloud in 2017, the year he graduated from high school, which caught the attention of Chicago music figures Gmoney and G Herbo, who both appear in the film. His first music video, for All Girls Are The Same, was released in February 2018 to overnight success; within a year, he had moved to Los Angeles, scored a record deal at Interscope for $3m, topped the Billboard charts, and occupied the Gen Z zeitgeist just as emo rap lost its forebears. Lil Peep, the subject of the similar posthumous documentary Everybody’s Everything, died of an accidental overdose just after his 21st birthday in 2017; the rapper XXXTentacion, controversial for his domestic abuse charges, was murdered at 20 in 2018. “What’s the 27 Club? We’re not making it past 21,” Juice WRLD, who released a tribute EP, Too Soon … for the pair, once rapped. Into the Abyss mostly skips over that early ascent, instead embedding in the day-to-day of its brief cruising altitude – a remarkably homespun touring operation of creative hangs, ATV joyrides and continuous, casual drug use. Juice’s fraught relationship with drugs, especially Percocet pills and “lean” (codeine syrup mixed with soda) is well documented in his lyrics and on frequent display here. There’s barely a moment when he doesn’t appear to be on something; he mixes lean while freestyling about “dark Sprite”, flashes a tongue dotted with pills to the camera, dozes off mid-sentence. At one point, he offers a Percocet to the videographer, who accepts, then snorts more off his Nintendo Switch with Lotti passed out in his lap. For all Juice’s talent and the electricity of his stage moments, the film often plays like a slow-rolling funeral, particularly as Juice’s drug use starts impinging on his ability to complete a 45-minute set in his final weeks. “It came down to never wanting to be exploitative, never wanting to glamorize, never wanting to sensationalize,” said Oliver of the decision to include such moments. “And beyond that it was just him being him, and the situation being what it was, without judgment, good or bad.” “He can no longer speak for himself, but he chose to have this stuff recorded,” Oliver said of the heavy reliance of archival footage, which eschews narration and incorporates sparse interviews. The goal became to “get out of the way and allow him to tell his own story, and for us to see who he was without the bias of an agenda, or a bias of trying to fit him into some preconceived idea of who he was or who he could’ve been, or shying away from certain things.” The tour footage is bookended with interviews from people in his orbit – collaborators such as the video director Cole Bennett and producer Benny Blanco, who calls him “a therapist to millions of kids”; managers Gmoney and Lil Bibby; a still-devastated Lotti and Juice’s mother, Carmela Wallace. There are no appearances from people not seen in the archival footage, just “the people whom he chose to have around him,” said Oliver, “who spent time with him, who understood him best. That was it.” This includes recollections from the entourage with him the night he died, with graphic descriptions of the seizure that occurred as the plane was searched for drugs and weapons by federal agents. Though the police presence has spawned theories over his death, Into the Abyss doesn’t suggest a mystery: it was addiction. The singer probably consumed a pint of lean and more than 20 pills the day he died. “I just wanted to show what happened,” said Oliver, “and I didn’t feel the need to address what didn’t happen” such as the rumor that, afraid of authorities, he suddenly swallowed a handful of pills. Throughout the film and his lyrics, Juice WRLD exhibited a fixation with his own demise that now reads prophetic. “It seemed like he was keenly aware of the possibility or the likelihood [of death],” said Oliver, and that “is probably one of the reasons why he lived his life as fast as he did.” As Lotti says, eyes closed, in her brief interview: “He knew, he fucking knew.” Juice WRLD’s legacy carries on, in two posthumous albums, 2020’s Legends Never Die, which set a Billboard record for five singles in the Top 10, and this month’s Fighting Demons. His protege, the Australian emo rapper the Kid LAROI (real name Charlton Kenneth Jeffrey Howard), who appears in the film and was on the plane with Juice when he died, scored the biggest pop song of the year with Stay, featuring Justin Bieber. His songs remain as anthemic to a generation of stressed-out kids as their supersonic debut. “[Executive producer] Bill Simmons asked me why people don’t think of Juice like Kurt Cobain,” Oliver said of Juice’s legacy as a generational star gone too soon. “And I said, because they haven’t seen the film yet.” Juice WRLD: Into the Abyss airs on HBO on 16 December with a UK date to be announcedShaun Bailey has stepped down from an official role in the London assembly after a photograph emerged of him joining a throng of people for a “raucous” party amid the Covid lockdown in December last year. The Conservative candidate for London mayor earlier this year stood aside as chair of the police and crime committee, a statement from the assembly’s Conservative group said. It said that Bailey “does not want an unauthorised social gathering involving some former members of the London mayoral campaign team last December to distract from the committee’s important work holding the mayor of London to account”. However, it later emerged that Bailey had stepped down after the Mirror approached him about a photograph it had obtained from the night, showing him amid a tightly packed group of people at the party, posing for the picture. The photo showed several people, among them the property developer and Tory donor Nick Candy, raising glasses of wine, with a substantial buffet laid out on a table next to them. One attendee was wearing a party hat, with another in a Christmas jumper. Bailey’s team had sought to present blame for the party as being with Conservative campaign headquarters (CCHQ) staff, saying that he had only attended briefly. Grant Shapps, the transport secretary, called the picture “disgraceful” on Wednesday. “This time last year my dad was in hospital – we couldn’t visit him, we didn’t know whether we’d see him again, we couldn’t visit him for four months and we were very careful to stick to all of the rules,” he told BBC Breakfast. “I expect everybody should do the same.” Shapps acknowledged that the CCHQ photo included four members of party staff seconded to the Bailey campaign, but added: “That was not a Conservative party thing but rather the mayoral candidacy, as I understand it.” He said the four staff members “have already received disciplinary action”. Bailey’s resignation places increased pressure on Boris Johnson and his Downing Street staff, who have been accused of holding a series of lockdown-defying social events in winter last year and earlier. Johnson has also faced claims he hosted events in his Downing Street flat. Another Mirror story on Tuesday evening said that prior to one of these events, a Downing Street quiz party hosted by Johnson last December, an email was sent to staff that told them to leave the building via a back entrance once it was over. No 10 has argued the quiz was virtual, with staff who were in the office attending from their desks. The only central government figure to have resigned so far has been Allegra Stratton, the spokesperson for the Cop26 climate summit, who was previously Johnson’s press secretary. She stepped down after footage emerged of her and other No 10 staff joking about an apparent party on 18 December 2020 at Downing Street, which officials had previously denied had taken place. The revelations about Bailey’s party first emerged in the Times last Thursday, and there is speculation that further details of what took place at the event on 14 December 2020 could be published imminently. According to the initial reports, staff danced and drank wine at the event, held in the basement of CCHQ, the floor from where Bailey’s mayoral campaign was being run. It took place on the day the then-health secretary, Matt Hancock, announced the capital was going into tier 3 restrictions. At the time, social mixing indoors with anyone from another household was already banned. The event was attended by people from the campaign, as well as Tory staffers working on another floor. Bailey attended and was given a Lego set as a Christmas present. The Times described the event as “raucous”, saying that a door was damaged during the party. Conservative officials argue Bailey was there “briefly” to give a speech and thank his team, and that the unauthorised element took place later. Bailey has not commented since the reports emerged. However, the Labour group in the London assembly has said he must publicly account for what happened. In a letter to Bailey, reported by the MyLondon website, Leonie Cooper, the chair of the Labour group, said: “Londoners will have read the allegations that you attended a party at CCHQ, organised by your campaign, on 14 December whilst tier 2 restrictions were in place, and will understandably want answers.” In the mayoral election in May, a vote delayed by a year due to Covid, Bailey ran the incumbent Labour mayor, Sadiq Khan, closer than expected, but lost by 55% to 45% once second-preference votes were counted.New modelling shows New South Wales could record up to 25,000 cases of Covid-19 a day by the end of January, health minister Brad Hazzard says, as the state moves ahead with its easing of restrictions. NSW recorded 1,360 new locally acquired cases and one death on Wednesday, with the Omicron variant continuing to spread and clusters linked to venues in Newcastle and Sydney. In light of the cases, Western Australia moved to tighten border restrictions, declaring NSW an “extreme risk jurisdiction” and urging Western Australians to return home. It was the highest daily case numbers for the state since 11 September, and a considerable jump on the 803 cases recorded on Tuesday. Of the new cases on Wednesday, 25 were confirmed to be Omicron, bringing the state’s total infections with the new variant to 110. Authorities say more cases will “likely” be linked to the Omicron variant in the coming days. NSW Health said it “remained concerned” at the escalating rate of transmission, particularly in Newcastle, with “venues linked to cases who are likely to have the Omicron variant of concern”. The modelling showing cases could skyrocket in the next six weeks came from the University of New South Wales, Hazzard said, adding the infection rate of the Omicron variant was at 1.5. He said cases had been increasing exponentially, “double, every two to three days”, and that, according to “simple maths”, NSW could see case numbers in the tens of thousands by January. “The one thing that would appear to be likely with the Omicron variant is the vaccine is not stopping transmission, the transmission appears to be quite high, we’ve seen it happening in Newcastle,” Hazzard said. “It may well be spreading across NSW as we stand here talking about it … the reproductive rate is concerning. “What [health experts] are telling us is that by the end of January, we could be looking at 25,000 cases of the virus every single day, so that takes us to about 175,000 a week … that’s a big difference from 1,360 today, which already is a cause for concern. “We may not get to 25,000 cases every day, but we could.” NSW has scrapped a range of restrictions, including lifting density limits, no longer requiring QR code check-ins at certain businesses, and masks only being required on public transport, at airports and on planes. NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, has defended the relaxation of mask and check-in rules amid the surge in cases, saying he has “complete confidence” the hospital system will cope thanks to the state’s 93% vaccination coverage. He rejected suggestions his government was sending confusing messages by warning cases could climb and urging caution, while at the same time easing restrictions and encouraging people to “enjoy the best that NSW has to offer”. “It is all about instilling confidence and ensuring everyone has a safe Christmas,” he said. Western Australia said on Wednesday NSW was now an “extreme risk jurisdiction”, meaning travellers from the state will not be permitted into WA unless an exemption is granted. Premier Mark McGowan said anyone from WA who was in NSW and with an approved G2G pass should return immediately. “This is not a situation to take lightly and it is necessary because my priority is the health of Western Australians first and foremost,” he said. In spite of the restrictions easing in NSW, chief health officer, Dr Kerry Chant, urged people to continue to maintain Covid-safe practices, specifically asking people to wear masks indoors even where there isn’t a mandate to do so. “That’s a matter for government in setting those mandates and all I’m saying is from a public health position, I am strongly recommending we keep masks and I’m asking the community to do so,” she said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “It’s a very tiny act and you’re actually protecting yourself but more importantly you’re protecting others.” Chant attributed the rise in cases to the Omicron variant, but warned there was still not enough information to make an informed assessment of its severity. “We still don’t have enough information to inform our assessment about the severity profile, but we believe that that information will be emerging over the next two weeks.” The eased restrictions come as the state changes its approach to close contacts, moving towards what Chant described as a “light touch” definition. This will only focus on household contacts of cases, including partners who don’t always live with a case, housemates and their partners. She also added there could still be situations where bigger groups are considered close contacts, if they were at high risk venues such as nightclubs. More than 200 people who attended the Argyle House club in Newcastle on Wednesday night tested positive for Covid, with at least one person infected with the Omicron variant. Hazzard took the opportunity to urge people celebrating the end of a difficult year to remain cautious. “If you don’t need to ... be in a jam-packed environment with no windows ... maybe it’s not a good time.”The Morrison government is likely to be campaigning for re-election at the peak of GDP growth next year, as favourable conditions align to create a sweet spot of economic activity, leading economists say. Forecasts from six major banks, including Australia’s four biggest lenders, show the federal election – which must be held by 21 May – will probably coincide with the highest quarterly growth rates before expansion slows. All but one of the banks tip the current December quarter will produce the greatest quarter-on-quarter growth in coming years, averaging 2.25% across the forecasts. National accounts figures for the October-December period are scheduled for release by the Australian Bureau of Statistics on 2 March, likely in the thick of the probable campaign. While the government can call a poll before then, no previous federal election has been held in January or February. Catherine Birch, a senior ANZ economist, said that for those campaigning on a “jobs and growth” mantra, the data to be released in March “is going to be very good on both of those”. ANZ predicts the economy will grow at 2.4% this quarter, and at a 2.1% clip in the March quarter. Expected further easing of Covid restrictions, combined with cashed-up households eager to spend, “will certainly provide that tailwind” to the economy, she said. The coalition is already starting to talk up its economic record, even though GDP contracted 1.9% in the September quarter. That was the third-steepest decline on record, behind only the 2% drop in 1974’s June quarter and the 7% dive during the first Covid wave in the June quarter last year. Treasurer Josh Frydenberg will release the government’s mid-year economic and fiscal outlook (Myefo) on Thursday. Among details dropped to the media is a more bullish Treasury prediction of jobs growth, with 60,000 more places expected, compared with the May budget. Brody Viney, a senior NAB economist, said the economy was already gathering momentum. The September quarter’s drop coincided with about half of Australia’s population being caught in Covid lockdowns and was not as bad as had been feared. “We’re in the midst of a really strong rebound from that,” Viney said. “We think that things look good for the next few quarters.” He predicted unemployment was likely to trend lower and business investment to pick up further. One reason for optimism is that both households and businesses are sitting on a lot of hoarded cash, Treasury secretary Steven Kennedy said in October. “Household and non-financial business deposits are almost $330bn higher compared to the end of 2019,” Kennedy said, adding household cash savings alone were up $145bn compared with the end of August 2020. “The run-up in household and business balance sheets provides resilience and will continue to support activity throughout the recovery,” Kennedy said at the time. Economists don’t expect the record low interest rates to be disturbed in the first half of 2022 at least, so there is unlikely to be an unpleasant surprise for those heavily in debt. And while a tight labour market – with the jobless rate heading towards 4% – may constrain growth in sectors such as construction, any resulting higher wages will be welcomed by voters, if not employers. “There’s obviously still issues around supply chains which are putting on price pressure, and that’s something that we’re watching really closely,” Viney said. “But we do think some of those things will resolve over the coming year as well.” All of the banks surveyed predict post-election GDP growth will taper off in the second half of the year compared with the first six months of 2022. Paul Bloxham, chief economist for HSBC’s Australian division, predicts the quarter-on-quarter growth rate to ease from 2.3% in the final three months of 2021 to 1.3% in the March and June quarters of 2022. The forecast slowdown is based on states other than NSW and Victoria taking longer to adjust to living with the Covid virus as they open up later. “As that happens … it’s likely to weigh on activity to a degree in those locations,” Bloxham said. Opening up internationally will also see a chunk of that pent-up consumer demand transferring overseas as Australians head abroad. Bloxham added that on a global level, “we’ve done better than most of the developed world in terms of handling health and economic outcomes”, addressing a theme likely to feature prominently during the coming election campaign. Frydenberg said on Wednesday that “as a result of our economic plan the economy is coming back strongly with consumers spending, businesses investing and more people getting back to work”. “With 350,000 jobs coming back since the start of September, the RBA, IMF and OECD all see Australia’s unemployment rate being sustained at below 5% – for just the second time in more than half a century,” he said. His Labor counterpart, shadow treasurer Jim Chalmers, said it was “welcome and unsurprising that the economy is recovering from the nation’s third-largest downturn in the September quarter”. But he said it was not a real recovery “if working families’ real wages are going backwards and they can’t keep up with the skyrocketing costs of living”.This week’s Guardian Weekly has two very different covers, depending on where you pick up your copy of the magazine. In the UK it’s all about Boris Johnson who, just two years ago, was the hero of Brexit-supporting Tories after a thumping general election victory. Now, damaging revelations about an illicit lockdown Christmas party at Downing Street last year – on the back of a series of other scandals – have pushed the prime minister close to the exit door of No 10. Toby Helm, Michael Savage and Jamie Grierson ask how it all came to this. Outside the UK, our international editions lead on fears that Vladimir Putin may be about to launch an invasion of Ukraine, where a massive buildup of troops is taking place on Russia’s side of the border. Why is Russia’s president on the brink of war, and what can the west do to stop it? In Ukraine, Luke Harding finds resignation, while in Moscow, Andrew Roth hears why Kremlinologists fear the worst. Anxious governments around the world were still assessing the likely impact of the fast-spreading Omicron Covid variant this week. In the spirit of optimism, Julia Kollewe looks at the next generation of vaccines that scientists hope will prove more resilient to virus mutations. In our features section, don’t miss Akhtar Mohammad Makoii’s gripping account of his 24-hour nightmare to escape from Taliban-occupied Afghanistan earlier this year. Plus, there’s a fantastic photographic behind-the-scenes look at the early days of Sesame Street, the groundbreaking children’s educational puppet show. The Guardian Weekly will take a short break over Christmas. Your next edition is out on 31 December and will include more year-end reflections as well as a big look ahead to 2022. To top up your reading list until then, check out the bumper roundup of this year’s best books in this edition. Thank you for supporting Guardian journalism; if you mark a holiday at this time of year, we hope it is a peaceful one. Get the Guardian Weekly magazine delivered to your homePaul Freedman’s Why Food Matters opens with a lament on the lack of intellectualism – indeed, discourse – around food and drink. They are considered “eminently compatible with conversation, just not worthwhile as its objects”, and he puts this down to three things: “materiality, necessity and repetition contribute to the apparent banality of food”. While repetitiveness might well put off a passing intellectual, the same way housework is such a turn off for economists in the Adam Smith tradition, arguably materiality is the main block. Appetite, like sex drive, is considered elementally base, bestial, ignominious. Physical desire stands opposed to cerebral or spiritual quest. We don’t describe in intricate detail the process and pleasure of satiation for the same reason we rarely talk in public about what actually happened in bed: yet sex gets a look in, intellectually, being so consequential, launching so many ships, wars, neuroses. It doesn’t have many consequences, does it, food? That’s where you’re wrong, Freedman gleefully declares, in a magpie tour of the whole of human history (skipping cavemen): the way we eat does have consequences, social and geopolitical, and even where it does not, it is nevertheless significant in the moment. If anyone could elevate food from the tasty to the erudite, it is this author, whose primary career is as a historian of medieval Europe, and who naturally tends away from the sensational statement, the grand generalisation, the razzle-dazzle, towards intricate curiosities, pattern-finding in miniature. He is a man who could give a sober account of drunkenness, probably during it. He can veer a little too far in that direction: describing Deipnosophistae, a third-century celebration of cuisine, he says: “Nothing else in the western canon equals Athenaeus’s often tedious yet absorbing compendium.” You can be tedious or you can be absorbing. You can’t be both. Food as a class signifier (leading inexorably to it being a means of judging and blaming one another) is vividly illustrated with examples from the past: when migrant Italians arrived in the US in the early 20th century, there was much discussion about why they insisted on eating their own cheeses, which were plainly more expensive but also considered less nutritious than American ones; moreover, their garlic, olive oil and spices were thought “innutritious”, and this accounted for the fact that they were often ill. It is dryly amusing to imagine Americans thinking they made good cheese, but also chastening to realise the universality of this preoccupation with the food choices of the poor, which is now greater than ever, mediated through concern about obesity and poverty. Meanwhile, creativity as a function of great inequality – while much discussed in the history of art and architecture – takes on a new dimension in Freedman’s description of Master Chiquart, chef for the Duke of Savoy in the early 15th century. He lists the “virtuoso dishes typical of medieval culinary ostentation” – a “dressed and redressed swan (roasted, then sewn back into its original skin and feathers)”, each dead animal breathing fire, having a camphor soaked wick in its mouth. There’s something legitimately disgusting about the excess, a kind of political nausea. Yet just as interesting is our internal battle with food: why, Freedman wonders, is gluttony the only original sin that has kept its taint, while all the others have becomes marks of honour? Why has ostentation come full circle, so that the rich now signal their superiority not by eating a mutilated swan but with their abstinence? Why is it “appropriate if ironic that a magazine called Self is not about philosophy but exercise?” Freedman is as much in the business of bringing a food sensibility to intellectual inquiry as he is about bringing intellectual inquiry to food: he doesn’t attempt to resolve these questions for all time; instead he relishes their piquancy before moving on to the next course. • Why Food Matters is published by Yale (£20). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Shad Khan, whose Jacksonville Jaguars have taken on water for pretty much the entire 10 years he has owned the team, invited the local media on Monday to his yacht, the Kismet, to commemorate the anniversary of his purchase of the forlorn NFL franchise. Of course, the conversation swung to his embattled first-year coach, Urban Meyer, whose team have won only two of their first 13 games this season. And the record is not the worst part. According to NFL.com, Meyer’s players and staff are furious with him, almost mutinous. Meyer, 57, whose teams won three national championships during his time in college football, still had his job despite his lousy record, his brusque style and other missteps, most notably when he was caught on video in October at his Ohio bar appearing to get cosy with a young woman who was not his wife. Khan reprimanded Meyer for his “inexcusable” behavior, for which Meyer apologized, and the Jaguars later won two of three. But they have lost five in a row, including a 20-0 drubbing Sunday by the Tennessee Titans. Meyer also had to address the NFL.com report. And it came up again Monday at his day-after news conference. Meyer said, again, that the report was “incorrect,” and when told NFL.com was not recanting its reporting, Meyer said, “Didn’t happen. We’ve got to move on.” Shifting his weight from one foot to the other, Meyer lightly suggested that Amy Palcic, the Jaguars’ top public-relations executive, hand out the number of wide receiver Marvin Jones, one of the players mentioned in the NFL.com report, so he could deny everything. It was reported that Jones stormed out of practice after an argument with Meyer, and that Meyer had belittled his assistant coaches in a let’s-compare-resumes match. Running back James Robinson was prohibited from re-entering a game after he was benched. In any case, it was the kind of report that springs up from anonymous leaks when a coach has worn out his welcome. Meyer does not appear to be going anywhere for another month, anyway, though the idea of him being a one-and-done NFL coach still is in play. So is the concept that great college coaches don’t automatically make great NFL coaches. Meyer has hardly enhanced his reputation with capers like his night at the bar in Columbus, Ohio, which came after the Jaguars fell to 0-4 with a loss at Cincinnati – and, almost as bad, after he decided not to travel back to Jacksonville with his team. “He either did it because he’s so unable to handle losing that an 0-4 start in the NFL relieved him of his senses,” Doug Lesmerises wrote on Cleveland.com, “or he believes he’s so untouchable he publicly created a situation that no boss of an NFL team should tolerate.” It all came to a head early Thursday when Meyer was relieved of his duties. Khan hired Meyer in January 2021 even though his tenure at Ohio State had ended poorly. Meyer was suspended for the first three games of the 2018 season after administrators said he knew about domestic abuse allegations against an assistant coach before that coach was fired. Meyer retired after the season, citing health reasons. Two years later, he was back on the sidelines – in the NFL, of all places. Khan had said as recently as Saturday, in an ESPN report that cited anonymous sources, that he was sticking with Meyer. During the news conference on his yacht Monday, Khan said he was “not impulsive” and would not be “acting helter-skelter on emotion.” “In the past it was like you were, quote, it’s like the lowly Jaguars, and everyone left you alone,” said Khan, a car-parts magnate. “Now the scrutiny we have is really something different. How much of that is that we’re bringing it upon ourselves, or how much of that is deserved? Urban, he won wherever he was. This is something he’s never dealt with.” In fact, Meyer even wrote (with the help of Wayne Coffey) one of those books offering advice that transcends football itself. “Above the Line: Lessons in Leadership and Life from a Championship Program”, according to the blurb, “delivers wisdom and inspiration for taking control and turning setbacks into victories for a team, a family, or a Fortune 500 company.” A Jaguars franchise floundering under a new coach is not exactly news, since Jacksonville have lost more games than they have won in every season but one since Khan bought the team. (The 2017 team inexplicably made it to the AFC Championship game.) The name of the coach, not to mention his $12m annual salary, pushed the Jacksonville story into orbit. Meyer’s college teams won 85% of their games, but he was also a guru to two notable quarterbacks: Alex Smith at Utah and Tim Tebow at Florida. The Jaguars won one game last year to sneak past the New York Jets and grab the No 1 overall pick in the draft, which they not-so-surprisingly used to take Trevor Lawrence, the quarterback from Clemson who was seen as a generational talent. Teams that get a No 1 draft choice usually need much more than just a quarterback though. Lawrence has struggled at times in his first year, with nine touchdown passes versus 14 interceptions, but that may be because the rest of the offense is scuffling even more. “Once we become more productive in one area, we’ll win,” Meyer said Monday. That was only the football side. Meyer was been regarded as driven, arrogant and slippery – he fit the occupational profile there – and one of the problems with his situation is that the fans and media in Jacksonville didn’t quite know what to believe. After this most recent run of losses, the Jaguars stand only a half-game behind the Detroit Lions, who have the NFL’s worst record at 1-11-1, and perhaps, another No 1 overall draft pick. Jacksonville end the season against New England and Indianapolis. But first come games against the Texans, who are also 2-11, and the crumpled Jets, who are 3-10, with only a victory over the Texans in the last six weeks. The Jaguars are three-point favorites against the Texans, which should tell you how bad Houston is. No matter who the next coach will be, the endless rebuild at Jacksonville will drag on, literally. Although the team had been earmarked for the UK in the past, Khan is determined to see the Jaguars’ stadium refurbished and the surrounding area developed so that Jacksonville can continue to play host to the annual Georgia-Florida college game and a college football playoff game. In Meyer, the city of Jacksonville had a guy with plenty of college experience. Unfortunately, he has not worked out very well outside that realm.Any further measures to limit the spread of the Omicron variant of coronavirus would lead to a recall of the House of Commons for a vote, the cabinet minister Grant Shapps has said. After disquiet among backbenchers over plans for vaccine certificates led to a rebellion by 99 Conservative MPs on Tuesday, Shapps told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme that he believed the precautions now in place would be enough to keep Omicron under control. But he said: “If more measures were required … then of course the house would be recalled and those measures would be put to the house. But I don’t think that’s going to need to happen this year.” Tuesday night’s rebellion, the largest of Boris Johnson’s premiership, meant that the package of new measures passed only with the support of Labour MPs, leading many to question whether the prime minister would be willing to risk a similar outcome – or even a defeat – by taking further action. Shapps suggested he understood the motivations of those MPs who voted against the government’s plans. “No one wants to curtail freedoms, and MPs rightly think about these things extremely carefully before voting,” he said. “I didn’t become an MP or go into government to do those things. We know though that usually with coronavirus … early action often removes greater pain later on.” With Johnson facing increasing disquiet among Tory backbenchers and the possibility of a byelection defeat on Thursday in the previously safe seat of North Shropshire , there have also been concerns that a string of revelations about parties in Downing Street and at Conservative headquarters last year have reduced his authority when imposing new restrictions. But Shapps insisted that the public and his party still trusted Johnson. He said: “When it comes down to the prime minister and his leadership through coronavirus, he went out on Sunday night and asked people to get boosted now, and I was walking past queues yesterday – enormous queues round the block – of people wanting to get their booster jabs. That is where we see the authority.” Asked about the latest damaging disclosure about a Christmas party last year – a “raucous” event at Conservative campaign headquarters (CCHQ) attended by the then mayoral candidate Shaun Bailey – Shapps said it was “disgraceful”. “This time last year my dad was in hospital – we couldn’t visit him, we didn’t know whether we’d see him again, we couldn’t visit him for four months, and we were very careful to stick to all of the rules,” he told BBC Breakfast. “I expect everybody should do the same.” Shapps acknowledged that the CCHQ photo included four members of party staff seconded to the Bailey campaign, but added: “That was not a Conservative party thing but rather the mayoral candidacy, as I understand it.” He said the four staff members “have already received disciplinary action”. Asked about images of long queues for booster jabs and shortages of lateral flow tests, Shapps said logistics rather than supply was the main issue. “Clearly, the prime minister talking about asking people to test and the like has caused a spike. There’s plenty of supply, it is actually a question of getting more Royal Mail and perhaps Amazon delivery slots to people’s homes,” he said. Shapps suggested the situation would improve in the next couple of days. And he said that in order to comply with advice to test before mixing with others, people should “pass around” stockpiled tests at home. Earlier, the former backbench MP and ex-minister Damian Green, one of those to rebel on Tuesday night, said: “While I supported the government’s other measures they brought forward, because I did think they would improve public health, I’ve seen no evidence that that particular proposal on a combination of vaccine passports and lateral flow tests would actually make anyone safer.” He said his own vote was not a vote of no confidence in the prime minister during a national emergency. “That may be the case for some people – it’s absolutely not for me,” he said. “What I want to see is, obviously, the government get to grips with the pandemic in the way they have been.” He said any further restrictions should also be voted on by MPs. “If some of the more apocalyptic warnings are true then we may be facing more restrictions, but I will want to know that they’re going to be effective and indeed, obviously, that they’ve been approved by parliament.”Australia’s honey industry has welcomed a UK decision to reject New Zealand’s bid to trademark the term manuka honey, which they hope will set a precedent for other jurisdictions. The UK is one of several jurisdictions where a group of New Zealand producers have tried to stop products made outside the country using the label manuka honey. In their decision, the UK Intellectual Property Office found that the term was not an inherent indication of certification because it was widely used as a descriptive term. “The combination of the dictionary definitions, the manner of the use and the way in which manuka honey is presented to the relevant public is very likely to lead to it being perceived, by at least a large proportion of the relevant public, as a purely descriptive term designating a type of honey.” The IPO also found that “manuka”, despite being a Mãori word, had entered the English language as a descriptive word, and that it had not come to reflect an understanding that the honey exclusively originates from New Zealand. “There is evidence from dictionaries, the FSA (Food Standards Agency) project and from press articles that all suggest that the public understanding of the term in the UK is that it describes honey from New Zealand and other geographical locations, in particular, Australia.” Manuka honey comes from bees feeding on the pollen of the Leptospermum scoparium plant, which is known as “manuka” in New Zealand, and “tea tree” in Australia. Manuka honey is one of New Zealand’s biggest exports, and is worth hundreds of millions of dollars a year. The honey is prized for its antibacterial properties. The Mānuka Charitable Trust, a group representing industry bodies, tribes and governments, said it was “disappointed” by the decision, and that it was “considering its options”. Pita Tipene, chair of the trust, said the issue was about Indigenous rights. “This is an Indigenous rights issue and is out of step with existing Indigenous IP frameworks. Manuka is our Māori reo [language] and a precious taonga [treasure] that we must honour and protect,” Tipene said. “This ruling ignores the role of iwi as kaitiaki [guardians] and is insulting to Māori and our culture. “All countries have their own unique honeys and the use of names that are specific to indigenous honeys is respectful and should be encouraged. This is key to maintaining value for consumers and producers across the world.” Tipene said it was “misleading” to continue to use the label on honey not produced in New Zealand. “We remain strongly of the view that it is misleading to consumers for honey producers outside Aotearoa New Zealand to claim the name manuka honey when the plant the nectar came from did not grow in Aotearoa.” The Australian Manuka Honey Association said it was “delighted” by the IPO’s decision, saying it would have “widespread ramifications in jurisdictions beyond the United Kingdom”. Association chair Paul Callander said it was the “right decision and a fair decision”. “The term manuka has been used in Australia since the 1800s and the Australian industry has invested significantly for decades in manuka honey science, research and marketing. “It would be deeply unfair – and financially devastating – to deny that reality.” Callander hoped other jurisdictions where trademark certification had been sought would follow the UK’s example. “The market is forecast to be worth $1.27bn globally by 2027 and offers vast potential for local innovation and manufacturing,” Callander said.The headline rate of inflation in the UK has risen to 5.1% – its highest rate in a decade. The speed of increase has taken forecasters by surprise – last month the Bank of England said it expected inflation to peak at 5%, but not until April next year. What is inflation? It is the measure of how much prices are rising and falling and is tracked by several different indices. The main measure used by economists is the consumer prices index (CPI), which records the cost of a basket of 700 items including food, transport and entertainment. The headline rate refers to how much those prices have gone up over a year. The Bank is tasked with keeping annual inflation at 2% but it has been above that for six of the last seven months and is now much higher. Why is October’s figure so high? The Office for National Statistics, which publishes the figures, said higher prices for transport, food, clothing and footwear had driven up the rate. Transport costs were the biggest contributor. Petrol prices rose by 5.1% month on month to reach a record high – the ONS said a 7.2p a litre increase between October and November was the biggest monthly increase it had recorded since it started keeping the figures in 1990. Second-hand car prices have also increased as supply chain difficulties have continued to hold up the number of new cars going on to the market. Clothing and footwear prices were up over the month. The ONS said this was usual at this time of year, but last year prices were low, so the annual rise is larger than normal. What does this mean for me? Moderate inflation is not a bad thing – people will be more likely to spend their cash if they think it will buy less in future. But high inflation has consequences. Most obviously, if you are on fixed pay then your money will not go as far each month. “This is the kind of inflation that is felt by almost everyone, although clearly those on low and fixed incomes such as pensioners, face the toughest struggle to keep their standard of living within their budget,” says Becky O’Connor, head of pensions and savings at Interactive Investor. “Budgeting will need to be turbo-charged for those with little disposable income left at the end of the month. It could push some people further into regular overdraft and credit card use, or result in some families being unable to pay their bills. People who have been relatively relaxed about the need to budget in the past may also need to consider belt-tightening.” What if you are saving? Rising inflation at a time when interest rates are at record lows is bad news – your money will not have the same buying power when you withdraw it as it did when you put it away. Put very simply, if you put away £100 last year, it would need to be worth £105.10 to have the same value in real terms. The best one-year account currently pays 1.39%, so in a year your savings would be worth £101.39. Moving into higher-risk investments is a way to try to beat inflation but there is always the chance you could lose money, too. “Real interest rates for savers will remain resoundingly negative for the foreseeable future,” says Adrian Lowery of Bestinvest. “Investors are also seeing their returns eroded at the moment but equities and other investments provide the only reasonable expectation of maintaining the real value of one’s savings.” If high levels of inflation stay for longer than anticipated, the Bank may raise interest rates, which would be good news for those with cash on deposit. However, it has so far resisted doing this, and when it announces its latest decision on Thursday few expect an increase. “The Bank is caught between its two primary functions – controlling inflation and ensuring financial stability,” says Ed Monk, associate director at investment firm Fidelity International. “With inflation already so far above its 2% target, getting prices under control would appear a pressing priority. The problem is that there is clearly a concern that the economy is too weak to withstand any increase in borrowing costs.” What if you are borrowing? If you have a loan on a variable rate of interest, a rise in the Bank base rate would push up your repayments. Fortunately, many people have opted for fixed-rate mortgages, and costs will remain the same even if the Bank does act to curb inflation. And inflation reduces the size of your debt in real terms. If it leads to a pay rise, then the sum you need to repay each month will be less of your income than when you first took on the loan. What about student loans? The rate of interest on student loans is linked to inflation, so a high rate sounds like bad news for many of those with university debts. The rate that matters is the RPI (retail prices index), which hit 7.1% in August, and students who have started university from 2012 are supposed to pay an interest rate of RPI plus 3. The good news for them is that the rate is calculated based on March’s figure, so there is time for it to fall. Also the rate is monitored against commercial personal loan rates, and altered accordingly. It has been capped below RPI plus 3, and the government may step in if RPI is still running high. What about pay? Most workplaces do not have to raise pay in line with inflation but it is often used in negotiations. Employers, who in some sectors are already battling with staff shortages, may have to increase wages to attract and retain workers who need to meet higher living costs. The UK’s national living wage – the minimum that employers can pay workers – is set to rise by 6.6% in April. The real living wage, which is paid to 300,000 UK workers, was increased last month. And pensions and other benefits? A number of benefits are linked to inflation, including the state pension. The government suspended the pensions “triple lock” this year, and in April pension payments will rise in line with September’s CPI of 3.1%. If inflation stays at its current level, those relying on the state pension for all of their spending will see their incomes eroded and could struggle with some of the costs they need to meet. Elements of universal credit and other benefits will go up by the same percentage next April. Some private pensions offer payments linked to inflation, so payouts should increase.Decreasing fertility rates may be linked to pollution caused by fossil fuel burning, a review of scientific studies has found. Over the past 50 years childbirth has steadily decreased. The study focused on Denmark, but the trend is also seen in other industrialised nations. One in 10 Danish children are born with assisted reproduction and more than 20% of men never have children, according to the researchers. This decrease seems to have started at the beginning of industrialisation. Experts have warnedthe trend could lead to an unbalanced demographic with too few younger people to support the older generations. “We have to realise that we know all too little about infertility in the population so the next step forward would really be to find out why so many young couples do not have children,” said Niels Erik Skakkebæk, a professor at the University of Copenhagen, Denmark, and lead author of the study published in the journal Nature Reviews Endocrinology. Falling birthrates are often chalked up to cultural and socioeconomic factors, such as the rise of access to planned parenthood, contraception and abortion, and the changing role of women in society, as education and participation in the workforce has delayed childbearing, for example. But data shows that pregnancies were already declining before the rollout of the contraceptive pill, overall abortion numbers are decreasing over the years, and unintended pregnancy loss has been increasing by 1-2% since 1990. Instead, a growing body of research has shown growing rates of human infertility due to biological reasons including 74,000 yearly cases of testicular cancer, insufficient sperm and egg quality, premature puberty in young women, and an increase in the number of congenital malformations in male infant genitalia . Such a trend cannot be explained genetically because evolution takes place over longer periods of time and more generations, so Skakkebæk and his colleagues are urging the scientific community to look at the impact of environmental exposure to toxic chemical pollutants from fossil fuels, which have been around since the Industrial Revolution. “What has struck me in this study was the finding that so much of modern life originates from fossil fuels,” said Skakkebæk. “We don’t think about it that way. When we buy a pair of shoes made of chemicals originally produced from fossil fuels.” Fossil fuels are ubiquitous and they have been found in people’s blood, urine, semen, placenta and breast milk, as well as their fatty tissue. Many fossil fuel pollutants are endocrine disruptors, meaning they interfere with the body’s hormonal systems and have a negative effect on reproductive health. “We know from numerous experimental animal studies that plastics, chemicals, and so forth can cause problems in animal reproduction,” said Skakkebæk. “We cannot do such exposure studies in humans, that would not be ethical, but we know enough from animal studies to be concerned.” Studies show that, for example, rats and mice undergo genetic changes affecting their reproductive abilities when exposed to endocrine disruption by toxic chemicals. Research on humans is still sparse, but some studies have shown that endocrine-disrupting chemicals might be substantially linked to male reproductive diseases. Animal data has shown female and male reproductivity is affected differently with the same levels of exposure, and that early gestation is a particularly sensitive time for these chemicals to have a disruptive effect. However, these links will have to be systematically examined and assessed for causality. Changes in lifestyle such as less physical activity, smoking, growing rates of obesity, alcohol consumption and changes in diet also must be kept into account.Let me introduce you to a little girl called Miriam. She’s five years old and attends a primary school in north-east London. The adults who know her describe her as a confident, outgoing child. “She has a hugely adventurous spirit; she wants to try everything,” said one. But the pandemic that continues to spread fear and uncertainty across all our lives has made her scared of the world around her. Getting to sleep is difficult for Miriam because she has nightmares. Especially on Sundays. Coming into school is hard, because she doesn’t want to leave her mother. Sometimes she gets angry and clings to her mum. “Am I safe enough to do this on my own?” she’s thinking, and sometimes the answer she gives herself is no. “Her wings have been clipped by Covid,” says the school-based counsellor who works with her. She is not alone. Concerns about the devastating impact of the pandemic on mental health have been well aired since Covid-19 first swept the globe, forcing schools to close and countries into lockdown, but the focus has been for the most part on older children and teenagers who have seen their lives turned upside down, their exams cancelled, their futures thrown into doubt. But what of our youngest pupils, who have missed school without knowing what they’re missing and shouldn’t have a care in the world? On the upside, psychologists and educationalists agree many will have benefited from the extra time and attention they received from parents, whose own lives were paused as the world locked down – even if they have missed significant milestones and rites of passage: the birthday parties, play dates and sleepovers with grandparents, the swimming lessons, dance classes and (the current government obsession) Christmas nativities. Many, however, , have also been cooped up in cramped accommodation, cared for by anxious, overstretched parents who are struggling with their own demons. How are they all coping now? What will it mean for them in the future? And how are they feeling as the new Omicron variant takes hold across the globe, threatening to derail our journey back to a more normal life? A Guardian callout prompted dozens of responses from parents of five-year-olds. Some said their children had thrived. “Brilliant and resilient throughout,” said one. “Largely unfazed”, said another. But many more who responded were anxious about their children – such as Bella, a business analyst in the south-west of England. Her son appeared to cope well with lockdown at the start of this year. “He was home and, although he watched far too much TV, he was OK. He did miss some of his friends, but, as he had always suffered with separation anxiety, I think he felt more comfortable being home with me.” But as the lockdown wore on and Bella could not always give him her full attention because of her work, he struggled, shouting and playing his musical instruments as loudly as possible. Whenever they had to go out, he would obsessively wash his hands and apply alcohol gel until his skin was red and raw. Because he has asthma, infections have gone to his chest and he has had to undergo repeated PCR tests, which have left him traumatised. “The first one was OK,” said Bella. “But since then every one has been progressively worse. We honestly don’t think we will be able to get him to do another as it makes him so distraught.” He has also started to worry about spreading any infection he might pick up to others. “This week he told me he had a ‘big tummy ache’ and I knew it was anxiety-based. He has lost family to Covid, and we do have several vulnerable family members, so he does know the impact of spreading it, but it is so sad that a five-year-old should feel so anxious about something he should never have to worry about.” Freya’s mum is also concerned. Freya is an only child and loves company. “We used to go to all sorts of groups and clubs together, which she thrived on.” But when England went into lockdown in January, “she was so lonely and isolated that she stopped eating”. “Now she is back at school, she is much, much happier. But there are still significant scars. She is very anxious about germs and infection, and washes her hands obsessively. When one of her friends vomited in front of her recently, she was so anxious about catching the infection that she didn’t sleep all night. “Although she loves school, she is struggling to engage with the academic side of it. She also doesn’t really look forward to planned events any more because she always suspects that they may be cancelled because of the virus.” Freya barely remembers a time before Covid. “This Covid world is the world she knows and remembers. It causes her anxiety, stress and disappointment, and I worry that these will be things which she carries with her for life.” Anna’s son is also struggling. “My little boy was very anxious about leaving the house during the first lockdown. Despite it being warm and sunny, he wanted to just be inside. When Boris announced it was time to go back to school, he came out in a rash that the doctor eventually diagnosed as hives – they had never seen such a stress reaction in a child so young. “We regularly have tears about going to school and him telling us that he’s scared. He can’t watch any Disney film that has death in it as he’s so scared of his parents and grandparents dying – something he shouldn’t be thinking about so young.” Other parents who got in touch with the Guardian described a variety of concerning behaviours. One mother said her child was wetting herself at school despite being dry for months before, another has developed facial and vocal tics, while another child is grinding their teeth. There is a lot of obsessive hand-washing and widespread anxiety about germs. Meanwhile, the pandemic has been incorporated into play – children make vaccines with Duplo and when they play shops, anyone not wearing a mask is ordered to leave. Teachers have reported a lot of separation anxiety, with more clinginess than normal, children not wanting to let go of their parents, less capacity to focus. The five-year-olds “are not like five-year-olds”, said one Norfolk primary school teacher. “At best, they are emotionally and socially three or four. All instructions have to be short, direct and repeated. All tasks have to be simply and fully supported. They are tired, sad and generally overwhelmed.” Simon Kidwell, the principal of Hartford Manor primary school in Cheshire, says that when children came back to school after lockdown, some of his youngest struggled to communicate with each other and had little idea of how to take turns or play together. “Some children have had a great time during lockdown because they’ve had more adult attention, but we’ve also seen children who have been isolated during lockdown and they found it difficult. Our youngest children were not speaking to each other; they were playing in isolation. They were quiet and withdrawn.” Things have improved since the start of the autumn term, but, he says: “The youngest out of all the children are the most impacted. Some parents are still very anxious about sending them to school. Our attendance for this week is 92%, which is very low. We would normally be at 97%.” Place2Be is a children’s mental health charity working with more than 300 primary and all-through schools, offering one-to-one and group counselling. “We are seeing an increase in separation anxieties, mood swings, attention difficulties, worries and sadness,” said one counsellor. “At the beginning of this year there was a kind of fizzing energy about them. There were squabbles and unkindnesses. They were not ready to learn. It’s much calmer now. But they’ve had very, very early experiences of disruption, inconsistency and uncertainty, and of the world not being a safe place. All of those things will have an impact.” The effect of the pandemic on younger children has not been researched to the same degree as older children. One key study, however, has been the Co-Space study, a UK-based longitudinal survey of parents and carers that has been running since the fifth day of the UK’s first national lockdown in March 2020. According to Dr Polly Waite from the University of Oxford, who led the study alongside Prof Cathy Cresswell, there was a “really striking” difference in how the pandemic affected the mental health of children aged four to 10, compared with 11- to 16-year-olds. “The 11- to 16-year-olds with their own phones were able to interact with their peer group,” Waite says. “The younger ones who would normally be running around in the playground with their friends were isolated from their peer group, with parents who were feeling understandably really stressed during that period.” More than 60% of parents in the Co-Space study reported they did not feel able to meet the needs of both their children and their work. Parental stress was particularly high in single-adult households, among low-income families and where children had special educational needs or neuro-developmental disorders. “Most parents,” Waite says, “were not their best parenting selves during the pandemic.” How worried should parents of young children be? Prof Vivian Hill, the programme director for educational psychology training at UCL Institute of Education, says that many children who had anxiety and separation difficulties as a result of Covid have already adjusted and settled well at school. She adds: “A few will continue to be vulnerable to stress and anxiety triggers when facing adverse events. This pattern of behaviour can continue for some time, but within a supportive environment and with adults teaching the child the right strategies, over time they will develop coping strategies and learn to manage triggering events. While life events impact on us all, we can recover, given the right support.” To some extent, Miriam – that adventurous but terrified little soul we met at the beginning – bears this out. Her teachers are working hard to help her and she is being supported by Place2Be. She still struggles to separate from her mum, and Sunday nights are still the worst for getting to sleep. She still complains about tummy aches and headaches and she sometimes wants to stay at home. But she is learning to cope. She has a keyring with her mum’s picture in it, which hangs on her belt until home time. At school, she can look at it whenever she wants, and she can put it away when she doesn’t need to. It’s helping her to deal with the fear and uncertainty that engulfed her five-year-old life. Some names have been changed • In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is at 800-273-8255 or chat for support. You can also text HOME to 741741 to connect with a crisis text line counsellor. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.orgNo, not the return of Sacha Baron Cohen’s outrageous Austrian fashion reporter. This Bruno – minus the umlaut – is a beautiful brown vizsla, the canine companion of a rough sleeper in Karl Golden’s London-set drama. It’s a well-intentioned look at homelessness if a bit soap-opera-ish at times, and perhaps not entirely authentic about the challenges of getting off the streets. Diarmaid Murtagh plays Irishman Daniel who’s been crashing in an empty lockup near a railway line in Hackney with his dog Bruno. Golden pushes the camera right up close to Daniel’s face as he tramps the streets, amplifying the noise of screeching trains and rumbling traffic; we feel his stress levels. Murtagh nicely underplays it: head down, avoiding eye contact, battened down against the world. There’s a terrific scene where he bumps into someone from his old life, a former colleague. A ripple of shame passes over his face as the guy pretends not to notice his filthy clothes. Daniel is particularly drawn to a children’s playground, which clearly has a connection to his past. It’s here that he’s attacked by a gang of youths; rushed to A&amp;E he loses sight of Bruno. The next night, back at the playground looking for his dog, Daniel instead finds a seven-year-old boy, Izzy (Woody Norman), who has run away from home. Here the plot takes a forced lurch. Instead of marching the kid straight to a police station, Daniel allows himself to be befriended by Izzy and the pair search for Bruno. Not even a revelation about a tragedy in Daniel’s past properly explains why he’d take the risk of being caught wandering the streets with a missing child. As a redemptive storyline it feels far-fetched, but still, this is an empathy-generating film, and a reminder that anyone is vulnerable to homelessness. • Bruno is available from 13 December on digital platforms.How much air pollution are you exposed to in your daily life? The answer may depend on the color of your skin, a new study released Wednesday confirms. The study published in Environmental Health Perspectives found that, no matter which of the main types of air pollutants you look at, people of color are breathing more of it. And while great progress has been made in reducing deadly pollutants in the air in the US over recent decades, the racial disparities have persisted, according to the work by an international team of researchers led by the University of Washington (UW). The group modeled the concentrations of a host of different air pollutants down to the neighborhood block level, then computed how exposure levels compared for different races. “For all pollutants, where there were noticeable differences in pollution levels, the most exposed group was a minority group,” said lead author Jiawen Liu, UW doctoral student in civil and environmental engineering. And she said “the racial and ethnic disparities existed in all states.” The research also showed that race mattered more than income in determining who lives with the most air pollution. The study scientifically confirms what many Black and brown communities, which have endured outsized amounts of industrial smoke and freeway pollutants, have been saying for decades. “If you are living in a community that is experiencing the brunt of bad air, this is not news to you at all; you notice it already,” said senior author Julian Marshall, a professor of civil and environmental engineering at UW. “Communities that have been living with the health risks have been speaking up for a long time, and often their voices are not heard,” he said. South Los Angeles resident Iretha Warmsley said she was startled recently when she could actually see the mountains that surround her southern California community. While they are just a few miles away, they are usually hidden by a thick haze of brownish smog. Warmsley, who has suffered from asthma her whole life, now represents her historically Black community as a clean air ambassador – working with the Los Angeles chapter of Physician for Social Responsibility to bring attention to the pollution problems. She said she has seen some improvements, such as a few large, polluting factories in her area being shut down. “But we still need a lot of change.” Freeways still frame the neighborhood. And Warmsley said small businesses that cause pollution, like auto body shops and dry cleaners, are still being allowed to open with little attention to how additional pollution will affect the already-burdened air. “They put in businesses wherever they feel like it,” she said. “They don’t consider human lives. “It’s not healthy for anyone. But we’re the last ones [to consider] when it comes to cleaning up the community.” The study followed groundbreaking work released by some of the same researchers last spring, which identified the racial disparities in exposure to a single pollutant, fine particulate matter. This new study looked at six different air pollutants, ranging from nitrogen dioxide, a freeway gas that spills out of the tailpipes of trucks and cars, to the highly mixed ozone pollution which forms as swirls of chemicals are exposed to the sun. The racial disparities were generally larger for urban areas than for rural ones, the study found. California and New York had some of the largest racial differences. The study, which concentrated on the changes between 1990 and 2010, found that, while the US has continued to make gains in reducing air pollution in the decades since the Clean Air Act was passed in 1970, it hasn’t closed the gap between different races. Meanwhile, concerns about bad air have grown. A host of new studies have shown that air pollution lowers life expectancy and worsens health outcomes, even at low concentrations that were previously believed to be safe. Research has shown that air pollution causes about 100,000 deaths in the US each year. New studies have tied polluted air to preterm births, miscarriages, dementia and Covid-19. “There’s a glass half empty, half full version of this story,” said Marshall. “The positives are that the air has gotten cleaner over time and the (size of) the disparities are also going down. Everybody’s experiencing cleaner air.” On the flip side, he said, it was notable how, across all states and all types of pollutants the study looked at, it was minorities who bore the biggest air pollution burdens. “We still have work to do,” he said. “We can’t just focus on addressing the overall air pollution totals. We have to focus on the disparities.”Pastel drawings don’t typically go viral on the internet. But this month, thousands of Twitter users were mesmerized by a courtroom artist’s sketch of Ghislaine Maxwell – the alleged sex-trafficking accomplice of Jeffrey Epstein – staring at the artist and sketching back. Twitter users were disturbed. “I thought this was funny at first but it’s starting to haunt me,” one person wrote. Others commented on the picture’s bizarre, recursive quality – reminiscent of MC Escher’s drawing of hands drawing hands, and raising the possibility of some kind of infinite loop. Was Maxwell trolling us? Or sending the artist an ominous message? “I don’t know, and I’m not going to try to read her mind,” Jane Rosenberg, the artist in question, told me. “Maybe she was just bored coming out of her jail cell. I know her sister sometimes also sketches in court. Maybe the Maxwell family just likes to sketch in their free time.” She and another artist, Liz Williams, were sketching Maxwell one day during a pre-trial motion when they noticed that Maxwell, armed with a pen or pencil, was returning the favor. She and the British socialite have since become “sketching buddies” of sorts, Rosenberg says. Maxwell waves to her sometimes. Once she mouthed something, and Rosenberg realized she was saying: “Long day, isn’t it?” For Rosenberg, it was, in fact, just another long day as a member of one of America’s most rarefied and unusual occupations. In more than 40 years as a professional courtroom artist, she has covered the trials of some rather “bad guys”, including the drug lord Joaquín “El Chapo” Guzmán; the celebrity sex criminals R Kelly, Harvey Weinstein and Bill Cosby; the World Trade Center and Boston marathon bombers; Mark David Chapman, assassin of John Lennon; the mobster John Gotti; the police officer Derek Chauvin, who killed George Floyd; and the fraudster Bernie Madoff. If there was a major trial in the last four decades, there’s a high chance Rosenberg was watching from behind a sketchpad. Sometimes, her subjects offer unsolicited feedback. “John Gotti wanted his double chin removed,” Rosenberg told the New York Post last year. And people “always want more hair. I get that all the time.” Although some state courts now televise trials, American courts have historically resisted allowing cameras – because photography is considered distracting, and can turn courts into media spectacles, and because of the risk of compromising the identities of jurors or protected witnesses. (New York permits photography on a case-by-case basis, but federal courts strictly prohibit it.) When courtroom artists sketch jurors or sensitive witnesses, they often leave their faces blank. Rosenberg’s illustrations of the Maxwell trial and other cases include poignant portraits of anonymous witnesses with ghostly, blank faces, their features sometimes further obscured by hands clutching tissues. Courtroom artists believe that hand-drawn art is more forgiving than photography, and potentially less lurid; it also has the advantage of artistic license – artists can compress people and action into a single frame, conveying a sense of courtroom drama and atmosphere that is difficult for still photography to capture. The job demands a brutal schedule. Rosenberg, who lives near Columbia University with her husband, a criminal defense attorney she met at a courthouse, wakes at 4am most days in order to get ready for court and arrive in time for good seating. When she’s not at court, she’s on call – arrests or arraignments can be announced at any time, and media organizations often contact her at the last second – so, like a country doctor, she always has her equipment case ready and waiting next to her apartment door. Her kit includes prescription binoculars and finger cots, the small latex thimbles that protect her hands from drying out. Every night when she gets home, she spends at least half an hour cleaning her equipment and ordering pastels to replace those worn down to quarter-inch stubs. When I spoke to her on the phone, she had just finished sorting and discarding “a million tiny lumps of black”. She has to work in daylight or she can’t see the colors accurately. Arraignments are particularly stressful, because of their brevity – a courtroom artist must race to capture the defendant in a few deft lines as they plead guilty or not guilty. In some big trials, artists are relegated to an overflow room and have to watch through video monitors. During pre-trial motions in the Maxwell case, Rosenberg was able to sit in the empty jury box and watch, with rare proximity, as Maxwell shuffled into the room in shackles – greeting people and exchanging pleasantries, and sometimes kisses, with them. Rosenberg sometimes covers trials in other states, but travel is unpleasant. “It’s hard to fly with my pastels,” she says. “I can’t check them – they’ll all get broken – and when they go through a metal detector they kind of look like bullets.” When she was in college studying art, abstract artists such as Willem de Kooning and Alexander Calder were in vogue and portrait painting was regarded as embarrassingly passé. “I just never knew how I was going to earn a living. I struggled for many years,” she says. “I did chalk drawings on the sidewalk, copying Rembrandts and Vermeers, with the hat out for money. I did pastel portraits for tourists in Provincetown, Cape Cod.” One day, she attended a lecture by a courtroom artist at the Society of Illustrators in Manhattan. She was intrigued, and decided to try to break into the niche industry. “I didn’t think I was good enough, or fast enough, but I knew I loved drawing people.” She began hanging out at courthouses, building a portfolio (“I spent a lot of time at night court, drawing prostitutes”), and eventually sold a sketch on spec to NBC. Since then, she has usually had more work than she can handle. Yet anxiety about job security is a feature of the industry. “Since I became a courtroom artist, I’ve always thought cameras are going to be in court any minute. And they did pass a bill in 1988 to allow cameras [in New York state courts], and I thought, ‘That’s it. It’s all over for me.’ However, it didn’t hold true in all New York state cases,” and federal courts show no signs of changing. “So I continue to work. There were a lot more courtroom artists back when I first started. At the Westmoreland trial” – an explosive libel case in 1982 – “I counted about 17 artists. Each TV station had their own artist, each magazine sent an artist. Now there’s about five in New York City. We don’t all survive what’s going on with wire services and social media; it’s just a different world now.” Each courtroom artist works in their preferred medium – some use watercolor, or oil crayons, or colored markers or pencils. Like members of any small and unusual industry, the artists share a quiet camaraderie, which extends to the other court regulars, like courtroom officers, clerks and reporters. Many have known each other for years. Rosenberg tries not to speculate about the outcome of trials before she’s heard the defense, and to bear in mind that defendants are innocent until proven guilty. She approaches trials with a sense of professional remove, and she’s usually too focused on sketching to feel emotionally or morally stirred. There are exceptions, though, such as the trial of Susan Smith, a South Carolina woman convicted of drowning her children, whose deaths the court testimony described in excruciating detail, or a case involving a woman from Rosenberg’s neighborhood who was raped and tortured by a home invader. “I try not to have emotion, because tears falling on my pastels is not good. But I hear horrific things a lot, and I’ve seen a lot of crime scene photos. Sometimes it gets to me, even when I’ve tried to be neutral. My life is weird, I guess. Forty-one years of seeing bad guys and bad things happen.” On a rainy, thunderstorm-filled night in 1983, she sketched the last moments of John Evans as he was electrocuted by the state of Alabama. Evans, the first person to be put to death in Alabama since the supreme court reinstated capital punishment in 1976, had waived his appeals and demanded to be executed. It was a gruesome debacle. He was electrocuted three times before he died. Rosenberg was traumatized, and it turned her against the death penalty. “I felt like my hands were dirty,” she says. In addition to her court work, she sells fine art, mainly plein air cityscapes in oil. She doesn’t have much time to devote to it, however, and rising crime in New York has made the prospect of painting for hours in public riskier. “I feel my neighborhood’s not as safe anymore, and I don’t feel comfortable getting absorbed in a canvas. I have to keep my eyes open and my ears alert.” As our conversation wound down, I remembered a crucial question I wanted to ask Rosenberg: was Ghislaine Maxwell’s art any good? “I did go running up to her lawyer after the first sketch,” Rosenberg says, “and I said, ‘Well, what does her sketch look like?’ And the lawyer said, ‘Oh, Jane, you know I can’t tell you that.’” • This article was amended on 15 December 2021. John Evans was the first person executed in Alabama after the reinstatement of the death penalty, not the whole of the US as an earlier version said.The bad headlines for Boris Johnson began with an attempt to rewrite sleaze rules to protect the backbench MP Owen Paterson, progressed through a series of revelations about Christmas parties, and are now focused on a massive backbench rebellion and questions about the prime minister’s personal authority. With a possible byelection defeat in Paterson’s previously safe seat on the cards this week, it is safe to call this the most difficult period of Boris Johnson’s premiership – and the Conservative press, which has long been loyal to him, is increasingly expressing its unhappiness. Here are extracts from coverage of the prime minister in right-of-centre outlets on Wednesday. Leader column, the Times “There may be no path back for Mr Johnson. His travails took a decisive turn in the fiasco concerning Owen Paterson, whose suspension from parliament Mr Johnson unavailingly sought to block. The notion that rules of propriety in public office do not apply to Mr Johnson and his friends is not believed by public opinion, and has proved disastrous to the government’s reputation.” Leader column, the Daily Telegraph “The new rules passed with opposition support but the scale of the rebellion is a further sign of the prime minister’s waning authority and Tory MPs’ dwindling trust both in his judgment and his intentions once parliament has gone into recess. They have put down a marker that he would be unwise to ignore.” Leader column, the Daily Mail “The PM endured the indignity of relying on Labour to win the vote – another damaging blow to his fragile authority. And by releasing a blizzard of dubious statistics to support his case that Omicron is such a deadly threat it requires intrusive and drastic action, he is taking us for fools.” Leader column, the Daily Express “Last night the prime minister won his votes on the new regulations being brought in to tackle the Omicron variant of Covid. But Boris Johnson will in the coming days need to reflect on why almost 100 Conservative MPs rebelled against vaccine passes. “The events in the Commons reflect a wider mood that patience is wearing thin … Mr Johnson must understand that much of the country is reaching the limit of tolerance on Covid restrictions in the absence of a development that clearly poses a significant risk.” Daniel Finkelstein, the Times Last night’s votes show that Johnson’s government is now dependent upon Sir Keir Starmer to provide a stable majority for its central policy. How long can such a position endure? How reliable is it? And isn’t Starmer entitled to insist that if his party is sustaining Covid policy, he ought to be consulted on what it is? Madeline Grant, the Daily Telegraph No Tory leader in recent memory has enjoyed such a unique opportunity [as Johnson] to implement vital reform or make conservatism palatable to future generations – and none has squandered it quite so quickly.”Egypt You Have Not Yet Been Defeated: Selected Works 2011-2021 By Alaa Abd El-Fattah In a totalitarian system where even ideas are punishable with imprisonment, this collection of essays from one of Egypt’s most high-profile political prisoners is like an oasis in a desolate landscape. Part manifesto, part memoir and part record of some of Abd El-Fattah’s trial scenes that are more than worthy of Kafka, the book contains passages smuggled out from Cairo’s infamous Tora prison. Abd El-Fattah has been detained repeatedly, and held in a maximum-security facility indefinitely without charge since 2019. “When I demand my right to read and write, I am not demanding a luxury. Rather, I am asking to be allowed to live in this age,” he tells a prosecutor, while still unable to know the charges against him. He is also denied access to reading materials, making this book all the more powerful. “The text you are holding is living history,” Naomi Klein declares in her foreword. The pages of You Have Not Yet Been Defeated are a journey through the uprising of 2011, autocracy and ultimately hope. It is a call to arms for the digital age, and for protest movements worldwide. Ruth Michaelson You Have Not Yet Been Defeated is published by Fitzcarraldo Brazil Lula and His Politics of Cunning: From Metalworker to President of Brazil By John D French At first sight, Lula and His Politics of Cunning appears to be a book about Brazil’s past: the storybook tale of a sharp-witted union leader who rose to become “the most popular president in the history of Brazil and perhaps the world”. But French’s masterly account of Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva’s journey from rural poverty to the Brazilian presidency – and his subsequent downfall – is infused with the present and the future. “The story is not yet over,” French writes of his 76-year-old protagonist, who looks poised for a sensational political comeback in next year’s presidential election. The looming showdown between the leftist Lula and his far-right arch-rival, Jair Bolsonaro – elected in 2018 after Lula was jailed by a judge who went on to work for Bolsonaro – hovers over French’s biography. The author’s contempt for the current president – whom he calls a “fascistic far-right troll” – is also clear. But the star of the show is the grit and sagacity of a politician who once likened himself to a Brazilian pit viper called the jararaca. Based on French’s admiring telling, Lula the pit viper is gearing up for the fight of his life. Tom Phillips Lula and His Politics of Cunning is published by University of North Carolina Press India The Silent Coup: A History of India’s Deep State By Josy Joseph India may still often be referred to as “the world’s largest democracy” but in recent years it has become apparent that this is a democracy at a crossroads. In this compelling book by the award-winning Indian journalist Josy Joseph, it is not India’s political leaders who are under the spotlight but the murky workings of India’s deep state, from the police to the federal investigative and intelligence agencies. Traversing incidents such as the Mumbai train blasts, the Kashmir insurgency, the Gujurat “war on terror” and the Delhi riots, Josy depicts, through a variety of colourful characters, how corruption and political agendas run through the core of the agencies that should be responsible for justice and accountability, subverting democracy in the process. “India no longer feels like a democracy. The contract of trust between citizens and law enforcers is permanently broken,” he writes. “In most parts, Indian society is adrift in lawless waters.” Hannah Ellis-Petersen The Silent Coup is published by Context, an imprint of Westland publishing house Africa Youthquake: Why African Demography Should Matter to the World By Edward Paice A common stereotype about Africa is that it is a ticking timebomb; its population is exploding, threatening to “swamp” Europe with an ever-increasing “flood” of illegal immigrants. There is another less common but equally misleading stereotype that the growing youth population, the “democratic dividend”, will lead to economic miracles as the energetic under-25s, who make up 60% of Africa’s population, will generate spectacular growth as people elsewhere in the world age and decline. Youthquake turns both the doom-laden and rose-tinted narratives on their heads. This meticulously researched, nuanced and careful book brings a voice of reason to the debate. The fact that Africa comprised 10% of the world’s population in 1980 and is projected to make up 25% of it by 2050 will have immense and complex consequences for the continent and the rest of the world. The book explores in compelling detail the positives, the negatives and all the bits in-between of what will be one of the most significant global shifts in the coming decades. It is essential reading for anyone who wants to understand Africa and its place in the world. Mary Harper, BBC Africa editor and author of Getting Somalia Wrong? Faith, War and Hope in a Shattered State (Zed Books, 2012) and Everything You Have Told Me is True: The Many Faces of Al Shabaab (Hurst, 2019). Youthquake is published by Head of Zeus Pakistan Mithi: Whispers in the Sand By Salman Rashid In 1984, when Pakistan’s Thar desert was largely inaccessible to outsiders due to a lack of roads, the travel and history writer Salman Rashid could be seen negotiating his way across its dunes in a 4x4. Today, life in the rural areas of Pakistan is as unfamiliar and alien to the country’s urban residents as it is to foreigners. Mithi: Whispers in the Sand, an account of Rashid’s explorations in Sindh’s Tharparkar district between 1984 and 2017, provides a nuanced understanding of the sensibilities and habits of local people through a series of detailed interviews. Rashid notes that the communities in every village and town in the district are “remarkably cohesive”, with Hindus and Muslims coexisting peacefully in the same areas and demonstrating a spirit of unity. “We are growing in numbers, but God has stopped making more land,” says Kheth Singh, a Rajput elder, as he expresses concern over the felling of trees when land is brought under cultivation. He refers to the village of Keetri, where locals have banned cutting down trees or plants. Rashid also attempts to weave a historical narrative, comparing the reports of colonial administrators with locals’ oral histories and his own archaeological findings. He refers to the published observations of the English merchant Nicholas Withington, who was robbed endlessly while travelling through the area in the winter of 1613-14 and left with barely even his clothes. Ali Bhutto Mithi: Whispers in the Sand is published by Sang-e-Meel The Middle East Our Women On The Ground: Essays by Arab Women Reporting from the Arab World, Edited by Zahra Hankir This memoir collection is a refreshing insight into living and working in some of the world’s most dangerous places. Nineteen female storytellers – all journalists from the Middle East, or with family links to the region – share their experiences of reporting in their homelands, whether in peacetime, on the frontlines, or in the thick of revolutions. In doing so, they upend our understanding of what it means to be a foreign correspondent. Our knowledge of the Middle East is richer and more nuanced thanks to these courageous women; it is long past time that we looked at things from their perspectives. What it means to love, and to fear for those we love, echoes throughout these stories. Even if you have never set foot in Syria, Egypt or Yemen, everyone can relate to that. Bethan McKernan Our Women On The Ground is published by Vintage Nigeria Formation: The Making of Nigeria from Jihad to Amalgamation, By Fola Fagbule and Feyi Fawehinmi Fagbule and Fawehinmi’s book reads almost like a historical novel in which a cast of unlikely characters acting independently over time brought about a series of unlikely events that culminated in the emergence of Nigeria as a country. Chief among these characters were the two lovelorn figures of Frederick Lugard and Flora Shaw who, after severe heartbreaks, found solace in each other in their 40s and were midwives in the birth of Africa’s most populous nation in 1914. While many Nigerians today see the country as the flawed tapestry of Lugard and Shaw’s broken dreams, Formation argues that from the 1800s, when the Oyo empire in the south collapsed and the jihadist empire of Dan Fodio rose in the north, regardless of the intervention of the two colonialists, Nigeria as a country was on the verge of emergence. Told in clear, precise prose, this is a rare history book written by two young finance executives that moves Nigeria’s narrative in a different and exciting direction for the 21st-century reader. Abubakar Adam Ibrahim’s latest book, Dreams and Assorted Nightmares, is published by Masobe Books. Formation: The Making of Nigeria from Jihad to Amalgamation is published by Cassava Republic Press Nepal All Roads Lead North: China, Nepal and the Contest for the Himalayas By Amish Raj Mulmi Amish Raj Mulmi’s book describes the recent pivot by Nepal from south to north. In 2008, with Nepal’s monarchy in the dustbin of history, the new Maoist prime minister, Pushpa Kamal Dahal, chose to go first not to Delhi but to Beijing to attend the Olympics, provoking a sharp intake of breath from Indian policy strategists. That process has only gathered momentum with Nepali political leaders sympathetic to China gaining ground and talk of a high-speed rail link between China and the Nepali capital, Kathmandu. There has been growing pressure too on the Tibetan diaspora living within Nepal. Mulmi’s detailed look at Nepal’s long encounter with Tibet and China is leavened with personal experiences but the message is clear: Modi’s bullish nationalism does not play well in Himalayan capitals. Ed Douglas is the author of Himalaya: A Human History All Roads Lead North is published by Hurst The Philippines The Philippines is Not A Small Country By Gideon Lasco Is Manila traffic really the worst in the world? Why do many Filipinos support President Rodrigo Duterte’s brutal “drug war”? Why do they keep electing bad leaders? Are they racist? This collection of essays is Gideon Lasco’s love letter to Filipinos who are tired of complaining about everything going wrong in the Philippines, especially these days. Lasco, a medical anthropologist, wants his compatriots to redirect their energies into understanding the country’s vicious cycle of poverty and bad governance – correcting some misconceptions along the way – so they may find a way out of it. “In the process of writing and curating this manuscript, I was especially mindful of young Filipinos, many of whom are unsure as to what the future brings, uncertain as to what to make of their national identity, and unclear as to how to critically engage with our nation’s problems,” Lasco wrote in his introduction. Lasco’s musings make it a good read for non-Filipino readers who want to better understand the idiosyncrasies of the country and its people. Carmela Fonbuena The Philippines is not a Small Country is published by Bughaw, an imprint of the Ateneo de Manila University Press Vietnam Ship of Fate: Memoir of a Vietnamese Repatriate By Trần Dình Trụ After the takeover of Saigon by Vietnamese communists in 1975, a million refugees – Trần Đình Trụ included – fled Vietnam, often in flimsy fishing boats. It is estimated that half of them drowned at sea in their attempt to seek refuge in south-east Asia before resettling in the west. Although Trụ managed to escape, his heart remained in Vietnam, where his wife and children had been left behind. So, along with 1,500 Vietnamese repatriates, Trụ decided to return. On his arrival, he was imprisoned in a “re-education camp” for 13 years, suffering gruelling labour and torture. Written in 1991, when he and his family finally resettled in the US, Trụ offers a rare Vietnamese perspective into both the chaotic fallout of the Vietnam-US war – and the private war raging inside him as he witnessed the loss of his homeland. “We are all just water lilies, carried by the current without ever knowing where the river flowed.” This is not a new book – although the English translation is only from 2017 – yet it resonates with our current era, tackling the complex, traumatic limbo experienced by the many desperate people fleeing conflict today. Georgina Quach Ship of Fate is published by University of Hawai’i Press Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:If Boris Johnson is a betting man then he is putting it all on boosters. As the Omicron variant spreads throughout the UK, and early data shows three doses of the jabs are needed for protection, Johnson has announced a speed-up of the booster programme. All over-18s are eligible from Monday, with the aim of rolling out 1m booster jabs a day through GPs and even the army. It’s a bold and necessary move but it would be naive to suggest it will be straightforward. Consider that the most jabs administered since the booster rollout began in September is a record of 699,192 on one day. The NHS website to book booster jabs had “technical difficulties” shortly after Johnson’s televised address, on top of previous IT glitches. There have already been accounts of people struggling to access their booster over the past month due to vaccine shortages, as well marginalised patients – such as those in rural communities – not being able to get to large centralised vaccine centres miles from their homes. Most worryingly, large numbers of clinically vulnerable people are missing out on their booster. Take those whose health or age means they are unable to leave the house to go to a vaccine centre. Nearly two-thirds of housebound people are yet to receive their booster after many already stretched GPs opted out of delivering top-up jabs. That translates as about 300,000 of the most clinically vulnerable people in the country having not yet received their extra protection. In March, I reported how some people who were housebound were missing out on the first and second vaccines, and in an all too predictable tragedy it is happening again. I spoke to the family of an 81-year-old woman this week who missed out on her Covid jabs last year because she was unable to leave her home and her GP “didn’t have her down as housebound on the system”. After developing bedsores, she was admitted to hospital and caught Covid while there. Unvaccinated, she died soon after. “Covid safety measures meant we had to have a funeral with no wake and the whole thing was just horrific,” her granddaughter told me. “My step-grandad sat there and cried and said, ‘I just want to kiss her goodbye.’” Elsewhere, immunocompromised patients report they are now missing out on additional doses of vaccines after confusion over who is eligible for a third dose followed by a booster jab. Some patients say their third dose has been wrongly recorded on their medical records as a booster jab, resulting in them being turned away. One woman with lupus, who has to take multiple medications to suppress her immune system, told me she’s due her booster this week – but her GP can’t give it to her because the system didn’t record her third dose correctly. “My GP is amazing – if she could find a way to give it to me she would – but the system just won’t allow it.” Or consider infants, who have not even had their first vaccine dose. And leading scientists this week called for the vaccination of young children in a bid to tackle the new variant and keep schools open, with the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) said to be currently reviewing data on Covid jabs for children over five as a “matter of urgency”. Remarkably, however, there has been no word on the need to specifically protect children with disabilities. Unlike other nations, such as the US, where vaccines have already been rolled out to children as young as five with no underlying health condition, in the UK a vaccine has still not been approved for under-12s – even if a child is extremely vulnerable. I spoke to the mum of an 11-year-old girl this week who has complex physical and learning disabilities. Her daughter can’t socially distance – she needs daily care and besides, she doesn’t understand how – but because she’s 11 and not 12, she’s just missed off the vaccine eligibility list. “Covid is circulating at her and her brother’s schools and it’s terrifying. The fact that pupils are exempt from self-isolating if they have a positive contact is particularly worrying. Your vulnerable child could be spending all day in class with someone whose parent has Covid, and because of their age they aren’t even vaccinated.” The charity Contact tells me it is in touch with several families hoping to start legal action about the continued lack of access to the vaccine for their clinically extremely vulnerable children. “They feel completely ignored and back of the queue again after all the talk of the booster drive.” In light of alleged Downing Street parties, there is rightly concern about how dwindling public trust will affect the booster drive – but perhaps not enough attention on whether the drive itself is fit for purpose. It has long been a paradox of the vaccine rollout that those who are most in need of protection from coronavirus are often the ones who find it hardest to access. Running an emergency mass Christmas booster programme may be the greatest challenge of the pandemic so far, but clinically vulnerable adults and children can’t be allowed to fall through the cracks. Lives depend on Johnson’s bet paying off. Frances Ryan is a Guardian columnist and author of Crippled: Austerity and the Demonisation of Disabled PeopleThey say everything looks worse in the middle of the night: England fans know this well. To be fair, a full-bore batting collapse, precipitated by the first ball of the first day of the first Ashes Test, is a pretty bleak prospect at any time. Pull the trigger at midnight, however, and you’ve got yourself an eight-hour existential crisis. While Pat Cummins was living the dream, those of us whose affiliations cluster closer to the Greenwich Meridian were tumbling in and out of a jet-laggy half-sleep, the place where reality meets our darkest fears. Australia’s bowling attack suddenly morphs into a personification of the Omicron virus and lays waste to the post-Brexit economy. Santa shows up at your house, only wait he’s also Nathan Lyon and he’s stealing all the presents and letting Rudolph crap on your carpet. At least that 85-ball century from Travis Head wasn’t real. Was it? Oh God, pinch me. If England can’t find a way to bounce back from Brisbane, it’s certainly going to feel like a long old series for the team and their followers. And there is a beautiful irony in that, because this is actually the shortest Ashes tour England’s men have ever undertaken. By the time they fly out of Australia in January, Joe Root’s brigade will have played only seven matches, two of them against their own development side. Their back-to-back-to-back-to-back-to-back Test series takes place over 42 days, which will have a nice biblical ring to it if they do indeed spend the entire time wandering through the wilderness. Global pandemics being what they are, it’s a Christmas miracle that we’re getting an Ashes at all this year, so it seems best not to carp about England’s lack of preparation for the Gabba. Ashes tours have been changing beyond recognition in the past decade, anyway, even before Covid demanded we do things differently. The previous one, in 2017-18, included a single game against a state side, with Cricket Australia XIs providing the opposition for the remaining warmup matches. The case of the shrinking Ashes tour isn’t a mystery: it’s the only way that cricket authorities can juggle their obligations to safeguard players’ wellbeing with their unconquerable commercial impulse to overstuff the international calendar. And yet in the past few weeks, with the passing of two of English cricket’s longest-living pioneers, we’ve been offered a telescopic view back to a very different time. Cecilia Robinson made her international debut on England women’s second ever overseas tour, in 1948-49; Eileen Ash was the oldest player in that squad, having played in the previous Test series of 1937, before the second world war intervened and stole the best years of her career. The tributes to both women made much of their self-funded, month-long voyage to Australia on a cramped and crowded ocean liner, with stops at Port Said and Aden, not to mention a match against an All-Ceylon XI in Colombo. Ash’s diaries of their seven-month tour, which she kept private until her death, might now come into the public domain, and if they do they will make a wonderful addition to the memories collected by Raf Nicholson in Ladies and Lords, her history of women’s cricket, as well as the first-hand account in Nancy Joy’s book, Maiden Over. England played four Tests and 30 provincial matches over the course of that tour of Australia and New Zealand, but it is notable in Joy’s reminiscences that their social schedule was just as packed as their playing one. Being hosted by local families – many of them dignitaries of some sort or another – came with certain obligations, and wherever they went the players were festooned with flowers, topped up with tea and taken to dances. The attentions were especially welcome given that back home the cricketers were still cooking from ration books. “Parties, tours and visits are arranged for every spare moment,” writes Joy. At lunches, receptions and suppers, where they were feted by no less than Sir Donald Bradman, they were required to marvel at every regional sight their hosts deemed worthy, be those cattle ranches, canning factories or a depression-era dam. They visited refugee centres and played bowls at the Maimed and Limbless Ex-Servicemen’s Association. “The spirit is endlessly willing,” says Joy, after the first month, “but we begin at last to find we just cannot live the pace.” Eventually their manager, Netta Rheinberg, had to step in and ask for the “programme of entertainments” to be cut down. The women landed back in England on 13 May, having left on 14 October. Their 211-day epic ranks among the longest tours in Ashes history, although it can’t compete with the men’s trips in the 19th century, when sturdy Victorians made it across the seas under sail power, and travelled to venues in a horse-drawn coach. It is possible, too, that the 1936-37 Goodwill Tour that followed Bodyline might well have tested that particular resource with its fixture list of 30 matches; while the postwar tour of 1946-47 was an especially big ask. It stretched from the end of August to the second week of April, despite the fact that some of the England players team were only recently demobbed and had to scrounge coupons for travelling clothes. The current tour looks like a minibreak by comparison. And whatever the outcome, at least no one has to share a cabin. • This is an extract from the Guardian’s weekly cricket email, The Spin. To subscribe and get the full edition, just visit this page and follow the instructions.England will face New Zealand next autumn for the first time since the 2019 World Cup semi-final as part of a bumper set of November internationals that will deliver a much-needed financial boost to the Rugby Football Union. England will also host the world champions, South Africa, as well as Japan and Argentina – both pool stage opponents at the 2023 World Cup – but the All Blacks match is the marquee fixture. It will be only the third time in eight years England have hosted New Zealand at Twickenham and, if full crowds are permitted, the RFU will hope to make more than £10m from the fixture. The four matches round off a busy 12-match year for England with Eddie Jones’s side also facing a three-Test tour of Australia next summer. Given England are due to meet Argentina and Japan at France 2023 and could conceivably meet New Zealand and South Africa in the knockout stages, Jones has likened the autumn schedule to a “mini-World Cup”. Jones said: “These fixtures will be a really important part of our preparation for the 2023 World Cup. It’s almost a mini-World Cup in itself and we’re fortunate to have it less than a year before the tournament.” England last played New Zealand at Twickenham in 2018, losing by a point in controversial circumstances when Sam Underhill’s late try was ruled out. It was the first meeting since 2014 and matches between the two sides have become a rarity amid friction over revenue sharing. The All Blacks will return to Twickenham on 19 November, following Argentina and Japan, with England rounding off the campaign against the Springboks, as was the case last month when Marcus Smith’s last-minute penalty secured a 27-26 victory. “It will be a good litmus test for the team to see where we are at, culminating in playing first and second in the world,” said Jones. “We saw how much of a difference having a full Twickenham stadium was this autumn and we can’t wait to play a series of games against such quality opposition in front of our supporters.”A pint-sized theatre that opened in the backroom of a London pub in 1970 is to toast five past productions by major playwrights before moving into a bigger, purpose-built home, next year. Dramas by Tom Stoppard and Victoria Wood are among the scripts which will be given readings in the King’s Head theatre’s season, Barstools to Broadway, which celebrates the first five decades of the Islington theatre founded by Dan Crawford. Playwright Mark Ravenhill, who was appointed co-artistic director with Hannah Price a few months ago, said that the weeklong season has unearthed some real finds. Bryony Lavery’s Grandmother’s Steps (1977) and Timberlake Wertenbaker’s The Third (1980) were both presented as lunchtime theatre shows at a time when stages were dominated by male playwrights. “One of the only chances that women had to get their work on was at lunchtime,” said Ravenhill. “Bryony and Timberlake wrote their half-hour plays and they had to be performed on the set of the show that was on in the evening – and that was always written by a chap.” The two plays were tracked down in theatre archives. “No one has read them, apart from the odd researcher, for getting on for 40 years,” said Ravenhill. Victoria Wood’s play Good Fun, set in a community arts centre, was staged at the King’s Head in 1981 after its premiere at the Sheffield Crucible. It was Wood’s second professional theatre production after Talent and she was actively involved in fundraising for the venue in later years. When the King’s Head sought rights for the reading, Ravenhill was told: “Yes, this is exactly what Victoria would have wanted.” After a launch event at the Victoria and Albert Museum on 14 February, where The Third will be read, the first reading in the theatre itself is of Tom Stoppard’s Artist Descending a Staircase, a 1972 radio play adapted for the King’s Head in 1988. It ran in the West End and then went to Broadway. At the time, said Ravenhill, West End producers would look to the King’s Head for plays that could transfer. “Given that they were performed on something the size of a kitchen worktop, it’s quite incredible.” Moreover, the theatre had a famously leaky roof: “You were likely to be rained on while you were performing.” Programming the season – which also features Stephen Jeffreys’ 1977 play Like Dolls or Angels – and overseeing the move to a new site has been “a hell of a lot to get your head round … like patting your head and rubbing your stomach at the same time,” said Ravenhill. The purpose-built space in the neighbouring Islington Square development will have 220 seats – double its current capacity – and the space “will look a bit like the Donmar”. Along with the new job, Ravenhill has also been busy with his own new plays: the autobiographical audio drama Angela was written while he was shielding during lockdown. Pub theatres have played a key role in his career: Shopping and Fucking had an early reading at the Finborough theatre. The King’s Head, he says, wouldn’t be here without the money it received from the government’s culture recovery fund. But as Covid case numbers rise and theatres around the UK battle through a wave of cancellations and postponements, the next few months “could be the most perilous of all” he said. “If this turns out to be a period where theatres are technically allowed to open, but very few people want to go to them, that would be a big financial challenge.” KHT: 50 – Barstools to Broadway is at the King’s Head theatre, London, from 14-18 February“I’m Sterling. Lost my father to Aids, my mother to alcoholism. Lost my country to conservatism, my language to PTSD. Got this England, though. Got this body, this Sterling heart.” So begins Isabel Waidner’s Goldsmiths prize-winning third novel, which, like its Goldsmiths-nominated predecessor, We Are Made of Diamond Stuff, is a seditious headrush of a book; a fresh and provocative act of resistance to our morally slippery times. It’s endlessly associative, bursting with ribaldry and Tory-baiting satire; reading Waidner is like plugging into an electric socket of language and ideas. When football-shirted, bullfighter-jacketed Sterling is assaulted on Delancey Street, Camden Town, by “six, seven actual bullfighters”, they (as Sterling and all their friends are described) question the motive for the attack: “Is it my fault? Did I elicit the violence … my jacket, too much? … I knew a gay who looked straight like a Gap advert. Got hassle still.” Consulting their bestie, Chachki Smok (“brutal looking, with critical acumen … lives with their mother in the low-rise council block”), Sterling finds comprehensible advice hard to come by. Instead, in a surreal twist, they are arrested for assault of the bullfighters by agents of the state, plunging Sterling into a world that might be described as Kafkaesque had the great Czech author done gags. What follows is an effervescent, supra-subversive adventure, held together (just) by a tenuous dream logic that is constantly surprising and delicious in its humour. Remanded in custody for 21 days in a detention centre near Margate, Sterling spends nights watching “a micro-dragon” and a hyena chasing a spaceship, as well as the “disingenuous” starlings, “trailing in and out of the immigration enforcement centre like it were an EU soft border”. Sterling’s day in court is staged as a Bosch “hellscape” with some of the same shapeshifting bestiary that tore through the pages of Diamond Stuff, including a unicorn, an “ochre boar” and a wildcat standing on its hind legs; with the judge (“your Dishonour”) included among the animals. Enlisting the help of two friends (the unimprovably named Elesin Colescott and Cataclysmic Foibles) to get them free, Sterling co-opts the spaceship for a Google Earth-guided trip to Baghdad and finally the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art: “A large redbrick building … which, like the British Library, can’t shake the feel of a big Sainsbury’s”. When they arrive back in the UK, they park the spaceship on top of Chachki’s estate and “go Istanbul döner place, Mornington Crescent … to decompress”. If the antic energy feels occasionally overheated, Waidner demonstrates they can effortlessly change gear, wrongfooting the reader with the starkly serious. When Sterling claims their father’s lover was the gay 80s footballer Justin Fashanu, their condemnation of the homophobic football industry is all the more searing juxtaposed with the carnivalesque prose that surrounds it: “We wanted you [Fashanu] then but we didn’t want you in the late 1990s when you hanged yourself in a garage in Shoreditch”. Some of the novel’s most evocative passages take place in the Chariots Roman Spa, the 90s gay sauna frequented by Fashanu. There, among the fake Roman pillars and plastic lions, Sterling recalls their first job as spa assistant: “there was a tinge of transphobia in the suggestion that I, with no recourse to cis masculinity, wouldn’t be able to handle the man-blood, the man-semen, and the man-faeces soiling the tiles”. The novel’s assault on the corrupt criminal justice system culminates in the triumphant capture of Judge Dishonour, who is held to account, with Sterling asking whether they know “what it’s like to exist on someone else’s terms? In someone else’s violent fiction?” While Sterling Karat Gold’s imaginative afflatus is as confidently sustained as its predecessor, it adds an extra layer of satirical bite with its shocking ending; a matador’s banderilla poked gamely into the eye of the establishment. The book’s award of the Goldsmiths prize, with its remit of rewarding fiction that “breaks the mould or extends the possibilities of the novel form”, is more than justified. • Jude Cook’s second novel, Jacob’s Advice, is published by Unbound. Sterling Karat Gold by Isabel Waidner is published by Peninsula (£9.99). To support the Guardian and the Observer buy a copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.The Los Angeles police department worked with a Polish firm that specializes in “strategic communications” to monitor social media and collect millions of tweets last year, including thousands related to Black Lives Matter and “defund the police”, according to records reviewed by the Guardian. Internal LAPD documents, obtained by the Brennan Center for Justice through public records requests, reveal that the department conducted a one-month trial of social media monitoring software from Edge NPD, a company that typically worked in advertising and marketing, had no prior experience contracting with law enforcement and was based thousands of miles away in Warsaw, Poland. During the trial in fall 2020, Edge NPD tracked tweets on roughly 200 keywords for LAPD, the records show. In the process, the software collected millions of tweets, according to Edge NPD’s CEO, Dobromir Cias. The data set included tens of thousands of tweets related to Black Lives Matter and racial justice protests, some of them from prominent Black activists outside LA and private civilians advocating for reforms, the files show. The records suggest that LAPD was interested in using the company’s services in part to help the department respond to “negative narratives”. Cias told the Guardian the company also aimed to flag possible threats. The documents did not reveal what LAPD did with the data that was collected, and the department did not respond to repeated requests for comment. LAPD ultimately did not pursue a permanent contract with the firm. But still, experts said, the trial raised serious concerns. They wondered about the effectiveness of pulling in so much data, in so little time. Some said that, although law enforcement, journalists and researchers regularly monitor public online activity, it was troubling that a police agency’s social media monitoring activities appeared to include tracking a broad swath of critics. And the partnership also raised questions about oversight of surveillance technology, as well as police agencies’ data collection practices. LAPD’s test run with Edge NPD came as law enforcement agencies have increasingly been forced to take their investigations online, and have sought tools to do so. Tech firms have responded by pushing new innovations and pursuing police contracts, and LAPD and the New York police department, with some of the largest budgets in the US, have often been at the forefront of piloting software. Identifying ‘negative narratives’ Edge NPD primarily assists private companies with market research and helps them ensure that advertising campaigns aren’t jeopardized by bots and trolls, Cias told the Guardian. The company was connected to LAPD by a US government agency that had used the firm’s software. A representative of that federal department emailed Edge NPD in September 2020, saying LAPD was interested in using its services for “public safety and strategic communications” and to “identify disruptive social media activity being artificially amplified by malign actors”. ABTShield, Edge NPD’s proprietary software, could help LAPD “identify as early as possible when activity that could lead to civil unrest is being amplified via social media”, the US representative wrote, adding, “From a messaging perspective, knowing what the negative narratives being artificially amplified are would allow the communications team to create effective and timely responses.” During the 40-day trial in October and November of 2020, Edge NPD provided LAPD with a dashboard monitoring tweets related to six topics: “civil unrest”, “American policing”, “domestic extremism and white nationalism”, “election security”, “potential danger” and the conflict between Armenia and Azerbaijan (which at the time was prompting local LA protests). The two entities discussed roughly 200 possible keywords to follow, including “lapdchiefmoore”, “abolish the police”, “nojusticenopeace”, “police budget”, “police killing” and “acab” (a protest slogan that stands for “all cops are bastards”). In one email, Cias suggested adding “defund the police” and “BLM” to the list of keywords to follow. An LAPD official agreed that BLM would be good to monitor, but added that “there are MANY legitimate people who are using that to express their rights”, records show. Cias said that in addition to the dashboard, on occasion he would also personally send tweets to LAPD that he thought might signal a public safety threat. “The major goal was to actually pass [along] quickly anything that looks kind of dangerous,” he said. He acknowledged he didn’t always confirm whether the content he was forwarding was legitimate: “When you’re passing this information, you don’t really know how serious it is. I think it’s up to law enforcement to really verify if it’s true … We don’t do fact checking.” At one point, the records show, Cias emailed the department a post from a critic who had tweeted a video that appeared to show an LAPD officer tackling a journalist with a comment the department was “overfunded … and high on power”. (Cias told the Guardian he was sharing it as an example of how “defund” narratives were gaining traction online.) The Brennan Center, which analyzed the tweets, found that the service collected nearly 2m tweets during the trial, including roughly 270,000 posts under the “American policing” category. The records show the software frequently captured tweets with mainstream news articles and private civilians expressing opinions. The system also flagged tweets from LAPD critics calling on the chief to “resign”, as well as celebrity posts, including a tweet from Common, the rapper and activist, about racism in America. ‘It creates a haystack’ Experts consulted by the Guardian raised questions about the trial’s set-up, doubting the effectiveness of collecting such large amounts of data. Mary Pat Dwyer, a Brennan Center fellow, questioned why LAPD was wasting limited resources to “chase content online that doesn’t pose any kind of safety threat”, including ordinary political speech and criticisms of police. “It’s striking the volume of information that they were pulling in and the terms they were using. It’s hard to understand how LAPD would even be processing all of this.” “It creates a much larger haystack of data that doesn’t actually lead to any real, tangible, positive outcome for communities,” said Steven Renderos, executive director of the national racial justice organization Media Justice. “Instead it just equips the police department with more data that helps it kind of justify its own efforts to to tell a better story about itself.” He pointed out that the list included keywords such as “domestic extremism” and “racist” that were purportedly intended to capture tweets about white supremacy. “No one is describing themselves as a domestic extremist,” Renderos said. “Instead you then start filtering in tweets and messages from people who are merely … protesting white supremacy. Take these keywords together and what it’s actually doing is capturing a subset of thought and dissent among people. And that’s dangerous.” They also worried what an agency like LAPD could ultimately do with such data. “I don’t trust the Los Angeles police department to use a tool with this amount of data in a way that’s responsible, because history has shown us that they can’t,” said Renderos. LAPD has faced several racial profiling scandals over the years. The Guardian also recently revealed that LAPD was engaging in broad collection of civilians’ social media data, and had partnered with a different tech firm that claimed its algorithms could identify people who may commit crimes in the future, with criteria that experts said was discriminatory. Those revelations prompted Facebook to demand that LAPD stop collecting data on its platform for surveillance. Activists caught up in the surveillance said they were not surprised. The software flagged tweets by Bree Newsome Bass, who received national attention in 2015 when she climbed a flagpole to remove a confederate flag at the South Carolina statehouse. In a thread included in the files, Newsome Bass advocated for demilitarizing police and putting funding toward mental health first responders. “The resistance to defunding police is 100% about racism &amp; normalizing the daily violence police forces inflict on marginalized communities for the benefit of ruling classes,” she wrote. “It’s political targeting,” Newsome Bass told the Guardian. “We’ve seen instance after instance where police agencies are focused more on policing Black people who are demanding equality and civil rights than actually preventing any violence … They’re making the case for defunding the police even further. They’re using taxpayer dollars to monitor our social media where we’re talking about how we’re wasting money on police.” “There’s nothing violent or criminal about saying ‘defund the police’,” added Melina Abdullah, co-founder of Black Lives Matter LA. “We have a right to say ‘defund the police’. The idea that LA is tracking this kind of ideology should be very scary to people.” Combatting ‘defund the police’ Cias told the Guardian the trial was free for LAPD and meant to be a “demonstration” of its technology, and to “help LAPD detect potentially dangerous situations” during the tense election period. He said the service identified roughly a dozen alerts related to possible threats and provided examples of tweets about protest clashes and about Dodgers fans allegedly engaging in vandalism while celebrating. He stressed his firm is not a defense contractor, and the service was not intended to monitor specific activists: “This was not for actually analyzing the members of the Black Lives Matter movement.” In a thank you letter to the company after the trial, an LAPD official said ABTShield had surfaced “threat-related content” and “enabled us to more efficiently analyze this barrage of data”. The service helps “parse out the proverbial ‘signal from the noise’”, the official said. In another email, an LAPD representative wrote, “The product is definitely working.” As Edge NPD was starting its trial, the company also proposed a $150,000 annual contract for LAPD. The company told LAPD it could use artificial intelligence, machine learning and “human analysis” to identify online narratives that were rooted in “disinformation”, as well as public safety threats. The firm proposed LAPD monitor specific “client-identified” topics, including “LA riots”, “police violence”, “BLM protests” and the “Proud Boys”. It also suggested that LAPD was the direct subject of misinformation and “malicious activity”, writing: “The LAPD itself is being targeted by organized attacks of automated bots and trolls (e.g. police brutality misinformation and “defund the police” narratives).” Asked for clarification, Cias told the Guardian he did not have specific evidence of bot attacks on LAPD or of trolls spreading “defund the police” misinformation, but that the discussion was based on a “very strong hypothesis”. “I could qualitatively assume that it might be true that those narratives related with Black Lives Matter and defunding police might be also supported … to some extent by malign actors who are interested in actually disorganizing public institutions in the United States,” he said, adding that he was proposing, in effect, doing “market research”. While there is evidence that Russian trolls amplified Black Lives Matter content during the 2016 US election, activists said they were concerned that police departments and other critics of their movement were conflating authentic organizing online and troll campaigns. “There’s been a lot of grassroots organizing to get people involved in the budget process and to put a spotlight on the absurd amount of money we spend on policing,” said Kenneth Mejia, an LA housing justice activist and city comptroller candidate who advocated for defunding. He noted that last year, BLMLA facilitated a community-driven process to present a proposed “people’s budget” that cut LAPD funding. “There’s an organic and growing awareness of the reallocating of resources from the police.” LAPD did not move forward with a formal contract with Edge, though has remained interested in this kind of service, with records showing the department bought or pursued software from at least 10 companies that monitor social media. Last week, Twitter said it had suspended ABTShield’s developer account based on evidence that the firm violated its policies by deviating from approved uses, though the company did not elaborate further on the decision. Twitter’s policies allow for public data to be used for “news alerting” and “first responder support”, but it prohibits surveillance of “sensitive groups”, such as activist organizations. A Twitter spokesperson, Shaokyi Amdo, said in a statement: “Twitter prohibits the use of our developer services for surveillance purposes. Period. We proactively enforce our policies to ensure customers are in compliance and will continue to do so.” Evan Greer, deputy director of Fight for the Future, a digital rights group, said there should be stronger restrictions against the broad collection of social media data and the analysis law enforcement may perform on it. “People don’t fully grasp the ways in which the ability to analyze data at a mass scale changes the game. There’s a difference between you tweeting something and knowing that it may be seen in public, and you tweeting something and knowing that it can be vacuumed up and analyzed in a million different ways using artificial intelligence and machine learning.”The British Airways and Iberia owner, International Airlines Group , is to scrap its plan to buy the Spanish airline Air Europa, a deal that was being investigated by competition authorities in the UK and the EU. The move comes more than two years after International Airlines Group (IAG) – under its former chief executive, Willie Walsh – first announced plans to buy the carrier from the Spanish tourism group Globalia for €1bn (£850m) in November 2019, before renegotiating the deal at half the price after Covid-19 closed down most international travel, prompting huge losses at airlines. Stephen Gunning, IAG’s chief financial officer, said in a statement: “International Airlines Group and Globalia today confirm that discussions are at an advanced stage to terminate the agreement.” The UK competition authorities and the European Commission were both investigating whether the merger would reduce competition in the British and Spanish air travel markets respectively. The UK’s Competition and Markets Authority said last month it was considering whether to launch a formal investigation into the takeover, and would make a decision by mid-January. Reuters reported claims from sources that European regulators had indicated they would not allow the takeover to go through without further concessions. IAG already owns Iberia, Spain’s flag carrier airline, and the low-cost carrier Vueling. The group had said the purchase of the Mallorca-based Air Europa would have benefited consumers and made its Madrid hub more competitive. The takeover would also have allowed IAG to target the South American market. In the UK, Air Europa flies from London Gatwick to a range of cities in Spain, and from Edinburgh to some South American destinations. Iberia and Vueling fly some of the same routes. The British trade union Unite, which represents some ground crew, had also voiced its opposition to the deal, accusing IAG of trying to cut costs in a way that would affect staff, while also spending €500m on a takeover. Analysts at the City broker Bernstein said they expected IAG to have to pay €40m to end the merger discussions but said this was probably insignificant “compared to the financial liabilities likely at Air Europa”.Good morning. The House of Representatives has voted to recommend criminal contempt charges against Mark Meadows, the former chief of staff to Donald Trump, a week after he ended his cooperation with the panel investigating the Capitol insurrection. The approval marks the first time the House has voted to hold a former member in contempt since the 1830s, according to the chamber’s records. It is the latest show of force by the 6 January panel, which is leaving no angle unexplored as it investigates the worst attack on the Capitol in more than 200 years. Lawmakers are determined to reassert the congressional authority that Trump eroded while in office. “History will be written about these times, about the work this committee has undertaken,” said Bennie Thompson, the committee’s chair. Before he stopped cooperating, what did he hand over? Meadows turned over about 9,000 documents. Text messages also revealed that Trump’s son Donald Trump Jr and three hosts on the Fox News network begged Meadows to persuade the former president to stop the insurrection. What other evidence does the panel have? The communications and other documents that Meadows turned over represent just a small sample of the huge trove of evidence the panel has gathered. Meanwhile, a judge has dismissed Trump’s latest bid to hide tax returns from the House committee. US passes 800,000 Covid deaths – highest in the world The US death toll from Covid-19 has passed 800,000, a once-unimaginable figure seen as doubly tragic given that more than 200,000 of those lives were lost after vaccines became available last spring. The figure represents the highest reported toll of any country in the world, and is likely to be even higher. The US accounts for approximately 4% of the world’s population but about 15% of the 5.3 million known deaths from coronavirus since the outbreak began in China two years ago. The grim milestone comes as the world braces for rise in cases of the new Omicron variant, with the World Health Organization warning it was spreading at an unprecedented rate. The deadly milestone comes as cases and hospitalisations are on the rise again in the US, driven by the highly contagious Delta variant, with the new variant Omicron posing a fresh threat. About 200 million Americans are vaccinated, or just over 60% of the population. That is well short of what scientists say is needed to keep the virus in check. AmazonSmile donated more than $40,000 to anti-vaccine groups in 2020 Amazon’s charitable programme is paying tens of thousands of dollars to anti-vaccine groups in a move experts say is “shocking” as millions of Americans remain unvaccinated in the face of another Covid wave. AmazonSmile reportedly donated more than $40,000 to leading sources of vaccine misinformation in 2020, according to separate analyses by Popular Information and the Washington Post. “That’s really shocking,” said Peter Hotez, dean for the National School of Tropical Medicine at Baylor College of Medicine. “That’s incredible that Amazon is supporting those groups.” What is AmazonSmile? It’s the charity programme of the e-commerce giant which donates 0.5% from purchases to designated nonprofits. Last year, Amazon donated more than $60m through the initiative. What has Amazon said? Amazon did not respond to a Guardian request for comment, but a spokesperson told the Washington Post it would continue to fund groups that oppose vaccination. Meanwhile, Amazon’s plastic packaging waste soared by almost a third, to 270,000 tonnes, during the pandemic last year, according to a report. In other news … Workers at a Kentucky candle factory have said they pleaded with managers to be allowed to leave as a deadly tornado barrelled towards them last weekend – but say they were told they would be fired if they left their posts. Seventy-four people died in Kentucky, including eight at the candle factory. The most powerful storm yet this season is pummelling California, dumping several feet of snow on the Sierra Nevada mountaintops. The deluge was a welcome relief from dry conditions, but wreaked havoc on roads, caused power outages, and raised the threats of mudslides in areas scarred by wildfires. Firefighters have rescued 350 people who were trapped on the roof of a shopping centre and office complex at the World Trade Centre in Hong Kong after a fire broke out in one of the city’s busiest shopping districts. Eight people were taken to hospital after a blaze reportedly started in an electrical switch room. A Nasa spacecraft has officially “touched” the sun, plunging through the unexplored solar atmosphere known as the corona. Scientists announced the news yesterday during a meeting of the American Geophysical Union. A judge said the secret 2008 settlement between Virginia Giuffre and Jeffrey Epstein should be made public this month barring an objection by Epstein’s estate. A lawyer for Britain’s Prince Andrew has argued that the deal also shields the prince from a separate claim brought against the prince by Giuffre this year. Don’t miss this: the court artist who drew Ghislaine Maxwell drawing her back Pastel drawings don’t typically go viral on the internet. But this month, thousands of Twitter users were mesmerized by a courtroom artist’s sketch of Ghislaine Maxwell – the alleged sex-trafficking accomplice of Jeffrey Epstein – staring at the artist and sketching back. “I thought this was funny at first but it’s starting to haunt me,” one person tweeted. Jane Rosenberg, the professional courtroom artist who has been sketching Maxwell, tells the Guardian about her strange and fascinating job. Climate check: People of color breathe more of six common types of air pollution, US study finds How much air pollution are you exposed to in your daily life? The answer may depend on the color of your skin, says a study. The study published in Environmental Health Perspectives found that, no matter which of the main types of air pollutants you look at, people of color are breathing more of it. And while great progress has been made in reducing deadly pollutants in the air in the US over recent decades, the racial disparities have persisted. Last Thing: Magnus Carlsen may opt against world chess defence due to lack of motivation Magnus Carlsen says he is ready to shock the chess world by giving up his world championship title – because defending it no longer motivates him. The five-time world champion retained the title in emphatic style in Dubai last week, crushing his Russian challenger Ian Nepomniachtchi 7½-3½, but now says he has other priorities. “It’s been clear to me for most of the year that this world championship should be the last,” he said. “It doesn’t mean as much any more as it once did.”The Treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, will reveal in Thursday’s mid-year budget update that Australia’s unemployment rate will fall comfortably below 5% next year as the economy continues to rebound. After many months of volatile unemployment figures due to lockdowns and falling participation rates, the mid-year economic and fiscal outlook (MYEFO) will forecast the unemployment rate to drop to 4.5% in the June quarter of next year. This is down from the 5% unemployment rate forecast for June 2022 in the May budget. In 2022-23, the unemployment rate will fall again to 4.25%, slightly below the 4.75% previously forecast, and the lowest level since September 2008. By 2024-25, an extra million jobs are expected to be added to the economy, as growth rates return to pre-pandemic levels. Unveiling the economic update – potentially the last before an election – Frydenberg will highlight the unemployment rate as being sustained below 5% for the first time since before the global financial crisis and only the second time since the early 1970s. Australia last had a run of unemployment below 5% from 2006 to 2009. “Not only is the unemployment rate today lower than when Labor left office, despite being in the middle of a pandemic, we are now poised to see the unemployment rate fall to 4 ¼% and sustained below 5% for only the second time in more than half a century,” Frydenberg said ahead of Thursday’s budget update. “JobKeeper, the CashFlow Boost, Household Payments, the Covid Disaster Payment and Business Support payments did their job in saving lives and livelihoods.” More than $13bn has been paid in pandemic support payments since the Covid pandemic began for more than 6m claims, mainly as Covid disaster payments. Frydenberg said that the government was prioritising “saving jobs and creating jobs” and had avoided “the scarring of the labour market that had marked the 1980s and 1990s recessions. “We have been working to a clear fiscal strategy to drive down the unemployment rate to historically low levels as we emerge from the greatest economic shock since the Great Depression,” Frydenberg said. “It’s not that long ago that the Treasury was contemplating a collapse in GDP of more than 20% and feared the unemployment rate could rise to as high as 15%.” The improved unemployment rate – which refers to the share of the labour force that is without work and seeking employment – suggests an extra 150,000 people will be employed by 2024-25 across the economy than forecast in the May 2021-22 budget. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning MYEFO documents will also show that Treasury expects to see the creation of 1m jobs over the forward estimates with a total of more than 13.8 million people employed by June 2025. The strong jobs growth will see a record high employment to population ratio of 63.1% by the September quarter next year. The lower than forecast unemployment rate is in line with the government’s updated “non-accelerating inflation rate of unemployment”, called the Nairu, which is the jobless rate at which inflation and wages are then expected to rise. The RBA’s latest quarterly monetary policy statement showed the bank is expecting the jobless rate to “be a little below 5% at the end of 2021, and is forecast to decline steadily from there, reaching 4% by the end of 2023. “The participation rate is expected to bounce back quickly to historically high levels, in contrast to the experience of some other advanced economies,” the RBA said. The RBA is expecting GDP to have contracted by about 2.5% in the September quarter, and hours worked declined by 3%, but forecasts a rapid recovery as a result of Australia’s high vaccination rates. GDP is expected to grow by about 3% over 2021, before growth of 5.5% next year, and 2.5% in 2023 – a rate closer to pre-pandemic averages. The improved unemployment rate comes despite expectations that Thursday’s budget update will show costs for the National Disability and Insurance Scheme growing by another $26bn over the next four years. The cumulative budget deficits, which were forecast at $342.4bn in the May budget, are expected to be slightly lower as a result of more buoyant tax receipts, but still constrained by spending pressures for the NDIS and Covid related payments.There was a moment towards the end of Sergio Agüero’s announcement that he is retiring because of a heart problem when a slightly shy smile flickered across his face. He hadn’t been speaking long, and a lot of the time had found it hard enough to speak at all, but he had been asked to name the moments he took with him from 20 seasons as a footballer. At first he sighed, which he did often, then he gave a short list. Independiente vs Racing, the Europa League with Atlético, that goal against QPR, and winning the Copa América. “And then,” he added, “the last goal, against Madrid.” He shrugged as he said it, which was something else he did a lot, but after 15 tearful, forced minutes that had been difficult to watch, there was a comfortingly familiar hint of mischief in the smile, a glimpse of himself. There was also more than a hint of sadness, and then just a little bit of a laugh. From the Camp Nou seats where Pep Guardiola and Txiki Begiristain were among those joining the Barcelona squad, Agüero’s former Atlético captain Antonio López and a delegation from the Argentinian consulate, came a chuckle. “Well,” Agüero said, “it’s not bad for a last goal, right?” Not bad at all but how they wished it wasn’t the last, the only one he scored for Barcelona, forced to walk away after suffering chest pains against Alavés in late October, taking the definitive decision “a week or 10 days ago” after doctors told him to stop. “I did all I could in case there was any hope, but there wasn’t much,” he said. So it came to an end, at 33. That, at least, was “positive”, Agüero said, “because I’m here to tell [you]; I could have not been had it happened again”. Because he had had a career to be “proud of” too. “It’s a good job it happened now, not before,” he said. Before, there had been brilliance. Asked how he hoped people remembered him, Agüero said that wasn’t for him to say. “It would be bad if I said I was a crack,” he smiled, a touch of loss to go with the cheek. “But you are,” he was told. “Yeah, but it’s wrong for me to say that,” he shot back. That solitary Barcelona goal was the 427th of his career. “We have been left with the hope of what might have been but we think you made the right decision,” Barcelona’s president, Joan Laporta, told him. “We would have liked you to come sooner: when you were at Atlético, we were jealous.” At the Calderón, he had been astonishing, La Liga’s best player in 2007-08 aged 19. Manchester City fans soon found out how good he was. Barcelona fans would not, not first hand. Injured in August, he played only 339 minutes, none with Lionel Messi, the friend alongside whom he won the Under-20 World Cup 16 years ago and hoped to play out his final games. When Agüero appeared on the stage, the microphone picked up the sighs and the sniffs. “Oooof,” he said as he took his seat, tissue in hand. For a while, that was all he could say. He bowed his head, taking deep breaths, gazing at the floor. He looked broken and tired, eyes heavy. There was applause. He shook his head. “I’m going to … well … pfff,” he said. “I am here to communicate that I have decided to stop playing football,” he continued, and then his voice broke. He shook his head, and tried again. When he spoke the words were slow, almost whispered, the pauses long. He said thank you many times. “I know there are lots of people who love me,” he said. The word nada was repeated a lot: a filler, it means nothing. It had been difficult even to get started. “I’ve decided to stop playing professional football: it’s a very difficult moment but, well, the most important thing is my health,” he had eventually said. “You know why I take this decision.” There was no need for more detail: the cardiac arrhythmia was known, the club saying that there would be three months of testing but within six weeks a definitive, dreadful conclusion had been reached. “When I did the first tests the doctors called to say there was a very big chance that I shouldn’t continue [playing] and I started to mentalise myself but it wasn’t easy,” he said. “I was processing it all when they called and said it was definitive. I took a few extra days to process it. I got it into my head, thought properly and decided. “I’m OK now,” he said, not entirely convincingly, “but the first few weeks were hard. I’m proud of my career, very happy. I always dreamed of playing football, ever since I first kicked a ball aged five. I leave with my head held high.”There is nothing new about a nostalgic TV reunion. In the last year we’ve seen televisual specials reunite actors from Friends, New Girl and The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air for emotional chats and table reads of episodes past. There are cast-led rewatch podcasts like Fake Doctors, Real Friends – hosted by the Scrubs stars Zach Braff and Donald Faison – or West Wing Weekly and Office Ladies (about the US Office). But, often, they are bathed in a cosy glow. They fail to lift the lid on the shows’ darker side. They avoid raising problematic issues that call into question the ethics of the industry they work in. This is not true when it comes to the wave of podcasts that have brought together the casts of 00s teen shows. Years spent portraying the breakups, makeups, hedonistic parties and burgeoning sex lives of teenagers – in hits such as The OC and 90210 – have made way for audio series in which their casts discuss the good and the bad of adolescent stardom. For 90210’s AnnaLynne McCord and Shenae Grimes-Beech, deconstructing their elite Beverly Hills high school characters in painstaking detail held no appeal. Instead, Unzipped is billed as the pair reuniting “older, wiser and more outspoken than ever”. “We have a lot of opinions and we want to ask questions that will probably get us in trouble and have a conversation around them,” says McCord. “We were in that last wave before social media really hit and we were spoken for, rather than having our own voices, a lot of the time.” Being able to tell their tale via a podcast is particularly important for these one-time teen stars, given that the 00s was the peak of tabloid mania, when young female celebrities in particular were chased by paparazzi and blogged about on sites such as TMZ and Perez Hilton. A perceived wrong move – anything from an outfit to a new partner – seemed like it could end their careers. Grimes-Beech, who was 18 when she began filming 90210, describes the intensity of the time. “I had really gotten into a place of depression,” she says. “I felt like I was being watched all the time.” In one episode of the podcast, she describes “having the shit ripped out of us [by the press] because we were at the club”. By season two, she was a hermit. “I was like: ‘I’m just not going to leave my apartment. I will just be as boring as possible so everybody leaves me alone.’” Today, however, the pair are playing the media at their own game. Knowing that people would tune in “because they were familiar with 90210”, McCord and Grimes-Beech’s first episode was a deep dive into their years-long feud. Meanwhile, countless headlines have emerged from the One Tree Hill podcast Drama Queens. Downloaded 2.5m times in the days after its release, it features Sophia Bush, Hilarie Burton Morgan and Bethany Joy Lenz discussing uncomfortable age gaps, “ssorg” kissing scenes (that is gross spelt backwards) and how they had to “turn up the sexy” to keep up with The OC. There is, of course, another podcast that lets you peer into the world of The OC – only to realise that the cast weren’t too far removed from its wide-eyed, hormone-fuelled teen viewers, as they grew up before our eyes. Welcome to the OC, Bitches! is co-hosted by Rachel Bilson, who played the assumed airhead – and actual intellectual – Summer Roberts in The OC. She revisits the show alongside co-host Melinda Clarke – who played Julie Cooper, the mother of Mischa Barton’s character, Marissa. It is a look at the music, fashion, writing and iconic moments (Chrismukkah, anyone?) of the show, in which it becomes clear that Bilson remembers entertainingly little about the four seasons she spent working on it, appparently learning much of the trivia for the first time. When I ask if there was ever a desire to leave The OC in the past, Clarke references her co-stars: “I know Adam [Brody] and Ben [McKenzie] have said publicly that they really wanted to distance themselves from the show.” (Brody said recently that he “cannot bear” to watch it, comparing his character Seth Cohen to a “chipmunk Vince Vaughn”). Indeed, a key feature of these throwback podcasts is listeners realising that the bonds between the cast aren’t as tight as we might have assumed. In one episode, Bilson and Clarke discuss Barton’s open letter, published last June, in which she described how unhappy she was while working on the series. The pair say they were “confused” by her admissions. “I’m willing to hear what she has to say and actually have a conversation … everyone had a different experience,” says Bilson. Although they haven’t reached out to Barton personally, Clarke says that “there always will be an open invitation for her to come on the show”. Another podcast looks at the complexity of being known predominantly for one role. British actor April Pearson’s Instagram Live series turned podcast Are You Michelle From Skins? leans into her association with the E4 series. She quizzes notable people – among them Les Dennis, the Harry Potter twins James and Oliver Phelps and other Skins actors – on life as “that person from …” She says that, when she admitted during a conversation with fellow Skins alumna Laya Lewis to feeling “unprotected” in sex scenes, the subsequent news reports, a statement from Channel 4 and an apology from the show’s creators were unexpected – and unwanted. “It was two colleagues discussing their experience at work,” she says. “I felt like there was no sort of salacious gossip or something that needed to be expanded on … It was a decade ago.” At the time – before intimacy coordinators and #MeToo – Skins was glorified and chastised for putting its teenage cast in eye-watering scenarios. But Pearson seems equally frustrated by the reaction to her admission. “We paint a rose-tinted picture of everything being fine. And then suddenly when someone says: ‘Actually, it wasn’t,’ it’s that kind of shock and horror.” (Although yet to be discussed on Drama Queens, One Tree Hill has had its own reckoning; 18 women, including the three lead actresses, have made sexual harassment allegations against its creator, Mark Schwahn.) Is the fact that these podcasts are all hosted by the leading women of their shows a coincidence? Pearson thinks not. “The representation of women has not aged well,” she says of The OC and 90210. “Those are really good starting points for interesting conversations that other women want to listen to, and that will make them feel seen.” It also spells a new chapter for an era often linked with diva behaviour and unattainable celebrity, allowing listeners to directly engage with the actors, perhaps for the first time. Clarke, whose character is at times a questionable mother, has noticed that fans who have become parents since they first watched the show see her in a new light. “[So many] people have said: ‘When I originally watched the show, I hated your character … Now that I’m older, Julie’s right.’” “It’s interesting,” says Bilson. “Rewatching the show, you see that they’re really strong and independent and actually good examples in lots of ways, even though they were pinned as the bitches.” As a result of gen Z connecting with Skins, Pearson – who “spent so much time thinking I’m the only person from the cast of Skins who hasn’t been nominated for an Oscar or appeared in Game of Thrones” – has found an unexpected TikTok fanbase. “I am a woman in her 30s who has half a million followers,” she says. She credits them for understanding Michelle as “a very impressionable young woman … [who] feels that the only way to be someone is to be attractive to the opposite sex”. “I feel vindicated for the 15 years that I’ve spent having to stick up for a fictional character who people just haven’t been able to relate to. I think that’s completely down to the change in the conversation around women and how far we’ve come. I’m really happy about that.” Welcome To The OC Bitches!, Unzipped and Are You Michelle from Skins? are available now on all podcast platformsGoogle has told its US staff they must be vaccinated against Covid-19 by the middle of January or face serious repercussions including a pay cut and ultimately the loss of their job. Employees were told they were required to have declared their vaccination status and uploaded proof of it, or to have applied for a medical or religious exemption, by 3 December, according to an internal memo obtained by CNBC, which first reported the story. After that date, Google said, it would start to contact workers who were unvaccinated or had not uploaded proof of vaccination, or whose exemption requests had not been approved. According to the memo, employees who missed a deadline of 18 January to comply with the rules would initially be placed on “paid administrative leave” for 30 days, followed by six months of “unpaid personal leave”. In the final step, Google would terminate the person’s employment. Google is one of several large US employers to have adopted a “no jab, no job” policy for their workforce, although it appears to have gone a step further than some other firms. Google declined a request to comment. It had already informed its US workforce that they would need to be vaccinated to return to its corporate buildings. The chief executive, Sundar Pichai, told staff in a memo in July that the policy would initially be implemented in the US before being adopted globally. Vaccination has also been made a requirement by other US tech companies including Uber and Facebook. Large American corporates have shown themselves to be much more likely to embrace a mandatory vaccination policy than their British counterparts. The US government has ordered companies with more than 100 staff to ensure their workforce is fully vaccinated or regularly tested for Covid by 18 January. The employment rights of UK workers, protected in law, have meant British employers are treading more cautiously. Employment lawyers have previously said that many companies and organisations feared accusations of discrimination or even unfair dismissal from staff, and therefore decided to make vaccination a personal choice. The UK government had to pass legislation to compel care homes to make sure all workers in England were fully vaccinated unless they had a medical exemption. US financial firms were among the most enthusiastic about bringing workers back to the office and also among the first to tell their teams during the summer that only fully vaccinated staff could return to their headquarters. On Tuesday the Wall Street bank JPMorgan informed its unvaccinated staff based at its Manhattan offices that they were required to work from home, amid concerns over the spread of the Omicron variant. It had previously allowed unvaccinated staff to work from its New York building provided they were tested twice a week, according to Reuters, which first reported the decision. In a memo, the bank called on unvaccinated staff to take up the offer of a jab, and asked eligible employees to get a booster vaccination.The digital wild west met its sheriff this week. The joint committee on the online safety bill announced on Tuesday that it was reining in the tech industry’s “land of the lawless” with its report on the pioneering legislation. Unveiling the document, the committee’s Conservative chair, Damian Collins MP, said: “The Committee were unanimous in their conclusion that we need to call time on the wild west online.” The 192-page report recommends a sweeping overhaul of the bill, which is aimed at companies that provide user-generated content – ie social media networks like Facebook and Twitter and video sharing platforms like YouTube and TikTok – as well as search engines like Google. The bill imposes a duty of care on tech firms to protect users from harmful content, at the risk of a substantial fine brought by Ofcom, the communications industry regulator implementing the act. The bill matters because it represents an attempt to properly regulate social media companies, video sharing sites and search engines under one legislative roof for the first time. And the report matters too. It is a thorough piece of work by a cross-party group of MPs and peers who know their stuff and supported the 170 conclusions unanimously. The government has already pledged to give it serious consideration and the committee is also likely to endure as a watchdog for the bill once it becomes law – an oversight structure modelled on the human rights joint committee. Here are some of the changes to the bill that the report recommends. Make the objectives of the bill clear The committee says the bill should set out its core objectives “clearly at the beginning”. This is also quite handy for any TechScape readers who want to stay on top of a complex piece of legislative work. The report says Ofcom should protect UK citizens online by ensuring that tech firms do the following: comply with UK law and do not endanger public health or national security; provide a higher level of protection for children than for adults; identify and deal with the risk of “reasonably foreseeable harm” arising from the operation and design of their platforms (algorithms and the like); recognise and respond to the disproportionate level of harms experienced by people on the basis of protected characteristics (disability, age, sexual orientation, religion etc); make sure your systems are designed to be safe, ie that they don’t steer users down dangerous content rabbit holes; safeguard freedom of expression and privacy; and operate with transparency and accountability in respect of online safety. Legal but harmful content One of the most controversial parts of the draft bill was clause 11, which covered the duty of care that applied to adults: protecting them from legal but harmful content. This caused concern because under the draft bill not only would the culture secretary have a key role in defining such content – meaning Nadine Dorries would, at least technically, have a censorship role over what is acceptable speech online – but it also contained an amorphous threat against freedom of expression. The report proposes doing away with clause 11 altogether and replacing it with categories of transgression that mirror illegality in the offline world. This would mean banning online content that constitutes abuse, harassment or stirring up violence or hatred based on the protected characteristics in the Equality Act 2010. This, the committee hopes, will make tech platforms deal with hate speech. The new approach would also mean banning other forms of content that are illegal in the offline world, such as intimidation of candidates in elections and facilitating human trafficking. The report’s reasoning is that because these harms are already illegal in the offline world, “society has recognised they are legitimate reasons to interfere with freedom of speech rights [online].” Journalistic exemptions – and citizen journalists While we’re on the subject of freedom of speech, the report also recommends a toughening up of the bill’s exemption of news organisation content from takedowns by tech platforms. Under the committee’s new recommendation, if it isn’t illegal, it stays up: “We recommend that the news publisher content exemption is strengthened to include a requirement that news publisher content should not be moderated, restricted or removed unless it is content the publication of which clearly constitutes a criminal offence.” There is also an attempt to provide cover for “citizen journalists”, such as bloggers, by addressing the draft bill’s protections for content of “democratic importance”. The report recommends instead that the bill protects content that is in the “public interest”. Citizen journalists whose content has been taken down erroneously or unfairly can have their work reinstated rapidly via a dedicated and speeded-up complaints procedure. Protecting children In the draft bill, one of the three duties of care is to protect children from harmful content (the other two are protecting users from illegal harms and protecting adults from legal but harmful content). There are a number of new protections for children recommended by the committee. These include: requiring all pornography sites to prevent children from accessing their content, which could involve introducing age assurance measures; the definition of internet services likely to be accessed by children should be taken from the information commissioner’s age appropriate design code; introducing minimum standards for age assurance measures (from entering your date of birth on to a pop-up form to more stringent age verification); and Ofcom should draw up a code of practice for protecting children online, which should refer to the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child, the AADC and children’s right to receive information under the European convention on human rights. Algorithms, misinformation, anonymity and safety by design The report recommends tackling harmful algorithms, anonymous abuse and the spread of misinformation via a “safety by design code of practice” overseen by Ofcom. This code of practice requires platforms to look at how they operate, how they are designed and how that might harm users. For instance, tech companies must look at the algorithms that push content at users and prevent them from steering people down dangerous “rabbit holes”. Mass-spreading of misinformation will be addressed by drawing up measures to prevent frictionless sharing of content at scale, as well as being covered in the code of practice. Anonymous trolling – and spreading of misinformation by anonymous accounts – will also be included in the code of practice as a specific category, with platforms required to come up with measures to deal with vexatious anonymous accounts, including the ability to prevent banned trolls from setting up new accounts. The big players should also be required to commission annual, independent third-party audits of the effects of their algorithms, their risk assessments (where they outline to Ofcom the harms their services could cause) and their transparency reports (which will include stuff like the incidences of illegal and harmful content, and how many users have encountered such content). Ofcom should also have the power to inspect these audits and do its own checks. New criminal categories The report recommends the creation of new criminal offences including: cyberflashing; encouraging someone to commit self-harm; intentionally sending flashing images to someone with epilepsy (with the intent of causing a seizure); and knowingly sending false, persistent or threatening communications. Tech execs are also hit with an expansion of criminal liability. The report calls for tech companies to appoint a boardroom-level executive who will be designated the firm’s “safety controller” and will be liable for a new criminal offence: failing to deal with “repeated and systemic failings that result in a significant risk of serious harm to users”. The committee sees the latter offence as a back-stop, but tech companies obviously do not like it one bit. Advertising Martin Lewis, the consumer champion, made an impassioned appearance at a committee hearing in October, telling MPs and peers that people’s lives were being “destroyed” by fraudsters using his image in scam online advertisements. The committee listened and has recommended that fraudulent ads be brought within the scope of the bill. Under its proposal, Ofcom will be responsible for acting against tech companies that consistently allow fraudulent or harmful ads on their platforms. No currency for crypto The Bank of England came out with more cryptocurrency warnings on Tuesday. The bank’s deputy governor, Sir Jon Cunliffe, said the price of digital money such as bitcoin could “theoretically or practically drop to zero”. Meanwhile the bank’s staff blog, looking at bitcoin, said: “It’s just a bunch of code that exists only in cyberspace. It’s not backed by the state.” Even if Threadneedle Street is right, it only serves to underline the anti-establishment status of cryptocurrencies. If you want to read the complete version of the newsletter please subscribe to receive TechScape in your inbox every Wednesday.Millions of people born in the 1970s may have to wait longer to collect their UK state pensions if a government review, which was announced this week, recommends bringing forward plans for a retirement age of 68. The state pension age rose to 66 last year, with two further rises planned, meaning that by 2046 those born on or after April 1977 would need to wait until 68 before they can draw the benefit. However, the review will look at bringing forward that change by eight years, so that the increase is phased in between 2037 and 2039. The state payment is paid to anyone who has made at least 10 years’ worth of national insurance contributions during their working lifetime. The maximum payment is £179.60 a week, but how much you get depends on how many years you contributed for. The government is obliged to regularly re-evaluate the state retirement age, and it must publish the results of the latest review by 7 May 2023. It said Britain’s ageing population meant it needed to make sure decisions on how to manage the cost of the state pension system were “robust, fair and transparent for taxpayers now and in the future”. The review will also look at the way the pension age is set, and what data could be taken into account when deciding on a fair retirement age. Becky O’Connor, the head of pensions and savings at the website interactive investor, said: “The idea of a long, enjoyable retirement seems set to be consigned to the history books. “It’s no wonder today’s younger workers have little faith in the state pension being there for them at all when they stop work, with many thinking they’ll end up working forever.” She added: “For those who find they can no longer work before they reach 68 because of age-related ill health, the inability to claim state pension presents huge issues. The age at which people can expect to start to experience health problems that might prevent them working is around 63, which could leave many people facing several years where they either have to rely on private pension provision, which may be inadequate anyway, or other benefits.” Helen Morrissey, a senior pensions and retirement analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown, said: “While it had been proposed that the increase in state pension age to age 68 should be moved forward to 2037-39 – from 2044-46 – an analysis of the latest life expectancy data as part of this review could stop this in its tracks.” Morrissey said the review it could also prompt a closer look at the pensions triple lock – the government promise to link pension rises to earnings, inflation or 2.5%, which ever it higher. That policy has been partly suspended this year as a result of high wage rises. One issue that has been raised by some critics of the current system is the impact of different life expectancy rates around the country. A recent report found that while a man living in the London borough of Westminster could be expected to live until the age of 84.7 years, in Blackpool it would be 74.1 years.I’m not surprised that the humour and gentle escapism of cosy crime is having a moment. The books themselves are not a response to what we’re living through: most were written before lockdown or Cop26. But while noir profits from exploring our deepest anxieties, cosy taps into a need for self-protection that many readers are feeling right now. It doesn’t mean that a well-constructed cosy mystery is light or meaningless. When I set out to write about the Queen as a secret detective, I wanted to explore a world run by a woman driven by a strong moral code. The sort who would say, on her 21st birthday, “My life, whether it be long or short, shall be devoted to your service,” and mean it. I wouldn’t say that integrity in public office is the defining characteristic of our age, but it can be relaxing to imagine it. Add to that a unique perspective on the world, a lifetime of high-level political experience, and access to any expert she pleases – and you have a ready-made investigator. The Queen is in fact one year older than Miss Marple, who first appeared in print in 1927. Is that really such a coincidence? There is no such thing as a cosy crime, of course. Murder is murder. However, while there may be sex and violence in these stories, it is usually off-stage. In the following books, we spend our time with detectives who have somehow managed not to become drink-addled loners, who inhabit places we would like to live or visit, among communities who, despite their differences, ultimately trust each other and get along. It makes a change from the papers. What’s not to like? 1. Evil Under the Sun by Agatha Christie Written before the second world war, this Poirot novel is full of tightly wound characters hiding seething emotions. The plot contains masterful misdirection about place and time, but its success was also due in part to its depiction of summer sun, silk pyjamas, blue skies and sandy beaches. By the time it came out in 1941, the peacetime Devon coast where it’s set had become a fantasy world. The victim is obvious from the start, as so often in Christie’s novels, but by whose hand will she die, and why? And what about those silk pyjamas? 2. The Appeal by Janice Hallett A postmodern, do-it-yourself mystery, composed exclusively of emails, texts and notes, in which the reader is asked to solve the crime. Set in the comfortable yet ruthless world of amateur dramatics, its comedy comes from the wide variety of the message-writers’s voices, from passive aggressive to desperate, all of which we recognise. 3. Agatha Raisin and the Quiche of Death by MC Beaton MC Beaton was one of the many pen names of the prolific Scottish author Marion Chesney, who died in 2019 having written 31 books about Agatha Raisin and 34 about Hamish Macbeth. If there’s anything cosy crime readers love more than an underestimated heroine, an Airbnb-worthy Cotswolds cottage and a cat, it’s a series. Agatha herself is a comic delight: sexy, vampish and rude, but hiding more than a few vulnerabilities, and not hiding them very well. I wasn’t convinced by the TV series, which didn’t quite capture her Birmingham roots with Mayfair overtones, but Penelope Keith makes Agatha her own in many of the audiobooks. 4. Strong Poison by Dorothy L Sayers I grew up on golden age crime fiction, and fell in love with Sayers’ Lord Peter Wimsey as so many readers do. He is Bertie Wooster with Jeeves’s brain, made human by the first world war PTSD that still haunts him in moments of stress. In Strong Poison, he has fallen madly in love with Harriet Vane, a spiky, unyielding, intelligent woman who is condemned to hang for murdering her lover. Sayers clearly made Harriet a successful crime writer because if she couldn’t have her beloved Peter, then no one could. 5. Brat Farrar by Josephine Tey A beautifully descriptive tale of a young man who inserts himself into a wealthy family, knowing he is not the missing son they want him to be. The mystery he encounters is a slow-burn, but ends up with a not-so-cosy denouement worthy of Iain Banks. 6. Magpie Murders by Anthony Horowitz If there’s a king of cosy crime, I’d argue it’s Horowitz, who originally adapted Midsomer Murders for TV and bettered it with Foyle’s War. In Magpie Murders, telling a simple detective story is too easy, so Horowitz tells two, one inside the other. The clues to the contemporary outer crime rely on an editor’s finely tuned understanding of the writing of the inner one, in which Horowitz recreates a classic golden age mystery. It could seem like plain showing off, but its clever theme of editing-as-detection is a delight. 7. The Thursday Murder Club by Richard Osman Richard Osman used to be a TV celebrity who secretly wrote crime fiction in his spare time. Then The Thursday Murder Club came out and he is now a worldwide publishing phenomenon who makes TV shows. Osman is a very funny writer, a brilliant observer of middle-class mores, who cares about the lives of his protagonists – residents facing their mortality in retirement homes – and it shows. He is also good at killing people all over Kent, and getting his unlikely quartet of detectives to work out why and how. Book two, The Man Who Died Twice, is as good if not better. 8. Three Pines series by Louise Penny Can these books be called cosy? Penny explores dark political themes and some of the books read like thrillers, but there is an essential goodness to the community in the fictional Canadian town of the title, and the warm and loving relationships that hold Chief Inspector Armand Gamache, his family and friends together. Her deft touch in capturing those bonds is a balm for any soul battered by the relentless news of what keeps us apart. They also feature good poetry and good food. 9. Hollywood Homicide by Kellye Garrett Garrett made waves in the US as a standout voice when her Detective by Day series was first published in 2017, scooping several awards. Garrett takes the cosy to Los Angeles, featuring semi-famous, mega-broke Black actress-turned-PI, Dayna Anderson. Her prose is fresh and funny and the settings are everything a film lover would hope for. 10. Murder Most Unladylike by Robin Stevens Before writing adult crime fiction, I wrote for children and I’m certain that some of the best books are written for 10 to 12-year-olds. This series imagines two 1930s schoolgirls solving crimes in Christie fashion, featuring the intrepid duo of Daisy Wells and Hazel Wong. The books combine a sense of history with a very modern sensibility and I have seen readers approaching Stevens at events to hug her, because they mean so much to them. A Three Dog Problem by SJ Bennett is published by Zaffre. To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Céline Sciamma’s beautiful fairytale reverie is occasioned by the dual mysteries of memory and the future: simple, elegant and very moving. Joséphine Sanz plays Nelly, the eight-year-old daughter of Marion (Nina Meurisse); Marion’s mother has just died in a care home. Marion and her partner (Stéphane Varupenne) take Nelly on a difficult journey to the late woman’s home. It is where Marion grew up and the memories come flooding back – particularly that of a secret hut she built in the woods adjoining the house. She is overwhelmed with grief and leaves Nelly alone with her dad. Playing in the woods, Nelly comes across what appears to be a half-finished hut in a clearing. A girl waves happily to her, asking for help in making it. She is the mirror image of Nelly (played by Gabrielle Sanz, evidently Joséphine’s twin sister) and announces that her name is … Marion. They go back to Marion’s house, an eerie mirror-image of Nelly’s mother’s childhood home. And there Nelly meets Marion’s kindly, withdrawn, thirtysomething mum, who walks painfully with a cane. It is a ghost story, or a parable, played with realist calm. The girls talk about the future and the past as casually as they would about anything else. I found myself holding my breath for long stretches, as the young stars insouciantly saunter in single file along the narrative tightrope. I’m not being facetious when I say that this meeting of the two girls reminded me of Marty McFly’s first encounter with his dad in Back to the Future, another brilliant film of a very different type. There is something eternally strange about the fact that your parents were once the same age as you, had the same worries and fears and thoughts as you, and the same inability to see into the future – which is you. Making these two characters vulnerable and delicate children is an artistic masterstroke on Sciamma’s part. What a superb movie.Ocean experts who are monitoring a North Atlantic right whale that gave birth while entangled in fishing rope say there is little chance of removing two 16ft lengths attached to her while her calf is young. The endangered whale, named Snow Cone by ocean observers, was seen in a video filmed off the coast of Georgia earlier this month by the Florida fish and wildlife commission. The video shows the newborn calf at her side and the twin ropes attached to her mouth. She was first pictured tangled in the fishing gear in Plymouth Harbor, Massachusetts, last March, prompting rescue missions by crews from the Center for Coastal Studies and the removal of about 300 feet of rope. In a rare event among this dwindling population, which is threatened by the climate crisis, ship strikes, rope entanglements and other human causes, the whale not only managed to migrate a long distance but also to successfully give birth while hampered by the ropes. Now, with the calf constantly at her side, experts say they can’t make another attempt to free her from the remaining fishing gear for the foreseeable future. A team of disentanglement responders from the Georgia department of natural resources travelled to Cumberland Island, where the whale was photographed, but “determined that trying to remove or further shorten the rope would be too dangerous with a newborn calf present,” according to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (Noaa) in a story posted to its website. “Right whale calves swim very close to their moms, making a safe approach by responders highly problematic if not impossible. Noaa Fisheries and partners are continuing to monitor Snow Cone and her newborn.” Barb Zoodsma, large whale recovery coordinator for the agency’s southeast regional office, said Snow Cone lost a male calf in a collision with a vessel off the coast of New Jersey last summer, then still managed to migrate 1,300 miles south from summer feeding grounds off Canada this year to give birth while caught up in the ropes. “Clearly, Snow Cone has game. Still, her and her calf’s current situation is very concerning,” she said. Only about 350 right whales are believed to survive in the North Atlantic, according to Noaa estimates. Snow Cone and her newborn are only the second known mother-calf pairing of the 2021-22 right whale breeding season.George Clooney has long been a force for good in movies and public life – but what a bafflingly bland, indulgent, gritless oyster of a film he’s directed here. It is a boy’s own coming-of-age story without any believable growing pains, or pains of any sort, and is based on the bestselling memoir by Pulitzer prize-winning journalist JR Moehringer – which has had a whole lot of famous men asking him to ghostwrite their autobiographies, including our own Prince Harry. The Tender Bar is about a kid growing up poor on Long Island with a mostly absent, abusive dad, a toughly determined mom, and getting a rough-and-ready literary education hanging out in the local bar run by his book-mad uncle, and finally getting a scholarship to Yale in the Class of 86. Ben Affleck plays the boozy bibliophile Uncle Charlie in whose pub, the Dickens, he nurses a literary spark in JR, played as a little boy by newcomer Daniel Ranieri and as a grownup by Tye Sheridan. Lily Rabe does a decent job as JR’s hardworking mom who has to bring her son back to her childhood home when her husband runs out on them; Christopher Lloyd is the cranky, ornery old grandpa in whose house all these deadbeats have ended up, and Max Martini is plausibly threatening as JR’s errant dad, a disc jockey called “The Voice” whose gravelly tones the boy yearningly listens out for on the radio. Affleck and Martini provide the film’s single weirdest scene: Charlie grumpily demands the 30 bucks The Voice owes him, and The Voice gives him what appears to be a horrible beating, behind Charlie’s car in long-shot where the camera can’t or won’t see it. This is presented to us as just another sad tableau from JR’s tough upbringing, with no consequences. We don’t see Charlie covered in cuts and bandages. And we never hear JR, in one of his many soupy-sonorous voiceovers, talk about how shocking this must surely have been. Another part of the film that is strangely without plausible emotional content is JR’s relationship with wealthy fellow student, Sidney (Briana Middleton), who has wild sex with him and finally breaks his heart by marrying someone else. There is a truly odd scene when JR insults Sidney’s mother over their breakfast table, presumably because of her snobbish attitude to JR’s mom. Is it supposed to be tense? Embarrassing? Funny? It just feels numb. And on hearing that he’s planning on being a writer, people keep coyly telling JR that “memoirs” are where it’s at in publishing. Maybe; Moehringer didn’t get round to publishing his until 2005. This doesn’t feel like real memory at all: just a collection of flavourless picturesque scenes. • The Tender Bar is released on 17 December in cinemas, and on 7 January on Amazon Prime Video.Though I’ll defend the nut roast (or, somewhat big-headedly, my nut roast, at least) to the death, I’ll generously concede a vegetarian’s right to celebrate Christmas with something else occasionally. And a wellington is a stand-alone dish that has the wow factor to cut it for the most special of occasions. Of course, just about anything can be wrapped in rich, flaky pastry and baked until golden brown, but to displace the nut roast from my affections, this needs to be a recipe that looks at least as impressive inside as the blushing beef version, and that pairs as well with roast spuds, sprouts and cranberry sauce as it would with a simple jug of gravy. This wellington ticks both those boxes (even if I say so myself), can be prepared up to a day in advance, is easily veganised and won’t cost you £60 in beef fillet. Happy Christmas! The ‘meat’ Thinking about a wellington, it strikes me that it ought to be more than just a giant vegetarian sausage roll, delicious as that might be – we all love Elly Curshen’s fruity nut wellington from her book Green, and Olive magazine’s chard, walnut and stilton filling, but it can’t be denied that, once cut, it is recipes, such as Jack Monroe’s and Anna Glover’s for BBC Good Food, with something solid in the centre that look more impressive. Monroe and Glover both go for beetroot, which is almost worth it just to steal the name beet wellington from Jack, but, even when it’s boiled in vinegar and sugar, as the former suggests, my testers and I find it just a bit sweet for our tastes. Glover also includes butternut squash, as does the recipe on Jamie Oliver’s website. Though the latter’s directions for cutting it are somewhat unclear, the picture suggests that, like Glover’s, it’s meant to be in small pieces. Without her central beetroot, however, and good as it tastes, the latter feels like any vegetarian pie. Instead, I’m going to use the squash in two large blocks to replicate the shape of the beef in a standard wellington, and bake it with a savoury glaze, rather than Oliver’s chilli, coriander, cinnamon and rosemary, to keep the flavour profile simpler (note that any large, dense winter squash will work here; indeed, a fudgy kabocha or crown prince would probably taste even better, though the shape is less convenient for cutting into blocks, so you might need to improvise). The duxelles Monroe, Glover and Oliver’s team all incorporate the traditional mushroom duxelles into their recipes, for its “distinctive depth of flavour”, as Monroe puts it in her book Vegan(ish), though, unlike Glover’s classic, creamy version, she blends her mushroom mix with chestnuts and spinach to make a savoury paste. Mushrooms, of course, are a familiar face in vegetarian food, thanks to their high umami content, which is popularly claimed to “make up” for a lack of meat (though why one fine-tasting ingredient should be better than another is unclear), but not everyone uses them, perhaps because they’re sick of eating mushroom risotto, mushroom lasagne and the like all year round. Alliums in some form, however, are mandatory: Olive uses whole shallots, Glover chopped ones, Curshen leeks, Oliver red onions and Monroe yellow ones. I like the faintly winey flavour of shallots with mushrooms, but be assured that any of the above will be delicious. I feel that the sweetness of the squash demands the balancing savoury notes of a duxelles, albeit one with a chunkier texture to compensate for the softness of a baked butternut squash in comparison with even the rarest of beef fillets. Roughly chopped chestnuts, as used by almost everyone, have a festive feel, but I prefer the bitter crunch of Olive’s walnuts (Curshen’s mixed nuts would also be delicious), especially in combination with cranberries, which feel more Christmassy than her dates or Oliver’s sultanas. Almost any dried fruit could be substituted, though I might draw the line at anything too tropical. And, for no other reason than I love greens, and that they look great in Olive’s wellington, I’ve included a layer of spinach, sauteed to stop it steaming in situ and making the pastry go soggy. If you’d like to use chard instead, or even finely chopped kale, you’ll need to cook it for a little longer. Because I want this wellington to work with as many sides as possible, I’ve confined myself to the citrussy flavour of thyme, rather than adding lots of herbs and spices. I will, however, like clever vegetarian sausage Curshen, be stirring in a little Marmite to enhance the savoury flavour of the mushrooms. If you eat dairy, you might like to substitute some crumbled stilton (most are vegetarian, but do check) as in the Olive recipe. The pancake The beef in the classic wellington is sometimes wrapped in a crepe intended to absorb its juices and so stop the pastry going soggy. Monroe makes vivid green spinach pancakes for her version, explaining that it “acts as a barrier between the vegetables and the pastry, keeping the former tender and the latter perfectly crisp”, but much of the water should have already been evaporated from the pre-cooked mushrooms, spinach and squash, so I don’t think this layer is necessary. I have, however, added breadcrumbs to the mushroom mixture, not to soak up any remaining moisture, but because they give Glover, Curshen and Oliver’s wellingtons a slightly stuffing-like quality that will more than make up for not being able to eat any of the sausagemeat stuff that may also be on the table. The pastry You can, of course, make your own pastry, but the bought kind is much quicker, easier to work with, and also comes in vegan form. If animal products are a concern, replace the egg wash with Monroe’s plant-milk glaze, and add a drop of soy sauce if you’d like a really golden finish. Perfect vegetarian wellington Prep 45 min Cook 1 hr 25 min Serves 6 1 butternut squash – one with a long neck, because that’s the bit you use here; save the rest for soup or curry 2 tbsp melted butter, or oil 1 tbsp Marmite, or soy sauce 500g puff pastry 1 egg beaten with a little water, or 3 tbsp plant milk For the mushroom layer 4 banana shallots, peeled and finely chopped 1 tbsp butter, or oil 250g chestnut mushrooms, finely chopped Salt and black pepper 2 thyme sprigs, leaves picked 100g shelled walnuts, roughly chopped 40g cranberries 50g fresh breadcrumbs For the spinach layer 250g spinach, trimmed and roughly chopped if it’s the mature leaf sort 1 tbsp butter, or oil 2 plump garlic cloves, peeled and crushed Heat the oven to 200C (180C fan)/390F/gas 6. Cut the squash at the point where the neck broadens out, and trim the stalk off the top. Peel the neck, then cut it in half lengthways (save the rest of the squash for something else). Warm the butter or oil, then whisk in the Marmite (or soy sauce) until well combined. Put the squash on a baking tray, brush all over with the glaze (save the excess for later), then roast for about 35-40 minutes, until tender. Remove and leave to cool. While the squash is roasting, for the mushroom layer melt the butter or oil in a frying pan over a medium heat, then saute the shallots, stirring, until softened. Add the mushrooms, season and cook, stirring regularly, for about 10 minutes, until soft and dry; add the thyme leaves towards the end of this time. Stir in the walnuts and cranberries, followed by the breadcrumbs and the reserved squash glaze, take off the heat and leave to cool. Bring a large pan of generously salted water to a boil, then drop in the spinach and blanch until just wilted (a few seconds for baby leaf, a little longer for mature leaf). Drain, run through with cold water, then squeeze out as much liquid as possible. Heat the butter or oil in a frying pan over a medium heat, then add the garlic and cook, stirring, until fragrant. Stir in the drained, blanched spinach, fry, stirring, until it stops steaming, then leave to cool. Put the pastry on a piece of greaseproof paper, roll out into a roughly 30cm x 40cm rectangle, then cut into two equal rectangles. Scoop most of the duxelles on to one half, leaving a 1cm border clear all around the edge, then arrange the spinach down the middle of the duxelles mix. Neatly lay the two pieces of squash on top of the spinach, then spoon a line of duxelles on top of the squash. Roll out the second piece of pastry a little wider than the first, paint the edges with egg wash or milk, then lay it on top of the squash and press down on to the bottom piece of pastry to seal. Transfer the wellington to a lightly greased baking tray (at this point, you can chill the wellington for up to 24 hours, if you like). Heat the oven again to 200C (180C fan)/390F/gas 6. Brush the wellington all over with egg wash or plant milk, then bake for 40-50 minutes, until golden brown. Leave to cool slightly before slicing and serving with all the usual Christmas trimmings. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from Ocado • If you’re an old hand at the vegetarian wellington game, what’s your favourite recipe or filling? And what other plant-based main courses do you like to serve at this time of year? • This article was amended on 15 December 2021. An earlier version incorrectly described egg wash as a dairy product.It was the achievement he had been working towards since childhood, years of graft and practice distilled into less than a minute in a Tokyo arena. So what does Ben Maher recall about the foot-perfect round that earned him the individual jumping gold at the Olympics in August? “I don’t really remember anything,” he says, which seems a shame, as his 37.85sec aboard Explosion W was flawless from start to finish. But perhaps it had to be that way. The kid whose enthusiasm for show jumping was fired by a visit to the London International Horse Show decades earlier was still in there somewhere, but his 38-year-old brain flipped to short-term memory only, keeping him in the zone as the fractions ticked away. “Everything happened really fast,” he says, “much faster than I was expecting. I won the individual qualifier on the first day so I should have been last in the [six-person] jump-off, which I guess would be like pole position. “It wasn’t possible to see what was happening in the arena from the final warmup ring so I didn’t even know how fast everybody went or who had jumped clear. I just had to take every risk and every chance and that’s what I did. Sometimes it’s a good thing when you don’t watch the others.” Maher shaved less than 0.2sec off the leader’s time and then watched as two rivals failed to better him. “London [where he won team gold] was an incredible atmosphere, we’ll never get anything like that again,” he says, “while in Tokyo, there was nobody there and we weren’t allowed out, but as a personal moment Tokyo will be hard to top.” He will be back at the event where it all started for him this week, though not at the famous venue that has staged the London International Horse Show since 1972. While Olympia is being redeveloped, it is moving to ExCeL London in Newham, with the first of its five days on Thursday. “It’s just a great atmosphere,” he says. “If you love horses, if you don’t love horses … that’s what so unique about that horse show, you get all different people from all walks of life and that’s what our sport should be about. “There’s a lot of kids and younger, aspiring riders and that’s the only show I go to where you have to pull your hat down and run for it if you want to get somewhere quickly. “But it’s a nice feeling, I can remember being one of those kids once when we got tickets one night to watch a jumping class, so I try to give as much time to give something back, say hi to people and give autographs. And I try to take the whole team, even the ones behind the scenes who don’t normally travel.” Maher’s team is based at Elsenham Stud, a couple of miles from Stansted Airport on the border of Hertfordshire and Essex. It is the hub of an operation that sends horses thousands of miles to compete. As he spoke at a recent media day, one horsebox the size of an locomotive has just returned from Prague and another heading out of the gates for Scandinavia. It is a year-round business that ensured he had little time to dwell on his Olympic success or take a week or two to wind down in the spectacular surroundings of the former thoroughbred stud Maher has been developing and improving for about 15 years. “Occasionally you get a week at home, but it’s rare,” he says. “I fly back on a Sunday evening and typically fly again on a Wednesday. I’ve driven the truck in the past and I still can, but if do all those things now, I just don’t get anywhere. “Mentally, [the Olympic success] has changed me maybe. I’m a little more at ease and it was quite a long wait and buildup over the last couple of years. But physically, day-to-day, it doesn’t change anything. We still come home and have the puppies to look after and a house to clean.” The climax of the jumping in Tokyo, as six riders took on a demanding circuit against the clock, was a memorable end to the competition. The jumping in the modern pentathlon was memorable too, but for very different reasons, after a German coach was seen punching a horse after it refused a jump. As a result, it seems showjumping may be replaced by cycling in Paris in 2024, but Maher does not expect the wider discipline to suffer in the fallout. “I didn’t see it, but I heard about it,” he says. “Unfortunately, there are always some individuals that ruin it for everyone else. It’s a shame when traditional things in sport have to change like that, but we’re in a different era now and when they bring in horses [for the modern pentathlon], the riders have never seen the horse and a lot of the horses have never seen an environment like that. “With horses, there’s a relationship you have that you build over time. Our horses are trained and produced for the right time, they’ve been under lights and they’ve seen huge arenas. A lot of those horses are not and it’s not a great balance when you add all those elements in.” In the Horse Show’s glory years in the late 1970s and 80s, millions of BBC viewers would tune in after the Nine O’Clock News and Harvey Smith and David Broome were household names. “It’s tough nowadays,” Maher says. “A lot of sports are maybe pushed harder than the one we’re in. But it’s about accessibility. People called me this year and said they’d never watched showjumping before and couldn’t believe how fast the horses are over such big jumps. That’s what we need to put across.” The London International Horse Show, ExCeL, 16-20 December. Some tickets still available at /https://londonhorseshow.comThe fire and rescue service in Greater Manchester is “unprepared” to respond effectively to a terrorist attack and must do more to protect the public, a government inspectorate has said. The issue is particularly sensitive as the service has previously apologised for serious failures that meant it played “no meaningful role” in the aftermath of the Manchester Arena terror bombing in 2017. A report published on Wednesday by Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Constabulary and Fire &amp; Rescue Services (HMICFRS) says the service “requires improvement at effectively and efficiently keeping people safe and secure from fire and other risks”. It says three causes of concern raised in 2019 have been resolved. But it has identified “a new cause of concern regarding the service’s ability to respond to major incidents, such as a marauding terrorist attack”. Greater Manchester fire leaders have accepted the report but expressed unhappiness at “contradictions” in how it has been presented. They argue the inspectorate is presenting headlines which are “not an accurate reflection of its own findings”. The Fire Brigades Union (FBU) has argued the report shows that the Greater Manchester service is struggling from the effects of government austerity. Andy Cooke, the government inspector responsible for the report, said the Greater Manchester service was good at looking after its staff and responding to fires and other emergencies. “However, there are several areas where the service needs to improve its effectiveness in keeping people safe – including preventing fires and protecting the public through regulation of fire safety,” he said. “How the service responds to, and trains staff for, marauding terrorist attacks is a cause of concern.” In a letter to Greater Manchester’s chief fire officer, Dave Russel, Cooke says the service needs to have a terrorist attack response which is “resilient, timely and cost effective”. An action plan had been requested by 31 October but not yet received, Cooke writes. The service’s poor response to the arena bombing four years ago makes the subject particularly sensitive in the city. Firefighters have described being ordered by superiors to move away from the arena rather than go to it. They watched on television colleagues from the police and ambulance services at the scene while they were told to stay back. Russel said the “fair and detailed” report showed that the service was “an evolving and improving” emergency service. “But there is a contradiction between the contents of the report itself and how it has been presented to the public,” he said. “It has been stated that the inspectorate has identified concerns regarding ‘the service’s ability to respond to major incidents’. In fact, the report praises GMFRS as being ‘well prepared for major and multi-agency incidents’ and that these plans are ‘well understood by staff’.” Greater Manchester’s deputy mayor, Bev Hughes, said there was a disconnect between the report and how the inspectorate presented the report that did a “disservice” to both staff and the public. “The people of Greater Manchester should be reassured to know,” said Hughes, that the inspectorate finds the service, “‘has effective means of declaring a major incident, and of responding to such incidents’ – it is a shame the inspectorate appears to have disregarded this and similar findings in its own press release.” Ed Burrows, the FBU general secretary for the north-west, said Conservative austerity since 2010 had been a disaster for the Greater Manchester service. He said: “Between 2010 and 2019 more than £20m was removed from its budget, and since 2010 nearly one in three of Greater Manchester’s firefighters have been cut. That’s appalling. “Unsurprisingly, this is having a real impact when it comes to the service the community receives.”Time magazine has announced that Elon Musk will be their “2021 person of the year”, citing the billionaire Tesla boss’s influence “for good or ill” as a “clown, genius, edgelord, visionary, industrialist, showman”. The choice has been criticised for Musk’s attitude to tax, opposition to unions and playing down the dangers of Covid. With this in mind, we would like to hear about your own choices. Who would be your 2021 person of the year, and why? Share your choice You can get in touch by filling in the form below. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Announcing a “new era” for Germany last month, the country’s new chancellor, Olaf Scholz, made his bold intentions clear. “We are united by our belief in progress and that politics can achieve something good,” he said, launching his SPD-Green-FDP coalition’s programme, under the slogan “dare more progress”. This self-described “progress coalition” promises a series of socially liberal domestic policies – but it could make its greatest impact of all if it dares to join the global movement to make Covid-19 vaccines available to all as global public goods. The statement “no one is safe until everyone is safe” must be more than a nice-sounding slogan: Germany has the opportunity and the obligation to help it become a reality. Scholz is justifiably proud of the leadership role he has played in recent years on global fairness. As Germany’s finance minister, he was a key player in bringing about a consensus on a global minimum corporate tax rate this July. As the country’s new chancellor, he must take a second step in the interest of global fairness. So far, Germany has not been able to bring itself to do its part to ensure the availability of Covid-19 vaccines for everyone in the world. Doing so is imperative to global public health – but it is also in Germany’s self-interest. What is needed is for Germany to agree to a temporary exemption from the World Trade Organization’s intellectual property rules. These currently stifle the worldwide production of Covid-19 vaccines and antiviral treatments. If this barrier were removed, more vaccine doses could be produced in, and for, developing countries. That is exactly what the world needs, as the emergence of the Omicron variant is proving, all over again. So far the German government has been the main drag on agreeing to the patent waiver within the WTO. While major EU countries such as France, Italy and Spain support the exemption, the German government is actively lobbying other EU member states to reject granting the waiver. It is encouraging that Karl Lauterbach, an SPD politician and epidemiologist who has clearly spoken out in favour of the WTO waiver, has been appointed Germany’s health minister. But now Scholz needs to act. The facts speak for themselves: while about 56% of the world’s 7.9 billion people have received at least one dose of Covid-19 vaccine, the figure is 7.2% in low-income countries. Vaccination rates are particularly low in Africa. Even before the need for booster vaccines became apparent and before the vaccination of children was approved, the world needed between 11bn and 15bn doses by the end of 2021, far in excess of current production capacity. The gap between demand and supply may even increase in coming months. Imagine that the WTO waiver had been granted a year ago when it was first proposed: there would be fewer infected people, fewer hospital patients and fewer deaths today, especially in developing countries and emerging economies. That is why production facilities in the global south must be brought on stream as soon as possible. Otherwise, we have no realistic chance of winning the fight against the pandemic anytime soon. The WTO waiver is about more than just humanitarian concerns and global fairness. For Germany as a major exporter, as well as a country of world-travelling tourists, this is also a matter of self-interest. Every day we read headlines about how Covid has disrupted supply chains. This has a direct impact on the global economy. The underlying logic is clear: the fewer people worldwide who are vaccinated, the more room the virus has to mutate into dangerous variants. A change in the German government’s position would also send an important signal across the Atlantic. The Biden administration announced its support for the temporary waiver of intellectual property rights six months ago and called on other rich countries to do the same. As Scholz knows from the global fight for tax justice, working with the Biden administration can be a key building block for progress. The Omicron variant highlights with new urgency how public health and the global economy are at risk, as long as the disease rages. The question for all people is: “Am I doing everything I can to control this virus?” This is especially true for politicians who are entrusted with the welfare of the people they serve. Regrettably, the answer to this question so far is no for both Joe Biden and Olaf Scholz. This also applies to France’s president, Emmanuel Macron, who, just like Biden, expressed his support for a WTO waiver in mid-2021, but has not yet acted on it. He should use France’s EU presidency in the first half of 2022 to ensure EU-wide support for the waiver. Only when they all agree to the WTO waiver will they have done what is necessary. But there will still be more to do, including incentivising the transfer of technology. Only then can vaccine production be adequately ramped up around the world. And only then will we really be able to effectively counter the spread of the virus. Joseph E Stiglitz is a Nobel laureate in economics and a professor at Columbia UniversityMore than 7m tonnes of raw sewage are being discharged into Northern Ireland’s seas and rivers each year, it has been revealed, and every recorded waterway in the country has been found to be in poor health. Upwards of 3m tonnes of untreated human waste was found to have been released across the Belfast metropolitan area, in which more than a third of Northern Ireland’s population resides. About 200,000 tonnes of sewage are discharged each year in the catchment area for Lough Neagh, where 40% of Northern Ireland’s drinking water is sourced, and about 250,000 tonnes a year is dumped close to the shores of Lough Erne in Fermanagh, near the Irish land border. The figures are averages based on 20 years of rainfall data. They were released by the infrastructure minister, Nichola Mallon, in response to a question tabled in the assembly by Rachel Woods, the chair of Stormont’s all-party group on climate action. Woods said: “Northern Ireland is already the 12th worst region in the world for biodiversity loss. These pollution figures indicate that this situation is likely to further decline. With about 100 locations in Northern Ireland’s sewage network currently beyond capacity, our sewage infrastructure requires investment of at least £2bn over the next six years to make it sustainable and fit for purpose. But funding announced by the infrastructure minister this year will start to address the capacity at just 40 sites.” A spokesperson for the state-owned company NI Water said: “These overflows are required to reduce the risk of sewage escaping from sewers and causing the flooding of homes, schools and businesses with sewage during periods of heavy rainfall. It is a regulatory requirement that overflows are designed to operate in heavy rainfall conditions; at this time, wastewater in sewer networks is significantly diluted with stormwater, protecting public health by preventing out-of-sewer flooding in properties.” A separate report on Northern Ireland’s overall water quality has determined that none of its waterways could be considered in good health under the water framework directive, European legislation designed to improve water quality. The report documents a considerable decline in the condition of 450 rivers, 21 lakes, and 25 “transitional and coastal water bodies”. A third of Northern Ireland’s rivers achieved “good” status in 2015 and 2018. The 2021 report does not specify the source of the pollutants identified. But environmental campaigners and heads of Northern Ireland’s rivers trusts have linked the findings to sewage spills and slurry runoff from intensive agriculture. Dr John Spence, the secretary of the Erne Rivers Trust, said water management had been neglected by consecutive devolved governments, and its implications for the Republic of Ireland required a cross-frontier strategy. “The recently released figures on the sewage discharges highlight the magnitude and severity of the problem,” he said. “There are no easy, readymade solutions to this situation. It results from cumulative neglect by successive administrations of funding the necessary infrastructure for modern sewage treatment, and also prevalent ‘see nothing, hear nothing, do nothing’ attitudes in the assembly.” The failure to address water quality improvement goals may incur significant economic costs. County Antrim’s north coast, Northern Ireland’s second most popular visitor destination, recorded around 1.3m tonnes of sewage spillages a year. Last year NI Water echoed business and construction groups’ concerns when it reported that “chronic underfunding” in Northern Ireland’s wastewater infrastructure was holding back development in 116 towns and cities. The agency is the only body responsible for running and maintaining Northern Ireland’s water and sewerage infrastructure, and its funding comes from the Department for Infrastructure. A spokesperson for the Department for Infrastructure said: “This financial year the minister allocated a combined capital and resource budget of some £350m to NI Water for 2021/22. NI Water will need to continue to be fully funded in future years to improve the water and wastewater infrastructure and ultimately reduce the frequency and volume of spills from combined sewer overflows.” The devolved Department of Agriculture, Environment and Rural Affairs has been contacted for comment.Can you really fall in love with a stranger you meet on a television dating show? Perhaps you have a better chance than you would in boring real life – if you can suspend your disbelief and give in to the tricks the producers play to make the right emotions flow. The Future Diary, a new Japanese reality series, leans fully into that collective delusion, giving two young people instructions on exactly how they’re going to win each other’s hearts. The stunts it uses are so contrived they ought never to work, on the participants or on us at home, but goddamit if artificial TV romance cannot sometimes be effective. College student Maai Nakasone is 19 years old and lives in Naha City, Okinawa; Takuto Wakamatsu, 24, is a trainee chef from Otaru, Hokkaido. They go on a series of unusual dates, made even more intense by written messages handed to them by the show’s producers, each grandly presented in the form of a leather-bound, hardback “diary”. These can be rules (the pair cannot exchange phone numbers, or meet outside the filming process) or exciting prophecies (“you kiss in a field of sunflowers at full bloom”), and, on occasion, one is given a message that hasn’t been seen by the other: Nakasone, for example, receives an order that, should she develop feelings for Wakamatsu, she must not express them and must wait for him to go first. The pair are brought up to speed by an introductory video, screened in a cinema in Yokohama. When the lights go back up, the scores of extras who were seated around them have magically disappeared, leaving the two potential lovers alone. The surprise means pulses are already raised as they conduct their first proper meeting over iced tea and coffee in a cafe, discussing how many siblings they have and how their locales of Okinawa and Hokkaido are so far apart. The chat is halting and basic but the scene is all about those little gestures and expressions that say: something could happen here. As it goes on, The Future Diary mixes tiny, tender moments with elaborate set-ups, designed to foster a whimsically old-fashioned view of love in which Wakamatsu is a strong, humble protector and Nakasone a pure companion waiting to be impressed. They board a cruise ship but, oh no! A manager emerges to say the chef is indisposed. Could Wakamatsu recreate his day job by preparing seared fillet of beef and a legumes garnish for 12 diners, with Nakasone as his sous-chef? He steps up, even though he never has the responsibility of overseeing a full service at work. Then they go on a road trip in a Volkswagen Beetle, but what’s this? The car has broken down and Wakamatsu must push it, sweatily but heroically, to their destination? Well, OK then, muscly chivalry it is. Yes, all this is absurd, which the show acknowledges by cutting sporadically to a studio – done up like a library, for some reason – where four Japanese celebs, including the singer Daigo Naitō and the TV Tokyo announcer Reina Sumi, react to what has been seen so far. They are fully into it but do point out that the underlying concept – when the show is over, the couple are supposedly not going to be put in contact and will thus never see each other again – is “cruel”. No time to fret about that, though, because we are now too busy watching a simply lovely scene where Nakasone and Wakamatsu walk down a street in Otaru, with her harbouring a secret task to hold hands with him when the moment is right. When she finally gathers the courage and links fingers outside a branch of KFC, the look of bashful exhilaration on her face is irresistible. You do wonder whether The Future Diary would work at all with different participants: switch her for a woman even slightly less open-hearted, or him for a man with only a smidge of cynicism or selfishness, and the whole sugary edifice could crack. Like stage hypnosis or indeed any structured reality programme, The Future Diary works if you want it to work. The spell is not even broken by the somewhat nonsensical cliffhanger at the end of the three episodes used to launch the show, before it goes weekly: there’s an implication that their dates might not continue, but we know they will because we’ve seen flashforwards to scenes that haven’t appeared yet. We can, it seems, look forward to a kiss and plenty of splashy tears. They all look real enough.For the past 10 years Seattle-based tech company Analogue has been making high-end retro video game hardware, with a steely focus on accurate, authentic reproduction rather than emulation. Its Mega Sg and Super Nt consoles were highly acclaimed modernisations of the Sega Mega Drive and Super Nintendo, allowing users to play all their old 16-bit game carts on modern machines with a variety of display and audio options. Now the company has finally launched its Analogue Pocket, a handheld console that will play Game Boy, Game Boy Color and Game Boy Advance (GBA) cartridges on a beautiful 3.5in LCD display in crisp 1600×1440 resolution. As with the other consoles in its range, there’s no software emulation of the old systems going on here. The company uses a field-programmable gate array (FPGA) circuit to replicate the original tech specs, which means it can pretty much run any Game Boy game from the thousands available, with few of the glitches, instabilities or compatibility problems often associated with software-based emulators. The first game we try is the lovely original platformer Tiny Toon Adventures: Babs’ Big Break, and the game’s intricate cartoon-style visuals are sparklingly clear and precise on the new screen. The comprehensive settings menu allows you to select from a range of classic or enhanced display and audio options, so if you want to play, say, Super Mario Land in the original green hue of the Game Boy, you can – or it can be rezzed up for the larger clearer Analogue Pocket screen. Switching to a GBA game, in this case Mario Kart: Super Circuit, the performance is equally good, with the tiny, colourful sprites perfectly replicated and no screen blur. The form factor resembles the old Game Boy, with its vertical design – screen at the top, D-pad and button array below. The GBA shoulder buttons are placed either side of the cartridge port on the rear, and they’re smaller and closer together than the originals so if you have big hands you might well have to claw up a little, which could lead to some wrist pain after a few hours of play. It’s reasonably heavy at 275g, but still extremely portable, and carts slide into the back very easily, with a pleasingly firm feel. There is also a headphone socket and an optional dock (sold separately) if you want to output to a TV. You can also buy adaptors to let you play Game Gear, Neo Geo Pocket, Neo Geo Pocket Color and Atari Lynx games, giving you access to even more of your retro collection. As for saving your progress (a modern luxury we’ve become extremely reliant on), the console currently lets you save a single game, and I found the function slightly unreliable. However, the console comes with its own operating system – Analogue OS – which will allow the company to provide a range of updates, including full save game functionality. Alongside this, Analogue has also included two widely available apps: GB Studio, a simple drag-and-drop game creation package, and Nanoloop, a digital synthesiser. We could end up seeing a whole homebrew developer community spring up around this machine. The gaming equivalent of buying a fancy new turntable to play your old records Away from the neat extras, the Analogue Pocket is intended for people who have decent cart collections, or are intending to go on a major splurge on eBay or at their local CEX. This is not an emulator console like the RG350, and it won’t give you access to hundreds of free game ROMs (at least not yet – there’s always the chance of a fan-made update later on). Instead, it’s the gaming equivalent of buying a fancy new turntable to play your old records: you get an authentic experience but with all the benefits of fresh digital technology. I still own a fair number of GBA and Game Boy games, as well as a few Game Gear titles, and rediscovering them on this system is proving a joy – not least because of the six to 10-hour battery life. Buying a system that’s built to get the most out of original carts also encourages you to value, explore and enjoy each game in full, rather than swapping between them like songs on a Spotify playlist. There is so much fun and challenge to be found in games such as Castlevania: Aria of Sorrow, Legend of Zelda: Oracle of Seasons and The Sword of Hope. They still deserve your time and attention – and Analogue Pocket provides the perfect venue. The Analogue Pocket is available for pre-order now; $219.99It has been purchased more than 200m times and after 10 years it’s still one of the most played video games in the world – now the block building sim Minecraft has passed another milestone: YouTube videos of the game have passed one trillion views, making it the most watched game on the platform. Originally released in 2009, Minecraft has always been popular on the video sharing site, thanks to its open and highly creative nature. Players can build whatever they like in the blocky landscape, and talented modellers have flooded YouTube to show off their most impressive creations, from scale models of Hogwarts and the Starship Enterprise to working computers. The game also proved immensely popular with the first generation of superstar YouTube influencers – the likes of Stampy Cat, DanTDM and PewDiePie built vast audiences through playing Minecraft and creating their own narratives, events and challenges via the game’s open design. According to Microsoft, there are are now more than 35,000 active Minecraft creator channels on YouTube, based in 150 different countries. To celebrate the one trillion milestone, YouTube has released an animated video featuring moments from the history of Minecraft on the platform, and is also changing the logo on the YouTube homepage for 24 hours. There will also be curated playlists featuring Minecraft creators and videos from around the world. Minecraft was originally developed by a small team in Stockholm, led by coder Markus Persson. That team became the development studio Mojang, which released an early version of the game in 2009, before a full launch two years later. Persson left the company in 2014, when it was bought by Microsoft for $2.5bn (£1.9bn). Mojang has been updating Minecraft ever since, adding new characters, stories and building blocks to the world and updating its characteristic visual design. Meanwhile, the Xbox Minecraft Marketplace allows users to sell the items, models and mini-games they have created to other users, giving the world its own functioning economy. With new add-ons arriving annually, a vast merchandising operation, a long-awaited movie in the making and growing interest in the concept of shared online worlds – or metaverses – it’s unlikely this is the last viewing milestone Minecraft fans will construct.After three months of eruptions, earthquakes and evacuations, scientists are cautiously optimistic that the Cumbre Vieja volcano on the Canary island of La Palma may be quietening down. The eruption, which began on 19 September, has destroyed almost 3,000 buildings, forced thousands of people from their homes and devastated the banana plantations on which many in La Palma depend for their livelihoods. Experts believe the lack of seismic activity since Monday evening – the longest such period since the eruption began – could herald its end. “We can see now that the seismicity is very weak, the deformation is zero, the tremor is zero,” said Rubén López, a volcanologist with the Spanish geographical institute. “Now, with these parameters, we can see the volcano had stopped, and maybe we could start to see the end of the La Palma volcanic eruption.” The Canary Islands government said volcanic activity had fallen to “almost nothing”, while the archipelago’s Volcanology Institute, Involcan, said emissions of sulphur dioxide – which had forced a lockdown of a third of the island’s population before the volcano went silent – had been “extremely low” on Tuesday. But experts are taking nothing got granted. “We cannot be 100% sure, as the volcano has been playing a few tricks over the last weeks,” Valentin Troll, a geology expert with Sweden’s Uppsala University and co-author of a geology study of the Canary Islands, told the Associated Press. “But many parameters have now subsided, and I think the volcano is indeed in decline now,” he said. The eruption, which sent rivers of molten lava down the slopes of Cumbre Vieja for weeks and expanded the size of the island by more than 48 hectares (119 acres), is the longest on La Palma, according to records dating back to the 16th century. No injuries or deaths have been directly linked to the eruption on the island, where about 80,000 people live. But many have lost their homes and the economic and environmental impact has been huge, with fields of solid black lava swallowing banana plantations, destroying irrigation systems and extending across roads. The Spanish government has formally classified La Palma as a disaster zone and promised financial aid to help locals rebuild their lives. Reuters and the Associated Press contributed to this report.The UK supreme court has ruled that a Police Service of Northern Ireland (PSNI) decision in 2014 to discontinue an investigation into allegations that men were hooded and interrogated by the British army at the height of the Troubles was unlawful. The ruling, described as a “landmark victory” by the solicitor representing 14 men at the centre of the case, is the second legacy case this week to expose shortcomings in the application of the due process of law since the Troubles ended. The 14 hooded men were subjected to a series of controversial interrogation techniques when they were interned without trial by the British army in Northern Ireland in 1971. The techniques included hooding and being put in stress positions, forced to listen to white noise and deprived of sleep, food and water, techniques associated with torture. The PSNI took the case to the UK’s highest court having failed in Belfast’s court of appeal to overturn a high court ruling that found the police should revisit its 2014 decision to end its investigation into the treatment of the men. Delivering his judgment on Wednesday, Lord Hodge referred to a 2014 RTÉ documentary about the hooded men case that referred to a British government memorandum, known as the “Rees Memo”, which “referred to the use of torture and to its approval by UK ministers”. Following the broadcast, the PSNI considered whether there was sufficient evidence to warrant a new investigation, but concluded that there was not. Hodge said: “The court finds that the PSNI’s decision taken on 17 October 2014 not to investigate further the allegation in the Rees Memo was based on a seriously flawed report, was therefore irrational, and falls to be quashed.” The case will add to the mounting pressure within Northern Ireland on the UK government to abandon plans to introduce laws to end all prosecutions relating to shootings and other allegations of criminal activity by soldiers during the Troubles. Jonathan Roberts, a PSNI assistant chief constable, said the force welcomed “the clarity” the case had brought “to some complex legal issues”. He added: “We recognise the difficult realities that victims, families, friends and broader society continue to deal with as a result of our troubled past. “We will now take time to study today’s judgment around these complex legacy issues in detail and we will carefully consider its implications for future legacy investigations. “If we are to build a safe, confident and peaceful society, then we must find a way of dealing with our past and we are committed to playing our part in that process.” Darragh Mackin, representing most of the 14 men, said: “Today’s decision is a landmark victory for the hooded men. Since 2014 they have actively contested the decision by the PSNI not to investigate the allegations of torture. “It was always clear that the initial investigation by the PSNI was nothing more than a window-dressing exercise.” On Monday, the Ministry of Defence and PSNI agreed to a £1.5m out-of-court settlement to compensate victims of the so-called Miami showband massacre over suspected state collusion with loyalist terrorists. Three members of the band died after they were forced to get out of their bus at a fake checkpoint on their return to Dublin from Northern Ireland. Stephen Travers, who was injured in the attack, said claims that their case and those of other victims and their families were vexatious were “lies”. He said he was convinced he would have won his civil action to prove that there was collaboration between the state and terrorists but that the government’s decision to “dispense with justice rather than to dispense justice” had motivated the settlement.A Conservative MP pleaded with a fixer to help him secure a well-paid second job with a Saudi company or other work relating to the Middle East, at one point saying he needed money to pay school fees. Daniel Kawczynski’s repeated pleas for lucrative employment – revealed in a series of WhatsApp messages seen by the Guardian – show him citing his pro-Saudi stance in parliament as part of an attempt to get paid work from a businessman. The Tory MP for Shrewsbury and Atcham asked a fixer to find him work with a Saudi employer, describing himself as the most “pro-Saudi” member of parliament and boasting that the Saudi leader, Mohammed bin Salman, “has stated that Saudi has no better friend in UK than me”. In one message, Kawczynski said: “I am looking for a position with a company as non exec director or adviser/consultant. Obviously my passion for Anglo Arab relations [is] something which could help a company with relations in the UK or Middle East. Not sure what remuneration I am looking for but you are such a good negotiator!!! Best wishes Daniel.” In another, the Tory MP asked the fixer for paid work on a conference related to Saudi Arabia’s regional foe, Qatar: “Promise you will push for good remuneration too for me … I need it to pay school fees!” Kawczynski arranged to host one potential Saudi employer in parliament, offering him a tour of the House of Commons and a dinner in the MPs’ private dining room. He also arranged to meet the fixer in his parliamentary office to discuss a project. While no new employment appears to have materialised from the conversations, both incidents raise questions over whether Kawczynski breached rules that bar MPs from using the House of Commons for private work. A spokesperson for Kawczynski said he had “broken no rules with regards to second jobs, and most importantly he prioritises his work as MP for the constituency of Shrewsbury and Atcham”. Elsewhere in the messages, which were sent between September 2017 and June 2018, Kawczynski said he was disillusioned with politics in Westminster and would like one day to be UK ambassador to Riyadh rather than a backbench MP. The revelations are likely to reignite debates over sleaze and the rules that allow MPs to take second jobs, and they come as the Conservatives are fighting to retain their seat in Thursday’s North Shropshire byelection, which was triggered by the resignation of Owen Paterson. Kawczynski’s constituency is adjacent to the North Shropshire constituency held by Paterson before he was found to have lobbied for private companies. In the WhatsApp conversations, Kawczynski repeatedly asked the fixer to secure him regular paid work with their Middle East contacts: “Please do your best … I need an important strategic position which will allow me to spend time in Gulf ideally helping and advising an important company.” In another exchange he said: “Ideally I am looking for a consultancy in monthly basis as I need the stability of regular income.” In one exchange, which took place late at night, the fixer raised the prospect of arranging paid work for Kawczynski with the Saudi businessman Yasser bin Homran: “He has money and is from a very prominent family in Saudi. He wants to engage in politics.” Kawczynski replied within minutes: “He wants to engage in British politics?? What time are you free in morning to discuss please?” When Bin Homran was in London, Kawczynski made himself available at short notice and booked a table for dinner with him in the MPs’ private dining room in the House of Commons, saying he would take the Saudi businessman on a tour of parliament and “into the chamber to watch debate”. Later, when the possibility of a paid consultancy appeared to be receding, the Tory MP asked the fixer to emphasise how committed he had been to promoting the interests of the Saudis in parliament. “Do they understand how genuinely pro Saudi I am??? No one in Commons has promoted Saudi more during last 12 years as genuinely pro Saudi.” Kawczynski later chased the fixer to find out whether Bin Homran would offer any work, but it appears that no employment transpired. Contacted by the Guardian, Kawczynski declined to comment on the dinner meeting. The fixer, who was also present at the dinner, said that “no money or business” was discussed. Bin Homran did not respond to requests for comment. ‘I need it to pay school fees!’ At the time, the fixer was working freelance for Khalid al-Hail, an exiled Qatari businessman who was hosting prominent conferences in London about his native country. Kawczynski declared a £15,000 fee for speaking at and helping the fixer to organise one of Al-Hail’s conferences on the Qatar crisis in September 2017. When Kawczynski heard that Al-Hail was organising a follow-up conference about the Qatar World Cup the following year, the Conservative MP again offered his services in return for “good remuneration”. “When do you think you could let me know about proposed role for me? Promise you will push for good remuneration too for me … I need it to pay school fees!”, the Conservative MP told the fixer in one message. Al-Hail told the Guardian he had no knowledge of messages between his fixer and Kawczynski. It was around this time that Kawczynski invited the fixer to a meeting in parliament to discuss the “next project”. As they firmed up a time to meet, the MP added: “Perhaps you could come to Commons?? We could have coffee together in my office in Commons or can meet you somewhere else if not convenient for you!” Kawczynski did not respond to a request for comment about whether the meeting in his parliamentary office breached the rules. Lawyers for the fixer confirmed the meeting took place in the Houses of Parliament, but suggested it was not a business gathering but a “general meeting to get to know more about each other”. In the end, Kawczynski does not appear to have succeeded in securing further paid work from either the fixer or their Saudi contacts. However, around this time he did find another lucrative source of work to supplement his income as an MP. From February 2018, he declared a consultancy earning £6,000 a month for a mining and precious metals investment company named Electrum Group. In July 2021, he reduced his hours and fees for the group to £3,000 a month. He has received more than £250,000 from the company to date. The Electrum Group is owned by the US billionaire Thomas Kaplan. Kaplan has spoken of his exceptional closeness to the Saudi and UAE royal families and shares a pro-Saudi position with Kawczynski. Electrum’s major investors have included the sovereign wealth funds of UAE, Kuwait and Saudi Arabia. Electrum and Kawczynski, who was born in Poland and came to the UK as a child, both said his consultancy was completely unrelated to any Middle Eastern interests and was solely for the MP’s advice on the Polish regulatory system. Additional reporting by Ben QuinnThe family of the Indian billionaire and self-proclaimed “prince of vaccines” Adar Poonawalla are donating £50m to Oxford University for the construction of a new research centre that will house the team who developed the AstraZeneca-Oxford Covid-19 vaccine. The Poonawalla family, who own and run the world’s largest vaccine producer, Serum Institute of India (SII), announced on Wednesday that they had agreed to give the university the sum to build a new home for the Jenner Institute. The new centre on the university’s Old Road campus will be named the Poonawalla Vaccines Research building. It will house the headquarters and main laboratory space of the Jenner Institute, the world-leading centre that created the Oxford Covid-19 vaccine developed by AstraZeneca and produced by SII and others. Oxford said the donation would allow the institute, which is named after the 18th-century physician and smallpox vaccine pioneer Edward Jenner, to double its research staff to 300 and develop more inoculations including a forthcoming malaria shot. Prof Adrian Hill, the director of the Jenner Institute, said: “The striking success of the collaborative programmes on both the malaria and Covid-19 vaccines between the Serum Institute of India and Oxford University has highlighted the great potential of partnerships between leading universities and large-scale manufacturers to develop and supply vaccines for very cost-effective deployment at exceptional scale. “We look forward to a wider range of vaccine activities in the future building on this generous support from the Poonawalla family.” The donation will be made through SII’s London subsidiary Serum Life Sciences, which is chaired by Adar Poonawalla’s wife, Natasha. “Vaccines save lives, and the development of vaccines has been the lifelong focus of the Poonawalla family,” she said. “We are committed to developing and supplying vaccines to people who need them most. To make this happen, we build many scientific collaborations with the world’s leading research institutes but today, we are making this keystone donation to give the world-class team at Oxford a brand new facility from which to take their research to the next level.” Vaccines have made the Poonawallas extraordinarily wealthy. They are the sixth richest family in India, with an estimated $15bn (£11bn) fortune, according to the Times of India. SII is the world’s largest vaccine producer, and even before coronavirus struck it was making more than 1.5bn jabs a year for everything from polio and diphtheria to tetanus, BCG, hepatitis B and the MMR (measles, mumps and rubella) vaccinations. Producing vaccines was not Adar Poonawalla’s idea. His father, Cyrus, founded SII in 1966 as a sideline to his 81-hectare (200-acre) thoroughbred racehorse stables Poonawalla Stud. Serum from purified horse blood was used in the production of early vaccines for diphtheria, tetanus, and scarlet fever. But it was Adar who convinced his father to “go big” on vaccines after he watched a Bill Gates talk in 2015, in which the billionaire Microsoft co-founder-turned philanthropist warned that the world was not prepared for a new viral pandemic. “I wanted to be prepared for a pandemic-level event ever since I heard Bill Gates in a Ted talk where he clearly said that we should be more worried and prepared for such situations,” Poonawalla told the Hindustan Times. The “vaccine prince” title stuck when Poonawalla was appointed chief executive of SII in 2011, replacing his “vaccine king” father, who is now chair of the wider Poonawalla Group, which includes SII. “Nobody wishes for a pandemic, but we were almost designed for one,” he told the Guardian earlier this year from his office inside a converted Airbus A320 jet, which he described as “kind of similar to Air Force One”. “We produce a 1.5bn vaccine doses each year. We never imagined the whole world being so dependent on us, but nobody else has our capacity to scale up,” he said. Among the family’s portfolio of properties is Lincoln House, a Mumbai mansion that is the former US embassy to India. At $113m it was the most expensive Indian home ever sold when they bought it in 2015. The family is also renting a Mayfair mansion for a record £50,000 a week. The property, which at 2,300 sq metres (25,000 sq ft) is 24 times the size of the average English home, comes with an adjoining guest house and backs on to one of Mayfair’s “secret gardens”. He is renting it from the Polish billionaire Dominika Kulczyk, who bought it for £57m last year. The Poonawallas also own paintings by Picasso, Dalí, Rembrandt and Rubens, and a collection of 35 rare luxury cars including several Ferraris, Bentleys and Rolls-Royces, as well as a Mercedes S350 converted into a replica Batmobile. The family follow a list of other billionaires who have donated to Oxford in recent months, including the Vietnamese airline tycoon Nguyen Thi Phuong Thao who donated £155m to Linacre College last month; Jim Ratcliffe’s petrochemicals company Ineos gave £100m in January for a new antibiotics research institute; and the steel magnate Lakshmi Mittal and his family gave £3.5m last year for the right to rename Hill’s position at the university as the “Lakshmi Mittal and family professorship of vaccinology”.Keir Starmer has said Boris Johnson is “too weak” to lead the UK through the health crisis caused by Omicron, and the government’s reliance on Labour votes to pass new Covid measures showed the PM had lost authority with his own MPs. In a final prime minister’s questions before Christmas, the Labour leader pointed to the rebellion by 99 Conservative MPs on Tuesday evening over Covid certificates, which meant that without opposition support the government would have been defeated in the Commons vote. Labour “stood up and showed the leadership the prime minister can’t”, Starmer told a noisy Commons. “The prime minister is so weak that without Labour help last night, vital public health measures wouldn’t have got through. “We can’t go on with a prime minister who’s too weak to lead. So will the prime minister take time this Christmas to look in the mirror and ask himself whether he has the trust and authority to lead this country?” Starmer said that while he disagreed with the Tory rebels, he understood their doubts about heeding Johnson’s call for tougher Covid rules given multiple reports about lockdown-breaking parties in Downing Street last winter. “For weeks now he claimed that no rules were broken,” Starmer said. “He claims he didn’t know what was happening in his own house at Christmas. I don’t believe it. His MPs don’t believe it, and nor do the British public. He’s taking the public for fools and it’s becoming dangerous. “The message from the government has to be: we know that following the rules won’t be easy this Christmas, but it is necessary. Can the prime minister not see that he has no hope of regaining the moral authority to deliver that difficult message if he cannot be straight with the British public about the rule-breaking in Downing Street last Christmas?” Johnson responded by calling the allegations about illicit parties “partisan trivia” that were of no interest to the public. He said he had repeatedly answered questions on the allegations, and that the cabinet secretary, Simon Case, was carrying out an investigation. Starmer tried several times to get Johnson to criticise the opposition to new Covid measures from so many Tory MPs, asking: “Given the seriousness of the situation, does the prime minister agree that the Conservative members who voted against plan B last night voted against steps which are necessary to protect the NHS and to protect lives?” Johnson declined to offer any condemnation, saying only that he understood the rebels’ worries, and talking up the government’s record in areas such as Covid vaccinations. But Starmer said Johnson was unable to lead. “The British public are looking for a prime minister with the trust and the authority to lead Britain through the crisis. Instead we’re burdened with the worst possible prime minister at the worst possible time,” he said. “His own MPs have had enough. They won’t defend him. They won’t turn up to support him.”Amazon’s charitable program is paying tens of thousands of dollars to anti-vaccine groups in a move experts say is “shocking” as millions of Americans remain unvaccinated in the face of another Covid-19 wave. AmazonSmile reportedly donated more than $40,000 to leading sources of vaccine misinformation in 2020, according to separate analyses by Popular Information and the Washington Post. “That’s really shocking,” said Peter Hotez, dean for the National School of Tropical Medicine at Baylor College of Medicine. “That’s incredible that Amazon is supporting those groups.” The charity program of the e-commerce giant donates 0.5% from purchases to designated nonprofits – including at least a dozen organizations working against widespread vaccination in the US. Last year, Amazon donated more than $60m to nonprofits. The portion of anti-vaccine funding is small compared to the full amount, but it may be significant to the fundraising efforts of groups with relatively small budgets. The donations come after ongoing criticism of the retailer’s role in health misinformation, and it raises questions about the roles of technology companies in combating misinformation and countering potential public harms. The donations legitimize anti-vaccine groups, Hotez said. “Beyond the money, it has a lot of power because a powerful organization like Amazon is essentially endorsing them.” The National Vaccine Information Center has received $41,533.71 over the course of several years, according to an anonymous volunteer. Last year, Amazon gave them $12,675, the Post reports – one of a dozen groups to receive such funding. Children’s Health Defense, headed by Robert F Kennedy Jr, received $10,969; Physicians for Informed Consent received $3,626; and Informed Consent Action Network received $2,970.41. More than 1m nonprofits are registered in the program, and organizations supported by AmazonSmile must not “engage in, support, encourage, or promote … illegal, deceptive, or misleading activities,” according to the participation agreement. Nonprofits may participate if they are registered 501(c)(3) organizations. Hate groups and terrorism groups are banned from the program. But in the past, AmazonSmile also reportedly funded anti-LGBTQ groups. In 2019, the Guardian reported on Amazon’s anti-vaccine donations, as well as its “influencer” program allowing those with significant followings – including leading anti-vaccine proponents – to earn commissions on products they recommend. Amazon has remained a home to prominent anti-vaxxers and conspiracy theorists after other platforms banned them, reports show. An Amazon spokesperson said: “We respect that our customers want access to a wide variety of viewpoints on the matter, which is why we continue to list the books in question and include these charities in the list of organizations customers can choose from as part of AmazonSmile.” The spokesperson added: “Organizations that engage in, support, encourage, or promote intolerance, hate, terrorism, violence, money laundering, or other illegal activities are not eligible.” Google, Facebook, YouTube, and Twitter have come under fire for the online spread of misinformation and disinformation, but retailers – including Amazon, the largest retailer in the world – have largely been spared scrutiny around spreading misinformation. “Everybody focuses on social media companies. I lay equal blame at e-commerce companies, especially Amazon,” Hotez said. A search for “vaccine” on Amazon.com shows anti-vaccine books are the third and sixth results, with others following. In a search for “Covid”, a conspiracy theory book is the second result. Many of the books are sold by Amazon itself, not third parties. “Amazon right now is the single largest purveyor of anti-vaccine books,” Hotez said. Amazon is also a commerce platform for anti-vax T-shirts, herbal supplements, and other products. Over the summer, customers posted reviews of ivermectin as a potential treatment for Covid, despite warnings from public health agencies that the deworming medication is not effective against the respiratory virus. And the company doesn’t just host the items, researchers recently found. Its algorithms actively promote anti-vaccine resources and goods, potentially pulling customers deeper into health misinformation and conspiracy theories. Two University of Washington researchers – Prerna Juneja, a doctoral student, and Tanu Mitra, an assistant professor – found Amazon ranks misinformation above quality information, according to their report about misinformation on e-commerce platforms. “Amazon is also ranking these anti-vaccine products higher in the search results as compared to the products that debunk vaccine misinformation,” Juneja said. YouTube, on the other hand, will recommend a debunking video after someone watches a video with misinformation, Juneja said. “I don’t see Amazon doing anything like that.” “The most shocking thing is, you only need to perform one action on these anti-vaccine products. You click on it, you add it to your cart, and then Amazon will actually start pushing you more related stuff,” Juneja said. And authors, including those who write anti-vaccine books, can pay to have their books “sponsored,” or placed higher in search results, she said. “Once users start engaging with the misinformation of these anti-vaccine products on the platform, they will be presented with more misinformative stuff at every point of their Amazon journey.” The spread of misinformation has dire public health costs, Mitra said. “There are certain sections of the population which haven’t even received one dose of vaccine. Because this thing actually impacts public health, all these platforms have an ethical responsibility to take some strong steps against this vaccine misinformation.” Hotez agreed. “Not only are they profiting enormously on the anti-vaccine empire, but in addition, now they’re going out of their way … to endorse anti-vaccine groups,” Hotez said. “Let’s remember the consequences here: 150,000 unvaccinated Americans have needlessly lost their lives to Covid because they refused Covid vaccines.”Britain’s abysmal level of statutory sick pay is a killer. If you are even eligible – and all too many low-paid, insecure and zero-hour contract workers are not – then you can expect to receive a derisory £96.35 a week, lower than almost every other western nation. With in-work poverty at a record high, the country’s low-paid workers (who are less likely to work remotely) face an impossible choice: they can ignore a sniffle and a temperature, or risk a test that could lead them to isolate and forgo their full wages. And so Covid rips through our workplaces, transport systems and the wider community. The result is more illness – damaging the economy and further overloading an overwhelmed NHS – and, most seriously of all, more death. The government’s incompetent handling of the pandemic serves to furnish the case for a Labour government, but we cannot wait until the next election for Keir Starmer to act. Boris Johnson’s 80-strong majority, which had previously allowed him to pass legislation unopposed, has now been weakened by the rebels in his own party. The prime minister is now reliant on the votes of Labour MPs, and with Starmer’s position strengthened the Labour leader can use his whipping operation to push the government for concessions, such as a hike in statutory sick pay. Protecting the health of the public is not the same as “playing politics”. In his national televised address, Starmer need not have departed from a statesmanlike tone by declaring that Johnson’s measures do not go far enough to protect the public. After all, leaked analysis from the government’s Covid-19 taskforce suggested that vaccine passports may reduce overall community transmission by just 1-5%. We clapped our key workers from our doorsteps, Starmer could have added, but their health remains imperilled, and that threatens the health of the wider community, too. A weak Conservative government was unable to take decisive measures to protect the safety of its own people – and so it must fall to Labour to offer the leadership that was desperately missing, could have been his compelling concluding remarks. Other measures to save lives and livelihoods could have been demanded, too, ahead of last night’s vote. The lack of ventilation in schools and workplaces allows the virus to run rampant: Labour could have requested an emergency programme to rectify it. The International Monetary Fund this week announced that Britain may need to introduce some form of furlough if shutdowns are required: here Labour could at least have demanded a commitment, including to revive support for the self-employed. People need financial security to self-isolate, and there will be ruinous consequences for both living standards and the economy unless the Treasury flicks the life-support machine back on. This is not playing politics, it is doing politics. An opposition party that succeeds in using its leverage to extract concessions from a government to safeguard the wellbeing of the population has played a blinder. If the Tories refused such measures, they would have to explain why, for example, they do not believe statutory sick pay should be raised to the level of other wealthy nations to grant often critically important workers financial security to self-isolate and slow the remorseless march of Omicron. Labour could have rightly said the current package will not succeed and more radical solutions are needed to prevent renewed national calamity. It would help solve another problem, too: throughout the pandemic, both Labour and Tory focus groups report voters complaining that the opposition carps from the sidelines without explaining what it would do instead. By putting further policies in place, Starmer looks like a proactive leader, unlike his reactive counterpart. Here is an opportunity for Starmer to change the political narrative that has kept Labour out of power for decades. After the financial crash, Britain’s Tories swiftly rewrote history to claim Labour’s lavish spending had led the country to economic ruin, laying the political foundations to impose slash and burn cuts. A Labour message that economic insecurity is itself a petri dish for the virus could resonate precisely because it speaks to the facts. Unlike the Tory narrative, the fact that the party spent a decade taking a sledgehammer to the state, leaving Britain exposed to the pandemic, happens to be true. This could be a breakthrough moment for Labour. Johnson himself has lost the confidence of much of his parliamentary party, and his premiership is in a parlous state. Starmer is in a uniquely advantageous position to demand measures that would objectively save lives and prevent crippling hardship. The failure to do so, thus far, comes with a terrible price. Owen Jones is a Guardian columnistPunch Pubs has been bought by the private equity investor Fortress in a deal for almost 1,300 British pubs thought to be worth as much as £1bn. The company’s pub landlords employ about 20,000 people, although Punch employs only 280 people directly. Punch owns more than 90% of the freeholds of its properties, making it an attractive target for private equity owners. It is also focused on rural and suburban pubs, which have been less affected by absent commuters than city centre-focused chains. Fortress is backed by Japan’s SoftBank and also owns Majestic Wine, a British chain of off-licences that it bought in 2019. Its latest purchase comes after it lost out in a protracted battle to acquire Morrisons in the autumn, being narrowly outbid in an auction for the British supermarket chain by its US private equity rival Clayton, Dubilier &amp; Rice. Punch was first taken private in 2016 after accepting a £400m takeover offer from the beer conglomerate Heineken and the private equity firms Patron Capital and May Capital. Punch owned 3,000 pubs when it was delisted in 2017 but under the 2016 deal, Heineken walked away with 1,900 of them, paying Patron and May £305m. A £1bn sale would suggest its owners have enjoyed significant financial returns. Stephen Green, a senior partner at Patron Capital, said Punch “has been an extremely successful investment for our investors”, without giving details. Punch felt confident enough to buy 56 pubs from Young’s in July despite the struggles of the hospitality industry, which is now contending with slumping trade because of the Omicron coronavirus variant. Private equity firms have bought a long series of British companies during the pandemic, targeting bargains particularly among undervalued listed businesses. However, these new owners are generally under pressure to give their investor backers returns within about five years, meaning more and more deals include private equity buyers and sellers. Clive Chesser, who was installed as Punch’s chief executive by Patron in 2018, said the deal was “very positive news for everyone connected with Punch”. He said Fortress “fully buys into our strategic positioning and business plan” and it would “work alongside the existing management team to invest in the business with innovation and capital”. Cyril Courbage, a managing director at Fortress, said Punch had done an “exceptional job of navigating the challenges of the Covid crisis”. He added that the UK was “an extremely attractive investment environment”.The UK and US may have many things in common, but when it comes to vaccinating children against Covid, the approach has been markedly different. In May, the US Food and Drug Administration’s emergency use authorisation of the Pfizer/BioNTech jab was expanded from people aged 16 and older to those aged 12 to 15, with two doses recommended for all those eligible. In late October, the FDA went further, extending it to five- to 11-year-olds – although with lower doses than older age groups. Since then some experts, including the American Academy of Pediatrics, have pushed strongly for even younger children to be vaccinated. However, the UK has shown significantly less speed in expanding its Covid vaccination programmes to children despite a successful rollout among adults, with almost 70% of the population having had two jabs. The Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) approved the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine in June for children aged 12-15 and the Moderna jab for 12- to 17-year-olds in August. However, a first dose was only made available to 12- to 15-year-olds from 13 September. The decision was finally made by the UK’s four chief medical officers after the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) advised that while the health gains from vaccinating this group were greater than the risks, “the margin of benefit is considered too small” to support it on health grounds alone. The Guardian understands the JCVI is already discussing whether the vaccination programme should be expanded to children as young as five. Meanwhile leaked reports suggest the NHS is already preparing to roll out the jab to this age group in the spring. However, the MHRA has yet to announce whether, like the FDA and European Medicines Agency, it will approve the use of Covid jabs for younger children. Covid infection levels have remained high for months in the UK, with school-age children among the most affected. The daily case numbers are expected to hit new records as a result of the Omicron variant, which has been found to dodge – at least to some degree – the immune responses provided by vaccination or natural infection. In the US, many experts believe the case for vaccination of children is clear cut. “The Delta wave in the summer convinced everybody that Covid-19 can cause a lot of devastating illness in kids and adolescents,” said Dr Peter Hotez, co-director of Texas children’s hospital Center for Vaccine Development. Hotez, who is also dean of National School of Tropical Medicine at Baylor College of Medicine, said the UK’s decision was perhaps based on “local data” that differed from the US experience. Other US experts advocate vaccines for young children as a tool to prevent this age group from becoming a reservoir of disease, which could pass Covid-19 to high risk groups such as grandparents. However, the JCVI has cited concerns over a very rare side-effect linked to Covid jabs among young people, myocarditis, including the potential long-term effects of the condition. Among other issues, the JCVI has also been concerned about the impact of rolling out Covid jabs to older children could have on the delivery of other school immunisation programmes. With children far less likely than adults to become seriously ill with Covid, there was an ethical concern over the appropriateness of vaccinating children to protect others. This was particularly acute given the uncertainty about the impact the vaccination of 12- to 15-year-olds would have on transmission in the face of the Delta variant. One expert, who is no longer part of the JCVI, suggested it could be better for children to gain protection from natural infection rather than taking a possible risk with a vaccine. Some scientists described the reluctance of the JCVI to approve jabs for older children “completely shocking”, with further concerns raised after it emerged its decision was taken despite modelling that suggested a rollout would reduce infections, hospitalisations and some deaths in this age group. However, Russell Viner, professor of adolescent health at University College London Institute of Child Health, and a participant in the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies during the pandemic, suggested there were a number of reasons why the UK and US have taken different approach, including cultural differences in medicine. “US physicians are generally much more pro-interventionist. In the UK there is a stronger recognition of the potential for harm,” he said. Viner also noted the US has been hard hit by Covid in terms of children. “Their health system does not protect the vulnerable and deprived as ours does,” he said. Although the UK had not handled the pandemic as well as some other countries with regard to adults, Viner added, “we have done very well in terms of children and serious Covid disease”. One source with knowledge of JCVI matters said a key difference between the UK and the US was that in the latter, parents may have to pay for expensive care for their child if they fell ill. The US has also had lower uptake of jabs among adults, which could be driving the push to vaccinate children to try stem the pandemic, the source added. But the question remains whether the UK and the US will eventually end up at the same destination, and to what degree Omicron has changed the equation.People who have cold-like symptoms in London are more likely to have Covid than a cold, according to the scientist behind the Zoe coronavirus symptom tracker app. Prof Tim Spector told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme that most of the symptoms of Omicron were the same as those of a common cold, including headaches, sore throat, runny nose, fatigue and sneezing. Spector urged people with cold symptoms – and not just the classic Covid symptoms – to take a test. “Things like fever, cough and loss of smell are now in the minority of symptoms we are seeing,” he said. “Most people don’t have classic symptoms.” He added: “In London, where Covid is increasing rapidly, it’s far more likely to be Covid than it is to be a cold. We’re seeing doubling in the numbers equivalent to what’s being seen elsewhere, every two and a half days.” Omicron is already the dominant Covid variant in London and will soon account for nearly all infections. Separately, a government science adviser has suggested that panic around the oncoming Omicron wave is unjustified. Speaking in a personal capacity, Prof Robert Dingwall, a former government Covid adviser from Nottingham Trent University, told the Daily Telegraph: “The Omicron situation seems to be increasingly absurd. There is obviously a lot of snobbery about South African science and medicine but their top people are as good as any you would find in a more universally developed country. They clearly don’t feel that the elite panic over here is justified, even allowing for the demographic differences in vulnerability – which are probably more than cancelled by the higher vaccination rate. “My gut feeling is that Omicron is very much like the sort of flu pandemic we planned for – a lot of sickness absence from work in a short period, which will create difficulties for public services and economic activity, but not of such a severity as to be a big problem for the NHS and the funeral business.” A study looking at 78,000 Omicron cases in South Africa found that the risk of hospitalisation was 29% lower compared with the original Covid-19, and 23% lower than the Delta variant, with vaccines holding up well. Fewer people with Omicron needed intensive care, with just 5% of cases admitted to ICU compared with 22% of Delta patients, the study found. Dingwall’s comments were at odds with those of the papers’s authors, who warned that South Africa’s experience of Omicron might not be a reliable indicator for how the Omicron outbreak unfolds in other countries. And the head of the World Health Organization, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, said on Tuesday it would be “wrong for people to consider Omicron as mild”. Prof Paul Hunter, of the University of East Anglia, said Dingwall’s comments were “going really out on a limb” and it was still too early to say how case numbers would translate into hospitalisations in the UK. Hunter said he was optimistic that immunity against severe disease would hold up quite well, but added: “A million cases of Omicron a day would be horrendous even if it was just as bad as flu.” This article was amended on 16 December 2021. Prof Robert Dingwall is no longer a government Covid adviser. He left his position on the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation subcommittee in the summer.The boss of Currys has urged the government not to impose further restrictions on high street retailers as he revealed a slowdown in sales amid increasing fears over the spread of the Omicron coronavirus variant and product shortages. Alex Baldock, the chief executive of the UK’s biggest electrical goods retailer, which formerly traded as PC World, Carphone Warehouse and Dixons, said there was “zero evidence of public health risk” in stores and the government would need an “unanswerable public health case” to close them in another lockdown, given the implications for jobs and the wider economy. “We are in a good position to power the recovery and are not asking for handouts. We just want to trade,” Baldock said. The retail boss made the comments as he revealed a 3% slide in sales at Currys UK and Irish business, excluding new store openings and permanent closures, in the six months to 30 October. Overall sales for the group, which also operates in the Nordic region and Greece, were flat at £4.8bn for the half-year, excluding the effect of currency exchange rate changes. Pre-tax profits ticked up almost 7% to £48m. The company said sales had been affected by supply chain problems and concerns about the virus, which had affected consumer confidence, as well as the fact they were being compared with very strong trading last year as families bought technology for home offices and entertaining children during the pandemic. Baldock said Currys had 15% more stock in the business than a year ago but there were “patches of restricted availability”, with it offering 100 models of large-screen television rather than the 120 it usually stocked, for example. Shortages of components for some sought-after items and shipping hold-ups affected supplies across the industry but Baldock said Currys had been able to use its scale to secure better supplies than many rivals. Baldock said Currys was still on track to meet its profits targets for the year as the technology market was 20% bigger than before the pandemic, given the surge in home working and rise of gaming as families spent more time in the business. “Most of that will stick,” he said.Sometime around the second curtain call, you begin to wonder if Bill Bailey is ever going to leave the stage. There he is, bouncing up and down, leading the crowd in a singalong and bellowing at us about the value of the shared live experience. To all the established pleasures of a Bill Bailey gig, tonight’s adds the palpable sense of a man rejoicing to be back – however briefly – in front of in-person audiences. That those audiences now include a quotient who know him mainly from Strictly Come Dancing is all part of the fun. Bailey’s act, after all, is the anti-Strictly, a non-mainstream confection free-ranging tonight across Polynesian tree snails, Rammstein riffs and the difference between hedonic and eudaimonic happiness. His genius is to bring arena-sized crowds along with this stuff by the force of his quirky enthusiasm and by neither pandering nor ever pretending to be anyone other than his idiosyncratic, off-the-beaten-path self. He is certainly not bound by the convention that new shows (this one’s called En Route to Normal, ironically) contain wholly new material. Two of tonight’s comic highlights – a steel-guitar song about beating the devil at cards, and a skit setting Bailey’s domestic life to a heavy-metal soundtrack – are recycled from 2018’s Larks in Transit. But they amply repay a second viewing, and are crowded on all sides by bumper routines and anecdotes. Less so in the first half, where his theremin/iPhone duet feels like warming up. Quoting online reviews of Poundland, meanwhile, is by Bailey’s standards, well, cheap. But his word-portraits of today’s rogues’ gallery of a cabinet are precious – as is a gag burlesquing the chaos of UK Covid regulations (“you can’t eat chicken in the bath – unless you’re wearing a onesie …”) By act two, Bailey has cut loose, with one zinging musical-comedy set-piece after another: Coldplay get a Turkish makeover, a vaudeville tribute is paid to the Last of the Cockney Sherpas, and our host croons a wannabe Eurovision chanson about un oiseau’s complex relationship with un petit garçon. Bailey clearly finds live audiences a joy to reconnect with – and the sentiment is warmly reciprocated. At Bournemouth International Centre on 16 December. Then touring until 15 January.There are two competing schools of thought when it comes to William Shatner’s space mission. The first is characterised by a kind of awestruck wonder over the beautiful symmetry of it all: Shatner starred in Star Trek, Star Trek inspired a generation of engineers, the engineers built a rocket, the rocket flew Shatner into space. The second tends to think that letting a billionaire indulge an actor by flying him to the brink of the atmosphere in a spaceship shaped like a willy might not be the best use of our resources. Shatner in Space is firmly for the first crowd. A 45-minute documentary about his mission, it airs on Amazon Prime. Jeff Bezos owns Amazon Prime. He also owns the rocket that Shatner flew on. Anyone expecting even an iota of criticism would be better off looking elsewhere. If you watched the news coverage of William Shatner’s journey into space on Bezos’s Blue Origin spaceship, New Shepard, you’ll have a rough idea of what will happen here. A 90-year-old man, at the invitation of the world’s richest man, travels up to the edge of space and returns transformed. Upon leaving the capsule on its return to Earth, Shatner tries to grasp at the profundity of what he saw up there; wide-eyed and slack-jawed, he struggles to articulate the fragility of life on Earth. Meanwhile, Bezos cuts him off to spray some champagne around like a tinpot go-kart champion. The champagne moment, unsurprisingly, has been sliced out of Shatner in Space. What’s left walks a fragile line. The show is part monument to Bezos’s ego, because of course it is, but it is also an incredible document of a man at the end of his life witnessing the great beyond. If you can stomach the former, there’s a good chance that the latter will move you to tears. Here, Shatner acts like a man who knows his time is coming. He speaks almost exclusively with a hushed sincerity that is frequently at odds with those around him. In a quiet moment with Bezos, for example, Shatner leans in and asks if he is scared of death. Coming from anyone else, it would be a stone cold conversation killer. But Shatner’s age, and his yearning to know what’s next, can’t help but draw you in. You are for ever on his side. In the run-up to the launch, Shatner shares an incredible story. When Star Trek was cancelled in the 1960s, his affectations of celebrity cratered around him. His marriage ended. He couldn’t afford a home, so he bought a truck and lived in it. And it’s from the truck that Shatner watched the moon landing. A man who had played an iconic space adventurer, watching mankind’s greatest moment at his lowest ebb. Sure, it’s probably a story he has told countless times before, and over the years it is likely to have been sanded and smoothed for maximum impact, but it lends his space trip a lovely poetry. The voyage itself is equally revelatory. As the rocket reaches its highest point, and everyone is allowed to unclip themselves, most of the passengers start giggling at the sensation of weightlessness. Not Shatner, though. He clings on to the window, staring at the blackness of space, eyes wide with revelation. “That’s it,” he whispers to himself. “I’ve got it.” Now, part of me thinks that, if Jeff Bezos got his way, then everything that ever airs on Amazon Prime would be a variation of Shatner in Space. We’d be beaten over the head with long, lush pro-Amazon infomercials that could never really be shown anywhere else because they border so shamelessly on propaganda. But in this instance, I’m inclined to cut it a break. Shatner in Space is a document of what space means to Shatner, and what Shatner means to everyone he has inspired. The sight of him immediately postflight, crying and wrestling with the magnitude of what he has just witnessed, is indescribably touching. What an unexpected treat.The 30-year-old founder of LadBible, the company born out of a sexist Facebook page that became one of the one of the biggest global publishers on social media, is worth £200m after his business floated on the stock market. Alexander “Solly” Solomou, who created the Manchester-based media company while studying business management at the University of Leeds, has cashed in shares worth £50m and retains a stake worth about £150m in the listed LadBible Group. Solomou used his life savings to buy the original LadBible Facebook page in 2012, and quickly learned how to game the site’s algorithms and make content go viral as social media use exploded. In the process he grew the business from a small outlet that recycled blokeish banter-heavy memes into a company that has about 450 staff, many of them young employees based in Manchester producing original content. Aware of the site’s problematic early reputation, LadBible attempted to redefine the definition of a “lad” to mean a caring individual who looks after their friends’ mental health and worries about plastic waste. It produced material featuring mainstream celebrities, such as an infamous video of Dame Judi Dench rapping with Lethal Bizzle, in addition to building a substantial female readership. The company now brands itself as an “environmentally and socially responsible business” that aims “to give the youth generation a voice by building communities that laugh, think and act”. LadBible owns other brands including UniLad, having bought up the debt of its former rival as part a complicated financial transaction in 2018 that left UniLad’s executives furious about losing control of their company. Unlike other new media outlets it has largely avoided hard news content, although it has made videos featuring the likes of the chancellor, Rishi Sunak. During the 2010s, investors poured enormous sums into so-called new media outlets such as Vice and BuzzFeed, on valuations that classed them as technology businesses. In reality, many of the companies struggled to meet financial growth targets and the market is increasingly valuing them more in line with traditional media outlets. The LadBible co-founder Arian Kalantari, also 30, has cashed in shares worth £3m and retains a £10m stake in the business. Other early investors who stand to benefit include Mahmud Kamani, the owner of Debenhams and co-founder of the online fast fashion website Boohoo. Last year, Boohoo was found to have known about “endemic” problems in its Leicester factories, including a failure to pay the minimum wage and life-threatening fire risks. LadBible said it made pre-tax profits of £5.6m on revenues of £23m in the first six months of 2021, a substantial increase on the previous year but still relatively small in the wider world of media companies. Its income came mainly from charging brands such as Lynx, PlayStation and KFC for bespoke marketing campaigns, or by earning money from programmatic advertising on sites such as Facebook, Snapchat and YouTube. The company could now pursue expansion in the US, where it has a large audience but no staff. Early trading in its shares pushed the market value of the business as high as £400m. By comparison, the US-based BuzzFeed is worth about $770m (£580m) after its share price fell sharply following this month’s listing on New York’s Nasdaq stock exchange.For Sergio Leonel Agüero del Castillo an enforced retirement because of a heart condition provoked tears on Wednesday, but friends of the 33-year-old say he has also come to feel serene that a stellar 18-year career is over. The former Barcelona forward is understood over recent days to have been zen-like in his take on his playing days ending, telling associates that “things happen in life and it is time to live”. Away from the strictures of the athlete’s diet Agüero can embrace his love of asado, the Argentine barbecue that grills choice cuts of steak, chorizo, chicken and other meat, and attend more concerts of his friend Maluma, a Colombian musician. In despair, initially, when he realised the chest pain and difficult breathing experienced in October’s draw with Alavés pointed to a serious issue that could not be ignored, Agüero’s mood then turned to a joy caused by all he has achieved. Even amid the raw emotion of his farewell Camp Nou press conference he referenced the happiness he feels, and it is easy to understand why. Agüero’s has been one of this generation’s great careers. For a start, consider again the sheer number of seasons the boy from Buenos Aires has been a footballer: 18. This is a phenomenal stretch at any level. For Agüero, though, all have been in the rarefied air of the elite. Just over a month after his 15th birthday he became Argentina’s youngest top-flight debutant when pulling on the shirt of his beloved Independiente, one of the Primera División’s “big five”. Agüero’s international bow came at 18 in September 2006, against Brazil, the year he moved to Atlético Madrid. He spent five seasons there, winning the 2010 Europa League and Uefa Super Cup before a transfer to Manchester City the next summer that transformed his career and led to him giving the Premier League its blockbuster moment. This occurred in May 2012, on the final day of the season, when City hosted QPR having to match Manchester United’s result at Sunderland to become champions for the first time since 1968. By the 93rd minute disaster seemed the only outcome. United had beaten Sunderland 1-0 and a tentative City were drawing with 10-man QPR. Being at the Etihad Stadium to witness what Agüero did next was among this writer’s most chaotic, surreal, life-affirming, sheer what-the-hell moments in two decades of covering sport around the world. The venue had been emptying but after Edin Dzeko’s 92nd-minute equaliser City fans had a renewed faith which was to be repaid in the kind of moment only sport’s theatre can occasionally provide. Mario Balotelli slid the ball to Agüero, whose tally in a debut Premier League season was 22 goals. The 23-year-old was about to score the goal of his career. Martin Tyler, on commentary for Sky Sports, had branded the City-United shootout as “truth more gripping than fiction”. It turned out that was underselling it. But, rewind. Before Balotelli receives the ball guess who starts the move he is to finish? Yes, “Kun” Agüero (the moniker from a childhood mispronunciation of his favourite cartoon) has dropped deep to collect possession and find the Italian who waits as the Argentinian curves right, into the area, before completing the one-two. Now, Agüero, ice-cold, leaves Taye Taiwo a spectator with a mesmeric body swerve and smashes a seismic winner past Paddy Kenny in the QPR goal to mainline ecstasy through City supporters, cause torment for all of a United persuasion and create the Premier League’s defining before and after act. There will be an appearance from Liam Gallagher in the media room later when the former Oasis frontman and City fanatic, drunk on the win and something more liquid-based, enters to share his bonhomie. Before this, though, back on the pitch, Agüero is wheeling away in celebration, City shirt off, spinning deliriously, having seized an undeniable slice of immortality as the creator of a moment that will be replayed endlessly. As impressive was what followed. There is no complacency. The first league title Agüero claimed on that sun-honeyed Manchester day was the launchpad for stratospheric achievement. There are four more English championships. There is an FA Cup. Six League Cups. There is, too, the despair of May’s Champions League final defeat by Chelsea, after the heartache of losing the 2014 World Cup showpiece to Germany. Agüero, whose son Benjamin’s grandfather is the late Diego Maradona, is City’s record scorer with 260 goals in 390 appearances, 184 of these in the league, the last two in a fairytale domestic farewell. On as a substitute against Everton, Agüero again sent the adoring congregation ballistic by scoring twice. Yet during the midpoint of all of this, when Pep Guardiola became City manager in 2016, Agüero had to convince that he could fit the Catalan’s high-press style. Agüero, who endured an uneven relationship with Guardiola, met the challenge, with the latter deserving credit for evolving the centre-forward’s game in the five years before Agüero left for Barcelona. A free transfer, he scored once in five appearances, in the 2-1 defeat by Real Madrid on 24 October, before the heart condition that has brought an abrupt close to his playing career. Agüero always played with a cheeky grin and an endearing nonchalance. This best friend of Lionel Messi ended his time at City with that Champions League defeat by Chelsea but he departed the international arena at the pinnacle as part of Argentina’s triumphant Copa América squad in July. Despite not featuring in that final, the triumph is among his most cherished achievements. His final goal, against Real, bookended the first, versus Estudiantes de La Plata. “I was 16,” he told the Guardian in 2013. “I received the ball on the edge of the area, controlled with the left and moved to the right side and hit it hard and it went on the left side of the goalkeeper.” Grace and menace from start to finish. Agüero departs as what he has always been: a winner.Last week as Joe Biden invited about 110 leaders to a virtual Summit for Democracy, he sounded the alarm over the rising tide of authoritarianism, as well as leading discussion on how to counter democratic backslide. The president admitted the summit was less of a magic bullet than the start of a global conversation on how to stop further democratic rot – an attempt to “seed fertile ground for democracies to bloom around the world”. Critics dismissed the summit as an ideological (and cynical) ploy to enlist countries in Washington’s strategic competition with China, as well as to appease overseas powers eager to see US leadership on the world stage. Both charges have merit. But if the US doesn’t convene world democracy, it’s unclear who would. Similar events in the past held by global coalitions, such as the UN and the Community of Democracies, have merely reaffirmed democratic principles without creating momentum for further action. And rarely has there been a moment in which we need a plan to reverse its erosion worldwide. In the past year, military coups have ousted governments in Sudan and Myanmar. Cuba has launched a violent crackdown on some of its biggest protests in years, and restricted control of the internet. President Alexander Lukashenko of Belarus refused to accept his election loss, and forced down a plane carrying political dissidents. Even as leaders gathered for the virtual summit, Russia launched a massive buildup of forces and heavy weaponry across its eastern border with Ukraine, amid growing concern in Washington and Europe about another large-scale military invasion. These are just the most notable examples of democracy in peril. Last month the International Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance found more than a quarter of the world’s population now lives in countries where democracy is in decline. The pro-democracy organisation Freedom House pointed to 15 straight years of steady democratic backsliding, warning the scales of global freedom are now tipping in favour of authoritarian-leaning populists and would-be dictators, justifying repression in order to expand power and influence. Implementing the slate of initiatives unveiled at the summit – from combating corruption and disinformation to strengthening election integrity and independent media – won’t be easy. The US has always been better at championing democracy than at supporting it in action. Neither the reaffirmation of democratic principles, nor these proposals, will do much to help democratic activists on the frontlines in countries such as Cuba, Belarus or Ukraine where Washington has instead favoured sanctions against the anti-democratic offenders in power. Or in Afghanistan, where 38 million Afghans have had 20 years of democracy snatched from under them, as the Taliban reimpose their severe form of repressive government. For them democracy represents more than a concept, but a way of life for which they continue to fight. Biden’s problems start at home. The president knows democracy is the product of a healthy society, in which voting rights, free elections, media and a judiciary are all critical elements. Yet these ingredients are in short supply on home soil. A recent poll by the Pew Research Center found that 85% of Americans believe their political system “needs to be completely reformed” or “needs major changes”, while respondents in more than a dozen countries said a majority of citizens want major changes or total reform. One might be forgiven for questioning whether the leader of the US has the moral authority to host such a gathering, given his own country’s spotty record – from the 6 January insurrection on Capitol Hill to new laws restricting voters’ access to ballots and stalled voter rights legislation – a victim of political dogfighting. The need for the US to strengthen its own democracy doesn’t mean it should not try to bolster it abroad, though, by rallying the forces of freedom. Biden is right when he warned the leaders attending the summit that the world is at an “inflection point in history”. Populations are facing rising inequality and a sense of powerlessness, coupled with hardships brought on by the global pandemic and faltering world economy. They are now questioning whether authoritarian rule may provide stability. China, uninvited to the summit, published its own briefing document offering one-party rule as an alternative form of governance. The world’s democracies must rally, if only to stop the world’s dictators and their supporters who, as Anne Applebaum describes in The Atlantic, share a network of security actors, media and financial interests to cement their oppressive rule. And populist champions like former Donald Trump adviser Steve Bannon are busy organising far-right activists across Europe – some of them funded by Russia. Their beliefs resemble those of 1930s fascist intellectuals and find resonance with the demagogues and authoritarians of today. Given all of these headwinds, it remains to be seen whether the summit can turn rhetoric into action, particularly when many of the leaders who attended – such as those from India, Iraq, Poland, Brazil and the Philippines – have been accused of harbouring authoritarian tendencies themselves. The democracy summit participants launched a “year of action” in which they dedicated themselves to implementing commitments they made. But the US has thus far declined to say how or even whether it planned to hold the participants to account for those pledges. The lack of these benchmarks is why summits get a bad name, criticised for being talk over action. Without them they are highly unlikely to produce meaningful change and reinvigorate democracy. Some suggested that before they are invited to an in-person follow-on summit planned for next year, countries should meet their commitments to take steps toward bolstering independent media, increasing financial transparency, limiting export of technology to authoritarian-run countries and strengthening election integrity and civic capacity – particularly for women and marginalised communities. It is the bare minimum that Biden can do to prove that the Summit for Democracy has teeth. Elise Labott is an adjunct professor at American University’s School of International Service and the founder and CEO of Zivvy MediaAlthough arguably a smidge too ponderous and self-serious for its own good, Nine Days still represents a reasonably promising debut for its writer-director Edson Oda. This Brazilian-Japanese film-maker, who comes out of the world of advertising and developed this through the Sundance Lab (not always a great sign to be honest) has crafted a visually striking work that blends metaphysics, moral philosophy and melodrama into a potent movie cocktail. The result is flavoursome and distinctive, but probably didn’t need the paper umbrella of grad-school literary grandstanding, a maraschino cherry garnish of sentimentality, and dash-of-absinthe cray-cray. It was probably sheer accident in terms of core plot device set-up, but Nine Days (which premiered at the Sundance film festival in January 2020), is very similar to Pixar animated feature Soul, which came out at the end of the same year. Like Soul, Nine Days concerns itself with unborn entities, all of whom are hoping to find passage into the world of the living. They will never remember their time in this strange-looking clapboard house filled with TV sets and shabby filing cabinets, a manse eerily sited in the middle of a desert expanse (actually, the Great Salt Lake). Each soul is processed by celestial bureaucrat Will (Winston Duke) who, unlike his colleague Kyo (the ever welcome Benedict Wong), once actually lived on Earth before landing his current gig. It’s Will’s job to decide which of the entities – played by Bill Skarsgard, Tony Hale, David Rysdahl, Arianna Ortiz and Zazie Beetz – will get to replace one of Will’s favourite earlier placements, a violinist named Amanda who inexplicably killed herself. Assessment consists of interviews where Will asks each candidate to answer a moral conundrum, as well as studying how they react to streaming footage of people living life on Earth. If they don’t get chosen, they get to choose an earthly moment of any kind to live in that Will and Kyo recreate for them using projectors and props. That concept is similar to one in Hirokazu Kore-eda’s 1998 film After Life, where the special-moment recreations were blessings bestowed by heavenly artisans on the newly deceased, rather than the never-born. It all made a lot more sense in Kore-eda’s film, which had an elegant simplicity, warmth and wit that’s mostly absent from Nine Days. That said, After Life didn’t have Duke reciting Walt Whitman like he was auditioning for the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art, a closing scene both tender, ridiculous and strangely affecting. • Nine Days is released on 17 December in cinemas.The Dutch government has unveiled a €25bn (£21bn) plan to radically reduce the number of livestock in the country as it struggles to contain an overload of animal manure. A deal to buy out farmers to try to reduce levels of nitrogen pollution in the country had been mooted for some time, and was finally confirmed after the agreement of a new coalition government in the Netherlands earlier this week. But the plan, the first of its kind in the world, faces a huge backlash from farmers who have staged big street protests in recent years over the prospect of tough regulation and farmer buyouts. They fear permanent damage to food production in the country if too many farmers are forced to quit. “We don’t want the system to collapse,” said Utrecht dairy farmer Marije Klever, from the Dutch young farmers’ union. She said farmers would oppose any nonvoluntary measures. “I am a land owner, so a critical question is whether the government are allowed to push farmers out of the land. It can’t be The Hague telling farmers they must go, you need an agreement.” While being lauded internationally as the “tiny country that feeds the world” and the continent’s biggest meat exporter, the Netherlands has been struggling at home with a pollution crisis caused by an excess of farm animals. “We can’t be the tiny country that feeds the world if we shit ourselves,” said MP Tjeerd de Groot, from the Democrats 66 party, which is part of the coalition government in the Netherlands. The country has the highest density of livestock in Europe – more than four times that of the UK or France – with more than 100 million cattle, chickens and pigs in total. The animals produce manure which, when mixed with urine, releases ammonia, a nitrogen compound. If it gets into lakes and streams via farm runoff, excessive nitrogen can damage sensitive natural habitats. The highest Dutch administrative court found in 2019 that the government was breaking EU law by not doing enough to reduce excess nitrogen in vulnerable natural areas, due to farming and industrial activities. The 13-year multibillion-euro plan, published today, includes paying some Dutch livestock farmers to relocate or exit the industry, and helping others transition to more extensive (as opposed to intensive) methods of farming, with fewer animals and a bigger area of land. It will start as a voluntary programme, with compensation offered to livestock farmers asked to leave. “In the end, it might be necessary to stop negotiating as a last resort, but the basis is voluntary,” said de Groot. The end result is expected to be close to a one-third reduction in the numbers of pigs, cows and chickens in the country. “We don’t have to feed the world, but we could show how to do it in a more sustainable way,” said organic dairy farmer Jaring Brunia, from Friesland in the north of the country. But farming groups said they would only accept voluntary measures and want time to reduce emissions through technological innovations. “Cars were very polluting but they had a chance to make cars less polluting with innovation. That is what we want,” said MP Caroline van der Plas, founder of the Dutch farmers party BoerBurgerBeweging (BBB). Support for her party in rural communities has soared since it was founded two years ago, as farmers told the Guardian they felt sidelined by politicians. “For my son, where can he find a living and know what will be allowed in 10 years? We are known as the best farmers in the world for our innovation, but if you push us all away we will have less innovative power. We need some positivity,” said Erik Stegink, a pig farmer in Bathmen, in the east of the country. “The problem does not go away when I go away, it goes to another country,” added dairy farmer Geertjan Kloosterboer, who said farmers were ready to protest on the streets again against the measures. Some farmers appeared more resigned to the changes, saying there was no future for intensive farming in the densely populated Netherlands. “We farm in the back yards of the city and everything is watched,” said dairy farmer Heleen Lansink-Marissen, from Haaksbergen in eastern Netherlands. “We can’t fight for the past. We need a plan for the future and how to make money through biodiversity, carbon offsetting and a little bit less milk,” she added. De Groot, who has previously called for a halving of livestock numbers in the Netherlands, said the government had dithered for too long on dealing with the nitrogen crisis. “The message now is that this needs to be fixed, no matter what,” he said. “We have to move away from the low-cost model of food production. This industry is causing damage to the farmers’ business model and the environment. It’s time to restore nature, climate and air, and in some areas that may mean there is no more place for intensive farmers there.” Brunia said many farmers wanted to change, but were locked into intensive systems with a lot of animals and debts to pay. He urged the government to spend money on helping all farmers transition, rather than for just a few to quit. “We are used to pumping around a lot of money, milk and poo, but what is good for economics is not good for the Earth,” said Brunia. The Netherlands is not the only country in Europe facing a crisis over livestock emissions, with observers suggesting Denmark, Belgium and Germany may soon have to consider similar action. The UK is reportedly on track to miss its own 2020 ammonia emissions reductions target by 20% and is likely to face legal challenges from environmental health campaigners. “We have been very good at feeding the world,” said Derk Boswijk, a Christian Democrats party MP and spokesperson for agriculture. “We can be proud. But it didn’t work out for us, so we have to change. I hope other countries will learn from what we have done wrong.” Sign up for the Animals farmed monthly update to get a roundup of the biggest farming and food stories across the world and keep up with our investigations. You can send us your stories and thoughts at animalsfarmed@theguardian.comSky Brown, the 13-year-old skateboarder who became Great Britain’s youngest Olympic medallist of all time at the Tokyo Games this summer, has been named on the three-strong shortlist for the BBC’s young sports personality of the year award. The other two candidates are the 18-year-old England footballer Jude Bellingham and the para-swimmer Ellie Challis, 17. Brown claimed bronze in the women’s park skateboarding final at Tokyo at the age of 13 years and 28 days. The teenager had already broken Margery Hinton’s record, which had stood for 93 years, as the youngest athlete to represent Team GB at a summer Games. Brown, who has never had a professional coach and instead learns tricks from YouTube videos, also won gold in the women’s skateboard park event at the Summer X Games in California in July. Bellingham established himself at senior level for club and country during a calendar year in which the Borussia Dortmund midfielder won the German Cup in May and was voted newcomer of the season by his fellow players. He was then included in Gareth Southgate’s England squad for Euro 2020, making three substitute appearances as they reached the final. In the first of those games, against Croatia at Wembley in June, he became the youngest Englishman to play at a major tournament, aged 17 years and 349 days. Challis won silver at the Tokyo Paralympics in August, finishing second in the S3 women’s 50m backstroke event just two years after making her international debut at the 2019 World Para Swimming Championships. Challis was the only elite British female in her class in Tokyo and the only Briton, male or female, in the S1-S4 categories. The diver Andrea Spendolini-Sirieix won the award in 2020. This year’s winner will be announced during the BBC Sports Personality of the Year show on Sunday.The ban on allowing asylum seekers to work should be lifted and care workers should immediately be given access to fast-track visas, the government’s independent advisers have recommended. The Migration Advisory Committee (MAC) on Wednesday said the government should release evidence backing ministers’ assertions that allowing claimants to work would be a “pull factor” for others to come to the UK. In its annual report to the home secretary, Priti Patel, the committee said there was clear evidence of the harm being caused by the ban on employment and that a change of policy was needed after the recent drownings in the Channel. Under current rules, asylum seekers are barred from working unless their claims have been outstanding for 12 months through no fault of their own. After this time, they must seek permission from the Home Office and can only apply for specified jobs on the official shortage occupation list. The immigration minister Tom Pursglove said last Wednesday that the ban must remain in place to “reduce pull factors to the UK, and ensure our policies do not encourage people to undercut the resident labour force”. However, Prof Brian Bell, the MAC chair, said on Wednesday he had not seen evidence to back up the “pull factor” assessmentand it was incumbent on ministers to make this public. “It’s not enough to say: ‘There’s a pull factor’. You’ve got to have evidence to support that. You can’t come to conclusions if you’re not willing to tell us what the evidence is on one side of the equation,” he said. In December 2018, the then home secretary, Sajid Javid, told parliament he would like to review the ban after findings by the Lift the Ban coalition showed that allowing asylum seekers to work could generate £42m a year for the government. In June 2021, there were about 56,600 asylum applications pending an initial decision, of which 75% had been waiting longer than six months. This compared with 33% five years ago. Dominic Raab, the justice secretary, told the Spectator magazine in an interview in September he would support allowing asylum seekers to work. The committee has also recommended that those working in social care should be placed on the shortage occupation list, which was introduced after free movement of people across the EU ended in January. It also advised the jobs be made eligible under the health and care visa. The recommendation, which is usually accepted by ministers, follows months of warnings from the social care sector that it is facing severe staff shortages because of Brexit and the stipulation that all workers be vaccinated against Covid-19. In a statement, the committee said: “Given the severe and increasing difficulties faced by the care sector, the report brings forward preliminary findings on adult social care. The MAC recommends the government make care workers immediately eligible for the health and care worker visa and place the occupation on the shortage occupation list.” The list includes jobs where employers face a shortage of suitable labour and where it is sensible to fill those vacancies with migrant workers. Ultimately it is for the government to decide whether the recommendation is accepted. The Home Office has been approached for comment.Thirty years ago, the Royal Court introduced a Chilean playwright, Ariel Dorfman, with Death and the Maiden, a much-revived, twistily structured thriller about South American human rights abuses. While theatre can have a one-hit-and-run attitude to distant politics, the Court has commendably kept an eye on Santiago. Its international programme mentors new writers in an initiative spawning several Court stagings, including Guillermo Calderón’s B in 2017 and now, in sparky English by the same translator, William Gregory, Una Lucha Contra … by Pablo Manzi. Like most exported Chilean literature since Dorfman, the play is haunted by the 1973-90 genocidal dictatorship of General Augusto Pinochet, a Thatcher-backed anglophile who liked to shop at Harrods near the Court. Three of the five short scenes occur in Chile or neighbouring Peru in 1998 (when Pinochet was finally indicted and arrested), 2014 and 2017, with interludes in 1880 Mexico, during a brief period of relative political enlightenment, and the US in 2019, where Trumpian vigilantes target Mexican immigrants. There are no overlapping characters but themes recur: resistance, violence, borders, human empathy, democracy’s fragility, and words a person dare not speak. This fragmented, patterned narrative – from which viewers construct meaning and much is left unexplained – resembles novels by the cult Chilean writer Roberto Bolaño, such as 2666 and Antwerp. As when reading Bolaño – or the great Peruvian political author, Mario Vargas Llosa – it struck me that foreign cultures might benefit from translation that adds footnotes or supporting information on details, such as identities of presidents and terrorist groups, that a native would know. Challenging for consumers in any medium, jumpy multi-story plots in theatre are exceptionally demanding for actors. A cast of six brilliantly embodies multitudes under Sam Pritchard’s slick direction, with Joseph Balderrama showing outstanding variation as four men from diverse nationalities, professions and centuries. Another lesson Manzi might learn from Bolaño is that the novelist wrote expansively, at up to 1,000 pages; the playwright should be encouraged to aim bigger to fulfil the potential of a play that feels like sketches for the epic political drama he could write. A Fight Against … (Una Lucha Contra … ) is at the Royal Court theatre, London, until 22 JanuaryMore than two-thirds of community pharmacies in England that offered to help deliver Covid booster jabs are still waiting for permission or have been refused, ministers have admitted, with some chemists having to wait 11 weeks. The Liberal Democrats’ health spokesperson, Daisy Cooper, uncovered the low approval rate and long delays through a written parliamentary question answered by the vaccines minister, Maggie Throup. The failure to give the green light to more pharmacies to become vaccination sites has raised questions about the NHS’s ability to deliver the 1m boosters a day that Boris Johnson has pledged. Fewer GPs are involved in the programme now than when first and second doses were given. Throup said that by the end of September, 4,733 pharmacies had between them submitted 5,376 expressions of interest to deliver Covid jabs, but only 1,454 had been accepted – a 30.7% approval rate. Some applications were decided by NHS England rather than the Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC). Cooper said the delays were “shocking” and urged NHS England to speed up its decision-making to help the health service administer as many top-ups shots as possible. The Omicron variant is spreading rapidly and is forecast to be causing 1m infections a day by New Year’s Eve. Cooper said: “Community pharmacies can play a critical role in getting boosters into arms in the coming weeks while taking pressure off our GPs and NHS staff. So it is staggering that some pharmacies applied several times to help provide booster jabs only to be rejected, while others have waited a shocking 78 days to be approved. “Ministers completely took their eye off the ball on the booster programme, which has left millions without vital protection. Sajid Javid must now get a grip of this crisis, ensure NHS England speeds up the application process and deals with these bureaucratic delays. Every pharmacy that has applied in the past should be given an opportunity to take part in this critical national effort.” Approval decisions were not being made for more than six weeks on average, Throup said. “Since 1 August, the shortest period from receipt of application to a pharmacy providing the Covid-19 vaccination service was 14 days, the longest was 78 days, with an average of 44 days.” Pharmacies have played an increasingly important role in the delivery of boosters since the programme began in September, because fewer GPs are involved. Of the 2,868 vaccination sites that were operational across England on 1 December, 1,464 were community pharmacies, 1,066 were GP-led premises, 108 were mass vaccination centres and 230 were “hubs” in NHS hospitals. The Royal Pharmaceutical Society urged NHS England to try to increase the number of sites by being less rigid in its requirements from pharmacies wanting to join the vaccination programme. Thorrun Govind, the society’s chair in England, said: “On 13 December just 1,500 community pharmacies delivered 44% of all the Covid booster jabs in England – 185,000 out of a total of 418,000 booster jabs – which is an extraordinary feat from an already exhausted workforce. “The workforce is under enormous pressure and is delivering boosters at an incredible rate, but must not be shackled in the attempt by unnecessary officialdom.” An NHS spokesperson said: “There are nearly 1,500 pharmacies delivering boosters compared to under 1,000 in October, and Monday saw a record number of vaccinations in pharmacies with over 185,000 people getting protected at their local pharmacy.”Rupert Murdoch’s New York Post criticized Joe Biden and his chief medical adviser, Anthony Fauci, for both mispronouncing the new Covid variant as “Omnicron” rather than “Omicron”. Biden’s detractors have seized on the mispronunciation as evidence of some sort of cognitive decline, but the president is far from alone. Daily Beast media reporter Justin Baragona confessed he “can relate” to Biden’s mispronunciation, and he’s not the only one: various digital news outlet URLs include the misspelling, suggesting that the mistake was in an early draft and only corrected after the article was published. According to linguists, the error is to be expected. We don’t often have cause to introduce entirely novel words to our common vernacular as adults, especially ones from unfamiliar languages. “Most of us don’t speak Greek – I think that’s fair to say,” Dr Taylor Jones, a linguist and post-graduate studies lecturer, told me. According to Dr Jones, it’s typical for us to take words from other languages and Americanize them, and the habit isn’t specific to English speakers: “Every language just takes from other languages and ‘nativizes’ the sounds.” Omicron already presents a challenge before introducing any new, unwanted letters: “Of the Greek letters, we barely use it [unless you’re a Futurama superfan, where the fictional planet Omicron Persei 8 makes frequent appearances], and as a three-syllable word, there are a lot of potential pronunciations if you aren’t sure how it’s said,” Dr Lisa Davidson, chair of the linguistics department at New York University, told me. The first syllable could be OH or AH, it could be MY-cron or MEE-cron or even MIH-cron. Dr Jones pointed out that I was actually merging the first and second syllable with my pronunciation: OM-ih-cron. “Omni, though,” Dr Jones said. “Forgive the inadvertent pun, but that’s everywhere.” Omnipotent, omniscient, omnivore, omnibus, omniplex and omnipresent: omni as a prefix is a much more familiar sound to the English-speaking brain, or “speech production area” (linguist-speak for “mouth”, generally). “In that sense, it serves as kind of a magnet,” Dr Davidson said. “It’s a stronger mental representation, so it draws in strings of sounds that are close, like omi–. There’s lots of research showing that if you present people with strings of letters that don’t exist as words in English but could, they’ll pronounce it like the most frequent existing word that has the most similar set of letters.” Dr Davidson recalled a paper she was recently sent “that shows that if you make an error of a newly learned word on a recall task, you’re more likely to keep making that same error (rather than a different error, or the correct pronunciation).” So people who are irritated by the mispronunciation may want to work on their serenity; it’s likely to stay with us for a while.From Wham’s Last Christmas to Jingle Bells, humans are not the only species to enjoy festive songs. A survey of 1,000 dog owners by the charity Guide Dogs found Wham’s classic was the most beloved by canines, with 10% of the votes, followed by Jingle Bells (9%) and All I Want for Christmas is You by Mariah Carey (6%). Those who took part in the survey said their animals liked upbeat tracks, rather than quieter, slower or instrumental ones. Additionally, 90% of dogs like music, and it can have a differing affect on them, ranging from making them energetic (23%) to helping them get to sleep (11%). A quarter of dog owners claimed that music was helpful to keep their dog calm or comfortable. Dr Helen Whiteside, the chief scientific officer at Guide Dogs UK, said: “As we look forward to spending the festive period with friends and loved ones, this Christmas will be a step-change for an entire generation of new dogs born during lockdown. “Houses are likely to be busier than normal and many dogs’ routines will change. Music is often used to calm dogs in times of change and stress, so it is unsurprising that it will play a key role for dogs this Christmas.” She added that the poll also showed that music can bring out fun moments for dog and owner to share. Other favoured tunes were Driving Home for Christmas by Chris Rea, It’s Beginning to Look a Lot Like Christmas by Michael Bublé and A Wonderful Christmas Time by Paul McCartney. The growth in dog ownership has been noted in the last few years as people bought puppies during the pandemic. Figures from March revealed that more than 3.2 million pets were bought by UK households during lockdown. However, since Covid restrictions were lifted it has been reported that some owners have started to return to the office and are abandoning their pets as they no longer have as much time for them. Many of these pets were bought online, charities say, and their true origins and medical issues were not disclosed. They often have a higher incidence of behavioural and health problems and are thus more difficult to rehome. Animal rescue charities and shelters have warned that people often pretend that dogs they acquired during lockdown are strays in order to get rid of them.Name: The 60-year career. Age: Sixty, obviously. Appearance: A long, slow, flat, miserable march to the grave. Well, whatever this is, you’re really selling it. A 60-year career, though. Seriously. Sixty whole years. Working. Could we track back a little? Of course. The Stanford Centre on Longevity recently published research suggesting that as many as half of today’s five-year-olds in the US can expect to live to 100. That’s great! May they have long and happy lives. Wait, you’re missing the point. A world full of 100-year-olds is a world full of pensioners. Yes, obviously. If we see similar demographic changes in the UK, all these people on course to be centenarians will be eligible for the state pension at 68. That’s millions of people drawing a state pension for 32 years, which is not only untenable for the country’s coffers, but also very unlikely to be sufficient for the many people who don’t have a handsome workplace or private pension. What’s the alternative? Why, the 60-year career, of course. It’s like a normal career, but lasts 20 years longer. How dare you? Hey, don’t be like that. Maybe there are upsides to spending 60 years of your life at work. Like what? I don’t know. Maybe some people like their job. Be serious. OK, what about this: you have a 60-year career, but you only do as much work as you would in a 40-year career. I don’t understand. It’s one of Stanford’s ideas: smoothing out the work/life balance so you’re not run ragged in the throes of midlife. OK, I’m interested. People in their 40s often have to juggle work with raising kids or caring for a parent. What if, for this part of their lives, they went part-time? And then, when they’re still relatively fit and healthy in their late 60s, they could pick up some of their own slack? So work longer, but work less? That’s it. Doesn’t it sound wonderful? Not really. I want to do nothing from my 68th birthday onwards. Well, that isn’t going to work. The pension system is outdated. It was designed in an age when workers spent their lives toiling until they bled, then died of boredom at 65. So I’m the bad guy for living longer? Yes, that’s right. You should feel ashamed. I guess this doesn’t apply to me, anyway: I’m nowhere near five years old. Precisely. They’re the ones who’ll have to work when they’re infirm, the adorable little suckers. Do say: “When you grow up, you can be anything you want to be.” Don’t say: “As long as you’re prepared to do it until the age of 80.”The German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, has used his inaugural address to parliament to promise to defeat the pandemic and to tackle a “minority of hate-filled extremists” trying to overturn the government’s coronavirus measures. In a wide-ranging speech in which he said there was “a lot to do” and “no time to lose”, Scholz also acknowledged the huge challenges Germany faced in tackling the climate emergency, including the fears many had about the impact a transition to climate neutrality might have on their lives. He promised a “fair distribution” of the costs and said everyone would benefit from the “safety and security” of switching to renewable energy. But he said a wide majority of the population would have to support the government’s promise to bring forward by seven years the withdrawal from fossil fuels – on which 250 years of German prosperity was based – for the transition to be able to work. Private investment supported by government subsidies would also be at the heart of encouraging climate neutrality innovations, he said. Scholz, whose three-party coalition government of his Social Democrats, the Greens and the pro-business FDP took office a week ago, also paid tribute to his predecessor, Angela Merkel. He thanked her for enabling a smooth transition of power from her government to his, due to her “calm manner”, and praised her for her “modesty and lack of affectation”. He said the civility of the transition had been “admired worldwide and earned the respect of many around the world”. Scholz opened his 90-minute address by urging Germans to get vaccinated so that the country could “return to normal”, and stressed the joint effort that was needed to defeat the virus. So far just under 70% of Germans have been double-jabbed, while 26% have received a booster dose. He spent the first 10 minutes of his speech condemning the “truth denial, absurd conspiracy theories, wanton disinformation and primed-for-violence extremists” that had contributed to Germany’s low vaccine rate, in a tone markedly sharper than that ever used by Merkel during the pandemic. Scholz said he lacked understanding as to why it was that despite every adult in Germany having access to two jabs, and those most vulnerable having access to a booster jab, so many had yet to take up the offer. “If they had we would have the pandemic under control by now,” he said. “Then we could experience a meaningful Christmas with our old freedoms.” He attacked in particular protesters who have attempted to derail the government’s measures to curb Covid-19 just as focus on Wednesday was on the emergence of reports of a plot by coronavirus deniers to murder the leader of the state of Saxony, which led to police raids on Monday. There have also been recent torch-lit parades outside the home of Saxony’s health minister as well as a stream of death threats sent to mayors and other public figures across Germany. Scholz said he would not allow a “small minority of extremists to try to impose their will on our entire society”, stressing that “our democracy is ready to defend itself and knows how to do it”. Scholz stressed his government’s determination to look beyond the pandemic, laying out his transport plans including an increase in the number of trains, bringing disused railway stations back to life, and encouraging the use of electric cars. More affordable housing is also high on his agenda, including an increase in new builds and introducing a cap on rent increases. He called Germany a nation of immigration and said in future it would be easier for people to become German citizens and to be able to vote, and multiple citizenship would also be made a possibility, to reflect “the reality of many people”. A minimum wage of €12 an hour was due to be introduced from next year, he said, stressing how the pandemic had increased awareness of the importance of every type of worker. He also announced an increase in the effort to tackle organised crime, political extremism and tax evasion, but said the biggest threat to German democracy came from rightwing extremism. Among an array of foreign policy issues, including China and Nato, in line with his predecessors he said the success of the European project remained Germany’s “most important national concern”. European unity he said was vital to act against the “highly concerning” gathering of troops on the Ukraine-Russian border.Christmas get-togethers may need to be downsized as Omicron is now “very likely” to increase the death toll in Europe even if it proves to be less severe, the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control has said. The new Covid variant’s high transmissibility means that more people are forecast by the EU agency to be admitted to hospital or killed this winter than previously projected. The risk assessment, published on Wednesday, advises governments they urgently need to reintroduce Covid restrictions, with one option being to advise families and friends to avoid mixing over the festive season. Dr Andrea Ammon, director of the ECDC, based in Stockholm, said: “We assess the probability of further spread of the Omicron variant in the EU/European economic area as very high, and it is considered very likely to cause additional hospitalisations and fatalities, further to those already expected from previous forecasts that consider only the Delta variant. “In the current situation, vaccination alone will not allow us to prevent the impact of the Omicron variant, because there will be no time to address the vaccination gaps that still exist.” Beyond ensuring that masks are worn and public spaces and buses and trains remain uncrowded, Ammon said governments “should also consider advising reduced inter-household mixing”. She added: “Exercising additional caution is recommended when travelling and when there is contact between people of different ages during the holiday season”. Anecdotal evidence from South Africa has suggested that Omicron may cause milder disease. But the ECDC’s assessment warns that “even if the severity of disease caused by the Omicron variant of concern is equal or lower than the severity of the Delta variant of concern, the increased transmissibility and resulting exponential growth of cases will rapidly outweigh any benefits of a potentially reduced severity”. The agency’s assessment adds: “Therefore, the Omicron variant of concern is considered likely to cause additional hospitalisations and fatalities, further to those already expected from previous forecasts that consider only the Delta variant of concern.” On Wednesday, South Africa reported a record number of daily Covid infections, with the figure of 26,976 surpassing a peak of 26,485 new cases in early July during a third wave driven by the Delta variant. There is currently a mixed picture on infections across Europe, with some countries experiencing a slump in cases. But governments across the continent have warned their populations of an imminent increase because of the new variant. Denmark and Norway have announced stricter Covid measures because of their soaring infection numbers, while Dutch and Belgian primary schools will close early for Christmas. Ursula von der Leyen, the president of the European Commission, tweeted: “We are facing another Christmas in pandemic mode. But we are more prepared to fight the virus than ever. Over 66% of Europeans have received two shots. And 62 million people already had their boosters, which is the best currently available protection against Omicron.” The ECDC said there was “serious concern” about clusters of cases among the vaccinated but that boosters would “increase protection against severe outcomes from the Delta variant of concern and possibly from Omicron”. Ammon said the onus was now on governments to “ramp up efforts to increase full vaccination in people not yet vaccinated or only partially vaccinated, as well as to administer booster doses to all eligible as soon as possible”.By now, most of us are all too familiar with the stats surrounding mental health: one in four of us experience mental health problems each year, while one in three of us don’t feel that we have the tools to deal with the ups and downs of life. Conversations about the way we discuss mental health are shifting, but for the former mining town of Ystradgynlais in Powys, Wales, change is well overdue. Powys currently has the highest suicide rate in Wales, with somebody dying in this way every three and a half weeks. It’s why last year, Ystradgynlais Mind, an affiliate of national mental health charity Mind, created the #ItTakesBallsToTalk campaign, featuring the voice of the actor Michael Sheen in the campaign video, to prompt discussion around mental health within the community. It was the brainchild of Ystradgynlais Mind chief executive Carol Stephens, Ystradgynlais Mind project manager Donna James, who wrote and produced the video, and Yogits rugby team player, Andrew Morgan-Jones.c “#ItTakesBallsToTalk was a project designed to remove stigma around mental health,” says James. “We don’t want people suffering in silence, we want to encourage a narrative where it’s less alien to say: ‘I am not OK,’ and to normalise the conversation around it. We have the resources to help and there is scope for recovery if people can speak their minds when facing mental anguish.” The realisation saw Stephens come up with the idea of bringing support to those in need, instead of waiting for them to ask. “We knew we had to try something completely different,” she says. “It’s a close-knit community here and rugby is a pseudo religion – the rugby clubs have taken the place of community centres and form a centre of support for their respective communities. So I proposed we train coaches, referees and guys from the local rugby clubs as ‘mental health first aiders’, to have parity of esteem with physios at the clubs. It’s like one of them said to us: ‘We have first aiders to help with torn hamstrings and dislocated fingers, but what about the mind?’” The initiative means free training is given to local rugby clubs to create their own mental health first aiders, supported by Ystradgynlais Mind. “The first aiders are best placed to notice any changes in behaviour, like self-neglect, drinking more or becoming withdrawn,” says Stephens. “The first aiders then have the knowledge and skills to facilitate conversations, with Ystradgynlais Mind on hand to provide support or referrals to counsellors if needed.” All are welcome to be trained as mental health first aiders, or to seek advice from one: “Wives, mothers, sisters and friends of these clubs, are all directly benefiting from the support we offer,” says James. “Irrespective of gender, race, sexual orientation, political views or religion, it is a rugby family, and it is inclusive. I think that’s one of the most powerful things about this project.” Proper funding has been an integral part of the campaign’s success. As a Co-op charity partner, the initiative has recently received £48,250 to carry on and expand the great work that has happened to date. The funding will also allow the training to be rolled out beyond rugby, with plans to train mental health first aiders in spaces such as barbers, hairdressers, football and golf clubs, too. “We also want to support supporters, enabling as many people as possible to be trained in mental health first aid, until it’s as commonplace as CPR training,” says Stephens. Gareth Brookes, 34, plays second row for the Abercrave Barbarians rugby club, and has recently begun his first aider training through #ItTakesBallsToTalk. As someone who has battled depression and anxiety himself, he’s proud to be a shoulder for teammates who may be struggling. “We want to help break the stigma around admitting you’re struggling with your mental health,” says Brookes. “While we will be on hand to listen, we’re not there to become full-time counsellors. We’re there to start conversations about mental health among our teams, encourage the guys to speak up and to direct them towards professional help if they need it.” Morgan-Jones, who has completed his first-aider training, notes the ripple effect becoming trained in mental health awareness can have: “I am now an advocate for building positive mental health within rugby clubs and the broader community.” It’s a sentiment that James echoes: “This form of early intervention is comforting to the whole community, who feel like they’re part of finding a solution and perpetuating a positive culture change. The community is standing up to depression together, and judging by the spirit and passion of those I have personally met, I think it is a fight they are likely to win.” “The project has really been a grassroots initiative, with a pool of people from all walks of life trying to make a difference. Initially we had no formal funding and were entirely reliant on donations. We’ve since received funding from Co-op, which has allowed us to continue rolling out training in the way we hoped. We were overjoyed when that was granted. I find it incredible that a stranger in Co-op buying a loaf of bread has the capacity to save a life here in Ystradgynlais.” Co-op is working with Mind, SAMH and Inspire to bring communities together to improve mental wellbeing. To find out more and how you can support visit here • In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org. • Contact Mind for information and support in England and Wales on 0300 123 3393 or email info@mind.org.uk. Lines open 9am to 6pm, Monday to Friday. • Contact SAMH (Scottish Association for Mental Health) for information and support in Scotland on 0344 800 0550 or email info@samh.org.uk. Lines open 9am to 6pm, Monday to Friday. Closed bank holidays. • Call Inspire for information and support in Northern Ireland on 0289 032 8474. Lines open 9am to 5pm, Monday to Friday. Closed bank holidays.In the UK, about a third of UK primary school pupils don’t take part in any form of drama, music or dance, and children from disadvantaged backgrounds are less likely than those from wealthier homes to learn to play an instrument, sing in a choir or play in a school orchestra. Yet activities such as these make a tangible difference to young people’s lives. Primary school children from disadvantaged backgrounds who take part in after-school clubs like these get better results than peers from similar homes who do not. Alongside improvements in grades, studies show that sports and musical activities can boost self-esteem and confidence, help build relationships, and encourage children to become more physically active, as well as broadening their horizons culturally and socially. Aishley Bell-Docherty and her wife Samantha Bell-Docherty know this all too well. Having first met as teenagers at a local theatre school, they quickly bonded over their passion for hip-hop dance and street culture. Today, the pair act as creative and artistic directors of the Blackpool-based charity, Skool of Street, one of the causes to benefit from Co-op’s Local Community Fund, designed to help make a difference in local communities. “We set up Skool of Street in 2013 after delivering dance and arts projects in Blackpool for a number of years,” says Aishley. “We noticed there were lots of barriers for young people who couldn’t afford to pay for dance, art, music or drama classes. There was a complete lack of provisions for kids needing an outlet for creativity, unless they were able to afford the monthly fees.” The pair put their heads together and, after taking advice from locals in the community, Skool of Street was born. Their first dance project launched in 2014 during the summer holidays and the pair were inundated, with 75 young people signing up. It’s since evolved to become much more than a dance school, Aishley says. “People often refer to Skool of Street as a ‘dance’ school but it’s more of a cultural movement, since it’s really about the culture rather than the dance itself. Dance is the medium we use to connect, but with that, come many other elements.” Sessions take place after school and during school holidays, with those able to pay doing so, and the team working to secure sponsorship and subsidies for those who can’t. Co-op members have helped raise £3,363 for Skool of Street, making them one of the 25,000 local causes across the UK supported by the fund since 2016. In the past five years alone, Co-op members, colleagues and customers have raised more than £100m for local communities, causes and charity partners. For every pound that Co-op members spend on Co-op branded products and services, 2p is shared between the Local Community Fund for local causes and the Community Partnerships Fund to support like-minded national organisations. Samantha describes the funding as a “lifeline”, being used to allow young people without financial means to attend classes. “It’s also enabled us to match-fund via other charities, which is more important than ever because much of our fundraising comes from shows and demonstrations, which weren’t possible during the pandemic. Knowing we’re supported by our local community is priceless, it means a lot to us,” she says. It was Samantha’s own experiences that shaped her desire to give back to young people in the community. “Growing up, I’d always had a love of hip-hop dance but when I was 16, my dad was attacked by three local boys. He was left for dead on the promenade in front of me. After that, I went off the rails until a member of my family suggested I get back into dancing. Slowly, I fell in love with dancing and hip-hop culture again, and began training more, travelling to different places to learn new styles and meeting people through my love of dance. It was so impactful, and is why I wanted to do this.” Today, sessions on everything from dance and rapping to art and sustainable fashion take place at the charity’s home, House of Wingz, which is set up to resemble a real home. “We have a lounge, kitchen, dance and recording studio, and young people are self-motivated to look after the space – they feel like they have ownership over it, which is important,” says Aishley. The impact the sessions have is far-reaching. “Initiatives like this are about young people having tangible life skills,” says Aishley. “It’s about learning how to be self-motivated, confident and work as a team. Through our sessions, young people learn to develop the self-belief to put themselves out there for other things, like taking exams, walking into a room and making friends with people and taking pride in the way they look. It’s all carried over into everything else they do. Many young people using our services have complex home lives, but dance and music are real forms of escapism. To know we’ve given them an outlet to make them feel good, even for an hour or two, is why we do it.” Thanks to the money raised by Co-op’s members, there are major plans afoot. “We want Skool of Street to grow in terms of the number of kids we’re reaching, but also the amount of creative and sporting opportunities, too,” says Aishley. “We’d like to bring in skateboarding, because it’s part of street culture and will open doors to more young people. We’re also implementing employment opportunities for young people coming through the ranks. Eventually we’d like them to run sessions themselves – after all, they know how because they’ve experienced it first-hand. It will be great for the wider community, helping shift negative perceptions many people have about Blackpool. There are a huge amount of incredibly creative people here, and we’re hoping these young people will help grow a stronger, more culturally exciting landscape here. To become a member and support communities every time you shop, visit coop.co.uk/membership“I’ve eaten Afghan food before,” says Big Zuu, who presents Big Zuu’s Big Eats on Dave, “But today I’ve learned exactly how these women cook their stews with spices, and how they put a certain type of berry and currant in their rice. It reminded me that I’d never get that experience online – you might see a TikTok video or something, but it’s not the same as being shown in person by an auntie who’s been cooking it for 20 years who says ‘and this is how I make the rice’.” The rapper and TV cook has spent the morning at the Afghanistan and Central Asian Association (ACAA) in Feltham, west London, being shown how to cook the tastiest, authentic Afghan cuisine – and now it’s finally time to sit down and eat. The association – which helps support refugees and asylum seekers – is one of many places to benefit from a wide-reaching Community Fridge Network, which received a massive boost when Co-op gave its support to the environmental charity Hubbub. Local businesses drop off surplus food (fresh food that would otherwise be thrown away), and members of the public can visit the fridge and take this food home for free, without being questioned about eligibility or referral. The scheme brings communities together and gives people the chance to learn new skills such as helping household budgets go further. Volunteer chef Najia Noory and Big Zuu But as Zuu is finding out today, helping solve food waste isn’t where the project ends. Alongside picking up cooking tips – expect these to make an appearance on new recipes on his socials soon – he has seen first-hand all the community work that the ACAA volunteers carry out on site; from offering English lessons and professional support and guidance, to running sports clubs. Once all 250 new venues being funded by the partnership between Co-op and Hubbub are up and running, there will be 500 in the UK that are part of the Community Fridge Network – and they’ll save an estimated 34m meals from going to waste each year. Food is served at the association; the Community Fridge is open for all to take what they need “The beautiful thing about communities,” says Zuu, “is that food brings us all together. Our communities are based on the people, and if you give the people a base to come together and work together and be involved in each other’s lives, it gives us so much scope to become better and help each other.” The opportunity to give something back to the community is what attracted ACAA volunteers Farah Ashraf, a graphic design intern, and Alice Bletsoe, who helps coach the Afghan and Muslim girls’ football team. Ashraf creates leaflets and social media content for the association, and previously hadn’t heard about the idea of community fridges, but has quickly seen the benefits: “Our fridges are used on a daily basis. We have a lot of people come in, especially those who need advice and support. Everyone is welcome to come and sit together to eat lunch. It’s a great way for people to socialise, meet new people and feel more comfortable. I’ve been really amazed how beneficial it’s been to the community.” The Co-op funding for Hubbub was made possible by Co-op members due to the success of the retailer’s membership scheme. Through the scheme, 2p of every pound members spend on Co-op-branded products is shared between Co-op’s Community Partnerships Fund and Local Community Fund. The aim of both funds is to give local communities the support to help bring people together and bolster their resilience. Bletsoe, who applied for the funding to set up the community fridge, says the scheme has become a launch pad for many other activities. “We decided to apply for funding to be able to expand the set-up we already had started here,” she says, explaining that every week they share food with people visiting for activities like ESOL (English for Speakers of Other Languages) classes and planned to open the scheme up to all. “We do cookery classes, and a women’s support group has been doing gardening lessons. Now we’re thinking they could grow herbs and that would link nicely with the community fridge. We’ve been given a great chance to expand what we do, and advertise it to the wider neighbourhood.” ACAA volunteer Farah Ashraf (left) and Juliette O’Loughlin, Co-op coordinator Ashraf adds: “This project helps to bring people together from communities and cultures who wouldn’t usually have the means to interact. As a result, I’ve been learning how people can have a means to identify, empathise with and support each other’s personal circumstances.” Post-pandemic, much has been said about the idea of “building back better” and it’s perhaps through grassroots schemes such as the Community Fridge Fund that this can start to happen. There’s high spirits buzzing around these local collectives, says Zuu, from his day at the heart of the operation. “The energy in the room was crazy, it was a beautiful thing to see. “I kept thinking this will be something in the future that they will look back on and say: ‘Look what we started, look what we were part of,’ and that’s empowering. It’s also just for starters, because when this builds up, you never know where it can lead.” To find a fridge near you and how you can support the Community Fridge Network, visit Coop.co.ukCommunity projects across the UK are benefiting, thanks to Co-op members, colleagues and customers who have collectively raised £100m to help local groups make a difference in their community. This money has supported, among other things, 25,000 Local Community Fund causes, that help people gain access to food, improve mental wellbeing or provide opportunities for young people. For each £1 Co-op members spend on own-brand products and services, Co-op gives 2p back in rewards, 1p to a Local Community Fund cause of the members’ choosing, and 1p to Co-op’s Community Partnerships Fund. This enables the retailer to partner with like-minded organisations, such as Mind, SAMH (Scottish Association for Mental Health), Inspire and Hubbub, to deliver lasting change on social issues. Data from the latest funding round of the Local Community Fund, shows that community support is needed more than ever, with more than one million Co-op members selecting a cause in a single round, the highest amount since it launched in 2016. “Our insight has told us that support for mental wellbeing, access to food and education and employment for young people are key to helping communities get back on their feet,” explains Rebecca Birkbeck, Co-op’s director for community and shared value. “We’re delighted to see the incredible amount Co-op members have raised over the past five years. By listening closely to our local communities and providing the long-term investment and support they need, our members and customers have all helped make their communities places where we can all be proud to live and work.” Here, three beneficiaries explain how life-changing these funds can be … Food for thought Every week, the volunteers at Foodcycle in Liverpool bring people from the local community together for a free, nutritious meal and great conversation, using food which would otherwise go to waste. “We take excess fruit and veg donated by supermarkets and turn it into a Ready, Steady, Cook-style healthy three-course vegetarian meal, which we serve to our guests,” explains head of fundraising, Victoria Meier. “Anyone can come along – it’s a melting pot of backgrounds and interesting conversations. There’s also a ‘Check in and Chat’ service, where we pick up the phone to those who can’t come in person, and just have a natter.” The project currently benefits approximately 150 people over the course of a year. “People are increasingly feeling isolated, particularly those living alone or on low incomes,” says Meier. “Having a laugh and a chat over a shared meal is great for mental health and wellbeing.” The Liverpool project has received £2,224 from Co-op, which will go towards store cupboard ingredients, kitchen equipment and volunteer training. “Our guests tell us we’re the highlight of their week,” says Meier. “They try new foods, get fruit and veg in their diets, make social connections and feel less lonely. The money from Co-op members will help ensure that continues.” It’s good to talk No5 has been providing free professional counselling in Reading for 50 years, and now works with 2,000 young people aged 11-25, both in-person and digitally, who need mental health support. “They come to us directly, and may be suffering from eating disorders, family breakdown, depression, anxiety, relationship issues, self-harm or abuse,” says Carly Newman, the charity’s operations and relationships manager, who sought help from No5 herself as a teenager and has seen first-hand how it changes lives. “We provide an early intervention service to prevent more serious problems by building a long-term relationship of confidential support. Each young person gets up to 20 weekly sessions with a trained counsellor, going to the root causes of issues and helping unpick them to find a way through. It reduces anxiety, increases their confidence and helps them do things they couldn’t before.” The £4,180 raised by Co-op members through the Co-op Local Community Fund will go towards their under-18 counselling sessions. “Those we help tell us, in their own words: ‘You’ve helped take my sadness away’, ‘I understand things I was finding difficult,’ and ‘I don’t want to take my own life any more’,” says Newman. “There’s no doubt it [these funds] will make an important difference.” Investing in the future Based in Oldham, Mahdlo Youth Zone provides a world of opportunities and support to more than 2,000 young people aged eight to 19 (and up to 25 with additional needs). The purpose-built town-centre hub is open 365 days a year for drop-in sessions, and includes a gym, climbing wall, boxing suite, theatre, cooking facilities and even a music studio. Staffed by youth work professionals and 96 volunteers, the charity runs multiple programmes, including mentorship and support programmes, providing a safe haven for young people while inspiring them at the same time. “The pressure on young people these days is huge – they have so much going on at school and at home,” says Lucy Lees, Mahdlo’s chief executive officer. “They need somewhere to go, something to do and someone to talk to, to be themselves, make friends, and let off steam. Mahdlo is the one constant in their lives; somewhere they can feel safe and have positive role models who care and nurture them, telling them what they can, rather than can’t do.” The charity relies on local community support and Lees says Co-op’s £4,308.83 grant is being put towards girls’ sessions, aimed at raising aspirations. “Funds like this will enable us to carry on building meaningful and personal relationships with young people, providing opportunities and support for young people to be the best they can be.” To get involved and support your local community, download the Co-op app today to become a member and you’ll be making a difference every time you shop. Find out more at coop.co.uk/membershipI found Charlie through a life modelling website, and it wasn’t until I showed this image to my PhD tutor that I discovered he is the son of Pink Floyd’s David Gilmour and kind of famous. I have been interested in feminism and gender issues since I was young. I’m currently studying at the Royal College of Art in London. When I started there I was using Tinder for dating, and was intrigued by the gender dynamic. For example, how men would swipe right a lot more than women did. I started getting interested in the male and female gaze and thought it would be interesting to use the app to find men for my photographs. I messaged a lot of men, but most of them ignored me. Or if they replied they would want something else. I chose the men partially because of personal preferences, but also, I didn’t want to photograph very stereotypically masculine men. In art history, we already have a lot of those. Eventually I stopped using Tinder after the whole process of talking to people on it, going to their homes and photographing them became very repetitive. And then I got banned from it – I had a solo show in Sweden and the gallerist thought it would be interesting to invite people to the opening via Tinder, but you’re not allowed to promote anything through the app. I think getting banned was actually quite a nice, funny end to the whole thing. I try to show men’s vulnerability in these photographs. I don’t want to portray them in a degrading way, and I don’t want to simply reverse the gender roles. I try to be the one who is in control, but this is a fantasy, because my power is never guaranteed. Even when I put myself in my work, it’s not like one person is definitely the subject and the other is definitely the object. In one of the images, I recreated Fuseli’s 1781 painting The Nightmare, in which there’s a woman lying on the bed, there’s a demon sitting on her belly, and the demon is trying to have sex with her while she sleeps. In my version, it was me sitting on a naked man. I made a picture called the Feast with a group of naked men, inspired by old paintings of groups of naked women. Half of them were life models and half were friends. I was trying to make a cornucopia of men, with different kinds of bodies. This picture was inspired by The Dream of the Fisherman’s Wife by the Japanese artist Hokusai. His work is a very erotic scene of a naked woman with a small octopus and a gigantic octopus. Tentacles have always seemed to me very phallic. I woke up at four in the morning to get the octopuses from Billingsgate market in London. I got the biggest one I could find, although it’s a lot smaller than the one in Hokusai’s painting. I had to buy a whole box of the small ones which I then gave to Charlie and the other model on the shoot. I find the octopus so fleshy, so slimy, and really erotic. Some of my pictures, like this and others inspired by paintings, are in a way, me acting out my fantasies. I don’t think it was very pleasant for Charlie though. In fact, I guess it was a bit disgusting, but he didn’t complain. I think most of the men in my shoots have enjoyed them. I have made some video work with video chats in which I asked them to do something mundane for me to watch – like chopping carrots – but naked, and some of them really wanted to be looked at, and enjoyed it. I found that very interesting. I like the domestic space, that they are not doing something very obviously sexual or erotic. They’re just doing something from everyday life, but at the same time, there’s something a bit strange. That’s what I tried to achieve. I get obsessed with technical things, and I love the texture and the quality of analogue film. And because some of my work is directly related to the internet, it’s nice to have the contrast of shooting with film. I think some people find my work humorous - a sort of dry humour, and I’m quite happy to hear that, although I wasn’t trying to make these images funny. Yushi Li’s CV Born: Hunan, China, 1991. Trained: MA in photography and Phd in Arts and Humanities (present) at the Royal College of Art, London. Influences: Sophie Calle, Jeff Wall, John Berger, Jacques Lacan, Édouard Manet. High point: “Two galleries represented my works at Photo London at Somerset House this year.” Low point: “Starting my MA at the RCA – I felt really confused and lost at first.” Top tip: “It’s better to overexpose one stop when you shoot with film.” • Yushi Li’s first photobook is available to preorder from Baron Books from 24 December.Leading UK charities have launched a joint winter appeal to save the lives of 8 million people at risk of starvation in Afghanistan, as aid workers in the country warn of a “small window of opportunity” to intervene. A combination of conflict, economic collapse, drought and the Covid-19 pandemic has brought the country to a tipping point, according to the Disasters Emergency Committee (DEC), the umbrella group of 15 aid agencies behind the appeal. Fiona McSheehy, director of humanitarian operations for Save the Children UK, said: “There’s a very small window of opportunity for us to support the population of Afghanistan. The situation is very bad at the moment. Winter is coming very quickly now. “I’ve witnessed emergencies around the world, and I can honestly say this is the worst situation I have seen.” The launch of the appeal on Wednesday comes as the International Rescue Committee (IRC) predicted that near universal poverty will take hold in Afghanistan next year, with 97% of the population at risk of living below the poverty line. Afghanistan has topped the IRC’s list of countries most at risk of a deteriorating humanitarian crisis in 2022, with Ethiopia and Yemen ranked second and third. In a briefing, David Miliband, the president of the IRC, called on the US and the global community to show “more urgency” towards the situation in Afghanistan. “It’s way past time to sound the alarm,” he said. “I think it’s very important to say that just as a matter of principle, trading off the needs of the Afghan people against the popularity or otherwise of the government is wrong, but in this case, it’s going to be the donor nations who get the blame for what happens. And so there’s an instrumental reason as well as a moral reason for far more urgency.” The IRC said the UK should increase aid and use its diplomatic influence to press the authorities in Afghanistan to ensure that the rights of women and girls are upheld. Women and girls face a new chapter in their suffering, it added. Vicki Aken, country director of the IRC in Afghanistan, said girls as young as six were being sold into early marriage as it meant one less mouth to feed. “The World Food Programme estimates that the average labourer gets roughly one day of work a week, not even close to being enough to feed a family, which is why we are seeing negative coping mechanisms, such as girls as young as six or seven years old being sold into early marriage just to keep the rest of the family alive,” she said. “When I arrived in Afghanistan in 2017, the number of people living in poverty was about 50%. It is now at 97%.” She said the freezing of humanitarian funding had led to the collapse of the healthcare system and was the main reason schools have struggled to open. “With people facing severe food shortages with children with weakened immune systems, we need to immediately be able to provide assistance, such as blankets, fuel and winter clothes so they can just survive the winter. “Humanitarian aid is merely a sticking plaster to prevent a humanitarian catastrophe. It will be a complete system failure if governments fail to stay engaged with Afghanistan and engage with longer-term solutions.”Human rights groups are demanding Qatari authorities show proof of life for a feminist activist, amid growing fears that she has been killed or detained. Noof al-Maadeed has been missing since mid-October after returning to Qatar from the UK. The young activist fled the Gulf kingdom two years ago, documenting her escape on social media, after alleged attempts on her life. She had recently returned to Qatar after being given reassurance by the authorities that she was safe. Before abruptly breaking her pattern of posting daily updates to Twitter and Instagram on 13 October, the 23-year-old told her followers to fear for her safety if she fell silent. Concerned supporters quickly began using #whereisNoof, demanding to know why she had disappeared. A Qatari official told the Guardian that al-Maadeed is safe and in good health, but said they were unable to speak publicly due to a request for privacy. “She said that if she is not posting on social media then it means she is dead. So we are just acting based on what she told us to do,” said Khalid Ibrahim, head of the Gulf Centre for Human Rights (GCHR), a Beirut-based organisation which tracks violations in the Middle East. “The Qatari government can easily prove to the international community that she is alive. They have no proof, and that is of concern for us.” GCHR said they had received multiple reports that the Qatari authorities handed al-Maadeed to her family on 13 October. Ibrahim and other supporters of al-Maadeed have said it is the responsibility of the Qatari authorities to prove that the activist is alive and safe. “What we know for sure is that she is at imminent risk at the moment. She was either killed or detained, there is no doubt about it,” said Ibrahim. Ibrahim accused the Qatari authorities of reneging on their private assurances to al-Maadeed that she would be protected on her return. As a result of those assurances, al-Maadeed rescinded her application for political asylum in the UK and returned to the Gulf nation to stay in a hotel under the watch of security officials. Al-Maadeed tweeted in early October that her father had accessed the hotel and that her life was put at risk, after three alleged previous attempts to kill her by members of her family. On 12 October she tweeted “Sheikh Tamim is the only one who can prevent the danger to my life,” a reference to the Emir of Qatar, Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad al-Thani. She tweeted “still not safe”, and later “a bit more OK”, the following day, followed by a thumbs up emoji. She has not spoken publicly since. Al-Maadeed documented her flight from Qatar two years ago, which included stealing her father’s mobile phone to request an exit permit, as Qatari guardianship laws prevent unmarried women under the age of 25 from travelling alone outside the country without the permission of a male guardian. Her exile followed years of alleged domestic abuse and efforts by her family to curtail her movements. She told Human Rights Watch that “[I was] only allowed to go to school and back. Anything else [and I] can expect a beating.” The group raised concerns about al-Maadeed on 15 October, two days after her last social media update. Human Rights Watch reported earlier this year that Qatari guardianship laws restrict women’s access to many basic rights, including access to some jobs, travel outside the country and reproductive healthcare. They added that a lack of clarity around guardianship legislation means socially conservative policies remain, despite changes to the law. “Many women in Qatar do not know what the official male guardianship rules are, or their legal basis, and only know of them because of their experiences or [those] of others … in many aspects of their lives, adult women are treated as legal minors in Qatar,” they said.Huawei has helped Chinese authorities create surveillance technology that targets the country’s Uyghur minority population, an investigation has alleged. A series of marketing presentation slides reviewed by the Washington Post found Huawei had a role in developing surveillance projects created in a partnership with other Chinese companies. They included analysis of voice recordings, monitoring detention centres, tracking locations of political individuals of interest, police surveillance in the western Xinjiang region, and corporate tracking of employees and customers. While the slides did not specify who the presentations were for, the report said some of them showcased surveillance functions specific to police or government agencies, which suggests Chinese government authorities may have been the intended audience. Huawei said it had no knowledge of the projects mentioned in the Washington Post report. “Huawei does not develop or sell systems that target any specific group of people and we require our partners comply with all applicable laws, regulations and business ethics,” it said in a statement. “Privacy protection is our top priority and we require that all parts of our business comply with all applicable laws and regulations in the countries and regions where we operate.” According to the report, many of the slides were created in 2014, a few months after a terrorist attack at Kunming railway station that killed 31 people – a case Chinese officials often cite when justifying their policies in Xinjiang. The report said some modifications to the files were made in 2019 or 2020. Huawei’s logo can be seen in many of these slides. The report claimed Xinjiang surveillance projects were highlighted in several slides. Although they did not mention the Uyghur ethnic minority specifically, at least one slide claimed Huawei’s technology had helped the public security bureau in Ürümqi, the capital of Xinjiang, capture a number of criminal suspects. The presentation said the system had been in use in Ürümqi since 2017 – which experts believe is around the time when the mass detentions of Uyghurs began. In recent weeks the US and several of its allies have announced a diplomatic boycott of the Beijing Winter Olympics in response to what the Biden administration called “crimes against humanity in Xinjiang and other human rights abuses”. The report said a “one person one file” facial recognition solution was co-developed by Huawei and a Beijing-based company, which was sanctioned by the US commerce department in July for alleged human rights abuses in Xinjiang. According to the report, other presentations said Huawei’s equipment was used in surveillance camera systems in other Xinjiang cities, highways and detention centres. The pitch to provide voice recording analysis aimed to help the authorities examine voice recordings for national security purposes, the report said. In China, the term “national security” is broad. It could range from activities conducted by political dissents to policies in Hong Kong. One 2018 presentation introduced the iFlytek Voiceprint Management Platform, a product co-developed by Huawei and iFlytek, a Chinese artificial intelligence company. According to the slide, this product can identify individuals by comparing their voice against a “voiceprint library”. It is unclear whether the developers of this product were involved in collecting voiceprints. But the partner, iFlytek, was sanctioned by the US for alleged human rights violations in 2019. The company did not respond to the Washington Post’s inquiry.Winter is here and Young Country Diary is once again open for submissions. Every three months we ask you to send us a piece about the natural world, written by a child aged 8-14. The article can be about anything to do with nature – whether it’s cliff-top birdwatching, a worm in the garden or a wintry walk in the park. It doesn’t matter if the child is a nature expert or has never picked up a pair of binoculars. We are especially keen to reach teachers who might like to get their class outside and noticing nature. We will pick six winning entries to be published in the Guardian newspaper and online – two in January, two in February and two in March. Then we will do another callout for pieces in spring. How your child can take part First of all, we’re looking for children age 8 to 14, so we will need your permission, as parent or guardian. Then here’s what the child needs to do: Step 1 – Go out one day to where there is some nature. It could be their local woods or beach, their nearest park, a farm, or it could simply be a garden. Step 2 – Write an article telling us where they were and what happened. The article needs to be between 200 and 250 words. Photos are helpful (especially landscape rather than portrait) but they are not a condition of entry. (NB, photos cannot be attached to the form below, but please do state if you have one.) Step 3 – We ask that you fill in the form rather than the child, pasting their piece below and filling in all other details. If they get stuck and don’t know what to write about, here are a few hints and tips to pass on to them: • Good nature writing starts with the senses – so what did you see and hear? What about smell and touch? Take notes when you’re out and about so you don’t forget • How would you describe what happened? Did it remind you of anything? • It’s great to look up some extra information about what you saw, and tell us about that too. For example, if you saw some blue tits feeding – what do they eat? Do they eat a lot? What are blue tits normally doing at this time of year? • You can think big, and describe the whole scene – the sky, the horizon, the landscape. Or you can think small, and tell us some details about the butterfly’s wings or the beetle’s markings. • What did your encounter with nature make you think about? How did it make you feel? Submissions are open for four weeks – the deadline for entry is Thursday 13 January. Anyone can enter their child who is aged between 8 and 14 and based in the UK. You the parent/guardian will be contacted if your child’s piece is selected for publication, and you will be paid on behalf of the child. The selected pieces will be published in January, February and March, and you will be informed of the precise dates. For further inspiration, here are a few recent Young Country Diaries: • Aphra on seeing her first goldfinch • Zac on seeing an adder • Alma on her snail wall Good luck, everyone! Paul Fleckney, editor of Country Diary and Young Country Diary We ask that the parent/guardian fills in the form below, rather than your child. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact with you, as parent or guardian, before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.At first glance, Shamima Begum and I don’t have much in common. She fled Britain when she was a schoolgirl to join Islamic State. I came to the UK from Sri Lanka in 2005 and qualified here as a public and human rights lawyer. I became a British citizen in 2015. Begum was born in the UK as a British citizen on the basis of her parents’ immigration status. She was stripped of her citizenship using a controversial power introduced after the 2005 London bombings, which allows the government to remove British citizenship from dual nationals if doing so is “conducive to the public good”. The use of this power increased from 2010 and further increased in 2014. Like Begum, I too could be stripped of my British citizenship without warning under a proposed rule change quietly added to the nationality and borders bill, thanks to a provision known as clause 9. This would exempt the government from having to give notice if it is not “reasonably practicable” to do so, or in the interests of national security, diplomatic relations or otherwise in the public interest. How does the government define what is in the public interest? Could that include displeasing the government of the day, even if no crime is committed and no law is broken? I renounced my Sri Lankan citizenship to become a proud British citizen. Begum had her British citizenship taken away from her after then-home secretary Sajid Javid cancelled it on security grounds. The supreme court ruled that the government was entitled to prevent her from returning to the UK to fight this decision. A tribunal ruled that removing her British citizenship was lawful because she was a citizen of Bangladesh – her parents’ heritage – by descent, a point disputed by the government of Bangladesh. My childhood was spent in Sri Lanka. Under the new proposals I could be deprived of my British citizenship without notice or notification. Dual citizenship is not a pre-condition. Begum grew up in the UK. She has been made stateless simply because the British government believes she is eligible for citizenship of Bangladesh. The power to remove British citizenship has long been regarded as controversial and was made even more draconian in 2006, but the proposed extension of these rules will disproportionately affect people of colour. Begum and I both have heritage from the same region of the world, and we both have brown skin. Some kind of advance warning of the government’s intention to remove citizenship at least gives time to prepare a defence and appeal. To no longer have this “heads up” will leave victims of such decisions winded and on the back foot – presumably this is why the “no notice” clause is being added to the legislation. In the case of R v Secretary of State for the Home Department, 2003, Lord Steyn emphasised the importance of notice as a key component of fair decision-making, stating that fairness is the guiding principle of our public law, and that fairness requires that a decision takes effect only upon communication. The Home Office has said that British citizenship is a privilege, not a right. A government spokesperson recently told the Guardian: “Deprivation of citizenship on conducive grounds is rightly reserved for those who pose a threat to the UK or whose conduct involves very high harm. The nationality and borders bill will amend the law so citizenship can be deprived where it is not practicable to give notice, for example if there is no way of communicating with the person.” The New Statesman has conducted research into the numbers of people and their nationalities who could potentially be affected by the new clause. Using 2011 census data it found that 5.6 million people in England and Wales could potentially be affected by the new rule. Just one in 20 are white, while half of British Asians and 39% of black Britons are potentially at risk. Of course this extrapolation of census data does not mean that all of us will be unceremoniously booted out of the UK on the whim of the home secretary. But what it does do is instil fear and uncertainty into our hearts. For millions of us the UK is the only place we consider home but clause 9 is whispering in our ears: “Don’t be too sure about that.” Psychologically, the rug of our secure lives here is being pulled from under our feet. Those of us among the 5.6 million who are people of colour will sleep less easily in our beds if this clause becomes law. • This article was amended on 22 December 2021 to clarify that powers to strip Britons of their citizenship existed prior to 2006, when the legislation was extended. Naga Kandiah is a solicitor at MTC SolicitorsA former World Cup 2022 worker has failed in his appeal against a controversial jail sentence in Qatar, which he believes came about because he criticised the Supreme Committee for its handling of a migrant workers strike. The decision to jail Abdullah Ibhais, a former senior World Cup 2022 media manager, for three years has sparked fierce condemnation from human rights groups, who say that he was coerced into a confession – and a counter-claim from the authorities. Human Rights Watch and FairSquare say there is no evidence of wrongdoing on Ibhais’s part and have also repeatedly criticised Fifa for its unwillingness to intervene in his case, saying it has enabled the Qatari authorities. However Qatar insists Ibhais, who has been on hunger strike for 31 days, was jailed for soliciting bribes and not for speaking out against the Supreme Committee, which is responsible for organising the 2022 World Cup. Speaking after the verdict, Nicholas McGeehan, co-director of FairSquare, who has spent years investigating human rights in Qatar, said the decision raised serious concerns. “This case goes to the heart of the serious issues with Qatar’s World Cup and every day Abdullah Ibhais remains in jail more people will know his name, know what he did for the migrant workers who built Qatar’s World Cup, and know the price he has apparently paid for that,” he said. “Did he get a fair trial? Absolutely not. Did Fifa make a call for a fair trial? No, they didn’t, which I think is pretty scandalous,” he added. “It was Qatar’s World Cup organisers who instigated this prosecution, but it was Fifa’s silence that enabled today’s verdict, for which there is no evidence other than a forced confession.” Qatar’s authorities insist that Ibhais, who was removed from his role in 2019, was sentenced on fraud charges relating to a contract to produce social media content for the 2022 World Cup. A Qatari official said: “The court of appeal has upheld its guilty verdict in the case of Mr Abdullah Ibhais. He was convicted following the careful examination of an abundance of strong and credible evidence against him for soliciting bribes to influence the outcome of a state-funded procurement process. This evidence included extensive details of the crime – much more than the defendant’s own confession.” A statement from the Supreme Committee said that Ibhais received his full salary from the date of his suspension in November 2019 until August 2020, when he was made redundant along with numerous others as part of a budget restructuring exercise. It also claimed that Ibhais had reapplied to work for it in March 2021 via a third-party agency. “Ibhais’s post-conviction allegations that the SC conspired against him because of his views on migrant workers are ludicrous, defamatory, and absolutely false,” it said. “The SC’s work culture promotes and encourages staff raising issues and grievances, and particularly on the subject in question (worker welfare).” However human rights groups insist that the Qataris have not been able to present any evidence of wrongdoing against Ibhais. “In contrast, Abdullah claims that he took a stance on workers’ rights internally, he has got evidence to support that,” said McGeehan. “He provided us with a very clear explanation of what happened in this case, before it went public, and all of that has been borne out by the documentation that we have subsequently seen. “We have seen the court’s judgment. We have seen the fact that the judge refused to investigate Abdullah’s allegations of a coerced confession. So when you compare the evidence presented by the Supreme Committee and the Qatari authorities on one hand, which is essentially none, and the evidence by Abullah, of which there is plenty. It leaves the Qataris and Supreme Committee with serious questions to answer.” A Fifa spokesperson did not respond to questions about its lack of an intervention in the case. However in a statement football’s governing body said: “Any person deserves a trial that is fair, where due process is observed and respected. “Fifa has been following the case involving Mr Ibhais and notes the statements from the government communications office in Qatar and the Supreme Committee for Delivery &amp; Legacy in relation to the court’s decision,” it added. “Fifa will consider today’s ruling before making any further comment.”From the “formidable” Princess Budur to Dalila the Crafty, a “master of ruses and rackets” who could “lure a snake from its lair”, the female protagonists of the Arabian Nights are finally being given their due thanks to a major new translation by Yasmine Seale, the first by a woman into English. Out this month, The Annotated Arabian Nights is a riposte, said editor Paulo Lemos Horta, to Richard Francis Burton’s 1885 translation, “stripping away the Orientalism and the added, interpolated racism and sexism Burton brought to the stories”. He hopes that, “if nothing else, this new edition knocks Burton’s finally off its pedestal.” Also known as The Thousand and One Nights, The Arabian Nights is a collection of Middle Eastern and Indian folk tales dating back to the ninth century. The stories are framed by the tale of Shahrazad, the daughter of a vizier who has been married to the homicidal king Shahriyar who kills a new wife every day. Each night, Shahrazad tells a story, leaving it unfinished in order that the king will keep her alive to hear the end the next day. The first European translation of the tales was Antoine Galland’s Les Mille et Une Nuits in the early 18th century; Galland included stories such as Aladdin and the Wonderful Lamp and Ali Baba and the 40 Thieves for the first time, drawing from a four-volume Syrian manuscript. “The new edition came as a response to a break in the mystery of the authorship of the most famous Nights tales that were only added in the French translation of the early 1700s – Aladdin and the Wonderful Lamp, Ali Baba and the 40 Thieves, Prince Ahmad and the Fairy Pari Banu,” said Horta, a literary historian and academic. “The French translator, Antoine Galland, had mentioned something in his private diary about a Syrian in Paris in 1709 who would have given him these tales missing in the Arabic manuscript … He said nothing of the kind in print. In the absence of more news, over the centuries Galland has been credited as the author, inventor, and creator of these tales [and] for three centuries we imagined the tales added by Galland’s hand to the Nights in French reflected his stay in Istanbul, a French fantasy of the Orient.” But the “elusive Syrian” from Galland’s diary has more recently been identified as Hanna Diyab, after the discovery in the Vatican library of Diyab’s Book of Travels, and “this discovery called for a modern translation of all the famous tales given to Galland,” said Horta. “Among these Hanna Diyab tales, only Aladdin and Ali Baba existed in modern versions,” he added. Horta said that the translation by Seale, a French-Syrian translator and poet who has previously worked with Horta on a standalone translation of Aladdin, is the first by a woman into English of both the core cycle of tales and all the tales added from Diyab’s storytelling. Although the acclaimed 2008 translation by Malcolm Lyons does include a handful of stories translated by his wife Ursula Lyons, it omits the stories of female protagonists including Parizade and Pari Banu. Horta said the best example of how female characters get their due in Seale’s translation might be the horror story Sidi Numan, in which a husband, unable to understand why his wife only eats a single grain of rice for dinner, follows her at night and finds her feasting on a fresh corpse alongside a ghoul at a cemetery. Later, when he confronts her, she turns him into a dog, but he gets his revenge by turning her into a mare. “We are given to understand that his wife’s strangeness may be a product of his failure to read her,” Seale said. “It is easier for him to believe that his wife is a supernatural creature than to engage with the part of her that eludes his grasp.” The Porter and the Three Women of Baghdad, meanwhile, sees the women live alone, happily, without a man. It is, said Horta, “a mystery that attracts the attention of a porter and passing merchants who turn out to be the Caliph Harun al Rashid and his vizier Jafar in disguise. The women will welcome them to their nighttime revelry, along with three dervishes who tell their stories. The guests are sworn not to ask questions. And the women get to tell their own stories. In Seale’s version the tale is a rediscovery, it is a revelation.” Publisher WW Norton said that the English-speaking world had relied on dated translations of the Arabian Nights “for too long”. “Seale’s distinctly contemporary and lyrical translations break decisively with this masculine dynasty, finally stripping away the deliberate exoticism of Orientalist renderings while reclaiming the vitality and delight of the stories,” said the publisher.Anne Rice, who has died aged 80 after a stroke, was one of the foremost writers of supernatural fiction, and the author of more than 30 novels. The best known of them was her debut, Interview With the Vampire, published in 1976, and adapted in 1994 into a film starring Tom Cruise, Brad Pitt and Kirsten Dunst. Her work became synonymous with deep, romantic portrayals of vampires, witches and revenant mummies and she was one of the first authors to turn the trope of supernatural creatures as monsters to be vanquished on its head, and put them in the role of protagonist, paving the way for later writers such as Stephenie Meyer and her Twilight saga. Interview With the Vampire introduced Rice’s most enduring character, Lestat de Lioncourt, an 18th-century French nobleman whose story formed the basis of what would become known as The Vampire Chronicles, a series of 13 books, with the most recent, Blood Communion, published in 2018. To borrow the title of Rice’s third Lestat book (filmed, with Aaliyah in the title role), the writer was indeed the Queen of the Damned, not necessarily turning into heroes the characters who had previously been the villains of horror fiction, but rather giving them a voice, and presenting their stories from the viewpoint of a different morality. She plumbed the depths of her own grief and terrors to write, saying in a Rolling Stone interview in 1995 that, “I think all my writing has been part of a battle with my fears. When I write I explore my worst fears, and then take my protagonist right into awful situations that I myself am terrified by. And I think that the act of putting all that fear and terror and confusion into an orderly, plotted story has been very therapeutic for me. It definitely helps me to continue through life.” Rice said that fantasy writing allowed her to talk about her own life whereas writing a “realistic novel” would be too raw. She said, “You can put the most horrible things into a frame, and you can go into that frame safely and talk about those things. You can go into the world of Louis and Lestat and Claudia, and be able to talk about grief or loss or survival, and then come back safely.” She wrote like a time traveller, layering especially the Lestat novels with astonishingly evocative period detail. And she did not confine herself to vampires. The Mayfair Witches series, beginning with The Witching Hour (1990), set in Rice’s native New Orleans, concerned itself with a trio of occult practitioners and the demon that bedevils them. The two books of the Wolf Gift series are about lycanthropy, while The Mummy (1989) revitalises the classic horror movie staple. A second mummy novel, Ramses the Damned (2017) was written by Rice with her son, Christopher, and a third collaboration– what will be Rice’s last book – is scheduled for 2022. Born in New Orleans, Rice was the second of five daughters of Kay (nee Allen) and Howard O’Brien. Her father served with the US navy and then for the US postal service, and both parents were of Irish Catholic heritage. She reportedly hated her name, Howard, and changed it to Anne in the first grade at school. Her mother died in 1956, when Anne was 15, from the effects of alcoholism and the family moved into the former home of her maternal grandmother, who had also died with an alcohol problem. Rice has said that she was inspired to be a writer by her father who, returning from the second world war and realising he barely knew his infant daughters, Anne and her sister, Alice (the novelist Alice Borchardt), wrote a novel, The Impulsive Imp, for them. Anne was educated first at St Joseph’s academy, a private girls’ school in New Orleans, and later at Richardson high school in north Texas, after her father remarried in 1957 and relocated the family. After completing a year’s higher education at the Texas Women’s University in Denton, and a sophomore year at North Texas State College, Anne dropped out, unable to afford the tuition fees, and moved to San Francisco, where she took night classes and began her nascent writing career. She had met Stan Rice at Richardson high school and they rekindled their relationship, marrying in 1961. They settled in the Haight-Ashbury district of San Francisco, living through the growing hippy counterculture years, though Rice once said she was a “square” who locked herself away to write while everyone around her was “dropping acid and smoking grass”. Their daughter Michele was born in 1966, and in 1970 was diagnosed with leukaemia – the same year that Rice returned to her studies at San Francisco State University. She graduated with an MA in creative writing in 1972, the year her daughter died. The couple’s second child, Christopher, was born in 1978. Like her mother and grandmother before her, Rice struggled with alcohol and she and her husband made the decision to stop drinking altogether not long after their son was born. Although she was brought up a Catholic and her books – the Lestat novels especially, as well as two books fictionalising the life of Christ – included strong elements of the Christian mythos, Rice had a complicated relationship with her faith. Not long after her mother died, she disavowed her belief in God, but returned to the Catholic fold in 1998, a decade after going back to New Orleans to live permanently. However, in 2010 Rice once again renounced Christianity, saying that while she was still a follower of Christ she could not reconcile herself with many of the church’s beliefs – particularly on same-sex marriage, Christopher being a prominent gay rights activist. Her son said that Rice had always decried fashion and forged her own path. “She always saw herself starkly at odds with whatever the literary trends of the moment were,” he said. “The accomplishment of Interview With the Vampire … was that she had completely flipped the point of view. She had taken what was previously considered to be … the unknowable monster, and she went in to their point of view and she showed us: what does the world look like through the eyes and the heart of the character we have dismissed in these terms?” Stan died in 2002. Rice is survived by Christopher and by three of her sisters. • Anne Rice (Howard Allen Frances O’Brien), writer, born 4 October 1941; died 11 December 2021The woman who murdered Star Hobson after inflicting “utterly catastrophic” injuries has been jailed for life with a minimum term of 25 years as a judge said the toddler was caught in the crossfire of a toxic relationship. Star suffered weeks of “neglect, cruelty and injury” from Savannah Brockhill, 28, in Keighley, West Yorkshire. The toddler died aged 16 months of cardiac arrest after being punched or kicked by Brockhill in September 2020 using “massive force” on a par associated with “a road traffic accident”, according to the judge. A postmortem revealed previous brain injuries, fractured bones and internal organ injury. Brockhill’s partner, Frankie Smith, Star’s mother, was jailed for eight years after she was found guilty of causing or allowing the toddler’s death. The 20-year-old was cleared of murder and manslaughter charges. “The physical injuries that Star suffered during her life are only part – however, a very significant part – of the tragic story of her life. She was also treated with, at best, callous indifference, by you both, and on many occasions with frank cruelty,” said Mrs Justice Lambert as she passed sentence at Bradford crown court on Wednesday. A local review of Star’s death is due to be published in January, which will feed into a national one ordered by the government after Arthur Labinjo-Hughes murder. The first of at least five safeguarding referrals from concerned relatives and friends was made in January 2020 by Hollie Jones, Smith’s friend. The judge thanked Jones for “love and care” she showed Star, noting she was frequently “used for free babysitting” while Smith went out drinking. Jones told the BBC that when social workers rang to say they were visiting, Smith spent an hour cleaning Star and covering up bruises. Social workers visited on four occasions, and closed the case three times, while police visited once. The judge found that Star was “caught up” in the crossfire of the 10-month relationship between her mother and Brockhill, which was characterised by “petty squabbles and jealous fights” which escalated into violent threats. Lambert said Brockhill, who she described as the “leading force in the relationship” with a violent temper, then took out her anger on Star, while Smith displayed cruelty and meted out “pointless punishments”. During sentencing, Lambert found that Star’s murder was not pre-meditated, and that Brockhill had not intended to kill her, but would “lash out” when in a “jealous rage”. Brockhill, an amateur boxer and security guard, denied all charges against her. Halfway through the seven-week trial, Smith pleaded guilty to eight instances of child cruelty against Star between April and September 2020. The court heard Smith was of extremely low intelligence, and “abnormally compliant” when told to do something by an authority figure. However, the judge said that she “did not accept” that these factors excused Smith’s conduct, describing her as a “neglectful and callous parent” who thought only of her own interests and would have realised her partner was abusing Star. “You chose to be and to remain in that relationship for your own purposes and your own gratification”, adding that Smith could have turned to several family members for help, as she had in the past. Anita Smith, Star’s great-grandmother, who had previously looked after the toddler for 10 weeks, said she would “treasure those memories of a content, happy child forever”. Bernard Hobson, Star’s paternal grandfather, choked back tears while describing a sunny child who often stayed with them overnight before Smith cut off all contact in March 2020. Describing the pain of hearing the evidence during the trial, he said that the family believed “all they could do is give her love and respect, and take the time to walk in her tiny shoes.” The sentencing follows the conviction of another couple, in a separate case, of killing six-year-old Arthur Labinjo-Hughes after a “campaign of appalling cruelty” during lockdown. Arthur died in June 2020 after being deprived of food, force-fed salt and assaulted, in abuse that was filmed and photographed by his stepmother and father. Anita Banerjee from the Crown Prosecution Service, said that “instead of love and protection”, Star “experienced a world of humiliation, cruelty and pain at the hands of those who should have protected her most”. “Our thoughts remain with Star’s family, as they have been throughout.”Bolton council has admitted it missed the deadline to apply for a £16m levelling-up grant because of an email mishap. This year the council was making two separate bids, which had to be submitted by noon on 18 June. The £4.8bn levelling up fund has been set up by central government for investing in local infrastructure that “improve everyday life across the UK”, such as town centre regeneration and better public transport. While Bolton council’s first £20m bid for a new medical college was submitted successfully, its second £16m bid for the renovation of a town centre development was not because it failed to send all the necessary documents before the deadline, Manchester Evening News reported. “Both bids involved collating many separate documents and third-party letters of support and unfortunately we did not receive all necessary signed documents until that morning [on 18 June],” said Gerry Brough, one of the officials responsible for the application, during a council meeting on Monday. “At the point of submission, it became apparent that file size limitations on the Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government server meant that both bids had to be broken down into four separate parts so they could be attached to four separate emails,” he added. This led to the second bid being submitted after the deadline. Brough stressed that there was no guarantee that the town centre bid would have been accepted, had it been correctly submitted before the deadline. The council said it was not told the missed deadline was the reason why the bid had failed until October, when central government informed it that the application was rejected. Nic Peel, the council opposition Labour leader, called the situation “a very costly mess”. The £16m would have been put toward a £250m redevelopment project in Crompton Place, which was granted planning permission last year. The project includes the demolition of the current shopping centre and the building of a new one. The council has been approached for comment.This has not been a banner year for Advent calendars. Tony’s Chocolonely was forced to apologise earlier this month, after it deliberately left one calendar window empty, apparently to highlight slave labour practices in the chocolate industry. A nice gesture, but one that apparently left thousands of children in floods of tears. More accidental was the snafu with Kmart’s calendar, which missed out Christmas Eve altogether. But how do these stack up against the all-time Advent calendar mishaps? Let’s find out. Cadbury Dairy Milk, 2019 Anyone who found themselves annoyed by the Chocolonely prank would have been driven to gales of outrage by Cadbury’s 2019 calendars, some of which shipped containing no chocolate at all. Every day, scores of consumers opened the door, tore off the foil and found a hole where the chocolate should be. This was thought to be the result of a simple production mistake rather than being a comment on social injustices. Still, it did cause one buyer to tweet angrily: “Cheers sons crying. Nice one”; an absolute classic of the genre. John Lewis, 2018 The problem with no-chocolate Advent calendars is that every element has to be exactly right to offset the inevitable disappointment. Unfortunately, three years ago, the John Lewis no-chocolate Advent calendar failed this simple task as those who opened the 2 December window were greeted with a cheery message informing them that Christmas was just 16 days away. Mathematically, this was incorrect. Our children deserve better. Hotel Chocolat, 2019 A similar fate befell anybody who purchased Hotel Chocolat’s Free From Advent calendar two years ago. As many recipients furiously tweeted at the time, the calendar didn’t have a door number three. Was it an error? Was it a joke, hinging upon some tenuous “three from” wordplay? Maybe we will never know. Cadbury Dairy Milk, 2020 And now for the mother of all printing errors. Think back to last Christmas. Think back to all the oppressive Covid regulations that stopped everyone from seeing their family. And now, think back to the time you opened your Dairy Milk Advent calendar and saw a message reading “Give hugs at Christmas”. Badly timed advice, to say the least. Zoella, 2017 We will now move on to rip-off Advent calendars, none of which caused more outrage than the one released by YouTuber Zoella in 2017. It cost £50. Its contents included tatlike candles, pens and cookie cutters, some of which were found on Amazon selling for 77p. Worst of all, the thing only had 12 windows. Zoella herself quickly apologised and the price was slashed in stores, but the damage had been done. Chanel, 2021 Here’s a more upmarket version of the Zoella problem. Chanel’s Advent calendar costs a whopping £610, and an army of TikTok unboxers have quickly revealed it to be terrible value for money. Its contents include a keychain, a wax stamp, a flip book and that most glamorous of items, a sticker book. To paraphrase Coco Chanel herself, the best things in life are free, but the worst will rip you off with giddy abandon. Celebrations, 2020 On to my favourite category of Advent calendar fail: the ones that rely on personal taste. This was most famously illustrated last year, when the Celebrations calendar was found to include a miniature Bounty bar – the item that is traditionally left in the bottom of the tub until mid-January – on two consecutive days. Now, there might be people who actually like Bounty bars. But to the rest of the world, this was nothing less than a tremendous slap in the face. May this horror never befall us ever again. Heroes, 2021 However, this sort of outrage can quickly backfire. This year, for example, some consumers attempted to initiate a firestorm based on the fact that the first door of their Heroes Advent calendar contained a Cadbury Creme Egg. Sadly, this overlooks the fact that Creme Eggs are actually one of the more superior Heroes items. If Cadbury really wanted to punish us, it would have filled its calendars with nothing but Eclairs, a dismal, cursed insult of a chocolate. Nightmare Before Christmas Advent calendar, 2021 Now, first it’s important that this isn’t a mass-produced Advent calendar, nor does it seem to be official. Nevertheless, this December a Sheffield professor ordered a Nightmare Before Christmas Advent calendar for her four-year-old great-niece, expecting “fun figures like Jack Skellington”, but was shocked to instead receive a calendar full of gruesome horror movie figurines. Not ideal, but it was reported that at least the girl took a liking to her Texas Chainsaw Massacre doll. Paw Patrol, 2017 I have to confess that I might be the only person alive who was appalled by this but, in 2017, the Paw Patrol Advent calendar suffered from an insulting preponderance of Chase. Yes, Chase is ostensibly the leader of the Paw Patrol, but other members barely got a look in. By 6 December, that cantankerous canine had appeared behind three doors. In total, Chase made 10 appearances, while Zuma – lovely, sweet, overlooked Zuma, the Paw Patrol connoisseur’s pup of choice – didn’t show up once. Cheers sons crying, nice one.Lady Hallett, a former senior appeal court judge, has been appointed to chair the public inquiry into the Covid pandemic. Hallett, 71, a crossbench life peer, was coroner in the inquest into the 7 July 2005 terror attacks on London’s transport network that claimed 52 lives. Boris Johnson announced the decision in a written statement to parliament on Wednesday afternoon, delivering on a promise to bereaved people to name a chair before Christmas. The inquiry is due to begin in spring 2022 and is likely to be one of the most complex undertaken in legal history, as it explores a pandemic that has so far led to 146,627 deaths within 28 days of a positive Covid test. Johnson told parliament Hallett had run several “high-profile and complex” inquiries and also highlighted her roles as chair of the Iraq fatality investigations and as chair of the 2014 Hallett review of the administrative scheme to deal with IRA suspects known as “on the runs” in Northern Ireland. She is currently acting as coroner in the inquest into the death of Dawn Sturgess, who died in July 2018 following exposure to the nerve agent novichok in Amesbury, which the UK has blamed on Russia. The prime minister said: “The inquiry will be established under the 2005 Inquiries Act, with full powers, including the power to compel the production of documents and to summon witnesses to give evidence on oath. The inquiry will be held in public. In consultation with Baroness Hallett, I intend to appoint additional panel members in the new year in order that the inquiry has access to the full range of expertise needed to complete its important work.” The prime minister said he would consult Hallett and ministers in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland on the inquiry’s terms of reference, which is likely to involve wrestling with how it covers the divergent responses of the devolved nations. The Scottish government has already said it will run its own inquiry. The draft terms will be published in the new year when Hallett will run a public consultation – including with bereaved families and other affected groups – before they are finalised. Hallett’s appointment follows a campaign by the Covid-19 Bereaved Families for Justice group, which represents thousands of grieving relatives. It wanted the inquiry to start much earlier to learn lessons for future Covid waves. Hallett now faces planning for an inquiry into a pandemic that is far from over, amid warnings of a “tidal wave” of the latest Omicron variant. Matt Fowler, the co-founder of Covid-19 Bereaved Families For Justice, said its members hoped to work closely with Hallett. He welcomed her appointment as a positive step in making sure “the terrible suffering and loss of the past 18 months are learned from, to ensure these tragedies are not repeated in the future”. ”Everyone agrees that the focus of the inquiry must be on saving lives in the future, and that means that those who have been most affected, including bereaved families, must be at its heart,” he said. “We must now be fully consulted on the terms of reference, and given core participant status, so that our stories and loss are learned from to protect the lives of others.” But the group said the inquiry was being established “far too late”. “We’ve been calling for an inquiry since the end of the first wave, and we will never know how many lives could have been saved had the government had a rapid review phase in summer 2020,” said Fowler. “With the Omicron variant upon us, the inquiry really cannot come soon enough. “This is a one-off, historic opportunity to learn lessons to protect lives across the country. We cannot afford to get it wrong and we look forward to working closely with Baroness Hallett to make it a success.” • This article was amended on 16 December 2021. Dawn Sturgess died following exposure to the nerve agent novichok in Amesbury, not Salisbury, as an earlier version said.A man who murdered two women then used a hospital job to prey like a “vulture” on more than 100 dead women in a mortuary, whose bodies he sexually assaulted, has been told by a judge he will die in jail. Victims of David Fuller, 67, gave harrowing accounts of the suffering his “psychopathic” offending caused, with him videoing his necrophiliac attacks on girls and women aged from nine to 100. The mother of his youngest victim said her daughter had been “raped” as she lay in the mortuary, with another whose loved one was attacked saying women were not safe when alive, nor in death. The government has ordered an independent inquiry into how Fuller was able to offend for so long. Fuller first stalked and murdered two young women in Kent in 1987, and for 33 years seemed to have got away with his crimes, before admitting them during a trial at Maidstone crown court. A DNA breakthrough led to him being identified as the prime suspect and when police raided his home in December 2020 they uncovered hard drives full of his attacks on the dead and material downloaded from the internet showing extreme pornography including the rape of children. Fuller murdered Wendy Knell, 25, and Caroline Pierce, 20, in separate attacks in Tunbridge Wells in 1987. Both were sexually assaulted and he had planned his attacks. Handing down a whole-life sentence at Maidstone crown court on Wednesday, the judge, Mrs Justice Cheema-Grubb, explicitly said her intention was that Fuller would die in jail. “Having killed two young women who were full of the promise of life you became a vulture, picking your victims from among the dead, within the hidden world of hospital mortuaries which you were left free to inhabit, simply because you had a swipecard,” she said. “The depravity of what you did reveals that your conscience is seared; callused over. The sentence I am about to pass means you will spend every day of the rest of your life in prison.” Fuller’s necrophiliac attacks are believed to be the most extensive offending of their kind in British legal history. He admitted the murders and attacks during his trial. He used his job as a hospital electrician to enter the mortuary of two Tunbridge Wells hospitals, where from 2008 to 2020 he sexually abused 102 dead bodies. There was no CCTV where the attacks took place. The prosecutor, Duncan Atkinson QC, said about 20 victims were yet to be identified, while 82 had been. “David Fuller systematically and repeatedly sexually abused the bodies of dead women and girls,” Atkinson said. In interviews after his arrests, Fuller claimed not to have derived sexual pleasure. He recorded the abuse, taking video footage and photos which he later watched, then catalogued them according to types of attack. Some recordings had the name of victims, one folder was entitled “best yet”. The court heard a Tens machine that normally offers pain relief via electrical stimulation was recovered from Fuller’s home when it was raided by police. For most of Wednesday morning, Maidstone crown court heard accounts of the searing emotional toll from those whose loved ones had been violated by Fuller. They told of their shock when police told them the details, in some cases years after they had lost their loved ones. If they had been alive, the victims would have suffered crimes equivalent to rape. The mother of his youngest victim faced Fuller, telling of the “catastrophic pain” he had caused, and said toys she left in memory of her lost daughter were moved: “You raped my baby … to me this is rape in the most unimaginable way.” The mother added: “She could not say no to the dirty 66-year-old man, who abused her body.” “It makes my skin crawl, it really does break my heart.” She told how after her child’s death, she had brushed her lost daughter’s blond hair, and felt guilt because she had left her in a place she believed was safe. The court heard accounts of people left anxious, as virtual recluses, betrayed, and in some cases on medication. The father of one of those attacked said: “I can’t sleep, I can’t eat, I cannot get these thoughts and images out of my head. “You have proved in your depravity that monsters are very real.” Some came to court in person, some had their statements read by the prosecutor, and others asked for their statements to be read by the judge in private. Another person whose loved one was attacked said: “In a world where women are not safe when they are alive, they are not safe when they are dead.” The father of an 18-year-old victim said: “Fuller has taken our little girl’s innocence and destroyed our souls. I am consumed with anger.” One husband who lost his wife said: “David, when you are serving your time behind bars, think carefully about what you have done and thank your lucky stars that I’m not sharing a cell with you.” The mother of one of Fuller’s victims demanded a statutory inquiry, with legal powers to force witnesses to give evidence. Nevres Kemal, whose daughter Azra died aged 24 after falling from a motorway bridge as she fled a burning car, questioned the independence of the government inquiry announced by Sajid Javid, which is to be chaired by the former NHS trust chief executive Sir Jonathan Michael. “The justice for the families of the mortuary victims and their families has just begun today,” said Kemal. The health secretary had promised a detailed inquiry, “but it has to be a statutory inquiry, and the families need to have an input into what goes into this inquiry”. She claimed the families had so far been “pushed aside” and not even contacted yet. “So, we need a statutory inquiry, with an independent chair, a different chair, commissioned by Javid, and the families given a voice. They talk about honesty and transparency and lessons learned. Let’s do it properly,” she said. Fuller researched many of his victims after the attacks via Facebook. Knell was found dead with severe injuries in her flat in Guildford Road on 23 June 1987. Pierce was killed five months later, on 24 November, outside her home in Grosvenor Park.The UK has delayed the introduction of imminent trade checks on goods moving from the island of Ireland to Great Britain, as both sides sought to take the sting out of the rancorous talks over post-Brexit arrangements for Northern Ireland. The Brexit minister, David Frost, signalled his acceptance that the negotiations with the EU would continue into the new year, issuing a statement saying the checks due to come into force on 1 January would be postponed as an act of “good faith”. “The government believes that this pragmatic act of goodwill can help to maintain space for continued negotiations on the protocol,” Lord Frost said. “It also ensures that traders in both Ireland and Northern Ireland are not faced with further uncertainty while the protocol arrangements themselves are still under discussion.” Frost spoke to his European commissioner counterpart, Maroš Šefčovič, on Wednesday and will speak again on Friday, with high expectation that the talks will be put on ice over the Christmas break. Earlier this year, it had appeared that Downing Street was willing to blow up the negotiations by unilaterally suspending the arrangements on Northern Ireland by triggering article 16 of the deal. But there has been a softening of approach in recent weeks, raising hopes of a settlement on what has been the thorniest Brexit issue for the past five years. Under the tortuously negotiated protocol in the withdrawal agreement, Northern Ireland in effect stays in the EU’s single market and a customs border is drawn down the Irish Sea. But both sides have agreed that consequences on trade between Great Britain and Northern Ireland have been heavy. This consensus had appeared to be in danger of imploding, however, after Frost responded to a new EU plan for the border that would cut the number of checks on goods by more than 50% by insisting that he needed a more thorough rewrite of the deal. In recent weeks, however, Frost’s most contentious demand, that the European court of justice (ECJ) lose its role as arbiter of EU law in Northern Ireland, has been put on the backburner, sources said. One senior UK official told journalists for European publications last week that the demand over the ECJ had been dropped, although the government later sought to distance itself from the briefing. “If the negotiations fail it won’t be because the UK is insisting on taking the ECJ out of the protocol,” the official was reported as saying. Despite the frantic denials of a U-turn, it is understood that the discussions between Frost and Šefčovič have indeed been more productive in recent weeks, with sources on both sides saying that a deal in the new year was looking more likely than not. A deal on ensuring that medicines approved in the UK can continue to be used in Northern Ireland is particularly close, although the EU may still act unilaterally before the new year to deal with the issue if final agreement is not reached this week. As it stands, most medicines entering from Great Britain would have to undergo batch testing at laboratories in Northern Ireland, a significant expense that would reduce supply. This problem also affects EU member states such as Malta, which sources many of its medicines from the UK. • This article was amended on 31 December 2021 to correctly refer to ‘Great Britain’ rather than ‘Britain’ on two occasions.SEVEN SHADES OF HELL Last night, soon after Leeds United’s 7-0 evisceration at the hands of Manchester City at the Etihad, an angry caller got in touch with a late-night talkSport show and said it was time for Marcelo Bielsa to leave the club. “He’s got to go, simply, that’s all I’ve got to say on that matter,” said Jack, who had plenty more to say on the matter before nominating his two potential replacements. “There are managers out there,” he said. “I’ll throw a couple of names out there now. I’m a big admirer of Sam Allardyce. Even Steve Bruce, I’d have him in charge.” How quickly they forget, eh? Jack wasn’t alone among a minority of fickle Leeds fans quick to get the radge on over what they saw as the club’s worst performance in living memory … assuming that is they had no recollection of the halcyon days before their return to the Premier League during a 16-year period when they lost 5-0 to Blackpool and 7-3 to Nottingham Forest in front of their own fans. Indeed, nobody seemed more upset by the manner in which they were smithereened at City than their own manager, who looked so utterly crushed at the final whistle it would not have been surprising to see him call up a radio network and demand his own head. While your Allardyces, your Bruces and other potential Bielsa replacements might have blamed the absence of several key players including Kalvin Phillips, Patrick Bamford and Liam Cooper on the emphatic nature of their team’s defeat to an imperious team playing at their very best, Bielsa did not even mention the missing trio as he sought to come to terms with the horrors visited upon his team at the speed of light. A lesser man might also have pointed to the fact that Pep Guardiola’s rampant side were nigh on unplayable as they romped to victory in a truly stunning performance but a sanguine if slightly masochistic Bielsa observed that “it’s not that City played very well, it’s a lot more noticeable how badly we played.” One hopes that, as he torments himself poring over replays on his laptop in his local Wetherby Costa coffee shop, Marcelo might in time concede that for all his team’s shortcomings last night, the reigning champions weren’t actually too bad. LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE Join Barry Glendenning for a Premier League clockwatch from 7.30pm, while Simon Burnton will be on hand at 8pm with minute-by-minute updates of Hoffenheim 1-3 Arsenal in Women’s Big Cup. QUOTE OF THE DAY “I am very proud of the career I have had – very happy. I always dreamed about playing football since I was five years old when I first touched a ball. My dream was to play in the top division; I never imagined I would get to Europe so I want to show my gratitude to everyone” – a tearful Sergio Agüero announces his retirement after a stellar career due to a heart condition. Enjoy your downtime, Sergio, you deserve it. RECOMMENDED LISTENING It’s the Football Weekly pod squad on majestic Manchester City and Mikel Arteta fighting Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang on the breaches. FIVER LETTERS “It’s fitting that Pep Guardiola’s admiration of Marcelo Bielsa was cemented over a BBQ at Bielsa’s house years ago, because Manchester City absolutely roasted Leeds. It turns out that this wasn’t even Bielsa’s worst defeat at the hands of Pep. In La Liga back in 2010, Bielsa’s Almeria were thrashed 8-0 by Guardiola’s Barcelona. Talk about biting the hand that feeds you!” – Peter Oh. “Jon Millard is so close (if being incorrect by a factor of 100 times can be called close) on the odds of Brighton being The Talking Point 10 times out of 13 games (yesterday’s Fiver letters). The true probability is 0.035, or 3.5% (not Jon’s 0.035%). Which still seems pretty remote (one in 29 chance). But don’t ignore that there are 20 separate clubs statistical observations going on here. The chances of any one registering a score 10/13 becomes pretty likely then. Yes, I should get out more but you’ll agree that’s been tricky of late …” – Paul Gaskell (and a few others). Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Peter Oh. RECOMMENDED LOOKING It’s David Squires on … a right Eton mess for Boris Johnson and Whitehall FC. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS A former World Cup 2022 worker has failed in his appeal against a jail sentence in Qatar – sparking fierce condemnation from human rights groups. Brendan Rodgers has revealed that Leicester failed in an attempt to get their match against Tottenham postponed, despite having nine players unavailable. “We have looked at it but unfortunately for us we weren’t granted dispensation,” sniffed the Foxes boss. Everton striker Richarlison has admitted manager Rafael Benitez was right to substitute him in the defeat at Crystal Palace. “It was frustrating … but Rafa did the right thing,” he chirped. “I wasn’t able to play at my maximum capacity because of the issue with my calf and if I stayed on I would have done more damage.” Organisers of the Africa Cup of Nations say the show will go on despite European clubs’ threats not to release players due to rising Covid rates. The FA and Barclays have agreed a new three-year £30m sponsorship deal that will double the bank’s investment in women’s and girls’ football, which is good news. And Real Madrid, Barcelona and Athletic Bilbao have have opened a can of legal whoopass on La Liga after it agreed a €1.994bn investment from private equity fund CVC Capital Partners last week. STILL WANT MORE? Jamie Jackson takes a look back at Sergio Agüero’s career and how he has accepted it coming to an end. Which players have paid their own transfer fees?The Knowledge has the answer. Arsenal need a new captain after Pierre Emerick-Aubameyang was a naughty boy. Nick Ames discusses their armband issues. Got, got, got, need! Richard Foster looks back at 60 years of Panini stickers. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! RECOMMENDED VIEWINGIt seems we will never know what motivated Monteverdi to bundle together five psalm settings and four concertato motets with an instrumental sonata, a hymn and two settings of the Magnificat, and publish them in Venice in 1610 as Vespers for the Blessed Virgin. There’s no evidence that the collection was ever performed in its entirety in Monteverdi’s lifetime, or even, despite much of its content, that he intended it as a single liturgical work. The mystery surrounding its purpose leaves performers today with a whole range of performing possibilities for the Vespers, both sacred and secular. But Christina Pluhar and the singers and instrumentalists of L’Arpeggiata treat it unambiguously as a work for the concert hall rather than a church or cathedral. Pluhar presents the music exactly as it appears in the 1610 edition, without any extra numbers or the antiphons with which some conductors preface each of the psalms. Her Barbican performance was urgent and to the point. With just 10 singers, and an ensemble of 12 players, clarity was everything, the kind of performance that would have been smudged and lost in a cavernous church acoustic. The dryness of the Barbican sound suited it perfectly, so that the technical accomplishment of the instrumentalists and the precision of the singers were easily appreciated. With just a single voice to each part in the choral numbers, there was no hint of grandeur or vocal splendour, even in the sentences of the closing Magnificat. Some of the solo motets might have benefited from a bit more sumptuousness, for voices had clearly been selected for their flexibility rather than their intrinsic quality. But instead of a choral extravaganza, what we heard was a performance of the Vespers that underlined its origins in a period when Monteverdi was also composing his first operatic masterpieces. As sung here, the solo-tenor motet Nigra Sum, or the soprano-and-mezzo Pulchra Es, seemed worlds away from any kind of liturgical setting, and much closer to the great set pieces of L’Orfeo. Everything about the energy and verve of the performance was thoroughly theatrical, too. • Available on demand (£) until 16 DecemberIt is curious how an idea can become accepted as a general truth. For months leading up to this Ashes series, one of the tenets largely accepted by punditry has been that the Adelaide day-night Test would be England’s best chance of getting into the series with a win. When the fifth Test at Perth was moved to Hobart, the framing became whether this second day-night match – without having seen the first – would tilt things even more in England’s favour. The concept is that the pink ball and the evening conditions can offer more chance of making the ball swing and seam and that England have bowlers skilled at making use of that. None of this is untrue. It also doesn’t at all factor in that England have played day-night matches four times, beating only a bewildered West Indies in an Arctic version of Birmingham before being pummelled in Adelaide, Auckland and Ahmedabad. Australia, on the other hand, have played eight day-night Tests and won the lot. Whether by fortune or cynicism, they have never played away from home. The tally consists of five in the past six years at Adelaide, two in Brisbane, one in Perth. Josh Hazlewood is missing this match with an injury, but he and his colleagues in Australia’s first-choice bowling attack – Mitchell Starc, Nathan Lyon and Pat Cummins – make up the four most-prolific wicket-takers of the format. There is only one team that is favoured by more day-nighters in Australia and it isn’t England. The idea presumably took root during the second innings of England’s previous Ashes excursion into the twilight. In Adelaide, in 2017, when Jimmy Anderson and Chris Woakes took the new pink ball for the evening session of the third day, they swung it around to make Australia 53 for four by stumps. The same pair finished off Australia for 138 the next day, Anderson finishing with five wickets and Woakes four. The only problem being that this was in the second innings, after Australia had declared on 442 in the first. Which rather tells a story. Pink-ball Tests in Australia are defined by two low-scoring shootouts: the first against New Zealand, in 2015, and the most recent one against India, in 2020. Mostly, though, scores have gone big. Usman Khawaja’s ton took Australia to 383 against South Africa. Pakistan the next year conceded 429 first up, before very nearly chasing 490 in the fourth innings. The next time they toured, David Warner made a triple ton. Mohammad Abbas, one of the world’s best exponents of seam, and Shaheen Shah Afridi, likewise with swing, were bowling with a bundle of rags. Later in the match there was a Test hundred for Yasir Shah, an expensive spinner who, like a prime ministerial staffer at Christmas, has spent more time than is credible at No 10. So yes, the ball can come to life here and there. It can also die and decompose. Partly it depends on timing, with the evening session more likely to offer help if you happen to ally it with a new ball. Approaching that session after 50 overs in the field, the story differs. Managing that aspect of the match requires being dominant enough to be in charge of a declaration. “You’ve got to earn the right to try and dictate the timing for the games,” Cummins said before Thursday’s match. “But you have to be in that position, you can’t forward plan it too much.” That means bowling first guarantees a team no access to an evening session with a new ball until at best the second innings. Not that evenings are always required. The times when havoc has really been visited – India in Adelaide or England in Auckland – have come in daytime sessions. All of the focus on a magic hour for bowlers only looks at one side of the game. Whatever the assistance, winning a match still requires batting. England’s first-innings scores in the team’s three overseas day-nighters have been 227, 58 and 112. All of the angst about which bowlers to pick and when to use them is irrelevant if they have no runs to back them up. This is how pink-ball matches are won. By having the application and restraint to bat through any difficult patches should they arise, knowing they give way to long periods of greater ease. The contrast is even more marked than in red-ball Tests. This is also the quality Englands utterly failed to show in Brisbane, where aside from one partnership between Joe Root and Dawid Malan the cost was 19 wickets for 282 runs. Banking on a miracle from the bowlers is not a sustainable option. Giving them enough to work with is England’s problem and solution.Vegetarians and vegans are sharpening their knives for MasterChef: The Professionals after analysis showed it featured meat and fish savoury dishes nine times more than vegetarian alternatives. The BBC One show reaches its climax on Thursday after six weeks of searing, stuffing and sauteeing, and its makers say the recipes reflect “what is happening in professional kitchens up and down the country”. But the Vegetarian Society has said the focus on meat and seafood risks turning the show into “a dinosaur” and fails to reflect growing enthusiasm for non-meat and “flexitarian” diets. And the Vegan Society, which believes close to a million people in the UK may now be vegan, has called for the programme to change direction to cast more vegan chefs and challenge the contestants to produce Michelin-standard food from vegetables. MasterChef remains a bastion of butchery, its opening montage featuring a chef lugging a side of pork and another blow-torching a chicken. By the end of the semi-final stage, 10 out of 100 savoury dishes presented by the contestants were vegetarian, and only two of those were vegan, according to Guardian analysis, while 37% featured red meat, 40% fish and seafood and 13% poultry. Richard McIlwain, the chief executive of the Vegetarian Society, said he was “endlessly frustrated” at the amount of meat and fish dishes. “We have been brought up since Gordon Ramsay and Marco Pierre White on the whole machismo of the kitchen; that there is something about cooking a good steak that is an extension of being a good chef,” he said. “Are these programmes turning into dinosaurs, not because more people are turning vegetarian and vegan but because many people are cutting out meat, particularly in terms of climate change? Where is that being reflected in the cookery shows?” In a semi-final challenge last week, all four chefs chose red meat for their street food dishes, with pork, beef, lamb and mutton served up. Early in the series, one chef, Gina, who works in a vegan restaurant, prepared a vegan menu including a mushroom Thai curry and a cashew milk parfait. She hoped the judges “won’t even notice that it’s vegan”. Her parfait didn’t set and her dishes were deemed too “grainy”, and she was sent home. In another of last week’s semi-finals, another contestant, John, told the judges: “I have got a lot of things I am passionate about and reducing our meat consumption is part of that.” He made a mushroom dish that included chicken stock, morels filled with a chicken mousse, chicken skin and chicken fat hollandaise. It underwhelmed the judges, and the co-host Gregg Wallace opined that it lacked a chicken sauce. John was knocked out too. “To see just two vegan savoury dishes on a show like MasterChef is very disappointing in 2021,” said Francine Jordan, a spokesperson for the Vegan Society. “Vegan food has never been more accessible, more exciting and easy to work with. We have vegan haggis, vegan eggs, vegan bacon.” There is evidence from the meat industry that restaurants are buying less meat, partly because profit margins can be higher on vegetarian dishes, but also as a result of shifting tastes. One in four mains and side dishes on Wagamama’s menu are now vegetarian or vegan, and in October McDonald’s launched a vegan burger. Tesco has said sales of plant-based meat alternatives have doubled since 2018, with sausages, burgers, deli meat slices and falafel particularly popular. A spokesperson for MasterChef said: “There have been vegetarian and vegan dishes set as skills tests in every recent series and the judges have also set plant-based challenges. For the rest of the series, the chefs choose their own dishes to best showcase their own unique skillset and in recent years we have seen an increase in plant-orientated food from contestants.” The meat industry hit back at criticism of the show, saying the ratio reflected British tastes and citing polling from 2018 that found 81% of people regarded themselves as meat eaters. “They probably are reflecting the amount of vegetarians in the country,” said Nick Allen, the chief executive of the British Meat Processors Association, who said the portions of meat were modest and were shown in balance with “fantastic vegetables”. He added: “It’s more interesting watching someone butcher a piece of meat than chopping up a carrot.” An Oxford University study published in October said meat consumption in the UK fell by 17% in the decade to 2019. The number of people who were vegan rose from 150,000 in 2014 to 600,000 in 2019, according to Ipsos Mori surveys for the Vegan Society. When the next poll is taken in 2022, the number is expected to reach close to 1 million.Late Tuesday night, the House of Representatives voted to hold Mark Meadows, Donald Trump’s fourth and final chief of staff, in criminal contempt of Congress. Whether Meadows is formally charged is now up to the justice department and a federal grand jury. If indicted, Meadows would be the second member of the Trump administration under a cloud of pending prosecution – alongside Steve Bannon, Trump’s former campaign guru, who also played an integral role in the run-up to the 6 January riot at the US Capitol. For Bannon and Meadows alike, their challenges to the House special committee are a mixture of theatrics and political self-preservation. Both men yearn for a seat at Trump’s righthand if a second Trump presidency comes to pass. Beyond that, they want to be heroes to the ex-president’s base. Obviously, Meadows’s task is more complicated. Before his latest change of heart, he had delivered thousands of pages of documents to the special committee, including emails and texts from Donald Trump Jr, the president’s son, and Fox News’s Sean Hannity and Laura Ingraham pleading for Trump to stop the riot. And then there are the revelations contained in Meadows’s recent memoir, The Chief’s Chief. There on the page, he admits that Trump had tested positive for Covid days before the first presidential debate. In other words, he and Trump engaged in a coverup that potentially jeopardized the life of Joe Biden. From the looks of things, Meadows is now engaged in a salvage operation. As for Trump, he has made his displeasure towards Meadows known, labeling him “fucking stupid” and damning his book as “fake news”. Not surprisingly, sales of The Chief’s Chief have languished, according to Amazon. Beyond that, Meadows looks ridiculous. Let’s recap. Here, Meadows turned over reams of records to a congressional committee that has Trump in its crosshairs, and then belatedly refused to appear before that very same committee after publishing a book and spilling his guts. To top it off, Meadows has also invoked the doctrine of “executive privilege”, despite the fact that Trump never asserted that claim on Meadows’s behalf. Meadows’s perorations are incoherent and craven. In contrast, Bannon has remained singularly defiant, going above and beyond the directives purportedly issued by Trump. According to Bannon, Trump had sought to limit the purview of Bannon’s testimony and document production to non-privileged matters. Bannon, however, took that a step further, and stiff-armed the committee: no documents and testimony. For all intents and purposes, his motto is “catch me if you can”, with an extended middle finger that all can see. Unlike Meadows, Bannon was not collecting a federal paycheck on 6 January – he had left the White House more than three years earlier. How Bannon’s post-election communications with Trump could be covered by executive privilege remains unclear, a fact that has not escaped notice. As framed by the committee: “There is no conceivable executive privilege claim that could bar all of the select committee’s requests or justify Mr Bannon’s flat refusal to appear for the required deposition.” Already, Bannon and Meadows have spawned at least one copycat – Peter Navarro, a Trump economic adviser who, in a book of his own, has cast Mike Pence as Brutus to Trump’s Caesar. More to the point, according to published reports, Navarro recently defied a subpoena issued by a separate House select committee that is examining the Trump administration’s response to Covid. In his letter to the committee, Navarro wrote that Trump told him to “protect executive privilege and not let these unhinged Democrats discredit our great accomplishments”. Whether contempt charges will follow Navarro is the subject of speculation. Regardless, Trump alums’ claims of privilege appear shakier by the day. Last week, an intermediate federal appeals court rejected Trump’s assertion of executive privilege in the face of the select committee’s bid for documents from the national archives. According to the court: “Former President Trump has provided no basis for this court to override President Biden’s judgment and the agreement and accommodations worked out between the political branches over these documents.” Then on Tuesday of this week, US district judge Trevor McFadden, a Trump appointee, rejected Trump’s attempt to block the treasury department from handing over his tax records to the House’s ways and means Committee. “A long line of supreme court cases requires great deference to facially valid congressional inquiries. Even the special solicitude accorded former presidents does not alter the outcome,” McFadden wrote. Against this backdrop, claims of executive privilege by Bannon, Meadows and Navarro appear to be more noise than signal. Trump remains the main prize – and it looks like Representative Liz Cheney is gunning for him. In summarizing Meadows’ texts, Cheney observed: “Mr Meadows’s testimony will bear on another key question before this committee: Did Donald Trump, through action or inaction, corruptly seek to obstruct or impede Congress’s official proceeding to count electoral votes?” Cheney’s language mirrored that of Section 1512(c) of Title 18 of the US code, a felony punishable by as much as 20 years in prison. Trump’s time outside office appears as tempestuous as his time behind the Resolute Desk. As for Meadows and Bannon, they are playing supporting roles. In the end, the spotlight belongs to their ex-boss. Lloyd Green is an attorney in New York. He was opposition research counsel to George HW Bush’s 1988 campaign and served in the Department of Justice from 1990 to 1992EU leaders will unite in warning Vladimir Putin that there will be “massive consequences and severe cost” if Russia invades Ukraine, a leaked draft has revealed. The message will be sent to the Kremlin via a post-summit communique on Thursday, although EU officials decline to flesh out what measures could be taken. The leaders will urge Russia to “de-escalate tensions caused by the military buildup along its border with Ukraine and aggressive rhetoric”. According to the leaked draft, they will say: “The European Council reiterates its support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity. Any further military aggression against Ukraine will have massive consequences and severe cost in response.” Putin has mobilised as many as 175,000 troops on Ukraine’s northern, eastern, and southern border, with the Kremlin blaming “provocative” Nato drills near the border for making the military buildup necessary. The US president, Joe Biden, spoke to Putin last week and the Russian president suggested a list of binding security guarantees that it wanted from the west. A formal document was sent this week. “A detailed discussion of the issue of security guarantees took place in the light of ongoing attempts by the United States and Nato to change the military-political situation in Europe in their favour,” the Russian foreign ministry said in a statement. The White House said it would share these demands with EU governments. One of them is understood to be that Nato withdraw a 2008 pledge to admit Ukraine and Georgia. In a sign that that request is unlikely to be satisfied, Georgia’s prime minister, Irakli Garibashvili, visited Nato headquarters in Brussels on Wednesday morning to meet the organisation’s secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg. Speaking to the European parliament, the European Commission president, Ursula von der Leyen, said the EU was prepared should Russia escalate the military situation. She said: “We all have seen the reports of Russia’s massive buildup of military along Ukraine’s eastern border, and also the attempt to destabilise Ukraine from within. “I want to reaffirm our unwavering commitment to Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, as well as the right of any sovereign state to determine its own future. “Of course, we want to good relations with Russia. But whether this is possible, depends first and foremost, on Russia’s behaviour. At this point in time, Russia’s choosing aggressive posture vis-a-vis its neighbours and, as the European Union and its G7 partners have made very clear, further aggressive acts against Ukraine will have massive costs for Russia. “We are prepared. There’s a whole set of economic sanctions in place, targeting the financial energy sector, dual-use goods and defence. Our response to any further question may take the form of a robust scaling-up and expansion of these existing sanctions. And of course, we are ready to take additional unprecedented measures with serious consequences for Russia.” EU officials and diplomats said they would not disclose what measures would be taken as it could weaken their stance. Western countries have varied economic ties with Russia.The Ryanair boss, Michael O’Leary, has said the UK government’s response to the Omicron Covid variant has been shaped by “panic” and “idiots”, blaming travel restrictions for a million fewer passengers than forecast flying on his airline this month. The chief executive of Europe’s biggest carrier contrasted the recent policies implemented in the UK demanding PCR tests for all arrivals with EU states where most fully vaccinated people can travel more freely. Speaking from Dublin to the Guardian on Wednesday, he said: “The panic is largely confined to the UK and Ireland. Across the continent there’s been a much more reasoned approach.” While Ryanair is offering fares of as little as £5 one way, O’Leary said “price incentives are not going to make any difference” around Christmas, which he said was well-booked, but the airline would fly about 10 million people this month instead of the forecast 11 million, and would cut about 10% of its capacity in January. He said: “Where it’s really hit us has been the early weeks of December, bookings in and out of Ireland and the UK … The rest of the continent is still travelling for business and for leisure.” O’Leary said the UK economy was suffering from “piss-poor political leadership”, adding: “What deters booking is the whole uncertainty – this idea that if I travel abroad if the government changes the rules in 24 hours I could be stranded, even if Covid-free and vaccinated … Travel only exists on a degree of confidence. “People in the UK recognise that the government there are idiots. You wouldn’t rely on [Boris] Johnson or Grant Shapps, or Dominic Raab who can’t add or subtract – would you want your journey dependent on the intervention of those idiots? The answer is no.” Before the mounting medical concern over Omicron, O’Leary declared: “What’s likely to happen is that we all get to Christmas, everybody calms down, the politicians fuck off for two weeks and everything settles down again. We’ll arrive back in January and realise, as South Africa has been telling us for four weeks, it is not going to flood your hospitals.” O’Leary said the airline had “no issues” in Europe: “They are all seeing an increase in case numbers but they’re not having the same kind of 24-hour panic. I don’t know if it is Johnson trying to cover his mismanagement of the Downing Street party shambles, who knows.” A Ryanair tweet that went viral sparked controversy this week. O’Leary said he had not seen it before publication, but added: “I was very proud of it – I went over first thing yesterday [to the social media team] to say well done, let’s do more of them.” O’Leary offered some support for the prime minister by saying he was in favour of vaccine passports for travel, work and even shopping: “We recognise your right to a choice [to not be vaccinated], but if you want to be some independent-minded idiot, sit at home. Why should people working in hospitals treat you and put themselves at risk?” Ryanair will delist from the London Stock Exchange on Friday to deter UK shareholders, as it attempts to comply with EU ownership rules. O’Leary said it was “an inevitability post Brexit”, adding: “Brexit has been a monstrous economic disaster delivered to you by those idiots … Even the great Brexiteers, [Simon] Wolfson in Next, Tim Nice-but-Dim Martin [of Wetherspoons] now want visas [for their staff].” Meanwhile, O’Leary said Ryanair would be engaged in further legal battles this year with online travel agencies. He claimed customers were being overcharged by third-party websites for fares, seat selection and baggage when they would be better protected booking direct: “They can only do it on an unsuspecting public who click on these paid-for ads on Google search, which take them off into online travel agencies. “If it was an airline doing this egregious overcharging they’d be jumped on by consumer protection agencies. It’s no skin off our nose – we still get the booking, we still get the money. But our passengers are being ripped off.” O’Leary said the practice had been “part of the issue” with complaints over slow refunds when flights were cancelled during Covid, leaving Ryanair unable to automatically alert on flight changes or refund customers because “the money would end in the belly” of the online agencies. He estimated about 10-15% of passengers were booking through third parties.Prosecutors described David Fuller’s offending as the “worst of its kind” in British legal history, as he was condemned by his library of images of “unimaginable sexual depravity” of him abusing his victims. His disturbing case has thrown the spotlight on necrophilia, until relatively recently an invisible crime in British law, and which today is punishable by a maximum of just two years in prison. Campaigners, among them the mother of one of Fuller’s victims, Nevres Kemal, are calling for sentences to be increased to a minimum of 10 years. The justice secretary, Dominic Raab, is said to be examining whether the current penalty is appropriate. Until the Sexual Offences Act 2003, sexually interfering with a body was not a specific sexual crime. When the Home Office set out its proposals in 2000 for reform of the law, its consultation paper admitted that this omission “came as a surprise” to most. Under the previous Sexual Offences Act of 1956, it was argued the dead body ceased to have rights in law, and so it was arguable that it was not a victim. The Home Office consultation admitted there was “no firm evidence of the nature and extent of the problem, but that is not surprising if the law is silent on the issue”. It was believed to be “a rare and unusual” occurrence. But, though the act was “profoundly repugnant” that was not, in itself, an argument for making it criminal, it said. However, the strong argument that led to it finally becoming illegal in 2003, was the effect on the families, “who have every right to expect human remains to be treated with respect and propriety”. This anguish was expressed over and again by relatives of those Fuller abused when they gave their victim impact statements in court. The mother of a nine-year-old girl spoke of how her daughter’s body had been “ruined and disrespected by that vile man”, which will “haunt me forever”. The father of an 18-year-old victim, said Fuller had “destroyed our souls”. The son of another said Fuller had “ruined hundreds of family members’ and friends’ memories of their loved ones”. Few previous cases of necrophilia have made the headlines in the UK. The north London serial killer Dennis Nilsen, who was convicted of six murders and two attempted murders of young men in 1983, but is believed to have killed at least 15, always denied penetration of his victims. He did, however admit pleasure in handling, dressing and being near his victims’ bodies, before dismembering them. John Christie, who murdered at least eight people during the 1940s and 50s at the notorious 10 Rillington Place in Notting Hill, London, was another alleged to be a necrophiliac. From cases reported, “it is mercifully rare”, said the psychologist Jason Roach, professor of psychology and policing at Huddersfield University, who has written on necrophilia as a crime. “But I have no idea about the frequency. It’s very hard to prove.” A 1978 study in published in the Bulletin of the American Academy of Psychiatry and the Law noted academic literature on the subject of necrophilia was “sparse”, adding: “Necrophiliacs are very rare, some are psychotic and inaccessible, and they infrequently consult the psychiatrists.” Roach said: “Like paedophiles, people who engage in this will gravitate to arenas in which potential victims and opportunities are plentiful. So you have people working in hospitals, mortuaries or graveyards, etc. And very little is known about it.” “When you are looking for cases, you won’t find many.” Such crimes take place in great secrecy, away from witnesses, often only coming to light, as in Fuller’s case, when another such as murder has been committed. Sentencing Fuller, judge Mrs Justice Cheema-Grubb said the shocked family members of some of his victims “wished they had never been told”. While Fuller’s self-incriminating evidence provided prosecutors with all the material they needed to convict, in less clear-cut cases putting families through a trial might be seen as too distressing, especially if the accused can be more easily convicted of other serious charges, such as murder, which attract high sentences, said Roach. “In some ways, it’s a charge that the CPS and the police don’t want to file because of all the anguish that it causes. And, as the law stands, the families won’t get much closure or justice out of that because the law at present doesn’t really suit the gravity of the crime:” he said. An independent inquiry has been announced by the health secretary, Sajid Javid. It will look at how Fuller was able to continue offending unimpeded on such scale, and how it can be prevented in future. Tougher security in mortuaries will include hospitals ensuring they have CCTV in place and controlled access arrangements.Sunrise across the Australian desert. Headlights blazing, a silver Mack truck accelerates towards its destination, kicking up a trail of dust in its wake. In the driver’s seat is Jalingbirri, a “blood hunter” – the only one of his kind left standing. For years, Jalingbirri has defended his people against the monsters the first fleet deliberately unleashed. Now he has a date with a vampire king. The truck, driven by an implacable Kelton Pell, sets the tone in the first few minutes of Firebite, Warwick Thornton and Brendan Fletcher’s hotly anticipated TV series for streaming service AMC+. Named for the bite that converts a mortal person into an immortal monster, the show reinvents the vampire genre for the Australian outback. Starring Rob Collins (Total Control, The Drover’s Wife) and Shantae Barnes-Cowan (Total Control, Wyrmwood: Apocalypse), Firebite was born when Thornton learned how members of the first fleet transported vials of smallpox onboard their ships. His anger at that felt consuming, and it was something he wanted Australians to know – except he didn’t want to share it in the style of the “gut-wrenching, important pieces of storytelling” he had become famous for in films such as Sweet Country and Samson &amp; Delilah. “I was a bit tired of making films like that so I turned the 11 vials of smallpox into 11 vampires that the British brought over to wipe us out,” says Thornton, who wears many hats on Firebite, including executive producer, co-creator, director, co-writer and director of photography. The show, fuelled by a team of First Nations creatives, kicks off when the last surviving vampire from the original 11 arrives in the remote mining town of Opal City, where an abandoned warren of mines lie beneath the surface. The 270-year-old vampire king, played by a cold-eyed Callan Mulvey, is determined to expand the only remaining vampire colony and bring the bloodsuckers out from their underground hiding place. Standing between him and his goal is an unlikely duo – Tyson (Collins), a charming yet reckless failed blood hunter, and his 17-year-old adopted daughter Shanika (Barnes-Cowan), a badass who absorbs all Tyson’s lessons on how to capture and kill the “pests” around them. While sequences were shot on location at Coober Pedy in South Australia, Amy Baker, the show’s head of production design, reconstructed the unique area inside Adelaide Studios, creating an elaborate network of tunnels where that distinctive white soil (trucked in from Coober Pedy) crunches under your feet. Coober Pedy’s lifestyle and landscape seemed to Thornton one that would give any vampire a great cover story – “You portray yourself as miner, so you’re down in the mine all day, and then you come up to the pub and you drink all night, and that’s kind of what vampires do. They sleep all day in the mines and then come up and feed all night in the pub.” Baker also created a wall of skulls (note the fangs) inspired by Europe’s catacombs, as well as cave paintings depicting the history of vampires in Australia and a lair with a throne of bones. One room offers unrivalled insight into the world of Firebite. A secret door opens into Jalingbirri’s hidden lair in the Mack truck. Inside, a wall is dominated by the hunter’s collection of weapons, including the chopstick machine gun that spits out lethal little stakes, flashbangs that deliver a blinding dose of “daylight” and an assortment of boomerangs, sharp and perfect for killing vampires. “Boomerangs are an alien concept to many people and I’m really excited that the extended world gets to just see a person who is using one as a warrior in a contemporary context,” Baker says. It’s a reflection of Thornton’s determination to not create another Mad Max or Burning Man-esque production. “We wanted to keep everything grounded in this wacky, fantastic reality,” he says. Opposite the weapons is a wall of missing people – potential “bleeders” being kept alive by vampires to be slowly drained for food. Rather than police posters, Baker chose to use detailed sketches and photographs (cheerfully donated by their sound designer and Thornton’s family) to represent the victims, underscoring that Jalingbirri is working with the communities to find their loved ones. Something, it’s implied, the authorities don’t care enough to do. The whole thing, Baker notes, is “very Warwick”. Unlike Sweet Country, which used no music, on Firebite Thornton opted for a pounding original soundtrack that reunited members of the Australian rock band the Drones along with the Dirty Three drummer, Jim White. “I’ve always loved punk music because it is anger, and anger is energy,” Thornton says. “And there’s a lot of important information coming out of those three-piece bands with long hair. There’s a lot of education about society coming from there as well.” In keeping with the music, “Let’s just wreck it!” became Thornton’s mantra. “The show is about kicking in the door and turning up the edge … It’s just a fun ride.” The emotional heart of the show is the relationship between Tyson and Shanika. The latter is one in a long line of complex female characters created by Thornton, who has a predilection for plotlines that confront and subvert the patriarchy. He thinks it’s the inevitable result of growing up with an “Amazonian” mother and sisters. “It’s subliminal for me, because that’s the way I was taught by powerful women, you know, to respect and love and to disagree and to argue but to be open-minded about all points of view.” Thornton also recognises himself in the character of Tyson. “Dickheads come in every shade and Tyson’s a dickhead, he’s an idiot,” he says, laughing. “There’s a lot of me in Tyson. There’s a lot of my daughters in Shanika … It feels truthful to me – my role is to embarrass my children as much as possible.” Though the series is uniquely Australian, its themes, in particular the impact of colonisation on Indigenous communities, feels universal. Thornton figures someone could do a spin-off in India, Hong Kong or North America and it would work equally well. And though it’s been a crazy year, the film-maker still has more rock’n’roll to give. “I need a couple of weeks to sit in a stall at the pub, and then I’ll be ready to do it again.” Firebite premieres on 16 December on AMC+, the new streaming bundle available via Amazon Prime Video channels and Apple TV channelsAboriginal people who paid into a funeral scheme that the ombudsman has ordered to repay customers, after finding it mislead and deceived them, face losing any chance of a refund now the scheme has gone into administration. Advocates for dozens of families affected by the collapse of Aboriginal Community Benefit Fund No. 2 are now appealing to the federal government to step in and help ensure they are not left out of pocket. However, they are not covered by a federal government proposal for a compensation scheme of last resort that is still on the drawing board, despite it being a key recommendation of the banking royal commission. Directors of Fund 2 put it into administration in late November. Administrators for the fund said they were facing a “a huge issue” working out what it owed to members based on the paperwork they had seen, and it is unclear whether the fund has the assets needed to cover its debts. Mob Strong, a financial advocacy service for Aboriginal people, said it is liaising with the administrators to ensure the rights of consumers were protected. “We implore ACBF’s administrators to ensure Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people are paid the refunds they are owed in full,” Mob Strong lawyer Mark Holden said. “I am very disappointed that our clients who were waiting for a payment before Christmas have not received it.” Mob Strong was also seeking clarity on the future of two other funds managed by the same company: the Aboriginal Community Benefit Fund (known as Fund 1) and ACBF Funeral Plans Pty Ltd (trading as Aboriginal Community Funeral Plan). Those funds are not in administration. The funds are run by Aboriginal Community Benefit Fund (ACBF), a Gold Coast-based private business that for decades has sold funeral insurance almost exclusively to Aboriginal people. At its peak ACBF had about 25,000 clients, predominantly Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people. Now owned by Youpla, it still has 13,000 clients. The Financial Rights Legal Centre, which represented 11 complainants, said it hoped the federal government would step in to ensure policyholders in Fund 2 were compensated, if they did not receive what they were owed in full as part of the administration process. “Anyone who was misled into joining Fund 2 and finds themselves out of pocket as a result of the administration ought to be included in any compensation scheme of last resort,” CEO Karen Cox said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Company documents show that Fund 2’s directors, Greg Wheeldon and John Allen, appointed administrator W Roland Robson of Queensland insolvency firm Robson Cotteron on 24 November. Wheeldon and Allen did not become directors of the company until after the misconduct alleged in complaints to Afca and before the Royal Commission occurred. In dozens of cases the ombudsman, the Australian Financial Complaints Authority (Afca), has previously found that ACBF misrepresented itself as an Aboriginal owned and controlled, not-for-profit, community organisation serving the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander community. ACBF was also found to have sold vulnerable Aboriginal people low-value funeral insurance, including cover for children and babies, with people allegedly paying more over time than the policies were worth. The Royal Commission into Banking in 2018 heard evidence ACBF would deduct money from Centrelink payments before people received them – which was then legal but is now illegal – and, until a policy change in 2017, deny payouts for suicide. Afca has been scathing about the company’s conduct. “The ACBF acronym is for Aboriginal Community Benefit Fund. The words themselves evoke an Aboriginal community, a benefit for that community and [that] the benefit is supported by a fund,” it said in one decision. “ACBF‟s conduct was misleading, deceptive and unconscionable. ACBF breached its duty to act with utmost good faith and the standard of conduct required by section 12DA of the Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001 (ASIC Act).” Minutes of a meeting of creditors held on 6 December show that Fund 2’s administrator W Roland Robson, of Queensland insolvency firm Robson Cotter, told the meeting that ACBF’s former owner, Ron Pattenden, had previously advised he would personally and financially assist the company with outstanding claims made against it to Afca. Pattendon sold the company in 2018. “However such offer was subsequently withdrawn which contributed to the current directors decision to place the company into the voluntary administration,” he said. Wheeldon and Allen did not become directors of the company until after the misconduct alleged in complaints to Afca occurred. Robson told Guardian Australia he was still investigating the alleged offer by Pattenden to financially assist with the Afca complaints. “We’re still trying to get to the bottom of that,” he said. He said he estimated he had so far received more than 100 claims to be owed money from ABCF clients, many of whom had won Afca determinations against the group. But whether the company has any assets it can draw upon to pay the determinations is unclear. In a report on the company’s affairs filed with the corporate regulator, Wheeldon said the company had no assets of its own but held a total of $56,000 on trust for other people in two Commonwealth bank accounts. Robson declined to say if this was money that belongs to fund members but said he was investigating the financial position of the fund. “At the moment, we’re reading actuarial reports which realistically would probably turn your head inside out if you could even understand them half the time,” he said. He said he had “a huge issue” in working out what Fund 2 owed to members because Youpla ran three funds and many of the determinations made against Fund 2 by the Australian Financial Conduct Authority were “made against two or three funds at the same time”. “So I don’t know what relates to Fund No. 2, which is the company I’m involved in, and what relates to other funds,” Robson said. “And unfortunately, a lot of the beneficiaries – members – haven’t retained paperwork or don’t know how much they paid. “We don’t have the capacity to dig through 20 years of paperwork and find that information in the very timely fashion that they want, unfortunately.” Company records show that Youpla’s general manager, Leanne Court, and Jamal Idris, an Indigenous former rugby league player who Youpla recruited as an ambassador in 2019, have both resigned as directors of Fund 2. Neither Court nor Idris was involved with ACBF at the time the misconduct alleged in complaints to Afca and before the Royal Commission occurred. The remaining directors, Wheeldon and Allen, put the company into administration on 24 November. Youpla did not respond to Guardian Australia’s questions and Pattenden could not be reached for comment.Almost 3,000 children have been hit with hefty fines of up to $5,000 for minor Covid breaches in New South Wales, prompting a furious response from legal groups, who say the punishments are crushing disadvantaged families. Data obtained by the Redfern Legal Centre under freedom of information shows fines worth $2.1m have been issued to 2,844 children aged 10-17 since the middle of last year. More than half the children received a fine of $1,000. Seventeen children were fined $5,000 and 39 were fined $3,000. Redfern Legal Centre’s police accountability solicitor Samantha Lee said she had seen examples of children with intellectual disabilities receiving fines. The penalty amounts, she said, were disproportionately hurting those from disadvantaged areas, causing both financial burden and stress. “These fines are enormous … it’s just absurd to even think we should issue such a fine to a child, there’s no way they can pay,” Lee said. “We’re doing this for families on Centrelink, and not only is it a financial impact, there’s an emotional impact. “There’s often a parent who will ring me with the child near them and the stress and the tension that the fine has created in the relationship between the child and the parent cannot be underestimated.” The most common breach resulting in a fine was failing to comply with a direction under the public health act, which Lee said was a catch-all offence used to fine people who had, for example, sat on a park bench but not breached a gathering rule, sat alone in their car, gone to the shop with another member of their household, or walked on the street without a valid reason. More than 1,500 fines were issued for that offence, accounting for $1.59m of the fines. Other breaches included not wearing a mask, not complying with curfews, not carrying identification outside greater Sydney, and not complying with restrictions on outdoor gatherings. Lee said fines for such breaches should only be issued as a last resort. Even where they were issued, fines for children in NSW were significantly higher than other states. In Victoria, the maximum penalty for Covid-19 fines is $91 for children under 15 and $454 for children aged 15-18. “It’s not an equal playing field out there. Not all of us have a five-bedroom house with a pool in the back,” Lee said. “Kids I’ve seen are just doing things kids do. They’re out playing or wanting to get out of the house. It’s been a very trying time for everyone.” The Redfern Legal Centre, the Aboriginal Legal Service (NSW/ACT) and the Public Interest Advocacy Centre are calling on the NSW government to revoke the fines and issue cautions instead. Acting chief executive of ALS NSW/ACT, Nadine Miles, said the data reveals a failure by police to exercise discretion. She said fines were issued disproportionately in Indigenous communities. “Crushing fines only exacerbate the significant disadvantage that many of our young clients already face,” she said. “The ALS continues to call for all Covid-19 fines issued to children under 18 to be withdrawn or converted to formal cautions.” The NSW finance minister Damien Tudehope said the government made “no apologies for putting the health of the people of NSW first”. “COVID-19 is a highly infectious and at times deadly disease,” he said. “In the past 2 years the Government has acted quickly in response to the health advice and introduced a number of restrictions to help protect communities across the state.” Tudehope said everyone was entitled to request a review of their fines through Revenue NSW. “We take breaches of the Public Health Orders very seriously and if you do the wrong thing, you will be caught and held accountable for your actions, this is the community’s expectation.” But Chief executive of the Public Interest Advocacy Centre, Jonathon Hunyor, said the fines were setting children up to fail. Hunyor said Revenue NSW’s attempts to recover the money from children would only “compound the hardship faced by families who may be doing it tough”. “As our community looks to recover from the pandemic, issuing cautions makes much more sense that seeking to extract this money from children.”Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people made up more than a quarter of all those hospitalised as a consequence of family or domestic violence over an eight-year period, a new report has shown. An examination of hospital stays due to family and domestic violence from 2010–11 to 2018–19 showed 28% of those admitted were Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islanders, despite Indigenous people making up only 3.3% of the population. The report was one of three new data releases from Australian Institute of Health and Welfare (AIHW) on Thursday, which also included a report on family and domestic violence service responses during Covid-19. The government agency examined public hospital data from all state and territory jurisdictions except for Western Australia and the Northern Territory, which showed 34,416 hospital stays as a result of family and domestic violence until June 2019. Those hospitalised for family and domestic violence were 1.3 times more likely to die than those hospitalised for other reasons, and 10 times more likely to die due to assault, the report said. Seventy per cent of those hospitalised were female, 75% of whom reported that the perpetrator of violence was their partner. More than half of the males hospitalised as a result of family and domestic violence reported that their perpetrator was not their partner but another family member. Antoinette Braybook, chief executive of Djirra, an Aboriginal family violence prevention organisation and legal service, told Guardian Australia that the cost of family and domestic violence against Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people had been estimated in the billions. “What we see in our work is the many barriers that Aboriginal women face trying to access services. We see the racism that our women experience from police and mainstream services, and to add to that we see a lack of investment in Aboriginal community controlled organisations that specialise in providing culturally safe family violence services to our people,” Braybrook said. “It’s going to take all levels of government investment to change this situation for Aboriginal women.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The accompanying new report, Family, Domestic and Sexual Violence Service Responses in the Time of COVID-19, showed changes in the services accessed by people experiencing family and sexual violence during the pandemic. Previously released data from the Australian Institute of Criminology has shown that in the 12 months to February 2021, one in three women experienced emotionally abusive, harassing or controlling behaviours, one in 10 experienced physical violence, and one in 12 experienced sexual violence from their partner. Calls to Kids Helpline spiked in April 2020 when national lockdowns were in force, with instances of counselling for child abuse and family violence rising by 51% on April 2019. The numbers remained higher than previous years in the following months. Child protection notifications – that is, allegations made to authorised departments, such as the police, alleging child abuse, neglect or harm – dropped in April 2020, but increased again in May and June, after Covid-19 restrictions had eased. “Similar falls and increases have previously been observed around school holiday periods, suggesting that the reduced opportunities for schools to report suspected child abuse also occurred during the shutdowns,” the report said. The report also showed a drop in family and domestic violence crisis payments granted during the lockdown period. Such payments are only available to those on income support, and the drop also coincided with social support payments being double their usual rate. “One of the drivers of violence against women is men’s control of decision-making and limits to women’s independence – something that plays out both in public life and in private relationships, when women have unequal access to economic resources,” said Patty Kinnersly, chief executive of Our Watch. “Increasing women’s independence and economic security is one of the many actions we as a society need to take to help prevent violence against women. “Violence against women is absolutely preventable, it is not a social condition that we have to put up with. We know, from a large body of research, that gender inequality creates the conditions for this violence to occur.” Child protection notifications were particularly traumatic for Indigenous Australians, as they came with an increased threat of child removal. Djirra has been calling for a referral scheme that requires the mother of any Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander child who has been the subject of a child protection notification to be immediately referred to Aboriginal-owned and controlled legal services, much like the custody notification service that requires police to notify Aboriginal legal services when they take an Aboriginal person into custody. “We have been saying for many years that we need national leadership to address the higher removal rates of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children from their mums and families and communities,” Braybrook said. “Family violence is a key reason for child removal. What we see is the punitive approach from authorities – rather than helping Mum escape family violence, they blame her. There needs to be investment in supporting mothers, not removing children.” • If you or someone you know is impacted by sexual assault, domestic or family violence, call 1800RESPECT on 1800 737 732 or visit 1800RESPECT.org.au; Lifeline 13 11 14; Suicide Call Back Service 1300 659 467; Kids Helpline 1800 55 1800; MensLine Australia 1300 78 99 78; Beyond Blue 1300 22 4636. International helplines can be found via www.befrienders.org.Mining giant Anglo American has admitted to a “large blowout” in greenhouse gas emissions at a coalmine complex in central Queensland that is expected to cost it about $10m in carbon offsets. Documents released under freedom-of-information laws show the multinational company conceded it had breached emissions limits by at least 841,000 tonnes of carbon dioxide at its Capcoal mine complex in central Queensland. The Australian Conservation Foundation, which obtained the documents, said it was the latest in a string of emissions breaches at the mine complex, which provides metallurgical coal used in steelmaking, since the introduction of the safeguard mechanism policy in 2016. Annica Schoo, the foundation’s lead environmental investigator, said the mining giant had consistently relied on loopholes in the policy. Had it been required to pay for emitting above its limit every year since 2016-17 it would face a carbon credit bill of about $50m, she said. The safeguard mechanism was introduced under then prime minister Tony Abbott to prevent increases in emissions at large industrial sites by requiring polluting companies to buy carbon credits if they emit more than a limit, known as a baseline. In practice, many companies have been allowed to either increase their baselines or change reporting periods to avoid penalties. “Capcoal is one of the worst over-emitters of the whole scheme,” Schoo said. “It has never been under limits from 2016-17 to today and Anglo has had every single free pass possible given to it.” Capcoal comprises underground mines and open cut mines in the Bowen basin, inland from Mackay and Rockhampton. In a November 2020 email to officials at the Clean Energy Regulator, an Anglo American staff member acknowledged the company had a “large blowout” in emissions in 2019-20 due to what it described as a single event in which “gas needed to be vented for safety reasons”. Anglo American agreed with an estimate by the regulator that the mine site would breach its emissions baseline across four years by 841,137 tonnes and said the company had carbon credits to cover that amount. It said its emissions were now “back on track”. A spokesperson for the company on Thursday said it had invested significantly in methane capture infrastructure and was working on technology solutions to further cut methane emissions as part of a commitment to operate carbon neutral mines by 2040. Schoo said at that stage Anglo had already been allowed to twice increase its annual emissions baseline and delay dealing with excess carbon pollution. It was permitted to move from a single-year baseline to a three-year baseline to avoid a breach and penalty, and allowed an increase equivalent to a third of its annual baseline. It was then allowed to extend the three-year reporting period to four years. She said it meant the site could now legally release 54% more heat-trapping gas than originally allowed five years ago. Analysis by the research firm RepuTex, carried out for Labor, found emissions covered by the safeguard mechanism had increased by 7% since the scheme began in 2016, and that industrial emissions had leapt 17% since 2005. Labor has pledged to gradually reduce emissions under the scheme if it wins next year’s federal election. It has promised the emissions covered by the scheme will be reduced by 5m tonnes a year to help reach a national target of cutting carbon pollution 43% below 2005 levels by 2030. The plan has been supported by some business groups, notably the Business Council of Australia, which has proposed reducing emissions under the safeguard. The opposition leader, Anthony Albanese, says Labor would negotiate with businesses about how the safeguard would be tightened. The architect of the safeguard mechanism, former environment minister Greg Hunt, once estimated it could be used to cut emissions by 200m tonnes between 2020 and 2030, but the Morrison government has since rejected requiring businesses to cut carbon dioxide. Cabinet ministers have described Labor’s plan to use the Coalition policy as originally intended as a “sneaky new carbon tax”. The government has not increased its 2030 emissions goals – a 26-28% cut – set by Abbott six years ago. National emissions are already more than 20% below 2005 levels. The bulk of this occurred before 2013, when Labor was in power. Most of that reduction was due to state governments slowing the pace of forest clearing. Total emissions from fossil fuels increased between 2005 and the start of Covid-19 lockdowns in early 2020, with a steep rise after 2014 when the national carbon price was abolished. Schoo said loopholes in the safeguard mechanism needed to be closed and pollution baselines brought down over time as recommended by the government’s Climate Change Authority and promised by Labor. The Clean Energy Regulator said Anglo American’s observation it had experienced a “large blow out” in emissions was “not correct”. A spokesperson said the safeguard mechanism was “designed to allow businesses to continue normal operations and support business growth, while encouraging lower emissions production”. A spokesperson for Angus Taylor, the emissions reduction minister, said the conservation foundation was “an activist group making out to be experts”. Chris Bowen, Labor’s climate change and energy spokesman, said Australia’s biggest businesses had recognised the safeguard mechanism was not working and recommended changes that would keep the country’s industry internationally competitive. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Labor has adopted improvements to the safeguard mechanism to make sure it works, shoring up Australia’s economic future in a changing global economy,” he said. The Greens leader, Adam Bandt, said the safeguard was being used to protect fossil fuel companies, not the climate. “We need laws that phase out coal and gas, but the safeguard mechanism allows coal and gas corporations to write their own pollution limits,” he said.In my 27 years on this Earth I have seen exactly 11 funny things on the internet. In June I fell off a horse, hit my head pretty bad and forgot my last three Christmases as well as the 11th funny thing, which makes curating this list bittersweet but straightforward. I usually consolidate my close friendships during the yuletide (Christmas parties, shopping centre Santa photo lines, etc) and since I have not yet told my friends about the horse incident (simply because I can’t remember who is/isn’t my friend), I anticipate I will be on the back foot socially in the coming weeks. Here are my 10 funniest things on the internet. 1. Excited train guy This guy knows what he likes and what he likes is trains. This video makes me laugh and inspires me, which means it’s top-tier internet, babyyyyy. 2. Kollektivet: I Wanna Be the Little Spoon I’ve said it once and I’ll say it again: Norway is ground zero for banging musical comedy. 3. Jesus Christ in Richmond Park One of those things you are happy was captured on camera. 4. Big Aussie Trash and Treasure I love a sketch with a twist that just keeps building to be more and more absurd. This is one of those and Ben Russell is my comedy hero (very nice moustache, too). 5. Sporty Sometimes I pretend to like sports too, so this video is close to my heart. 6. The Beach Boys shred I Get Around It is important you watch this, then the original Beach Boys music video clip, then this again. 7. Alan Partridge does charity I could watch Steve Coogan playing Alan Partridge all day, and it’s for charity, so why not? 8. Brian Badonde the whisky connoisseur You might know Kayvan Novak from the TV series What We Do in the Shadows, but try to recognise him pranking people on this fake documentary as Brian Badonde. Very clever, very silly. 9. Spotify Wrapped is too hip It seems every year my Spotify Wrapped gets more and more cool and trendy. I feel as though I’m being peer-pressured into something but I don’t know what. 10. The rainbow sponge Hark back to No 1 – excited train guy. We love the fervour, the passion in people, especially when it is for the magnificent rainbow sponge. Tom Cardy is a comedian, actor and songwriter. You can follow him on Twitter and Instagram and buy his album Artificial IntelligenceTelstra has paid $2.5m in fines for failing to list close to 50,000 people as private numbers to prevent them being listed in public phone directories. All mobile and landline phone numbers in Australia are stored in the Integrated Public Number Database (IPND), which is managed by Telstra, Australia’s largest telecommunications company. When telecommunications companies register new phone numbers with customer information, they are required to specify whether the phone number should be listed or unlisted. If a number is unlisted it won’t appear in public directories, but can be accessed by law enforcement and national security agencies. The Australian Communications and Media Authorities (Acma) fined Telstra $2.53m for what it said was “large-scale breaches of rules intended to protect the privacy and safety of customers”. Telstra failed to correctly upload nearly 50,000 customers’ choices to have their number unlisted in the database, meaning those numbers were publicly identifiable. The authority also found Telstra failed to provide or update the data on the national database for customers of its subsidiary internet service provider, Belong, on 65,000 occasions. Acma chair Nerida O’Loughlin said that could leave some of those people at risk in an emergency when Triple Zero needs to locate someone, or to issue emergency alerts in floods or bushfires. “The provision of these critical services can be hampered and lives put in danger if data is missing, wrong or out of date,” she said. “It is alarming that Telstra could get this so wrong on such a large scale.” The failure to register unlisted numbers could also lead to harm, she said. “When people request a silent number it is often for very important privacy and safety reasons, and we know that the publication of their details can have serious consequences,” she said. A spokesperson for Telstra said the company had not met its own high expectations of its responsibilities to protect privacy and safety of customers. “We self-reported these issues to Acma and took steps to correct them. We accept the Acma findings and have paid the infringement notice.” It is the second time Telstra has been found in breach of the obligations, with the first finding in 2019 after Telstra self-reported it to the authority. Acma said the $2.53m penalty was the largest of its kind to be issued for such a breach.Do you earn more than most people? This question vexes a lot of people, because we mostly like to think we are “middle class”, and politicians – especially those selling high-end tax cuts – encourage us to think we all earn more than we actually do. The Australian Bureau of Statistics’ latest annual characteristics of employment survey released this week shows that if you earned $62,400 this year, you are smack bang in middle Australia: If the graph does not display please click here Median earnings for full-time employees are $77,948, and $31,200 for part-time workers. The figures show how the use of “average” earnings – a figure that is skewed by high incomes – is quite a misleading way to talk about middle Australia. The latest figures, from May, suggest that average earnings for all workers are $67,902 – some 9% more than the median rate. For full-time workers the disparity between average and median earnings is even greater. Average full-time earnings are now $93,496, nearly $16,000 more than the median level of $77,948. If the graph does not display please click here So when politicians talk of average full-time earnings, they are referring to people earning at least 20% more than what half of all full-time workers earn, and an amount most workers won’t reach for many years. Current median male-full time earnings are just under $80,000, which is what the average level was nine years ago: If the graph does not display please click here Little wonder that when the treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, said in 2019 that “we have abolished a bracket – a whole tax bracket. The 37c in the dollar bracket has been abolished,” he justified it by saying that “if you’re on average full-time earnings, you can get a promotion, you can get a wage increase, but you won’t get a higher marginal rate of tax”. Remember that this measure to tackle “bracket creep” by removing the 37% tax bracket only applies to people earning more than $120,000. For half of all full-time workers that is a level they will only reach in more than a decade’s time, and for half of all workers, earning more than $120,000 is something they will have to worry about only in 2040: If the graph does not display please click here Such a timeframe does rather put a damper on the need for the tax cuts to come into effect in 2024. As it is, by 2024 fewer than 20% of employees will earn above $120,000, and even by 2030 only the top quarter of employees will be benefiting from the removal of the 37% tax bracket: If the graph does not display please click here Just as noteworthy, by the end of the decade even those in the 90th percentile – ie those earning more than 89% of all employees – will earn less than $200,000. Such a fact really does put scorn on statements such as those by Anthony Albanese a couple of years ago, when he suggested that he did not “regard someone who’s earning $200,000 dollars a year as being from the top end of town”. Even now, only in mining and finance do more than 10% of employees earn above $200,000. And half of workers in the mining industry earn less than $122,500: If the graph does not display please click here If we are at a point where the leader of a notionally progressive party of workers is unable to concede that earning more than $200,000 puts you in very rare and elite company, then it is little wonder the ALP decided to support the stage three tax cuts. We need to be much more honest about who earns what, because allowing talk of the “average Australian” to mean someone on average full-time earnings excludes around three-quarters of workers. We often hear about “aspiration”. The treasurer just last month boasted to parliament that “this is what lower taxes are helping to do across the Australian economy: create jobs, reward effort and encourage aspiration”. And yet that is just a fib to justify giving tax cuts to a small minority of workers. If you care about rewarding effort and allowing people to aspire to higher incomes, the figures show that without any doubt education is the path to pursue. Employees with a certificate III/IV qualification earn around a third more than those with just year 12 qualifications. Those with a bachelor degree earn a further 19% more: If the graph does not display please click here If you want people to earn more, help them be able to afford more education, not give tax cuts to people who earn almost double what half of Australians do. And while education is clearly the key, fewer than 10% of people with a postgraduate degree earn more than $200,000, and the median earnings for someone with a bachelor degree are nearly $20,000 below “average full-time earnings”. We need to be honest about how much people earn, and not develop policy that pretends Australians earn more than they do in order to benefit those who actually are rich.Last night I sang in a carol service, many people together indoors, exhaling an anxiety-inducing whirl of aerosols. Was it sensible? I’m not sure: we did our lateral flow tests, but you never know. Could I resist? Absolutely not. Living abroad, I would become deeply melancholy at this time of year if I couldn’t sing carols. I’m not religious, but something about, I suppose, the very precise way they conjure a nested sequence of times and places always moves me. There are French-language Christmas carols but they never gave me the intense, heart-swelling nostalgia I get from those I grew up with. I mean, one of them is called Quelle est cette odeur agréable?, or “What’s that nice smell?” Surely that is something you would ask on entering a kitchen where a delicious cassoulet is cooking, not a stable to adore the Christ child? Although I was delighted to do some proper Christmas singing at last, when the running order was circulated, I started pulling Scrooge-like faces and making sour comments, determined to check the gift horse’s molars. I have opinions on carols. Lots of them. First, I believe there are two types of good carol: deeply weird and sombre, and what I would describe as “shouty bangers”. The weird ones have mysticism and strangeness, a sense of the palpable, dangerous winter darkness that makes all that miracle stuff pop. I love lyrics such as “Dread caverns of the grave” and “Nether hell” (O Come, O Come, Emmanuel), “bitt’r as any gall” (The Holly and the Ivy) or “Sorrowing, sighing, bleeding, dying / Sealed in the stone-cold tomb”, the only redeeming bit in the otherwise tedious We Three Kings. Obscure words (what are “oblations”?) are welcome, as are amazing visuals (“His wings as drifted snow / His eyes as flame” is gorgeous) and gratuitous Latin. The second kind have a pulpit-thumping energy that leaves the singer hoarse and sweaty, however cold the venue. Hark! the Herald Angels Sing combines shoutiness and, in the full version, baffling lyrics (“bruise in us the serpent’s head”, anyone?). O Come, All Ye Faithful has the kind of chorus that builds and builds until you go home with a sore throat no Strepsil can touch. Although not strictly a carol, the advent hymn Hills of the North, Rejoice includes the line “Shout while ye journey home”, taking it into the God tier. Mention of sin, Satan or Herod gets bonus points in either category. As for the bad, I don’t want schmaltz and easy sentimentality: earn my tears, dammit. Away in a Manger is saccharine (and the “fit us for heaven” bit is sinister); Little Donkey perhaps even worse. Yes, I will almost certainly cry at Silent Night, but I will be furious at both myself and the carol (and good luck getting that “peace” bit at the end of the first verse not to sound like a beast in pain). I considered whether the use of the word “little” is a red flag, but it features in the lovely Coventry Carol, though this is less a carol than a hauntingly beautiful lament for the massacre of the innocents (festive!). Anything that summons a vision of muttonchop whiskers or fur tippets is problematic, threatening a dyspeptic overdose of jollity. I enjoy Ding Dong Merrily on High, but disapprove of my own enthusiasm. We Wish You a Merry Christmas used to cause my mother to fling open the front door when shifty youths came round carol singing for cash and hiss with steely intensity, “That is not a carol – sing another!”; I honour her memory by hating it. Once in Royal David’s City’s “Christian children all should be / Mild, obedient, good as he” is the worst kind of Victoriana: I imagine – doubtless unfairly – its author writing the line while an urchin cleaned her chimney. I raised the good carol/bad carol question on Twitter and stirred a good-humoured hornet’s nest, spanning everything from the best setting of In the Bleak Midwinter (Darke, but it’s irrelevant, as Christina Rossetti’s assertion that “my heart” is an appropriate gift for an infant is unacceptable) to punctuation in God Rest You Merry, Gentlemen. A day later, people are still volunteering their loathing of The Twelve Days of Christmas and love of O Holy Night: it’s been a delightful distraction from, well, everything. In the end, of course, I loved every second of the concert, ending the evening teary and tight-throated (hopefully emotion not Omicron). It was a pinprick of bright joy in the darkness, just like the best carols. • This article was amended on 16 December 2021 to correct the sex of Once in Royal David’s City’s author.Trevor Noah On Tuesday’s Daily Show, Trevor Noah marveled at a remarkable data dump from the House select committee into the events of 6 January: a collection of frantic text messages from Fox News hosts to White House chief of staff Mark Meadows during the attack, urging him to urge Donald Trump to stop the rioters. “Mark, the President needs to tell the people in the Capitol to go home,” Fox host Laura Ingraham wrote to Meadows. “This is hurting all of us. He is destroying his legacy.” Sean Hannity wrote to Meadows that Trump should “make a statement” to “ask people to leave the Capitol”. “Oh man, this is so amazing,” the Daily Show host said. “Fox News has spent the whole year acting like January 6th was nothing. Just nothing, it’s just a few patriots having their voices heard. But it turns out that in private, they were freaking out about it.” “This is like finding out the flight attendant who’s been telling you it’s just a little turbulence is actually going back into the cockpit like, ‘doesn’t anybody know how to fly this thing?!’” he added. “It’s crazy that CNN fired Chris Cuomo because he was caught giving secret advice to a politician, his brother,” he continued. “But now it turns out that basically everyone at Fox News was giving secret advice to President Trump and his people,” including Fox and Friends anchor Brian Kilmeade. “But I guess that’s what makes it ok?” Noah added. “Like if one person at your network has no integrity, that’s a problem. But if nobody has integrity, that’s a company policy.” Stephen Colbert On the Late Show, Stephen Colbert also examined the trove of text messages sent to Meadows, including from Trump’s eldest son, Donald Trump Jr, who wrote, “We need an Oval Office address, he has to lead now.” “OK, that reveals two things about Don Jr,” said Colbert. “One, he knew his dad was responsible and failing to lead, and two, he does not have his father’s cell phone number.” As for Ingraham’s private fear that Trump’s failure to address the riot was “destroying his legacy”, even Colbert was surprised. “The January 6th attack scared Laura Ingraham! And keep in mind, her side gig is appearing in your bathroom mirror if you whisper Medicare for All three times.” “These Fox News hosts pushed the big election lie for months leading up to January 6th,” he continued. “And then when their obedient viewers stormed the Capitol, they acted all surprised.” “It reminds me of Charles Manson’s statement after he was arrested: ‘They did what?! I was kidding. Helter sorry.’” Jimmy Kimmel And in Los Angeles, Jimmy Kimmel mocked the two-faced performances of Trump’s supporters despite private misgivings over the insurrection. “Donald Trump Jr, a man who glues his beard to his face every morning, was right: the president did nothing for hours, and as a result people died,” Kimmel said. “Of course, Don Jr spent the past 11 months praising his father’s lack of action.” Kimmel then read the texts from Kilmeade, Ingraham and Hannity expressing concern over the president’s legacy in abetting the attack on the Capitol. “Gee, if only they had some sort of media outlet where they could’ve said that publicly,” he deadpanned. The host then contrasted the texts with their on-air statements after the riot: “There was certainly a lot of violence that day but it was not a terrorist attack, it wasn’t 9/11, it wasn’t the worst thing to ever happen to America, it wasn’t an insurrection,” said Ingraham on 27 July 2021. “Please get him on TV, destroying everything you have accomplished,” wrote Brian Kilmeade during the attack. And this November, on Fox News: “Why is it that every other network, if you took January 6th out of their rundown, they’d have a test pattern.” “I have to say, I don’t think we give the Fox News gang enough credit for their acting,” Kimmel remarked. “It’s really good.”This is a pivotal moment in Nicolas Cage’s career. Once a gold-plated blockbuster icon, he crashed to Earth many years ago in a flurry of financial mismanagement and poor career choices. You just have to look at his IMDb page for proof of the latter. Did you watch Inconceivable? Mom and Dad? Southern Fury? Vengeance: A Love Story? The Humanity Bureau? No, of course you didn’t, and they were only the movies he made in 2017. Slowly but surely, though, Cage has been working his way back to us, either with fun little parts in big movies (Teen Titans Go to the Movies, Into the Spider-Verse) or acclaimed turns in smaller fare (Mandy, Pig). The Cage comeback continues, with news that he has signed on to star as Dracula in Chris McKay’s Renfield, alongside Nicholas Hoult and Awkwafina. And then there is The Unbearable Weight of Massive Talent. Plenty has been spoken about The Unbearable Weight of Massive Talent, most of it weird, but the trailer released this week makes everything much more clear. In The Unbearable Weight of Massive Talent, Nicolas Cage plays Nicolas Cage, an actor enduring a career slump, who is forced to take a million-dollar job attending a wealthy super-fan’s birthday. And Nicolas Cage has to assume the identity of several classic Nicolas Cage characters, which are all real-life Nicolas Cage characters because Nicolas Cage is playing the real Nicolas Cage. Additionally, Cage will also play Nicky, a figment of his own imagination. I may have overestimated how clear this all is. What we can say for certain about The Unbearable Weight of Massive Talent is that Nicolas Cage will never watch it. In September, he told Collider that “It’s just too much of a whacked-out trip for me”. This is apparently because the director Tom Gormican wanted Cage to play himself as much more extreme as he usually is. “I’m really [made of] quiet, meditative, thoughtful moments. I’m not this neurotic, high-strung, anxiety-ridden guy all the time,” he said. And yet it seems fairly certain that Cage will get more attention for The Unbearable Weight of Massive Talent than for any role he has played in a decade. Because although we’re impressed when actors successfully erase themselves in the pursuit of a role, it’s much more interesting when they play themselves. Of course it is. Watching any actor play any role is always a game to try and see where the actor stops and the character begins. When they play themselves, the stakes are heightened. Is Bill Murray really the same as the Bill Murray who appeared in Zombieland? Probably not, no; that Murray is the idealised version of him that we see in our mind when we close our eyes. What about the Neil Patrick Harris who appeared in the Harold and Kumar films? Not like the real Neil Patrick Harris at all, by any stretch of the imagination, but that was the fun of it. Was the Keanu Reeves who appeared in Always Be My Maybe the real Keanu Reeves? I’m willing to say yes on this. Keanu Reeves is a rare and special flower, and he is allowed to be anything he desires. Plus playing yourself in a film is a very quick way to redefine your persona. Before Harold and Kumar, for example, everyone knew Neil Patrick Harris exclusively as Doogie Howser. But having an extended cameo in a comedy where the characters shout your full name so often that it becomes a catchphrase is perhaps the best possible way to wipe the slate clean. Similarly, Jean-Claude Van Damme was a down and out middle-aged action star in 2008, reduced to churning out home entertainment fare for wildly reduced rates. But then came JCVD, in which Van Damme played a version of himself riddled with insecurities and self-loathing, and people started to take him seriously again. In this instance he couldn’t make good on it – the very next year he was back making unwatched Universal Soldier sequels – but for one shimmering moment the whole world was opened up to him. And, at least to me, that’s what The Unbearable Weight of Massive Talent is designed to do for Nicolas Cage. It’s going to be a joyride through all of his greatest hits, and will therefore reconnect him with an audience that long since left him. It is going to say “This is who I am”. It is going to say “This is what I can do”. It is going to say “This is why you fell in love with me”. Either that or it’ll be absolutely terrible. That’s the thing with this sort of film. There’s never much of a middle ground.The Conservative government won the Commons vote; but it was so badly wounded by the revolt that it could not continue without change at the top. Boris Johnson will be aware that this is precisely the situation in which his hero, Winston Churchill, waded to power in May 1940. Neville Chamberlain’s government had managed to win a crucial vote on the conduct of the war, but Tory rebellions and abstentions meant a new leader became inevitable. Johnson always craves comparison to Churchill, but the shoes in which he finds himself today are snugly those of Chamberlain. Britain is not at war in 2021, but it faces a continuing emergency because of Covid. Further restrictions against the Omicron variant may be needed soon as cases continue to multiply, and Johnson has now promised another vote if they are. After Tuesday, when 100 Tories rebelled and at least 16 deliberately abstained, Johnson cannot now win another victory like this week’s without triggering far more acrimony and humiliation for himself and his party. That possibility really could be terminal, especially if the Tories lose the Shropshire North byelection. Tuesday’s revolt was not just a protest by the usual backbench suspects. It was an explosive fusion of several different forms of Conservative opposition against their leader at a particularly volatile time. The list of rebels was a rainbow coalition of Tories: it contained some new MPs and a lot of veterans, some remainers as well as many leavers, several centrists alongside a larger number on the party right. Very little else unites a Tory MP like Damian Green with one like Esther McVey, or Chris Chope with Tracey Crouch. But out-and-out exasperation with Johnson and his recent record certainly does. As one rebel MP, Charles Walker, put it, the vote was a “cry of pain”. The Tory crisis is partly the consequence of Johnson’s off-the-cuff way of governing. In the turbulent and messy wake of Owen Paterson, the Peppa Pig speech, the lockdown Christmas parties and an opinion poll slide, Johnson went on TV on Sunday to announce ambitious vaccine targets and controls. There was no detail about how they were to be delivered, and parliament and the press were bypassed, presidential-style, not for the first time in Johnson’s career. Many on the backbenches and in government were furious. Another part of the seriousness comes from this week’s spectacular reminder that the Conservative party is now practically ungovernable – something of which Johnson himself is both a symptom and cause. Backbench revolts have become more embedded in the culture, embodied by the regular presence, including again this week, of the 1922 Committee chairman Graham Brady among the rebels. Some of Tuesday’s rebels, such as Iain Duncan Smith and Edward Leigh, are serial offenders from the John Major era. Others acquired the habit under the coalition with the Liberal Democrats; Philip Hollobone (a teller on Tuesday) was the most rebellious MP of the 2010 parliament, and even voted against his own government’s Queen’s speech in 2013. Another MP of the same vintage, Steve Baker, is the most focused of the Tory backbench organisers. The 2019 intake, supposedly Johnson backers when they were elected, is itself now well represented in the rebel ranks by MPs such as Lee Anderson and Dehenna Davison. Yet this week’s revolt also highlights the growing importance of rightwing libertarianism in the modern Tory party. In some ways the driving force of this week’s revolt, this libertarianism represents a striking break with the party’s origins and past. Historically, the Tory party stood for order and authority, rather than the sovereign individual beloved by today’s libertarians. Even Margaret Thatcher, who is often still seen as the modern Tory party’s guiding light because of her economic individualism, argued that the party stood for what she called “ordered liberty”. Unlike today’s libertarians, Thatcher was never afraid to tell people how they should live their lives. In today’s libertarianism, Thatcher’s economic individualism has spilled over into every other form of life. In this view of the world, every power given to every public official is a step towards tyranny, all departments of the state are malign empire builders whose existence threatens fundamental liberty, and all the checks and balances of liberal democracy, such as parliament and the law, are attempts to disarm the sovereign individual. It is a view that is both paranoid, massively overstating the threat from government action while largely ignoring the benefits, and politically self-destructive, since it is almost wholly at odds with the more balanced and pragmatic way that the public sees the same issues. Nevertheless, this new ideological variant is proving highly transmissible on the backbenches. It is extremely infectious, and there have been several recent disturbing outbreaks. Graham Brady himself has described the UK government’s earlier lockdown measures as going “full eastern bloc”, and warned against being “pinged into the gulag”. Backbench rebel Marcus Fysh told a BBC interviewer that he opposes the requirement to wear a mask and show a Covid pass because “this is not Nazi Germany” and Britain is not “a ‘papers, please’ society”. And another rebel, Desmond Swayne, said the government’s proposals were the work of an Orwellian Ministry of Fear and claimed that the Health Protection Agency was the creation of “Stalinist minds”. Where does this all come from? Paranoia over Covid regulations should perhaps be seen as first cousin to the intemperate exaggerations about British victimhood – made in some cases by the same people – that were part of the Brexit arguments. Leavers claimed that membership of the European Union destroyed all national sovereignty, and reduced a free people to vassal status from which Brexit would liberate and then empower us. The reality has been more modest. Today’s claim that to show evidence of a negative lateral flow test somehow makes Britain a police state is equally removed from reality. The big difference between the politics of the two issues is in the mood of the public. The leavers won the referendum in 2016 and won the general election in 2019 on the back of it. In 2021, however, the public is consistently supportive of the more cautious approach to the pandemic that the rebels dislike. The more the rebels succeed in capturing the Tory party, therefore, the more dangerous the situation becomes for both Johnson and the party. If the rebels manage to block Johnson from taking future measures that have public support, or if they oust him in favour of someone who will toe their line on Covid regulations, the public may take its votes elsewhere. Martin Kettle is a Guardian columnistFormer Minneapolis police officer Derek Chauvin has pleaded guilty to violating George Floyd’s civil rights during the arrest that killed Floyd in May 2020, sparking mass racial justice protests across the US and beyond. Chauvin appeared in federal court in person on Wednesday morning to change his plea to guilty. It means he will not face a federal trial in January, though he could end up spending more years behind bars when a judge sentences him at a later date. Chauvin is charged with two counts of depriving Floyd of his rights for pinning his knee against Floyd’s neck as the Black man was handcuffed and not resisting, and for failing to provide medical care to Floyd during the 25 May 2020 arrest that resulted in Floyd’s death. Chauvin, who is white, has already been convicted of state murder and manslaughter charges and is serving a sentence of 22 1/2 years. As part of the plea deal, Chauvin also pleaded guilty to violating the rights of a then 14-year-old boy during a 2017 arrest in which he held the boy by the throat, hit him in the head with a flashlight and held his knee on the boy’s neck and upper back while he was prone, handcuffed and not resisting. Floyd’s arrest and death, which a bystander captured on cellphone video, sparked mass protests nationwide that called for an end to racial inequality and police mistreatment of Black people. Chauvin and three other former officers – Thomas Lane, J Kueng and Tou Thao – were indicted earlier this year on federal charges alleging they willfully violated Floyd’s rights. A federal trial for the other three men still appears to be scheduled for January. They face state trial on aiding and abetting counts in March. To bring federal charges in deaths involving police, prosecutors must believe an officer acted under the “color of law”, or government authority, and willfully deprived someone of their constitutional rights. An accident, bad judgment or simple negligence on the officer’s part isn’t enough to support federal charges. Prosecutors have to prove the officer knew what they were doing was wrong in that moment but did it anyway. According to evidence in the state case against Chauvin, Kueng and Lane helped restrain the 46-year-old Floyd as he was on the ground – Kueng knelt on Floyd’s back and Lane held down Floyd’s legs. Thao held back bystanders and kept them from intervening during the 9 1/2-minute restraint, in which Floyd called for his mother and repeatedly told the officers that he could not breathe. All four former officers were charged broadly in federal court with depriving Floyd of his rights while acting under government authority, but the federal indictment broke down the counts even further. In the 2017 case involving the then-14-year-old boy, Chauvin wrote in the police report that the teen resisted arrest and after the teen, whom he described as 6-ft-2 and about 240lb, was handcuffed, Chauvin “used body weight to pin” him to the floor. The boy was bleeding from the ear and needed two stitches. That encounter was one of several mentioned in state court filings that prosecutors said showed Chauvin had used neck or head and upper body restraints seven times before dating back to 2014, including four times state prosecutors said he went too far and held the restraints “beyond the point when such force was needed under the circumstances”. Floyd’s killing reignited calls for police departments across the country to face much tighter scrutiny. However, in November, Minneapolis voters rejected the idea of replacing the city’s police department with a new department of public safety. If the “yes” vote had won, the Minneapolis police department would have been replaced with a department run by a nominated commissioner who would be approved by the city council. The projected department would have used a “comprehensive public health approach” outlined by the mayor and city council, along with the erasure of mandatory minimum police staffing from the city chargers. Opponents pushed back against the proposal, arguing that it would leave the communities already affected by violence more vulnerable. Associated Press contributed to this reportUK energy suppliers will face new financial stress tests from January as part of a series of plans from the industry regulator to boost the sector’s resilience after rocketing market prices for gas and electricity caused dozens to collapse. Ofgem will test providers against a range of scenarios and set an improvement plan for companies showing signs of financial weakness that could put their customers at risk. The regulator also plans to toughen existing financial rules for suppliers and introduce new conditions by the spring, which could include checks on energy company bosses. In some cases, Ofgem may bar a provider from taking on new accounts before reaching certain milestones, such as 50,000 and 200,000 customers, until it is satisfied that they are financially resilient. The planned regulation shake-up comes as Ofgem faces deepening criticism over the collapse of 26 energy suppliers in the last four months, which has left almost 4 million customers in need of a new supplier. The cost of managing the fallout of the UK’s energy market crisis, including the collapse of Bulb Energy, which had 1.7m customers, is expected to reach highs of almost £3.2bn – or £120 a household – on top of the hit to domestic bills from record high energy market prices. Citizens Advice has laid the blame for the spiralling cost of managing the crisis on Ofgem for failing to take action against rule-breaking suppliers for almost 10 years despite mounting concerns over the energy market. The chief executive of trade body Energy UK, Emma Pinchbeck, added that the industry “has long been calling for a more sustainable regulatory and policy environment– not only to avoid situations like the present one, but because suppliers need to drive the innovation in products and services to help customers get the best of the green energy transition”. Households have faced one of the steepest energy bill increases on record this winter because of a global gas crisis, with market prices hitting fresh highs across Europe this week. UK gas prices reached a record closing price of 322.5 pence a therm on Tuesday, according to data from market price experts at ICIS, surpassing the previous high of just over 298p/therm set in early October this year. Jonathan Brearley, the chief executive of Ofgem, said the regulator has worked hard to protect consumers as gas prices have risen by more than 500% in under a year but has admitted that regulation would need to “go much further”. He said: “I want to see more checks on staff in significant roles, and better use of data to help us regulate. We need a regime that can enable a sustainable market, to promote our transition to net zero. Richard Neudegg, the head of the regulation price comparison site Uswitch, said introducing financial stress testing after 26 energy providers have gone bust “feels like the very definition of shutting the stable door after the horses have bolted”. “While necessary for the future, these proposals are clearly too late to help the current crisis,” he said. “Ofgem’s priority must now be to build a resilient market that can stand strong in the face of any future shocks”. The regulator’s new rules will be finalised in the spring, and there remains uncertainty over how often suppliers will face stress tests or whether they would be carried out by the regulator or undertaken by the suppliers themselves. Ofgem has also put forward plans to adjust how the price cap is calculated from next winter, so that it can rise more quickly. An industry consultation has proposed that from next October the price cap could change every three months rather than twice a year. Another option could be a “circuit breaker” clause that allows Ofgem to change the price cap in the event that costs suddenly deviate from their calculations by a significant percentage. This would help energy suppliers to cover their costs and avoid going bust in the face of soaring market prices, which are not yet reflected by the price cap. The regulator is also considering some short-term interventions to help stabilise the market.Vladimir Putin has confirmed he will attend the opening of the Winter Olympics in Beijing, an event that Boris Johnson and other western leaders have boycotted in protest at human rights abuses in China. Putin made the pledge during a video call with the Chinese leader, Xi Jinping, as he said that a “new model of cooperation has been formed between our countries, based on other matters of principles such as non-interference in [each other’s] internal affairs”. Russia and China are facing increasing pressure from the US and western countries as regional conflicts and human rights abuses have led to growing tensions. The US, UK and Australia have said high-level officials will not be attending the winter Games owing largely to China’s abuses of Uyghur Muslims in Xinjiang and crackdown on the Hong Kong pro-democracy movement. Putin is seeking support in his growing conflict with the west over his military buildup near Ukraine. During their conversation, Putin and Xi voiced shared concern over the trilateral Aukus security pact between Australia, the UK and US. In return, Xi had said he supported Putin’s demands for new security guarantees in Europe, according to Kremlin aide Yuri Ushakov. “He understands what concerns Russia has with regard to its western borders,” Ushakov said. Putin’s promise to attend the Olympics would mark a rare trip overseas for the Covid-shy Russian president. He has travelled abroad only twice since the outbreak of the pandemic – to Geneva in June to meet Joe Biden, and to New Delhi to meet the Indian prime minister, Narendra Modi. Xi has not publicly left China since 2019. “As agreed, we will hold talks and then participate in the opening ceremony of the Winter Olympic Games,” Putin told Xi during the meeting. While the two leaders are not allies and compete with one another for influence, they have found a common cause in resisting pressure over how they govern their countries. The pledge came as a senior US official arrived in Moscow for talks with Russian diplomats. The US assistant secretary of state, Karen Donfried, had earlier travelled to Kyiv, where she told officials that under no circumstances would Washington press Ukraine into making concessions to Russia. In Moscow she met the Russian deputy foreign minister, Sergei Ryabkov. The meeting lasted an hour, during which Ryabkov said he would formally propose the “security guarantees” that Russia has sought from the US and Nato countries. In particular, Moscow has demanded guarantees that Ukraine will not join Nato and will not serve as a base for the military alliance’s infrastructure. “There has been a substantive discussion of security guarantees in light of the ongoing attempts of the United States and Nato at changing the military-political situation in Europe in their favour,” the Russian foreign ministry said in a brief statement that gave no other details about the meeting. Donfried also reportedly met with Dmitry Kozak, a Kremlin official seen as curating Russia’s policy for east Ukraine. The meeting indicated that Russia was interested in pursuing high-level contacts as soon as possible concerning the conflict. Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov later said that Putin may speak with Joe Biden by the end of the year. In a public statement, Donfried said that she would share Russia’s proposals with US allies in an effort to provide transparency to Washington’s negotiations with the Kremlin. “Ryabkov asked to meet with me to share Moscow’s proposals on European security. I will take these ideas back to Washington and also share them with our allies and partners,” she said.The head of the UK Health Security Agency has called the Omicron variant “probably the most significant threat” since the start of the pandemic amid warnings over a coming surge in hospitalisations. Dr Jenny Harries told the Commons transport select committee on Wednesday that it was still too early to judge the potential risk of the new Covid variant and warned that the virus was “growing faster”, telling MPs to expect a “staggering” growth rate over the coming days. “It’s probably the most significant threat we’ve had since the start of the pandemic and I’m sure for example the numbers that we see on data over the next few days will be quite staggering compared to the rate of growth that we’ve seen in cases for previous variants,” Harries said. “The real potential risk here – and I would underline that because we are still learning a lot about the variant – is in relation to its severity, clinical severity, and therefore whether those cases turn into severe disease, hospitalisations and deaths. We’re still at too early stage for that. In fact, the world probably is still at too early stage to be clear.” Her comments came as the head of the NHS in England said the increase in Omicron infections could lead to a higher number of Covid patients being hospitalised than at the peak of the pandemic. The seven-day rolling average for daily admissions in England is currently 752. But Amanda Pritchard, the chief executive of NHS England, told MPs that hospitalisations could exceed the numbers seen last winter. The record high was 3,812 on 9 January. Giving evidence to the public accounts committee, Pritchard said NHS staff were racing to expand the booster vaccine rollout “whilst also preparing for a potential significant wave of hospitalisations”. She added: “We don’t know what’s going to happen. But at the moment the indications are it could be as big or even bigger than the previous wave this time last year. So we’re preparing for that.” The NHS has been put on a crisis footing with hospitals in England told to discharge as many patients as possible. In the same evidence session, Prof Stephen Powis, the medical director of NHS England, said that while he was hopeful the wave of Omicron infections would not seriously “dent” national efforts to clear the backlog of care, operations could be cancelled. Earlier this month, the National Audit Office said the already huge backlog for NHS care in England would keep growing for years and could hit anywhere between 7 million and 12 million patients by early 2025. It currently stands at 5.98 million, official NHS figures show. “We will not stand elective care down, unless we have to,” Powis told MPs. “But of course, let’s not sugarcoat it – if we do see a large wave in January we will see disruption again, and unfortunately we will see cancellations.” In a letter to hospitals this week, Pritchard and Powis said patients who could be discharged to care homes, hospices, their own homes or hotels before Christmas to free up beds, should be. The briefing also said the service was facing a level 4 “national incident”. Harries said that in most regions of the UK the doubling time of the virus was now “under two days” and that its growth rate was being felt in London and Manchester in particular. She added: “We’re very sure there are levels growing across most communities in the UK now, although there is quite a lot of regional variation still.” On Wednesday, the UKHSA and Royal Mail announced that capacity for home deliveries for Covid-19 testing kits would double to 900,000 a day in response to a week of unprecedented demand, amid soaring numbers of coronavirus infections. Harries said demand for lateral flow tests has been “absolutely astounding” and that between 6am and 8am on Wednesday alone, the public ordered 200,000 packs. The NHS, she said, was also experiencing “unprecedented demand” for PCR tests. She said there was capacity for about 650,000 PCR tests a day but that demand varied depending on location. In Wales, she said, some test sites were operating at 7% or 8% capacity, whereas in London they were “quite full”. “People can still order tests at home, and we have put in mobile testing units to try and boost those supplies so people can get tested. So we do have sufficient tests both for PCR and LFTs. But the very rapid rise is causing some temporary pressure.” The stark warning follows the government’s most senior public health adviser, Dr Susan Hopkins, telling MPs on Tuesday that Omicron infections in Britain could reach 1m a day by the end of the month.Ghislaine Maxwell’s lawyers have taken the unusual step of asking the judge to allow several defense witnesses to testify anonymously in her sex-trafficking trial, which resumes on Thursday in Manhattan federal court. Maxwell’s legal team has said that some witnesses might be so leery of testifying that they might not take the stand unless allowed to give evidence under pseudonyms. Defense attorney Christian Everdell said: “We have been in contact with a number of our potential witnesses, and we are already getting requests – and I think these are valid requests – that at least some of them testify anonymously.” Everdell said that if there weren’t outright anonymity, their testimony could be “under some sort of protection, name protection, whether that’s a pseudonym or a first name…” “We all know that this case has gotten a lot of attention and that people who are testifying here might get a lot of unwanted attention, especially if they are testifying on behalf of Ms Maxwell,” he continued. “And they would like to be able to do this, at least some of them, with some sort of anonymous protection.” On the eve of resumption of the trial, when Maxwell’s team is expected to begin presenting its defense case, it remained unclear how judge Alison Nathan would rule on the issue. Bobbi Sternheim, Maxwell’s lead attorney, said in a 12 December letter: “The Court’s ruling on this issue may impact the willingness of these witnesses to testify, thereby compromising Ms. Maxwell’s right to present her defense…” Maxwell, 59, is on trial for six counts in relation to her alleged involvement in Jeffrey Epstein’s sexual abuse of teen girls. She was arrested at a luxury New Hampshire estate in July 2020. Maxwell maintains that she is innocent and denies wrongdoing. Epstein, a convicted sex offender whose influential and wealthy associates included Prince Andrew and former US presidents Donald Trump and Bill Clinton, killed himself in a Manhattan federal jail more than two years ago, while waiting for his own sex-trafficking trial. Maxwell’s attorneys have argued that Nathan permitted three of the four accusers to testify either anonymously or under their first names. Nathan correctly pointed out that she “broke no ground in permitting anonymity” and that such was “well-tread territory” – sexual abuse accusers are routinely allowed to testify pseudonymously. However, the unusual request for defense witness anonymity stands in contrast to the lawyers’ prior attempts to dispel notions that she is an elusive figure, and cast Maxwell – the daughter of British press baron Robert Maxwell – as normal relative to her background and life experiences. “You’ve heard many negative things about Ghislaine Maxwell, and the evidence is going to show many exceptional things about Ghislaine Maxwell – well educated, well traveled, a graduate of Oxford,” Sternheim said in her opening statement. “She socialized with extraordinary people, she can pilot a helicopter, she speaks numerous languages, and she has worked her entire adult life.” “She is being pegged as the rich girl, the socialite. But privileged background, comfortable lifestyle, status – they may be things that easily check the wrong box, but they are not crimes…” Sternheim said. Sternheim said in a letter that “many” defense witnesses “are coming from locations out of the district and abroad.” The defense wanted to call several of the lawyers representing Maxwell’s accusers, to ask them questions “relevant to motive and bias.” Sternheim also said she expects the presentation of the defense’s case will last until Monday, which means closing arguments could take place as soon as Tuesday. Maxwell’s attorneys have voiced concern about this timeline. After closing arguments, Nathan is expected to instruct jurors about how to weigh the case, meaning they might start deliberations shortly before there is a two-day Christmas break. “To put the jury in a posture where they have basically four hours to deliberate before the holiday season begins is very dangerous…” Sternheim said. “I do understand the concern. And we’ll see where we are,” Nathan said. “What I don’t want to hear is if the evidence closes on Monday, that you don’t want to do your closings until the 27th. That’s definitely not going to happen.”The UK government has cut grants for electric vehicles for the second time in a year, provoking the anger of the car industry and prompting a call for car tax to be redesigned. The grant available for electric cars will fall from £2,500 to £1,500 – half the sum available to buyers at the start of the year. The upper price limit for eligible car models will fall from £35,000 to £32,000, down from £50,000 in March. The government is also cutting the grant on large and small vans from £6,000 to £5,000 and £3,000 to £2,500 respectively, it said in an announcement on Wednesday. Electric cars – which produce zero carbon dioxide exhaust emissions – accounted for 19% of cars sold in the UK in November, as carmakers bring a series of new models to market and demand soars amid rocketing fuel prices. The government is helping with a mixture of stick – including large fines for carmakers who make too many polluting cars – and carrots like the plug-in car grant and some tax exemptions. However, the rising take-up of electric cars has presented a problem to the Treasury, which has been alarmed by the increasing cost of subsidies, many of which are enjoyed by wealthier buyers who can afford a new electric car, as well as the impact on fuel duty. Some experts argue that government funding would be better aimed at problems such as still-patchy charging infrastructure. At the same time, the government has allocated as much as £50bn in implicit subsidies to petrol and diesel consumption by freezing fuel duty for a decade. Greg Archer, UK director of Transport &amp; Environment, a campaign group, said: “I think it’s inevitable that grants will be progressively phased out, and it’s right that they should be. The government can’t keep bankrolling this transition, but it needs to make sure there are good incentives for all parts of the market. “We could be doing just as much by increasing the taxes on large, high-emitting vehicles.” The industry argues that the government should not be making electric cars more expensive while also trying to encourage more people to buy them. Paul Willcox, the managing director of British brand Vauxhall, which is owned by multinational conglomerate Stellantis, said a “more strategic, longer-term approach” was required from government, and argued that the UK is lagging behind other European countries which are still heavily subsidising purchases. Mike Hawes, chief executive of the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders, said: “Slashing the grants for electric vehicles once again is a blow to customers looking to make the switch and couldn’t come at a worse time, with inflation at a 10-year high and pandemic-related economic uncertainty looming large. “We need to move the market even faster – from one in a hundred cars on the road being electric, to potentially one in three in just eight years – which means we should be doubling down on incentives.”Though never a solo star, David Lasley, who has died of cancer aged 74, was regarded as an invaluable backing singer, songwriter and collaborator by some of the most prestigious names in the music industry. Among the headlining names he worked with are Chic, Joni Mitchell, Whitney Houston, Burt Bacharach, Bonnie Raitt, Aretha Franklin, Dionne Warwick, Todd Rundgren, Herb Alpert and Boz Scaggs. Lasley also became an indispensable part of James Taylor’s band, and Taylor would introduce him on stage as “a great singer-songwriter in his own right”. The writer and producer Desmond Child, renowned for his work with Meat Loaf, Cher, Aerosmith and many more, observed that Lasley “sang and wrote on many of the classic records across the last five decades that have become the soundtrack of our lives”. With his remarkable four-octave vocal range and distinctive falsetto, Lasley worked steadily as a songwriter while developing a spectacular career as a backing singer. He gained prestige as part of a quartet of singers (including Luther Vandross) who featured on Chic classics such as Everybody Dance and Le Freak, as well as Chic-produced hits such as Sister Sledge’s We Are Family. By the time he began working with Taylor in 1977, he had also appeared on such chart landmarks as Odyssey’s Native New Yorker and Vandross’s Stop to Love, and even sang (uncredited) on the Ramones albums Leave Home and Rocket to Russia. He was in such demand that at one point he featured on 13 of the Top 25 songs on the US Billboard singles chart. Lasley wrote songs with a variety of partners, including Vandross, Kiki Dee and Scaggs, and in 1980 joined Geffen Records as a recording artist. Initially delighted, he quickly became disillusioned because “they wanted me to copy other artists”, and at great expense he bought himself out of the deal. In 1981 he released his first album, Demos, a double LP of his own demo recordings put out by Irving Almo, where Lasley was a staff songwriter. He followed up with the much more high-profile Missin’ Twenty Grand (1982), a look back at his early years in Detroit (the title refers to the city’s 20 Grand nightclub.) Released by EMI America and featuring guest appearances by Pete Townshend and Taylor, it earned him rave reviews, some of which likened him to a variety of other notable artists, including Laura Nyro and Mitchell. “The critics said – it’s embarrassing to read them now – that I was the next Bob Dylan,” he recalled. The track If I Had My Wish Tonight gave him a Top 40 hit in the US. Lasley released eight albums altogether, winning particular acclaim for Raindance (1984) and Soldiers on the Moon (1990). He was born in Sault Ste Marie in Michigan, to Bernice, a music teacher, and her husband, Roy Lasley. He grew up on a farm near Grand Rapids, and gained his earliest musical experiences singing in church with his sisters, Judith and Julie, and his saxophone-playing brother, Dean. David and Julie created the a cappella group the Utopias in their teens, and performed regular club dates around Detroit as well as recording three singles. The first of these, Welcome, Baby, To My Heart, was a regional hit in 1966. David and Julie also wrote songs together, most notably I Ain’t Gonna Let You Break My Heart Again, which was recorded by Raitt on her Grammy-winning album Nick of Time (1989). In 1970 David joined the cast of the musical Hair, with which he toured until 1972, when he moved to New York and appeared in the Broadway musical Dude. He then formed the group Rosie with two fellow Hair cast members, Lana Marrano and Lynn Pitney, and they recorded the albums Better Late Than Never (which included the Lasley/Marrano composition Roll Me Through the Rushes, recorded by Chaka Khan in 1978) and Last Dance. Lasley liked to say that being versatile was the key to making a living, and he was happy to turn his hand to recording advertising jingles and voicing commercials for Miller Beer and Seagram’s Coolers. “I’m really blessed because I’m doing what I love,” he said. “I don’t go to industry parties. I like to keep to myself.” In 2013 he featured in 20 Feet From Stardom, Morgan Neville’s documentary about the lives of backing singers, which won an Oscar. He is survived by Dean. • David Eldon Lasley, singer and songwriter, born 20 August 1947; died 9 December 2021 • This article was amended on 17 December 2021 to remove a reference to David Lasley as having had Lewy body dementia.Efforts by the British and French drugmakers GSK and Sanofi Pasteur to produce a Covid-19 vaccine have suffered a further setback, with final clinical data on the jab and a potential launch delayed until next year as they struggle to find enough uninfected people to test it on. The two vaccine specialists announced positive preliminary results from a trial that showed the vaccine raised antibody levels against Covid by nine to 43 times when given as a single booster shot in people who had already received doses of AstraZeneca, Johnson &amp; Johnson, Moderna or Pfizer/BioNTech vaccines, for all age groups. There were no safety concerns, according to an independent review body. It is the most comprehensive booster trial to date, said GSK and Sanofi. The vaccine has suffered repeated delays, after a dosing error early on and initial clinical trials revealed it had failed to produce a strong immune response in older people. Sanofi has developed the antigen, the substance that induces the immune system to produce antibodies against it, and GSK is contributing its adjuvant, a substance that boosts the vaccine’s immune response. The booster trial is under way in countries including the US, France and the UK, and the jab is being tested on new variants including Omicron. Separate late-stage trials of its use as a primary vaccine involve more than 10,000 volunteers aged over 18. The two companies said: “Regulatory authorities require phase III efficacy to be demonstrated in naive populations, ie participants who have never been infected by the Covid-19 virus.” Most volunteers were recruited for the phase III trial in the third quarter, at a time when the number of people infected with the virus surged globally because of the Delta variant. To generate enough data to allow the drugmakers to file their booster vaccine for regulatory approval, the trials need to continue into next year, with results expected by the end of March. They had aimed to publish them by the end of this year. “These preliminary data show we have a strong booster candidate, whatever primary vaccine you have received,” said Thomas Triomphe, the executive vice-president of Sanofi Pasteur. “While pursuing a phase III trial is a challenge in a quickly shifting pandemic environment, we look forward to seeing the results to support submissions of our booster vaccine as quickly as possible.” Roger Connor, the president of GSK Vaccines, added: “As the pandemic threat continues with the current dominant Delta variant and Omicron rapidly gaining ground, booster vaccines will continue to be needed to help protect people over time. The initial booster data are promising.” GSK, which is run by Dame Emma Walmsley, is currently undergoing a complex break-up, separating its consumer arm from its pharmaceuticals and vaccines business.About 30% of American adults say they do not have a religious affiliation, according to a new study exploring the growing secularization in American society. In 2007, only 16% of American adults surveyed by the Pew Research Center identified themselves as religious “nones” – people who describe themselves as atheists, agnostics or “nothing in particular” when asked about their religious identity. That figure is now 29%, according to a new Pew research released on Tuesday. “The religiously unaffiliated share of the public is six percentage points higher than it was five years ago and 10 points higher than a decade ago,” the center said. Despite the growing shift away from religious affiliation, Christianity continues to dominate the American population. Self-identified Christians, including Protestants, Catholics, members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and Orthodox Christians, constitute 63% of the adult population, outnumbering religious “nones” by a ratio of a little more than two-to-one. In 2007, Christians outnumbered “nones” by nearly five-to-one. The decline in the Christian population is largely centered among Protestants, a group broadly defined to include nondenominational Christians and people who describe themselves as “just Christian” along with Baptists, Methodists and Lutherans. Currently, 40% of American adults are Protestants. Over the last five years, the Protestant share of the population dropped by four percentage points and has dropped 10 points in the last decade. In contrast, the Catholic share of the population, despite ticking downward between 2007 and 2014, has mostly remained steady in recent years. According to the survey, as of 2021, 21% of American adults identify as Catholic, identical to the Catholic share of the population in 2014. The survey also asked respondents how often they pray and how important they consider religion to be in their lives. Survey results revealed that 45% of the American adult population pray on a daily basis, compared to 58% in the 2007 survey. Now, 32% of American adults say they rarely or never pray, up from 18% in 2007.My friend George Jamieson, who has died aged 84, was a Shetlander and a man of Unst, the most northerly of the British Isles. He died in the house that he had been born in. Yet George’s influence stretched out across the whole extent of the islands. As a teacher and then head of Shetland’s principal secondary school, he influenced the lives of new generations. George’s parents were crofters. Willie Jamieson trapped rabbits, was a part-time boatman, tended a navigation light and was the local receiver of wrecks. Daisy (nee Ritch) ran a household where water arrived in a bucket, peat on the back of a pony and light had to come from an oil lamp. George grew up with a deep respect for the success of earlier generations in meeting the challenges of such as harsh life. He gathered a great fund of knowledge of Unst, its landscape, its history and the many connections between its families. He attended the village school in Uyeasound, south Unst, and won a scholarship to study at the then selective Anderson Institute in Lerwick. He left Unst aged 12 when he had still to see the north of his own island. He thrived as a student, as a footballer and among a wider society. A degree in industrial chemistry followed at Heriot Watt University, in Edinburgh; he graduated in 1959 and went on to do teacher training at Moray House (now part of the University of Edinburgh). His first teaching job was at his old school in Lerwick, which became a comprehensive, Anderson high school, while he was there. He was a science teacher, then deputy head, and head of the school for 13 years. His long career coincided with immense and unexpected change in Shetland. Oil began to flow in from offshore; with it came opportunities and affluence. Welcome though these were, they also threatened the values of a society that cherished co-operation and the importance of community. George wanted the young Shetlanders to retain that sense of rooted togetherness which most of their parents had known. As he broadened and adapted the curriculum of his school, he continued to demonstrate to his students his love of Shetland and an appreciation of characters from at least two previous centuries. Retiring in 1995 to his parents’ croft, George continued to research the island that still fascinated him. He also applied much energy and tenacity to campaigning for a new pier, which Uyeasound had long needed. The new pier opened in 2009. It has not (yet) been named after him but it would make an appropriate memorial. George married Lorraine Johnson in 1961. She survives him, along with their daughter, Morag, a grandson, Stephen, and a sister, Hilda.Ellis Genge has dropped a bombshell by informing Leicester he will be the latest star player to leave at the end of the season, with the Tigers captain expected to return to his hometown club Bristol. The 26-year-old was appointed captain at the start of the season and has overseen the Tigers’ 100% winning record so far this term – including the impressive win at Bordeaux last weekend – but he is set to follow George Ford out of the club in the summer, having also opted against extending his existing deal. This season Genge has also established himself as England’s first‑choice loosehead prop and his homecoming would be a considerable coup for Bristol, who have made a disappointing start to the campaign. Genge has previously spoken of his desire to move back to the West Country, however, and he would join England’s first-choice tighthead, Kyle Sinckler, at Ashton Gate. His departure is a blow for Leicester, who signed Genge from Bristol in 2016, all the more so given the recent announcement of Ford’s move to Sale for similar reasons. The arrival of the World Cup‑winning fly-half Handré Pollard will soften that blow but losing their captain and their in‑form No 10 is at odds with Leicester’s resurgence under Steve Borthwick. “I’ll be forever grateful for what this club has given me,” Genge said. “I’ve created lifelong friendships and learnt a great deal. The club has been amazing in understanding my reasons for this decision and I will continue to give everything I have got for the boys and the fans of Leicester Tigers for the rest of this season.” Saracens had also been linked with Genge should Mako Vunipola leave the club at the end of the season. Both he and brother Billy are out of contract in the summer and out of favour with England. Mako in particular is thought to be weighing up a move to France. The north London club would be loth to see such high-calibre players depart but Saracens are among a number of Premiership clubs faced with trying to keep all their stars and remain under the reduced salary cap. The issue has been exacerbated because, while a host of clubs re‑signed large swathes of players on partially exempt contracts before that reduction came into force, the majority were on two-year deals which expire this summer. Saracens, meanwhile, have been forced to forfeit Saturday’s Challenge Cup match against Pau as Covid-19 again affects Europe’s club competitions. Tournament organisers have said Saracens have had a “significant” outbreak and, taking into account close contacts, the club have said that they were unable to field a 23-man squad. With a host of players and coaches having to isolate, Saracens have closed their training ground and the squad will not convene again until Christmas Eve, two days before they are due to host Worcester. Saracens have insisted that match will go ahead but they are up against it to advance from their Challenge Cup pool now, having lost their opening match to Edinburgh last week.One of the UK’s largest private care providers has banned residents’ families from making in-person visits unless they are chosen as “essential care givers”, in a policy that has angered relatives and appears to breach government guidance. Barchester, whose facilities are home to around 11,000 people, has told families that because of the incoming Omicron wave “only those who are essential care givers are to visit inside our care home services and they must be fully vaccinated including the booster dose, and show proof of this”. Until at least 23 December it will only allow other visits through screens, with conversations through intercoms where care homes have the facilities, although the number of people who can use these will be unrestricted. End-of-life visits will continue where the manager, supported by a medical professional, judges that stage has been reached. The rules on routine visits are stricter than government guidance issued on Tuesday evening that three visitors should be allowed in homes in addition to an “essential care giver”. This allows one person per resident to be tested as part of the care staff regime and continue visits even during Covid outbreaks. “I think it is absolutely scandalous,” said Victoria Pegg, whose 83-year old grandfather lives in a Barchester home in Northumberland. “My granddad has never been consulted on this change and it is his home. He has capacity to make decisions.” She said his partner is his essential care giver but it means he won’t be able to have in-person visits with his children, grandchildren and great grandchildren. “All that matters to him is his family,” said Pegg, who said he can’t communicate properly through the intercom. “I really feel like he is going to deteriorate massively.” Diane Mayhew, the founder of the Rights for Residents campaign group, described Barchester’s policy as “absolutely unacceptable” and said she hadreported it to the regulator, the Care Quality Commission (CQC). About 74% of care home residents in England had received a booster jab by 5 December. English care home Covid deaths averaged six a day in the first 10 days of this month, compared with 162 in January. The chain’s chief executive, Pete Calveley, told families by letter on Monday the measures would be “a firebreak” and he said “re-opening to more visiting over the key Christmas period” was possible. Sarah Eastlake, whose mother, Enid Lawson, 86, lives in a Barchester home in Epping, described the policy as “absolutely disgusting”. She pointed out that care staff could go to nightclubs and be in the same room as her mother, but loved ones could not. She has shelved plans to put up Christmas decorations in her mother’s room this week. “We need to be there in person,” said Eastlake, whose mother is bed-bound and cannot manage a visit through a screen. Mayhew said some families with loved ones in Barchester homes had been unable to get essential care-giver status. Barchester said it had “always followed official guidance”. Barchester has also said it will require residents to isolate for seven days whenever they voluntarily leave the home, a rule that again goes further than the government guidance which asks for isolation only after an emergency stay in hospital. Barchester said it was aware of the new guidance but “limiting those coming into the home is right for the moment”. “Given what government experts are calling a ‘tidal wave’ of the Omicron variant, we are taking some pre-emptive action for a limited period of time to protect residents and patients in Barchester care homes and hospitals,” it said. “We also hope by doing this we can enable more visiting at Christmas, depending on what further information is known.” Kate Terroni, chief inspector of adult social care at CQC, said: “Blanket approaches to visiting are unacceptable and may trigger an inspection.”The Omicron Covid variant has been found to multiply about 70 times quicker than the original and Delta versions of coronavirus in tissue samples taken from the bronchus, the main tubes from the windpipe to the lungs, in laboratory experiments that could help explain its rapid transmission. The study, by a team from the University of Hong Kong, also found that the new variant grew 10 times slower in lung tissue, which the authors said could be an indicator of lower disease severity. Michael Chan Chi-wai, who led the work, said the result needed to be interpreted with caution because severe disease is determined not only by how quickly the virus replicates but also by a person’s immune response and, in particular, whether the immune system goes into overdrive, causing a so-called cytokine storm. “It is also noted that by infecting many more people, a very infectious virus may cause more severe disease and death even though the virus itself may be less pathogenic,” he said. “Therefore, taken together with our recent studies showing that the Omicron variant can partially escape immunity from vaccines and past infection, the overall threat from the Omicron variant is likely to be very significant.” Jeremy Kamil, an associate professor of microbiology and immunology at Louisiana State University Health Shreveport, pointed out that Delta, which turned out to be more pathogenic, showed a similar pattern of replicating more slowly in the lungs. “These authors found Omicron replicates fantastically well – even far better than either Delta or the original virus – in bronchial tissue,” Kamil said. “This could in some ways contribute to an advantage in spread/transmission between people. “Of course, a huge component of Omicron’s transmissibility in real life is going to be its potential to escape neutralising antibodies that protect against infection in the first place. It’s very likely spreading well even between vaccinated people, especially those who haven’t recently gotten a booster shot.” The initial data, published online and not yet peer-reviewed, came from experiments using lung tissue samples taken from patients during surgery. By 24 hours, the Omicron variant had replicated about 70 times more than Delta and the original variant. Although the bronchus is not the upper respiratory system, scientists said this could lead to people shedding more virus and passing on infections more easily. The findings, together with other recent work showing Omicron infects cells more readily, add to an emerging picture that the variant may be intrinsically more transmissible in addition to evading existing immunity.Eric Adams, New York City’s mayor-elect, named Keechant Sewell, a Long Island police official, as the city’s next police commissioner, making her the first woman to lead the nation’s largest police force. Adams, himself a former New York police captain, introduced Sewell on Wednesday as his barrier-breaking choice for one of the most high-profile and powerful jobs in his upcoming administration. “She’s the woman for the job,” Adams declared as he appeared with Sewell at a news conference in her native Queens. “She carried with her throughout her career a sledgehammer and she crushed every glass ceiling that was put in her way,” Adams said. “Today, she has crashed and destroyed the final one we need in New York City.” Sewell, who serves as the Nassau county police chief of detectives, will be the third Black person to serve as New York Police Department commissioner. The 49-year-old will replace Dermot Shea, who is retiring from the NYPD after 30 years, having spent the last two as commissioner. She’ll begin when Adams takes office on 1 January. Adams had promised on the campaign trail that he would hire a woman as commissioner. Other potential candidates included Carmen Best, former Seattle chief; Danielle Outlaw, Philadelphia commissioner; Ivonne Roman, former Newark chief; and Juanita Holmes, NYPD chief of patrol. Adams praised Sewell for her “emotional intelligence”, describing her as “calm, collected, confident” and someone who had risen through the ranks. It has been decades since a Black person ran the NYPD, with Benjamin Ward and Lee Brown, who served in the 1980s and 1990s, preceding Sewell. She will inherit a police department in flux. The NYPD has struggled to keep crime down a few years after achieving record lows. The rise, particularly in shootings and killings, is part of a national trend in the wake of the pandemic, but police officials have also blamed state reforms that eliminated pretrial detention for many charges. There is little evidence that the reforms have resulted in more crime. Sewell said she will be “laser-focused on violent crime”, with a particular emphasis on gun crimes. “We are in a pivotal moment in New York as our city faces the twin challenge of public safety and police accountability. They are not mutually exclusive,” Sewell said after Adams introduced her. Sewell, as well as Adams, took questions on a number of topics including Adams’ controversial support of Stop and Frisk, an NYPD practice that many advocates have called a form of racial profiling. “I understand the concerns as it relates to stop and frisk but I will tell you that anti-crime [units] in [plain clothes] work,” said Sewell. When asked about how to implement plainclothes units to avoid previous problems, Sewell emphasized the importance of the selection process, saying, “You have to make sure you get the right people with the right temperate with that emotional intelligence to service the communities we’re going to deploy them to.” Adams followed by adding that city officials are exploring an opportunity to address petty crimes through social services. “If you are arrested for shoplifting where you’re hungry, why not have the agencies there to defer those prosecution to get people the resources they need?” “This is a new way of thinking,” added Adams. Adams, the cofounder of 100 Blacks in Law Enforcement Who Care, an advocacy group that sought criminal justice reform and spoke out against police brutality, has pledged new strategies to fight crime, including the return of foot patrols. He has rebuffed progressive calls to defund the police and has defended the controversial stop-and-frisk police strategy as a useful tool that has been abused. He has also pledged to diversify the NYPD’s ranks. Among about 35,000 uniformed members of the department, about 45% are white, 30% are Hispanic, 15% are Black and 10% are Asian. Sewell on Wednesday reiterated that promise to diversify the force. “I am mindful of the historic nature of this announcement as the first woman and only the third Black person to lead the NYPD in its 176-year history. I bring a different perspective, committed to make sure the department looks like the city it serves, and making the decision, just as Mayor-elect Adams did, to elevate women and people of color to leadership positions,” she said. Sewell was named Nassau’s chief of detectives in September 2020, overseeing a staff of about 350 people. The NYPD has about 35,000 officers. Adams acknowledged Sewell has been leading a much smaller force in her current role, but said Wednesday she helped make Nassau county one of the safest communities in the country. Sewell has overseen Nassau county’s detectives, including its homicide squad and special victims squad, for about a year. Before that, she oversaw the department’s professional standards bureau and internal affairs, according to a report last year in Newsday. She started with the department as a patrol officer in 1997 and worked her way up the ranks to become a precinct commander, to head the department’s bureau of major cases and to serve as the chief hostage negotiator. The New York Post first reported the selection of Sewell on Tuesday night. Associated Press contributed to this reportRe getting a tattoo later in life, my twin brother, Phil, a gifted physics teacher, got one of the formula for Newton’s law of universal of gravitation after his 70th birthday (‘It is a celebration of my body!’ Meet the people who had their first tattoo after 60, 14 December). Phil unfortunately died this year, and his tattoo – F = -GmM/r2 – was written on his coffin and is now on stickers on our family cars. It remains a talking point and a way to remember a loved one and his wish to teach others. Robert Towers Unthank, Cumbria • As a pupil at a girls’ secondary modern in the 1960s, my memories of home economics lessons are somewhat different from those of Jennifer Kennerley (Letters, 13 December). We learned how to lay out a nice tea tray and how to make lots of cakes, with a whole term on a Christmas cake, including handmade icing roses. All lovely, but a life tool? Not so much. Roz Treadway Sheringham, Norfolk • The compiler of your quick crossword (14 December) may “thrum” their guitar, but I strum mine. Perhaps that’s where I’m going wrong? Richard Percy Newburgh, Lancashire • To get guests to leave (Your niece is suddenly vegan! How to survive the 12 disasters of Christmas, 14 December), my 105-year-old great aunt would simply say: “Well, dears, that’s been a lovely visit.” Gerard Hastings Céret, France • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.While I am certainly not in the anti-cycling lobby, I would take issue with Jude Wilkinson’s claim (Letters, 14 December) that the use of cars has led to the “immiseration” of elderly people. As an active 70-year-old, I play table tennis and bowls, as well as having less active hobbies such as bridge. I am also a volunteer for a local hospice, providing at-home listening support for patients, carers and bereaved people across the local area – usually in small villages. I don’t live in a city but, like my clients, in a small village with limited public transport, and even that is only at limited times to very specific places in local towns. If I did not have a car I simply could not access any of the above activities, which would lead to considerable immiseration, both for me and my hospice clients, and would also lead to the closure of most small village bowls clubs, which are often located in hard-to-access places. Those who claim a life without cars is easy and healthier are almost all urban dwellers, and don’t realise how few transport options are available to those of us in rural areas. Jill Wallis Aston Clinton, Buckinghamshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Speaking at the Royal Television Society’s autumn conference, the former media minister John Whittingdale suggested that the dominance of global streaming giants such as Netflix, Amazon and Disney was endangering the future production of distinctively British content. In future, public service broadcasters would need to be legally directed, he suggested, to create programmes embodying a kind of “Britishness” exemplified by old favourites such as Dad’s Army or Only Fools and Horses. As critics such as the historian David Olusoga have pointed out, attempting to define a supposedly core Britishness in a multicultural, evolving society would be a highly contentious exercise. It would also be a futile one in an industry that is entering a fast-moving, exciting and unpredictable golden age. Startling figures released this week underline that investment from the streamers is helping to transform the scope, ambition and range of TV and film production. Traditional broadcasters such as Sky and the BBC are following suit, spending more on big-budget content. As the year comes to an end, overall investment in shows costing at least £1m an episode is two-thirds greater than the previous record set in 2019 – before the pandemic. Netflix intends to double the size of its Shepperton studios in Surrey. Disney, at Pinewood studios, and Apple, in Aylesbury, are also expanding their footprint. During the course of the past year, the UK has hosted close to 200 major TV and film productions, including the home-grown Doctor Who, Shetland and Ghosts. Public service broadcasters have a special responsibility to attend to the state of the nation and must always be given adequate resources with which to do that. Small-scale creativity and innovation must also be protected in an age of big-budget production. But portraying “Britishness”, in this transformed landscape, is becoming a perpetual work in progress. A transatlantic focus on greater diversity has led to milestone portraits of multicultural Britain in which, for example, black lives and experience have been belatedly foregrounded. Michaela Coel’s I May Destroy You – on the BBC and HBO – and Steve McQueen’s Small Axe films for the BBC broke new ground in this regard. Luther, the detective series starring Idris Elba, also broadcast by the BBC, is now to be made into a film by Netflix. The hit Netflix drama Bridgerton is more in the “made-for-global” category, but – filmed in Bath and produced by a black American – it showcases both Regency England and a full range of contemporary British acting talent. Interviewed in the Radio Times earlier this month, the former Doctor Who actor David Tennant joined Mr Olusoga in questioning the government’s desire to protect nebulously defined “British values” in television programming. They are right. At this time of new possibilities, proliferating platforms and cultural cross-fertilisation, the last thing our broadcasters need is a nostalgic attempt to force the future of high-end British drama to conform to a narrow, selective version of the past.It has been said that even the dead racehorse Shergar has a better chance of winning Ireland’s national lottery than a member of the public. For six months the jackpot has yet to be won, prompting calls for an investigation, a reduction in the number of balls to increase the chances of a win and on Wednesday, a parliamentary inquiry. Now the operators of the Irish national lottery are seeking regulatory approval to end the marathon winnerless rollover period with a “must-be-won draw” to ensure that such a long wait for a jackpot payout cannot be repeated. In the UK’s national lottery, such a draw takes place if no one matches the six numbers in the previous five draws, then the prize money is shared between all other players who match two or more numbers. The change in the Irish approach was sparked by a mounting controversy over the lack of a winner for the top prize since June and the intervention of a veteran politician, whose calls for an investigation have caught the public’s imagination. The changes “seem so remote that punters must be thinking Shergar would have a better chance at winning Squid Game”, said the Fine Gael TD (Irish MP) Bernard Durkan, referring to the racehorse who was kidnapped in 1983 and to the hit Netflix show. “I’m not saying anything odd has happened, but it’s the longest run in the history of the game so we need a bit of reassurance,” he added. The office of the national lottery has said the rollover each week was “unprecedented” but pointed out that the jackpot had been capped at €19m (£16.2m) since September and the extra ticket sale receipts were trickling down to the next tier in prizes. Andrew Algeo, the chief executive of Premier Lotteries Ireland, which runs the operation, said it was “highly unusual” that this jackpot still had no winner. “Given the tickets purchased since early June, the chances are akin to rolling a die 37 times without the number six arising,” he said. The regulator Carol Boate was questioned at length by the Oireachtas (Irish legislature) joint committee on finance, public expenditure and reform and Taoiseach. Asked whether it was the fault of a machine or whether any other lottery had a must-win draw, she told the committee that the draw was determined by a mechanical machine similar to that used in Britain and elsewhere in the world, and explained the UK jackpot rollover system. “It would be a known risk that this could happen,” Boate said of the six-month rollover of the jackpot in Ireland. She added that he did not know why a must-win draw was never introduced when the game was redesigned in 2015 but the November request was the first she knew of. When the Irish national lottery launched in 1988 there were 36 balls. This was changed to 39 in 1992, then 42 in 1994, 45 in 2006 and 47 in 2015. This still compares well to other lotteries including the UK’s which has 59 balls and the EuroMillions lottery in which players choose five balls from a pool of 50 main numbers and two lucky stars from a separate pool of 12 numbers. Boate’s deputy, Derek Donohoe, said the “unprecedented rollover” of the jackpot was happening while the Irish national lottert was “operating in line with the game rules” and insisted he had identified “no regulatory issues”.Sotheby’s has sold a record $7.3bn (£5.5bn) worth of art and other collectibles so far this year – the most in its 277-year history. The auction house said on Wednesday that an “influx of younger, tech-savvy collectors” buying luxury items such as handbags, jewellery, wine and non-fungible tokens (NFTs) during the pandemic had helped lift sales to the record high. Sotheby’s, which was founded in London in 1744 and now operates from 80 offices around the world with its headquarters in New York, said the 2021 total would rise still higher as it has 20 more sales to come before the year end. So far this year, Sotheby’s has sold 57 pieces for more than $15m each, with a Botticelli painting of a young man holding a roundel selling for $92.2m being the top selling item. Sales are already 71% higher than they had been in 2020, when demand had waned in the early stages of the pandemic. Records were also set for the most expensive trainers (or sneakers) ever auctioned, with the Nike Air Yeezys that Kanye West wore to the 2008 Grammy’s selling for $1.8m in April, and for a 1933 “double eagle” gold coin, which raised $19m to become the most expensive coin ever sold at auction. The most money changed hands in modern and contemporary art, which totalled a record $4.3bn across auction and private sales. The departments that sell luxury watches, wine and spirits, design and books &amp; manuscripts also all achieved record annual sales. The company also set a record for the most valuable single-owner auction, with $676m paid for the Macklowe Collection amassed over more than half a century by the real estate magnate Harry Macklowe and his ex-wife Linda Macklowe. The couple were ordered to sell the collection, which included masterpieces by Alberto Giacometti, Mark Rothko and Cy Twombly, by a judge overseeing their divorce after they failed to agree on its value. Sotheby’s also held its first sale of NFTs, selling $16.8m worth in three days including the “source code for the world wide web” which sold for $5.3m. It said the NFT sale fuelled a “dramatic expansion” of its audience, with 78% of the NFT bidders being new to Sotheby’s and more than half under 40. Overall, 47% of bidders were new customers in 2021, and the number of bidders under the age of 40 increased by 187%. “An influx of younger, tech-savvy collectors also saw a landmark crossover into purchases of physical works such as Alberto Giacometti’s Le Nez bought by Justin Sun, founder of the cryptocurrency platform Tron, for $78.4m last month in New York,” the auction house said. The announcement of Sotheby’s annual sales came as speculation mounts that the auction house’s billionaire French owner may be planning to float the company on the stock market. Patrick Drahi, who bought Sotheby’s in a $3.7bn deal in 2019, is said to be exploring a prospect of flotation of Sotheby’s as soon as next year according to Bloomberg.At the start of the pandemic, Boris Johnson had the parliamentary majority and the personal authority to dictate a response. Now he has neither. Tuesday’s huge backbench Tory rebellion demonstrated that a large section of the party has lost the will to impose the social restrictions that are necessary to curb the spread of Covid. That insurrection was partly ideological, reflecting a paranoid libertarian view of public health measures as the gateway to tyranny. But partly it expressed a loss of patience with the whole manner of Mr Johnson’s government – the dishonesty that draws MPs into complicity with venal practice, which in turn makes them unpopular with their constituents. The danger now is a vicious cycle: a disgruntled party makes life impossible for Downing Street, leading to ever more dysfunctional government, which feeds public discontent that is then fed back to MPs. That is traditionally a death spiral for Tory leaders, although Mr Johnson’s resilience should never be underestimated. In any case, the coming months are sure to be marked by internecine Tory squabbles that distract ministers from the task of managing a health emergency. It is hard to conceive of a worse time for the ruling party to beat such an unruly retreat from responsibility. A doubling of Omicron infections every two days, as appears to be the current trajectory in parts of the country, will lead to millions of cases within weeks. Even if the variant is milder than Delta and its severity is diminished by vaccination, a small proportion of a big number equates to a terrible cost in sickness and all the attendant social and economic consequences. This is why the chief executive of the Health Security Agency has warned that Omicron poses “probably the most significant threat” since the start of the pandemic. What many of the Tory rebels seem not to understand is that suppressing the rate of infection is vital not just to protect individual health but to maintain a functional health service when there is already a backlog of treatments, and staff are exhausted and unable to deliver care if required to self-isolate. The same applies in many sectors. In these circumstances, the ideological subordination of collective endeavour to a fetishised notion of personal liberty is facile and dangerous. Also dangerous is a situation in which the prime minister is unable to confront the folly because he has no political authority over his MPs. Worse still, Mr Johnson has no moral authority in the country when it comes to the exercise of social responsibility, given reports of flagrant rule breaches in Downing Street and at Conservative headquarters during the last lockdown. More regulations might yet be required. The prime minister has pledged to recall parliament if so. Given the irrepressible rebellious spirit among Tory MPs, those measures might only be enacted with the support of Labour MPs, as was the case on Tuesday. That was the responsible thing for the opposition to do, since the alternative meant having no plan for the Omicron wave. But it is not a sustainable arrangement, because the prime minister cannot be trusted to grant the policy input that Keir Starmer is entitled to give in exchange for keeping the nation’s pandemic response on the road. For years, British politics has been dominated by the ideological fixations of the Conservative party, and its capacity to inflict them on weakened leaders. That unruly dynamic gave us a hard Brexit, and it is now sabotaging the fight against Covid. A party so detached from reality cannot be trusted with the levers of power; a prime minister who was installed to embody that irresponsible spirit will never be able to control it. Even if he battles on, Mr Johnson’s fate is sealed. He is the hostage to the Tories’ ungovernable tendency, which should be his disqualification from leading the government in a crisis.Drawing attention to the Tory party’s transformation from a traditional Conservative political party to a ragbag of dangerously self-interested diehards ought to be the focus of opposition to the government, rather than the irresponsible hedonism of Johnson, who looks unlikely to be leading the party into the next election. Polly Toynbee rightly draws attention to the pervasive influence of Steve Baker MP (Fear for a party that sees Boris Johnson as too far to the left, 14 December). Opportunism, short-termism and entryism mean that a party whose leader described Ukip as “fruitcakes” and “closet racists” 15 years ago has now welcomed those same people, and also become a party where Baker and his ilk hold sway without taking any responsibility. Les Bright Exeter • In her frightening article about the growing power of the extreme right within the Conservative party, Polly Toynbee omits to mention one glaring reason why this has come about. Under Jeremy Corbyn, the Labour party made itself unelectable, sending millions of voters into the arms of the Tories. Thus, what Shirley Williams once called “the fascism of the left” has facilitated the rise of fascism on the right. It seems to me that the solitary hope for this country lies in an alliance of Keir Starmer’s more moderate Labour and the other progressive parties. In the dire situation in which this country now finds itself, I have never been more proud to be a centrist. Just look at what extremism, at both ends of the spectrum, has brought us to. Alan Clark London • Polly Toynbee misses one vital point. The problem for the Tories, and for Labour, is that they represent such a broad coalition of views. The need for these internal coalitions is based on our undemocratic voting system. When we finally get a fair proportional system – I am an eternal optimist – the Conservatives and Labour will split into at least two parties each, on the basis of their natural factions. Then, as in most true democracies, governments formed from external coalitions between parties will become the norm in the UK. Better government will surely be the outcome. Richard Carden Denton, Norfolk • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Sadiq Khan said he would have to raise council tax in London and reduce free travel for over-60s, with the government yet to offer a deal to fund the pandemic-hit transport system. The London mayor accused ministers of planning to “unfairly punish Londoners” by refusing to agree longer-term financial aid for Transport for London, which relies on fare revenues that have dropped by billions of pounds during the Covid pandemic. A funding deal expired on Saturday and while the government has agreed to prolong the terms by a week, it demanded Khan explain by Wednesday how he would raise additional income. The mayor has ruled out an additional fare rise but bowed to demands to review concessionary travel, particularly for older passengers, raising the age of the over-60 Oyster card, which allows holders who live in London to travel free of charge. The biggest change will be an increase in council tax, via the London precept collected for City Hall, by about £20 per property a year. Khan said: “The sole cause of TfL’s financial problems is Covid-19 and, with the emergence of the Omicron variant and the new guidance to work from home, it’s never been more urgent for the government to agree a fair, sustainable, long-term funding deal for TfL – for the benefit of our capital city and the whole country. “Train companies across the UK have faced the same emergency funding issues as TfL. In every case, the government has bailed out the private rail operators with long-term agreements. However, the government is treating London differently.” He accused ministers of “holding London to ransom” by threatening to withhold funding without forcing changes, and that he had been left with no alternative but to plan to increase council tax. Fares were raised by 1% above inflation as part of the earlier agreements, but Khan said: “I refuse to hike up fares further as this would be unfair and counterproductive, discouraging Londoners from using public transport.” He said that even with the additional revenue through tax, TfL would still have to make significant cuts to bus and tube services, leading to “managed decline”. Other proposed changes include applying all-day peak fares to Heathrow on the tube, raising the price of an Oyster card deposit, and stopping the use of rail travelcards to reduce ticketing costs. Ministers have said throughout that they will ensure continued funding for the capital. The transport secretary, Grant Shapps, said earlier this week: “The government is committed to supporting London and the transport network on which it depends, whilst balancing that with supporting the national transport network.” TfL meanwhile has warned passengers of widespread disruption on the tube network on Friday evening and Saturday, with strike action by the RMT likely to close several lines and lead to much busier services elsewhere, in an ongoing dispute about staffing the night tube.In the Newtown ward of central Birmingham, the government’s “Get boosted now” slogan means nothing to half of over-16s, because they have not had any vaccination against Covid at all. It is a similar story in Westminster and Camden in London where among the over-12s, 30% have not had a single jab. In Nottingham, a quarter of the whole population face the coming Omicron “tidal wave” unvaccinated. The vaccination scramble is not just about boosters but about persuading millions to get any jab at all. “Omicron will unevenly hit the least protected,” said Jim McManus, the president of the Association of Directors of Public Health. “We have two jobs: to get the vaccines into as many arms as possible and really get into the communities with the worst uptake.” In Birmingham, one of the least vaccinated groups is Chinese 18- to 29-year-olds, who, according to the city council’s public health director, Dr Justin Varney, have been so heavily influenced by anti-vax messaging on Chinese social media that three out of four are not vaccinated. Across the city, 42% of under-40s are not vaccinated – more than 200,000 people, including more than 70% of Caribbean people aged under 40. Varney said vaccination clinics are being set up in the Bullring and Fort shopping centres and said a key problem was reaching younger people, who do not see the virus as life-threatening and will not take time off work for jabs if employers do not pay them. The council is telling bosses to “view this like a chemotherapy appointment; it is really important,” Varney said. McManus, who is also the director of public health for Hertfordshire, said the booster programme needed to be matched by a push to reach less-vaccinated groups, which analysis shows includes poorer, younger and more ethnically diverse communities. In a previous article, experts told the Guardian that London’s figures could look worse than they were because of the capital’s highly mobile population, with many people moving home without deregistering from a GP. London also has a younger-than-average population, and younger age groups have had less time than older people to get vaccinated. Across England, just under 84% of people who live in the most deprived fifth of areas have had at least one dose, while this rises to more than 92% in the least deprived, figures from government deprivation data showed. McManus said local health teams needed to offer transport, recruit community activists and even use contact tracing skills to contact unvaccinated people. One of the least protected areas is Camden in north London where 30% of people have no vaccine protection. The public health director, Kirsten Watters, said on Wednesday she was “concerned for those residents who have not yet had their first or second dose and [I] urge them to come forward”. The need for a push into harder-to-reach communities comes as the UK Health Security Agency reported that Omicron is now the main strain in London. Fifty-two percent of a sample of new coronavirus cases in London with specimen dates for 11 and 12 December were found to have S-gene target failure – a way of detecting the likely presence of the latest variant. Its penetration across England is now estimated at 24% but the spread is uneven, with only 6% of Covid cases likely to be Omicron in the north-east. London’s relatively low vaccine protection is one reason Omicron has become dominant so rapidly, said Prof Azeem Majeed, chair in primary care and public health at Imperial College London. The size of the city’s international airports, number of international visitors and its dense, often overcrowded population were other reasons. “The challenge we face in London is significant but every dose of vaccine given to someone is a brick in that wall of protection,” said Prof Kevin Fenton, the London regional director of public health at the Office for Health Improvement and Disparities. “We need all of London to get full vaccine protection as soon as possible – one dose, two doses and get boosted.” A spokesperson for the London mayor, Sadiq Khan, said projects were under way in the capital to work closely with “community stakeholders, schools and faith leaders to deliver communication campaigns to promote the vaccine to all Londoners, especially those targeted by disinformation around vaccines, and supporting the NHS to open walk-in centres for Londoners regardless of immigration status and GP registration”. The capital has the highest proportion of the UK’s migrant population, who are less likely to be registered with a GP and some, with uncertain immigration status, are reluctant to share the personal information required to get jabbed. “The mayor continues to urge all Londoners who are eligible for their vaccine doses to come forward as soon as possible to protect themselves and their loved ones,” the spokesperson said.Fees paid to agents rose in 2021 despite clubs cutting their transfer spending, with intermediaries pocketing $1m (£760,000) or more on 117 occasions. The eye-opening figures have been published by Fifa as it seeks to rewrite the regulations relating to agents, including capping the amount of money they can make from any transfer deal. According to the report Intermediaries in International Transfers, fees paid to agents totalled $500.8m in 2021, up slightly on the year before ($497.5m), with fees of $1m or more making up 64.2% of that total. The spending came as total international transfer fees fell from $5.18bn in 2020 to $4.31bn this year. Other interesting snapshots captured by the Fifa report include the 48 deals in which every party – buying and selling clubs as well as players – paid an intermediary for their services. It also records that payments, as a percentage of the total transfer fee, grow larger the smaller the deal, with the median fee paid to an agent in a deal of less than $500,000 amounting to 18.8% of the total. The figures are not without their context, given Fifa’s attempts to revise the transfer system. A third version of new football agent regulations are out for consultation in the game. They include stricter rules on agent payments than in previous versions, with caps set to apply across all types of fees, rather than simply the commission from a transfer. In total an agent will never be able to claim more than 10% of a transfer fee or a player’s annual remuneration, and will often be entitled to less. These moves have been welcomed by many within the game, including the European Club Association and the Premier League, who have lobbied for the rules to be tightened. There has been opposition from many of the world’s most powerful agents, however, with Jonathan Barnett and Mino Raiola threatening legal action over the plans. Fifa says it remains in dialogue with the majority of agents and has shared its latest draft of regulations with those agents who remain outside the process. Emilio García Silvero, Fifa’s chief legal and compliance officer, said: “We know there are a certain group of agents who have some reservations. We respect this position. We think we are doing the right thing and that our ideas will bring greater transparency. If 20 or 30 agents think we are in breach of the law, we cannot prevent them going to court. We are not worried.”The Tory rebels spout about slippery slopes, kneejerk emergency measures and “a permanent change to the understanding of what liberty is” (MPs back Covid passes in England amid large Tory rebellion, 14 December). They should read that great libertarian John Stuart Mill: “The only purpose for which power can be rightfully exercised over any member of a civilised community, against his will, is to prevent harm to others.” It’s pretty clear that being complicit in the spread of Covid-19 to your fellow citizens is likely to do some of them harm, so restrictions on the behaviour of those who wilfully refuse to minimise the risk are not only justified, but are an essential act by any responsible government. Doug Maughan Dunblane, Stirling • I do think it is wrong to characterise rightwing Conservatives as “freedom loving” (Rebellious mood on Tory backbenches puts Boris Johnson on notice, 14 December). True, they like to promote certain limited sorts of freedom – the freedom for people rather like themselves to do what they want without interference from pesky regulations, the freedom to spend their money and manage the economy as they would like, and so on. But there are a lot of freedoms they have little interest in – freedom from want, from squalor, from hunger, from disease, of assembly, of the courts, of movement and to settle in this country. These are instead to be dealt with through firm and strict regulation. Richard Williams Hove, East Sussex • Martha Spurrier (Who will stop human rights abuses if the government puts itself above the law?, 14 December) is absolutely right about this government’s systematic dismantling of our freedoms. That is why the freedom and liberty claims by Tory MPs as the reason for voting against the new Omicron restrictions ring so hollow and mendacious. If they were honest and sincere in their beliefs, they would not be sitting on their hands as this government trashes the Human Rights Act; disenfranchises citizens without a photo ID; criminalises protests; intends to abolish or at least dilute judicial review; removes protection from whistleblowers; and threatens to castrate the Electoral Commission. I wonder, too, how many of them consulted their constituents before making their decision? Michael Newman Shefford, Bedfordshire • I am relieved Labour supported Covid vaccine passes, and other “plan B” measures, in parliament, though a “plan C” is clearly also needed – imminently. The bill passed but, as you report, nearly 100 Tories voted against: that’s a large proportion of the party’s backbenchers. The government now has to rely on Labour to get totally necessary health legislation through the Commons. That’s a damning indictment of the Tory party, and on Boris Johnson’s leadership. Johnson is not leading anyone – not his country, not even his party. Sebastian Monblat Sutton, London • I get why further restrictions might be needed, and why parliament should get to vote on them. But given that the restrictions are going to be about reducing mixing between people, how on earth can it make sense to drag 650 MPs from all over the country to vote in person? Or is our system so archaic that they’d have to vote in person on a decision to allow remote voting? Mark Walford London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Gloria Jean Watkins, better known by her pen name bell hooks, has died aged 69. Her niece Ebony Motley tweeted: “The family of @bellhooks is sad to announce the passing of our sister, aunt, great aunt and great great aunt.” She also attached a statement, which said that “the family of Gloria Jean Watkins is deeply saddened at the passing of our beloved sister on December 15, 2021. The family honored her request to transition at home with family and friends by her side.” The author, professor and activist was born in Hopkinsville, Kentucky in 1952, and published more than 30 books in her lifetime, covering topics including race, feminism, capitalism and intersectionality. She adopted her maternal great-grandmother’s name as a pen name, since she so admired her, but used lowercase letters to distinguish herself from her family member. hooks’ first major work, Ain’t I a Woman?, was published in 1981, and became widely recognised as an important feminist text. It was named one of the 20 most influential women’s books in the last 20 years by Publishers Weekly in 1992. She went on to write Feminist Theory: From Margin to Center in 1984, All About Love: New Visions in 2000 and We Real Cool: Black Men and Masculinity in 2004, continuing to draw on themes of feminism, race, love and gender. Since 2004, she taught at Berea College in Kentucky, a liberal arts college that offers free tuition. In 2016 hooks wrote in the Guardian that Beyoncé’s album Lemonade was “capitalist money-making at its best”, but criticised the notion of “freedom” depicted in the lyrics. “To truly be free,” wrote hooks, “we must choose beyond simply surviving adversity, we must dare to create lives of sustained optimal wellbeing and joy.” “I want my work to be about healing,” she said in 2018 when she was inducted into the Kentucky Writers’ Hall of Fame. “I am a fortunate writer because every day of my life practically I get a letter, a phone call from someone who tells me how my work has transformed their life.” hooks’s family stated that “the family is honored that Gloria received numerous awards, honors, and international fame for her works as a poet, author, feminist, professor, cultural critic, and social activist. We are proud to just call her sister, friend, confidant, and influencer.” “Oh my heart,” writer Roxane Gay tweeted in response to the news. “bell hooks. May she rest in power. Her loss is incalculable.” Margaret Atwood told the Guardian: “bell hooks embodied amazing courage and deeply felt intelligence. In finding her own words and power, she inspired countless others to do the same. Her dedication to the cause of ending ‘sexism, sexist exploitation and oppression’ was exemplary.” The author of The Handmaid’s Tale added: “Her impact extended far beyond the United States: many women from all over the world owe her a great debt.” The British writer Candice Carty-Williams also paid tribute: “bell hooks was a writer whose scope of sensibilities taught me, nourished me, engaged me. But it was her writing on love that changed my life after a friend forced me to read All About Love, a book that I knew would contain so much power and truth that I was afraid of its contents. bell hooks will be missed, but the legacy she leaves behind is monumental and enduring, much like the ideals of love she put to the page.” Meanwhile Aminatta Forna, the Scottish and Sierra Leonean writer, remembered meeting hooks in the early 90s. “I met bell hooks as a young reporter when I was sent to interview her for the BBC’s Late Show,” she said. “She took care to put me at my ease, played music, made tea for us and complained about not being able to find anyone to braid her hair where she lived in the Greenwich Village. In the ensuing interview she predicted the so-called ‘culture wars,’ which I guess now, looking back, had already begun in the US. She said that one day the centre would have to shift. And she was right.” The broadcaster and writer Afua Hirsch commented that “reading bell hooks was an experience of profound relief. She had powerfully identified and articulated, with characteristic intellectual rigour, phenomena which I instinctively perceived but had never seen vocalised.” She added: “And yet as a young black woman, it was bell’s generosity in sharing her own experience of love, sexuality and gender that provided the conduit for her work to reach me in such a personal and direct way. She exploded the false binary between the personal and the academic through her truth telling, and it continues to inspire me to this day.” hooks’ family said that contributions and memorials can be made to the Christian County Literacy Council, which promotes reading for children, or the Museums of Historic Hopkinsville Christian County, where a biographical exhibit is on display. • This article was amended on 16 December 2021. hooks’ description of Lemonade as “capitalist money-making at its best” was not a criticism as suggested in an earlier version.The statue of Edward Colston in Bristol was “a monument to racism”, a court has heard, as a defendant described the moment he gave the signal to topple the memorial to the slave trader. Rhian Graham, 30, Milo Ponsford, 26, and Sage Willoughby, 22, are accused of helping to tear down the statue of the slave trader during a Black Lives Matter protest on 7 June last year. They are on trial alongside Jake Skuse, 33, who is accused of helping to roll the bronze to Bristol harbour where it was thrown into the River Avon. Opening the defence for Willoughby at Bristol crown court on Wednesday, barrister Liam Walker told jurors they would hear evidence that the statue of Colston “was in fact indecent and threatening, particularly to members of the black community in Bristol”. Colston “cast a shadow” over Bristol “until the very statue that venerated him was forcibly and, we submit, lawfully removed from its plinth”, Walker added. He said: “Edward Colston oversaw the genocide of 19,000 human beings – that number included children. All of them were enslaved with a brutality that you will learn about and will no doubt conclude is as upsetting as it is shocking. “He is not, as has been described, a ‘divisive figure’. Colston’s vile, immoral enrichment and indeed his life should not, I suggest, divide opinion in the slightest.” Walker said the actions and values of his client were “diametrically opposed” to those of Colston, and that he had never disputed his role in tearing the statue down. “You will recall, from his [Willoughby’s] interview, that he said: ‘The statue was a monument to racism’,” Walker said. “That its presence felt, to him, ‘like a hate crime’ and that ‘at that moment, it felt like the right thing to do. To take the statue down’.” Earlier, the court heard from Ponsford, who told the court he and Willoughby had been friends for about two years. Giving evidence in his own defence, Ponsford told the court how he had brought rope with him to the protest. Asked by his barrister, Tom Wainwright, what was happening when he arrived at the statue, Ponsford said: “There was a black man who confronted the statue saying how he couldn’t bear to look at the statue in the eyes on that day. He was saying: ‘Please don’t take the cloth [which someone had placed over Colston’s head] off.’ “And people were stood around chanting and cheering for the statue to come down.” Ponsford said they were chanting: “Colston must fall, bring him down.” It was then that Ponsford retrieved a black rope from his rucksack and passed it to people who had already climbed the plinth, the court heard. “Those individuals then secured the ropes … around the neck of the statue and then jumped down once they were secured tightly,” he said. Ponsford described how protesters “were jumping to get a chance to hold the rope” and “as many people as possible” took hold of the end he was holding. After he made sure there was no one standing where the statue might fall, he said, he gave a signal. “I believe I put my fist in the air,” he said. “And people started pulling on the rope.” Skuse, Graham, Ponsford and Willoughby all deny criminal damage. The case continues.Soldiers were put at risk of harm in testing the new £5.5bn Ajax armoured vehicle, which was so noisy that troops could suffer hearing loss, the defence procurement minister has told MPs. Jeremy Quin said 11 soldiers had to be placed under long-term monitoring following a catalogue of “complex and systemic” failures. He admitted the episode showed the army did not place as high a value on safety as cost and value for money. A string of warnings about excessive noise and vibration dating back three years were not properly acted upon, the minister said. “It lays bare a deep malaise which is cultural and results in systemic failures across our organisations,” Quin told MPs on Wednesday. Further details were spelled out in a health and safety report published by the Ministry of Defence in conjunction with Quin’s statement to MPs. It said: “Safety is not viewed as an equal partner to cost, schedule and military capability” – and that the army felt that soldiers had to put up with discomfort as part of the job. The MoD first decided on Ajax in March 2010, and awarded a contract to the US military contractor General Dynamics. At the time it believed there was a 50% chance the vehicle would enter service in 2017 but more than 11 years later it is still being tested as the manufacturer tries to reduce noise and vibration. Eleven people out of 310 who tested Ajax now have “long-term restrictions on noise exposure recommended” following a medical assessment, while 17 remain under specialist outpatient care. A further four were discharged from the army on health grounds, although in some cases for unrelated reasons. Military chiefs want to buy 589 of the armoured vehicles, which Quin told MPs would cost £5.5bn. According to a National Audit Office review of defence projects published last June, the MoD has spent £3.75bn out of the whole-life cost budget of £6.3bn. Despite the long-running problems, Quin said the MoD hoped to resolve the problems by working with the manufacturer in the coming months. But he offered no timing or certainty that the efforts would succeed in resolving one of the military’s worst continuing procurement crises. “It remains impossible to share with this house 100% confidence that this programme will succeed, or if it does the timing of achieving full operating capability,” Quin said. The backbencher Tobias Ellwood, the chair of the defence committee, called on ministers to make a final decision in February. Quin also said the MoD would appoint a senior legal figure to lead a review of the Ajax procurement which would cover “not just health and safety” but “the cultural and process flaws that it has highlighted”, in particular the fact it was “tacitly expected that soldiers can and should endure such issues”. Labour said the government’s response left Ajax in limbo. John Healey, the shadow defence secretary, said: “It is deeply unsatisfactory that the action following this review is to launch another review.” He told MPs the suspicion was that the project had become “simply too big to be allowed to fail”.