Click here to access the print version. Fill the grid using the numbers 1 to 9. Each number must appear just once in every row, column and 3x3 box. Buy next week’s Observer Digital Edition to see the completed puzzle.Click here to access the print version The Chambers Dictionary (2014) is recommended. Special announcement We regret to announce that, until further notice, we are unable to offer prizes for solvers of the Azed weekly crosswords. The special monthly Azed clue writing competitions are not affected and will continue as normal. Entry rules for these will appear as usual.Click here to access the print version. Normal Sudoku rules apply, except the numbers in the cells contained within grey lines add up to the figures in the corner. No number can be repeated within each shape formed by grey lines. Buy next week’s Observer Digital Edition to see the completed puzzle.The golden goose is airborne again. The reopening of the US border to leisure travellers from the UK and most of Europe – with the accompanying fattening of transatlantic schedules – has finally given the long-haul airlines something to be cheerful about. The first flights for non-essential foreign visitors – holidaymakers, friends and family – will take off on Monday. For British Airways owner IAG, not to mention rival Virgin Atlantic and other carriers, it will feel like Christmas, Thanksgiving and all their birthdays rolled into in one. In the wake of the reopening, IAG predicted a narrower loss – €3bn this year, down from €4.3bn in 2020 – and a possible return to profit by Easter. Transatlantic travel is the bedrock business for long-haul airlines, and location and shared language has traditionally put UK carriers in pole position in the European market. In the pre-pandemic days, when airlines turned a profit, the bulk of IAG’s returns came from BA, and the fat end of BA’s came from the US. On short-haul routes, BA has been firmly pushed off its perch by the low-cost airlines. Apart from those who have a connecting flight, live next to Heathrow or particularly like smartly dressed stewards and free biscuits, there is little reason to pay the national carrier’s fares to Europe. The US, though, is different. Norwegian, which tried to grab a slice of this market, has retreated, and the full-service airlines have all made partnerships, joint ventures and alliances – Virgin in particular opting for the strong arms of Atlanta-based Delta. Next week, both British carriers expect full planes as passengers also benefit from easier, cheaper testing requirements. BA says Zoom-weary business travellers are booking too. It’s almost enough to make investors forget the billions in losses and an uncertain future: shares in IAG rebounded on Friday after an initial dumping when the group reported third-quarter results and its full-year forecast. Analysts don’t see the returns coming quite so soon. There is still trouble ahead: the industry was obsessed with oil prices a decade ago as the dollars-per-barrel skyrocketed, and they are rising sharply again. The cost of the massive borrowing that pulled carriers through the past 18 months also looks set to rise. And it remains to be seen whether the opening of borders and loosening of travel restrictions is a one-way trend – not least when you consider how the UK’s laissez-faire politics and relatively high case rates are being viewed by more cautious governments. Nonetheless, for now, it’s the season of goodwill, and BA and Virgin have come out of their old trenches to stand together and gang up on their common frenemy: Heathrow. The ritual pantomime of circling the regulator every few years and hurling overegged demands for increases or cuts to the airport’s landing charges has taken on a particular edge this time around. Not only does the pandemic mean that all the parties really are skint, but Heathrow has gone the full Ebenezer by attempting to double what it charges. The Civil Aviation Authority, playing the hapless sad sack, has said that “only” a 56% increase in average charges – about £35 per passenger – would be permissible. The wrangling continues. IAG boss Luis Gallego indicated on Friday that he would consider moving IAG investment abroad if charges meant the airline could make no decent return on capital in the UK. But in another breath, Gallego admitted that BA had only turned a profit at cheap old second-choice Gatwick once in a decade. Virgin has handed back its slots at the West Sussex alternative. IAG is, however, continuing with plans to start a cunningly disguised BA subsidiary for short haul, allowing it to cut costs and fend off expansion by rivals. For the big bucks, though, there is clearly only one game in town. One in four flights between Europe to the US goes via Heathrow – albeit 40% fewer now than two years ago. After an 18-month course of survival rations, both IAG and Virgin will be aiming to fill their boots on packed planes heading across the pond from Heathrow.An exploding drone aimed at the Iraqi prime minister’s house has failed to kill him, the government has said. Mustafa al-Kadhimi was reported by the government to be unharmed. In a statement released early on Sunday, the government said the drone tried to hit al-Kadhimi’s home in Baghdad’s heavily fortified Green Zone, which houses foreign embassies and government offices. Residents of Baghdad heard an explosion followed by gunfire in the area. Two Iraqi officials told the Associated Press that seven of his security guards were injured in the attack. They spoke on condition of anonymity because they were not authorised to give official statements. “I am fine and among my people. Thank God,” the prime minister tweeted shortly after the attack. He called for calm and restraint, “for the sake of Iraq”. He later appeared on Iraqi television, seated behind a desk in a white shirt, looking calm and composed. “Cowardly rocket and drone attacks don’t build homelands and don’t build a future,” he said. A security statement released by state-run media said the failed assassination attempt was with “a booby-trapped drone that tried to target his residence in the Green Zone”. It added that he was not harmed and was in good health. No group has claimed responsibility for the attack, which the US condemned as terrorism. “We are relieved to learn the prime minister was unharmed. This apparent act of terrorism, which we strongly condemn, was directed at the heart of the Iraqi state,” state department spokesperson Ned Price said. “We are in close touch with the Iraqi security forces charged with upholding Iraq’s sovereignty and independence and have offered our assistance as they investigate this attack.” A spokesman for the commander in chief of the Iraqi armed forces said the security situation was stable inside the Green Zone on Sunday. Images published by the state news agency INA showed damage to some parts of the prime minister’s residence and a damaged SUV vehicle parked in the garage. Remains of a small explosive-laden drone used in the attack were retrieved by security forces to be investigated, a security official with knowledge of the attack told Reuters. “It’s premature now to say who carried out the attack,” said the security official on condition of anonymity, as he was not authorized to comment on security details. “We’re checking our intelligence reports and waiting for initial investigation results to point the finger at perpetrators.” Pro-Iran Shia militias supporters have been camped outside the Green Zone for nearly a month after they rejected the results of Iraq’s parliamentary elections, in which they were the biggest losers. Protests turned deadly on Friday when the demonstrators marched towards the Green Zone and there was an exchange of fire in which one protester was killed and dozens of security forces were injured. Al-Khadimi ordered an investigation to determine what sparked the clashes and who violated orders not to open fire. Some militia leaders have openly blamed al-Kadhimi for Friday’s clashes and the protester’s death. Al-Kadhimi, 54, was Iraq’s former intelligence chief before becoming prime minister in May last year. He is considered by the militias to be close to the US, and has tried to find a balance between Iraq’s alliances with the US and Iran. Prior to the elections, he hosted several rounds of talks between regional foes Iran and Saudi Arabia in Baghdad in a bid to ease regional tensions. The US, the UN security council and others have praised the 10 October election, which was mostly violence-free and without major technical glitches. After the vote, militia supporters had pitched tents near the Green Zone, rejecting the election results and threatening violence unless their demands for a recount were met. The unsubstantiated claims of voter fraud have cast a shadow over the vote, while the standoff with the militia supporters has also increased tensions among rival Shia factions. The election was held months ahead of schedule in response to mass protests in late 2019, which saw tens of thousands in Baghdad and predominantly Shia southern provinces rally against endemic corruption, poor services and unemployment. They also protested against the heavy-handed interference of neighbouring Iran in Iraq’s affairs through Iran-backed militias. The militias have lost popularity since the 2018 vote, when they made big election gains. Many Iraqis hold them responsible for suppressing the 2019 protests, and for challenging the state’s authority. The biggest gains in this year’s poll were made by influential Shia cleric Moqtada al-Sadr, who won the largest number of parliament seats, 73 out of 329. While he maintains good relations with Iran, al-Sadr publicly opposes external interference in Iraq’s affairs. The protests appeared to be aimed at pressuring al-Sadr to ensure that Iran-aligned factions are part of the next Cabinet. As the winner, al-Sadr’s bloc will seek coalition partners and name the prime minister. With Associated Press, Reuters and Agence France-PresseIt’s been a fascinating and memorable meeting, and Knicks Go put up another great performance to land the Classic at the end of the two days. Brad Cox has his first Classic winner, Joel Rosario his second. It’s been a great two days, with Charlie Appleby dominant for the Europeans and Japan is celebrating not one, but two, winners. It’s back to Keeneland in Kentucky next year, when the temperatures will be cooler but the excitement hopefully will be just as intense. I don’t know if it was a Guardian thing or a Virgin Net thing but my connection went AGAIN just as they were leaving the stalls. Apologies. But Knicks Go went straight into the lead for Joel Rosario and he set steady fractions from there before staying on well in the stretch. Essential Quality was being niggled a long way out, and it was Medina Spirit that kept on for second with Essential Quality third. Knicks Go wins the the Breeders’ Cup Classic. Off and running They are heading into the stalls, Essential Quality still just favourite but Hot Rod Charlie is getting plenty of support too. Five minutes to post for the Classic and they are out on the track. A special moment in the racing year. But it does come down to Medina Spirit in many ways, because he’s - probably - going to be the first horse to be disqualified from the Kentucky Derby for a failed dope test since Dancer’s Image in 1968. The NBC feed just suggested that “there are two sides” to the debate, but from where I’m sitting, there’s just the simple fact that the horse tested positive for a banned substance on raceday and it *still* hasn’t been DQd. There is one more big hitter in the Classic field: Knicks Go. He won the Lukas Classic last time: Hot Rod Charlie is another big runner, he finished third at Churchill and then went down by one-and-a-quarter lengths to Essential Quality in the Belmont: Essential Quality is the narrow 9-5 favourite to continue the incredible run of the Godolphin colours. This is going to be his last race and he’s only lost one - the Kentucky Derby - in his entire career. Here’s the Run For The Roses, with Medina Spirit* first past the post and Essential Quality back in fourth. Consider how much more ground Essential Quality covers from a wide draw. And now we move on to the Classic, my favourite race of the year. That was some run through the field by Yibir, who kicked off his season finishing third in the Sandown Classic Trial. The winner there was Alenquer, a Group Two winner at Royal Ascot next time, and the runner-up was Adayar, the Derby winner. Lone Eagle, who was touched off in the Irish Derby, was fourth. A classic Classic Trial, for sure. For the Godolphin operation, meanwhile, it could yet get even better, as Essential Quality is a huge runner for the royal blue colours in the Breeders’ Cup Classic - up next! What a Breeders’ Cup for Charlie Appleby and Wlliam Buick, and what a year too. That’s their third winner at the meeting, and Yibir came with an irresistible run to collar the outsider Broome a few strides from the line. Tarnawa is a long way back, Broome goes clear in the stretch but now here comes Yibir and William Buick, they are getting up! The field is stretched, the pace is strong, but bunching more as they turn out. of the back Yibir is rhid, Bolshoi Ballet fourth, Channel Maker prominent in the chasing pack too Level break, Tribhuvan and Acclimate go several lengths clear turning in first time Off and running in the Breeders’ Cup Turf! A great stat after the Mile was that Charlie Appleby has had runners in 10 races in the US this year, and won six of those. Walton Street and Yibir could make it seven from 11. Won’t be long now, the last ones are going in ... Gufo, third in the Joe Hirsch at Belmont last time, is also on the backers’ minds, at 7-1. Teona, who skipped the Prix de l’Arc de Triomphe after the ground went soft, is 9-1 for Roger Varian’s Newmarket stable. Ten minutes to post time for the Turf, and the runners are heading out to the track. Tarnawa is now 3-2, Charlie Appleby’s Walton Street is 7-1 and his other runner Yibir is 11-1. The Turf is up next, Tarnawa is 6-5 favourite to repeat last year’s success. The pace in that race was crazy and Letruska was beaten before the home turn. But what a result, and a first win for Japan in the Distaff with their first runner in the race. Yoshito Yahagi, whose purple titfer is a sight to behold, is the big story of this year’s Breeders’ Cup. Oisin Murphy is being interviewed on the track: I try very hard to get on the best horses I can around the world. I’m only 26 years old and these are the opportunities I crave.” And the winning rider is none other than Oisin Murphy! It’s Marche Lorraine for Japan, the biggest price on the board at 45-1! It’s on the nod after a great run to the line, and it could be another for Japan. Marche Lorraine and Dunbar Road flashed past together. Another strong quarter, Private Mission still leads turning in, Letruska has dropped away Private Mission leads, a very strong pace, Letruska is just behind in second and As Time Goes By is third Off and running in the Breeders’ Cup Distaff! Letruska is 6-5 on the tote, Malthaat is 7-2 and Shedaresthedevil is 6-1. Here’s Malathaat in her last race in the Alabama Stakes at Saratoga: Next up at Del Mar is the $2m Distaff,in which Letruska, who is on a five-race winning streak including four Grade Ones, heads the market as she attempts to extend her career record to 18 wins from 23 starts. Here she is going down by a head to today’s rival Shedaresthedevil when giving her 6lb at Oaklawn in March (the only race that Letruska has lost all year by the way): That was Space Blues’ final race before going to stud and William Buick is delighted that he went out with a win. I knew he had a turn of foot and he really is one of my favourites. I wanted him to go out with a win and I probably felt a bit more pressure than I usually would. He’s been a great horse for us and now he’ll go to stud and hopefully become a great stallion. William Buick was perfectly positioned to strike off the bend and Space Blues did it nicely from there. Into the stretch, Space Blues second and running at the lead, he’s in front and wins! It’s just like yesterday, except this time the winner’s backer’s get paid. Space Blues now third, down the back stretch, Got Stormy is fourth, 47.3 sec for the half which isn’t too quick Off and running in the Breeders’ Cup Mile Space Blues is fourth, Smooth Like Strait leads, Blowout second Unlike last night, Appleby’s other runner has not been officially scratched. Going back in ... James Doyle walks back with his saddle and tack, Master Of The Seas looks fine. For the second day running, Charlie Appleby has lost a runner just before the off, Master Of The Seas is out after getting upset in the stalls. Again like last night, he has another runner: Space Blues. A problem at the gates, Other Europeans in the Mile include Pearls Galore for Paddy Twomey while victory for Hideaki Fujirawa’s Vin De Garde would redouble the delight for Japan and then redouble it again. Mo Forza leads the home team, he’s done most of his winning at Grade Two level but this is his win in the Hollywood Derby at Del Mar last year. Some form to consider: here’s Space Blues winning the Group One Prix de la Foret at Longchamp on Arc day. That was a terrific finish to the Sprint, as on-the-nod as it gets. But we must move on, to the Mile - which has always been a key race for the Europeans. Space Blues is favourite for Charlie Appleby and William Buick, and he has Master Of The Seas (James Doyle) as backup. Other European runners include Mother Earth, the 1,000 Guineas winner, for Aidan O’Brien and Ryan Moore, but in a race that gave us a 73-1 upset 12 months ago, I’m taking a small stab at Jessica Harrington’s Real Appeal (currently a 70-1 shot on the local tote). As a reserve that got into the race only because of a scratch, Real Appeal has the outside draw, but he has a hold-up running style so would need to drop in in any case, and he has plenty of boot at the business end of the race if Shane Foley can find a way through. And at that kind of price, it costs almost nothing to take a chance. Apologies for the drop off in updates, I lost my internet connection just as they went off for the Sprint. And what a race it was, Dr Schivel looked to have sealed the win with a burst of speed inside the final furlong but Aloha West closed relentlessly all the way to the line and got it on the nod. That was a semi-flared nostril that won it. And among the outsiders we have Firenze Fire, a horse with a distinctly carnivorous streak: Dr Schivel is drawn nine of nine, which isn’t ideal, but he’s a serious sprinter as he showed at Santa Anita last time: After that moment of racing history, we move on to the Sprint, and another short-priced favourite in Jackie’s Warrior. Steve Asmussen’s three-year-old is currently showing at 2-5 on the tote board, with Dr Schivel (my fancy for the race) showing at 9-2. Here’s Jackie’s Warrior in the Gallant Bob Stakes at Parx: Loves Only You is trained by Yoshito Yahagi, who is quite a colourful chap apparently: Love was fourth by the way, and Audarya fifth. Loves Only You was a 4-1 shot, and her connections are now picking up the prize. “A dream come true for Japanese racing,” her owner says, and promises to come back for more next year. A huge moment for Japanese racing, and a truly memorable finishing flourish by Loves Only You to seal the win at the end of the best race of the night (so far), and beat the best that America and Europe had to offer. Loves Only You is chasing the favourite, Love on the inside too, but Loves Only You has done it! Japan’s first winner at the Breeders’ Cup! Loves Only You fifth, travelling well, War Like Goddess goes wide and into the lead at the top of the stretch Turning back out for another circuit, War Like Goddess was last but now makes a move Going To Vegas leads early from Dogtag and Pocket Square, Loves Only You fifth and Love in sixth. Not long now in the Filly &amp; Mare Turf, they are going in quickly ... And OFF AND RUNNING! The NBC feed points out that Japan’s record at the Breeders’ Cup is 0-16 after three more losers so far this year, but very few runners from there have gone off at as short a price as Loves Only You. She is, incidentally, rated 1lb in front of Love and War Like Goddess by Timeform. My pick here was Loves Only You, for what that’s worth, but it’s a fascinating race with any number of plausible winners. War Like Goddess is now 2-1 at the track, with Love on 5-2 and Loves Only You on 9-2. Audarya is 13-1 to defend her title, while Pocket Square, a Grade Three winner at Belmont last time, is around the same odds. Rougir also merits close consideration after her win in the Prix de l’Opera at Longchamp last time: Love is a familiar name to European racing fans, having run away with the Oaks at Epsom last year, but Loves Only You needs a little more introduction. Here she is winning the QEII Cup at Sha Tin: We’re heading back to the green stuff shortly for the Filly &amp; Mare Turf: Love, Audarya - last year’s winner - and Japan’s Loves Only You, up against War Like Goddess for the home team (and a few more besides). In the early betting, War Like Goddess is the favourite at 5-2, with Love and Loves Only You popular too. Here’s the favourite winning the Flower Bowl at Saratoga earlier this year: Life Is Good is going clear, this is another very easy win, Life Is Good is very, very good Life Is Good leads into the straight, Ginobli in pursuit, stretch drive coming up The favourite leads once again, 21.88sec for the quarter, that’s lightning fast Life Is Good leads, followed by Jasper Prince and Eight Rings OFF AND RUNNING IN THE DIRT MILE: Going into the gates for the Breeders’ Cup Dirt Mile ... Ginobli is a 9-2 chance, he won the Pat O’Brien Stakes right here (well, there) at Del Mar, over seven furlongs: Silver State is the second-favourite for Steve Asmussen, he won the Metropolitan Handicap at Belmont in June: Another odds-on shot for the next Breeders’ Cup race, Life Is Good is current 3-5 for the Dirt Mile. He started his three-year-old career in Bob Baffert’s barn and was the early favourite for the Kentucky Derby after winning the San Felipe Stakes by eight lengths. An injury ruled him out of theTriple Crown races, however, and he then switched stables to join Todd Pletcher. Here he is winning the Kelso Handicap at Belmont unchallenged: Just tidying up the other Europeans: A Case Of You was fifth and Golden Slippers eighth. Andrea Atzeni, meanwhile, sums up Emaraaty Ana’s race into fourth place fairly succinctly. Golden Pal is a great horse and I couldn’t really go with him. I was hoping he’d stop but he didn’t. Wesley Ward, Golden Pal’s trainer, happily confirms that the three-year-old is the best horse he has trained (so far). He’s the best, the best so far. He’s just fast, now that he’s matured he’s got so much upstairs as well, so much natural ability. There were some fast horses up against Golden Pal, but he flew out of the stalls and did not see another rival from that point. A brutal and exhilarating exhibition of sprinting. Still Golden Pal turning in, and he quickens! Golden Pal all the way ... Golden Pal straight into the lead, came out with afterburners, Lieutenant Dan second, then Caravel and Emaraaty Ana They are going into the stalls quickly ... and now off and running in the Breeders’ Cup Turf Sprint! Glass Slippers is 13-1 on the PMU, Emaraaty Ana currently 8-1, and Lieutenant Dan is 7-2. He won the Eddie D Stakes at Santa Anita last time out: Golden Pal is a warm favourite here at around 5-2, and would be only the fifth horse to win two different races at the Breeders’ Cup. And they are now coming out onto the track. While this might seem like an obvious target for Europe’s best sprinters, though, it is worth recalling that last year’s renewal was the 13th since the race was added to the schedule and Glass Slippers was the first European-trained runner to win. Golden Pal, who won the Juvenile Turf Sprint at Keeneland last year, is the big hope for the homes team. European backers may recall that Wesley Ward’s sprinter was a distinct flop when he was sent to York for the Nunthorpe Stakes in August, but he bounced back to form in his next race and is likely to take all the beating if he can get on the pace. We are heading onto the turf for the next of our Grade One races, the Turf Sprint to be precise, in which Kevin Ryan’s Glass Slippers, last year’s winner, is joined by her stable companion Emaraaty Ana and also A Case Of You – one for the Joni Mitchell fans there – from Adrian McGuinness’s yard in Ireland. Emaraaty Ana arrives fresh, having been rested since his win in the Haydock Sprint Trophy in September, while Glass Slippers and A Case Of You were third and first respectively in the Prix de l’Abbaye at Longchamp last month: Bob Baffert, Gamine’s trainer, is interviewed afterwards. It wasn’t her day today. I could tell she was struggling. It hurts me like my children when they get beat but the winner is a good filly. A real surprise to kick off proceedings, Gamine could never dominate as she did last year and the writing was on the wall as soon as Ce Ce edged in front in the stretch. Gamine is fading! Bella Sofia too, it’s a big upset, Ce Ce takes the spoils! Edgeway is close up in third with Ce Ce, Gamine leads them into the straight between horses Gamine straight into the lead, Bella Sofia half a length behind, 22.31sec for the opening quarter ... Going into the gates ... and now off and running in the Breeders’ Cup Filly &amp; Mare Sprint Gamine is now 2-5 to get the Del Mar punters off to a flying start. Bella Sofia, who is rated 6lb behind the favourite by the sages at the Timeform organisation, is the only real danger to the favourite according to the betting. She is a Grade One winner, in the Test Stakes at Saratoga in August, and followed up with this success in a four-runner Gallant Bloom Handicap at Belmont Park in late September. Hello and welcome to the Guardian’s live coverage of day two of the Breeders’ Cup meeting at Del Mar in southern California, where the question that many racegoers will ask themselves is whether anything on today’s nine-race, multi-million dollar card can possibly match Friday’s Juvenile Turf when it comes to drama, uncertainty and confusion. The answer, almost certainly, is no, but that can only be a good thing, as a chorus of boos and jeers from a packed grandstand after a Grade One race is the worst possible look from the Breeders’ Cup organisation’s point of view. As Charlie Appleby, the trainer of the winner, Modern Games, said afterwards: “For the sport, you hate to see it but the fans are here to have a fun weekend and hopefully they will still enjoy it. We’ll have a better day tomorrow.” We certainly should, as the meeting’s main card has much to excite and entertain for fans on both sides of the Pond and, perhaps, in Japan too, as the country’s long-awaited first winner at the meeting is a distinct possibility. Europe will hope, indeed probably expect, to add to Appleby’s success yesterday, with Tarnawa favoured to defend her title in the Turf at 23.40 GMT. Glass Slippers, another defending champion, is one of three big Anglo-Irish contenders for the Turf Sprint (19.40), while Love and Audarya are lined up for the Filly &amp; Mare Turf (20.59) and Appleby’s Space Blues is favourite for the Mile (22.20), a race which also features several more European-trained challengers. And at the top of the card, there is the Classic, where the presence of Bob Baffert’s Medina Spirit, the, er, Kentucky Derby winner*, could lead to some more unwelcome headlines for the Cup committee on Sunday. Medina Spirit is still, officially, the winner of this year’s Run For The Roses, despite testing positive for bethamethasone, a banned corticosteroid, a few days later, a shocking situation for the sport in the US and one which seems likely to continue to hang over it for some time to come. Baffert’s filly Gamine – who also features on Baffert’s disciplinary record having been DQd from third place in last season’s Kentucky Oaks after a positive for betamethasone – is the hot favourite for the first Breeders’ Cup race on the card, the Filly &amp; Mare Sprint (19.05). Away from possible Baffert-related controversy, meanwhile, Loves Only You is Japan’s big hope in the Filly &amp; Mare Turf, while American fans in particular will be looking forward to an intriguing renewal of the Distaff at 23.00, with Letruska, Shedaresthedevil, Malathaat and Royal Flag among a closely-matched bunch of leading contenders. It should also be pointed out that this is the first Breeders’ Cup at which the race-day anti-bleeding medication, Lasix, is banned in all 14 races, which can only be a good thing for international racing going forward. Some thoughts about Saturday’s main events are here, and there will be previews, tips, results, post-race quotes and more throughout the card as the action unfolds.Charlie Appleby and William Buick completed a double on the second day of the Breeders’ Cup at Del Mar and took their total for the two-day meeting to three victories as Yibir and Space Blues took the Turf and Mile respectively on Saturday. Yibir took a strong hold in the early stages but still arrived with an irresistible run under a perfectly timed ride by Buick, collaring Aidan O’Brien’s outsider Broome, ridden by Frankie Dettori, a few strides from the post. “I’m delighted for the team,” Appleby, who is all but certain to be Britain’s champion trainer for the first time this year, said afterwards. “They’ve done a fantastic job shipping these horses. This horse is not the easiest, but to have three winners on this stage is fantastic.” Earlier on the card and for the second day running at this year’s Breeders’ Cup, Charlie Appleby saw one of his runners withdrawn a moment before the start at Del Mar on Saturday, and again for the second day running, he then watched his other entry in the race record an easy success. The difference on Saturday was that the backers of Space Blues in the Breeders’ Cup Mile got paid. “It’s deja vu all over again,” Jimmy Bell, the racing manager for Godolphin in the US, said afterwards, having seen Master Of The Seas taken out of the Mile after getting upset in the stalls, just as Albahr had been in the Juvenile Turf on Friday. Albahr’s stable companion, Modern Games, was mistakenly scratched for betting purposes on Friday and then raced, and won, for the prize money alone. Space Blues, however, went back into his stall and then delivered at 2-1 for his backers, easing past Smooth Like Strait just after the home turn to record a comfortable win. “I’m absolutely delighted,” Appleby said. “He’s been a fantastic horse and will now be retired to stud. William gave him a great ride and he was in the perfect position throughout. It was an interesting race beforehand with Master Of The Seas being scratched but we’re getting used to that now. Rules are rules and we have to abide by them.” Buick was delighted that Space Blues had ended his career with a win on one of the sport’s biggest stages. “I knew he had a turn of foot and he really is one of my favourites,” Buick said. “I wanted him to go out with a win and I probably felt a bit more pressure than I usually would. He’s been a great horse for us and now he’ll go to stud and hopefully become a great stallion.” In the final race, Knicks Go, who was stepping up to a mile and a quarter for the first time in his career, made all the running under Joel Rosario to give Brad Cox his first success in the Breeders’ Cup Classic. Medina Spirit, the controversial winner of the Kentucky Derby, was second, with Essential Quality, the favourite, back in third. Japan had sent 16 runners to Breeders’ Cup races before Saturday’s card without success but that drought ended in spectacular fashion as Loves Only You and Marche Lorraine came home in front in the Filly &amp; Mare Turf and Distaff respectively. Loves Only You was one of the favourites for her race and came with a strong run through a narrow gap to record a first winner for Japan at the meeting, but Marche Lorraine was a 45-1 outsider for the Distaff under Oisin Murphy, who got her home by a nose. “The race seemed like a very competitive race,” Yoshito Yahagi, who trained both horses, said after Loves Only You’s success with Yuga Kawada. “It was a very tough race. But before the race, we thought our horse is number one. We believed it. “He rode perfect and we won. First time she went to overseas, actually she wasn’t that good to travelling, but every time we go travelling she’s getting better and better and she gets stronger mentally.”A new frog species, one of only two in Australia known to carry its tadpoles on its body, has been discovered in the Gondwana rainforests world heritage area in northern New South Wales. The tiny frog measures 16mm and is found on one mountain in the Wollumbin national park. Researchers from the University of Newcastle and the South Australian Museum used genetic analysis to identify the frog as a distinct species from its close relative Assa darlingtoni. The frogs are commonly referred to as pouched or hip pocket frogs, or sometimes the marsupial frog. The male frogs carry developing tadpoles in pouches on their sides of their bodies before little frogs emerge two to three months later. “The hip pocket frog is not only unique for its amazing breeding biology among Australian frogs, but it is also unique among frogs of the world,” said the University of Newcastle’s Michael Mahony, one of the researchers who discovered the frog. “There are only four of the 4,000 species worldwide that have male parental care where the male carries its developing tadpoles.” The tiny frog population is confined to an area of about 2,000 hectares on Wollumbin mountain. The frog is one of three new Australian species the researchers have described in the past year. Mahony said it was discovered while they were examining frogs from five isolated areas from south-east Queensland to Dorrigo in northern NSW where pouched frogs were known to occur. Genetic tests showed the Wollumbin population was a unique species. The newly described pouched frog is one of nine threatened species of frog the researchers are studying in the aftermath of the 2019-20 bushfire disaster. The NSW environment minister, Matt Kean, said the new species had been named Assa wollumbin in consultation with Elders of the Wollumbin Consultative Group. He said the government had declared its habitat an asset of intergenerational significance, a designation that was introduced after the 2019-20 bushfires for places that warrant special protection. The species is expected to meet the state’s criteria for a critically endangered listing. “The small population size makes this frog more vulnerable to the impacts of climate change, which is why the NSW government moved quickly to protect its habitat within days of being formally described,” Kean said. “A conservation action plan will be developed to ensure the survival of this fascinating frog species, which has been living undiscovered high in the cool forest.”The imperious march of Saúl ‘Canelo’ Álvarez continues as, in the 60th fight of his long and illustrious career, he became the undisputed super-middleweight champion of the world after a devastating stoppage of Caleb Plant in the 11th round on Saturday night in Las Vegas. In a typically patient yet dominant display Álvarez dispatched Plant with a brutal series of blows as he added the American’s IBF title to the WBA, WBC and WBO belts he already owns. The end was as ferocious as it was clinical. A shuddering left hook from Álvarez made Plant sag like a suddenly stricken tree hit by lightning. He began to totter forward but Álvarez pushed him back to find the space to then uncork a vicious uppercut. Plant went down heavily but, being such a brave and defiant fallen champion, he rose to his feet and made a curious little jog to the opposite corner. He could not escape Álvarez for long because, as soon as the standing count of eight was over, Plant was again battered by a sustained series of clubbing combinations. The American crashed down against the ropes before hitting the canvas. He rolled over on his back, his arms spread wide in barely conscious surrender, and the fight was over. Álvarez peeled away and climbed the ropes to celebrate with the capacity crowd of 16,586 spectators, which had risen in foot-stomping, whooping unison as soon as the end became inevitable. While the 31-year-old Mexican was then carried around the ring on his trainer Eddy Reynoso’s shoulders, a doctor paid careful attention to Plant – who fought courageously and skillfully while never really threatening Álvarez. When a crown was placed on the head of Álvarez it was acknowledgement of a small slice of modern boxing history. Across the weight divisions, only five other male fighters have held all four belts at the same time and been recognised as the undisputed champion of the world. Álvarez had been emphatic all week in Vegas that, despite the frequent absurdities of the titles peddled by the competing sanctioning bodies, he had this vision of history in mind. Even before the fighters reached the ring the odds against Plant were evident. Every clip of him in his dressing room unleashed a cascade of booing which rolled down the steep banks of seating and all the way into the basement where the fighters readied themselves for their ring walks. In contrast, the adoration of Álvarez boomed around the seething arena and chants of “Can-e-lo, Can-e-lo, Can-e-lo” grew in intensity – until the MGM Grand was rocking after a passionate rendition of the Mexican national anthem folded into another homage to“Can-e-lo, Can-e-lo, Can-e-lo.” Plant cut a lonely, if stoic, figure as he walked to the ring. Álvarez, in contrast, looked as if he was already embracing victory as he fed the raucous delirium of his fevered supporters. It was easy to feel sympathy for Plant – who resembled a lost stranger in his own country. From the outset, Álvarez stalked Plant who was the busier of the two fighters. Plant has an effective jab and he won a couple of early rounds simply by being the more active boxer. But Álvarez is always ready to bide his time and wait for the openings to come. His far heavier punches began to take their toll on Plant. Álvarez closed down the distance effectively and, with methodical venom, set about his destructive work. The pressure Álvarez exerted on Plant was suffocating and he went to the head and the body as the rounds progressed. But his 29-year-old opponent should be commended for his slick boxing and resolve even if he could not do much to stem the heavy tide of punching from a marauding Álvarez. Slowly, inexorably, Plant began to wilt and yet more body punches landed with damaging force in round 10. The savage conclusion was soon completed by the new undisputed champion. There were touching scenes in the ring afterwards when Álvarez and Plant met and embraced. They spoke intently and respectfully to each other and all the bad blood of the build-up drained away. There was nothing left for either man to dispute. The Mexican star is on a mission to cement his place among the greatest fighters who have ever lived. His most serious problem will be to find enough new opponents who can offer the serious test he needs. The best way for him to burnish his growing status as a fighter who transcends the limitations of contemporary boxing is to move up to light-heavyweight and sweep through that division of much bigger and more dangerous men. Artur Beterbiev is the most formidable champion in this weight category and the Russian would offer the kind of exacting challenge that Álvarez loves to pursue. That enticing prospect could become reality next year but, for now, we should pause to consider the latest achievement of Álvarez. In the space of 11 months he has had four world title fights and taken the gaudy alphabet belts from three talented champions in Callum Smith, Billy Joe Saunders and now Plant. His supremacy among the super-middleweights has long been an easy assumption. But after another masterful performance on the glittering Vegas Strip, Álvarez is now the undisputed ruler of his division. The fevered response of his vast army of supporters, who filled the MGM Grand Garden Arena with the noise and colour of Mexico, confirmed another obvious truth. His domination cannot be limited to one division. Canelo Álvarez is simply the best fighter in the world by some distance – with his authority and popularity unmatched by any other current world champion.My eyes flutter open. I’m surrounded by four nurses holding me upside down. They shake me back and forth, urging the blood back to my head. As I regain consciousness I wonder: is this worth it? That “it” is the $10,000 question. Seven months ago, I received my acceptance to Columbia University’s School of Journalism. I was absolutely stunned to be admitted, but even more shocked by the $116,000 price tag, for tuition and living expenses. The school, whose education is widely considered the golden standard in journalism, would provide me with unparalleled access, in an industry I currently felt immobile in. Fortunately, the vast majority of the cost would be covered by scholarships. For the remaining rent and living costs, I looked for something else to plug the gap. I landed on a burgeoning industry offering struggling people vast amounts of cash, relatively fast: egg donation. ••• It’s 90-something degrees on a June morning in New York City. My wrinkled, green satin skirt sticks to my legs as I rush into the egg donation clinic’s main office for another screening, a urine test. Over the last four months I’ve been lying to my somewhat conservative family about where I’ve been escaping to on these early mornings: surreptitiously showing up for examinations and psychological assessments in order to donate my eggs. Outside of my family, I’ll more often say I’m “selling my eggs”. Donation is a term that is supposed to reflect that it’s a woman’s time, not the value of her eggs, that’s being paid for. But here was an industry offering me more per hour than I’d ever earned at a regular job. To say I’m selling feels more honest. In the clinic’s main office, Amy Winehouse’s deep voice plays softly on a nearby speaker. Looking around the waiting room, with its lavender and gray accents splashing the walls, I quickly realize I’m the only woman sitting alone. I share fleeting glances with giggling couples and wonder if any of them are sizing me up as a possible donor. Sometime after my arrival, a nurse calls my name. Amy Winehouse’s harmonies fade away. She takes me to a chair in a hallway: a dozen or so vials clinking around on an attached tray. The space feels cold and sterile. The silence is oppressive. I try to remember if I ate breakfast – I didn’t. A nurse scoots over and pulls my arm over the cuff of the chair. “Beautiful veins,” she says. After she has filled eight or so vials with my blood, I slump over and pass out. When I awake, the nurses have swept me into the air. Semi-conscious, and embarrassed I stumble over an apology. I’m escorted to a gynecological chair in a nearby examination room and given a pineapple flavored lollipop. I lean my head back against the cold chair. Another nurse walks in, showing off more vials in her hand. I roll up my sleeve and hold out my other arm. Time for round two. ••• I first called the egg donation clinic back in March 2021 – moments before I attended Columbia Journalism School’s introduction day. The first time I heard of donation was through a friend during my undergraduate studies. I knew I couldn’t risk the distraction and stress of a job while studying at Columbia full-time. Plus, the school’s administration reminded us outright that we were to avoid employment during our studies. The Google search that led me to my new career choice was simple: “Egg donation agencies in New York City.” I’m not the only one to type it. Every year, donors are being paid in the thousands to provide eggs to prospective parents. The CDC found that in under a decade, IVF cycles using donor eggs nearly tripled, from roughly 5,000 in 2007 to more than 13,000 in 2016. The woman on the phone was cheery but meticulous when she described the process. In contrast, my first visit to the clinic’s SoHo office was impersonal. During my ultrasound, awe-struck as I gazed into the contents of my ovaries and uterus, my doctor spoke about me to the nurse, but not to me. In a traditional doctor-patient relationship, the doctor’s bedside manner is fundamental. In the US – where healthcare is privatized and people weigh up doctors as if their health were a business transaction – medical offices treat you well because they want you to come back. My first day in SoHo made me realize that this time, I wasn’t the patient. I was the product. The bloodwork from that first appointment was sent off to a genetic testing facility, Sema4, which tested 283 of my genes against hundreds of disorders. Those ranged from cystic fibrosis and Fragile X syndrome – which has been connected to autism – to maple syrup urine disease, a disorder where the body cannot process certain amino acids. I tested positive as a carrier for three genetic conditions: dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa – a condition that creates skin so fragile that it blisters and breaks easily, leaving severe scarring; metachromatic leukodystrophy – a rare genetic disorder; and non-syndromic hearing loss. I felt a mixture of shock and morbid curiosity hearing the results, though the clinic reassured me it was normal to test positive for a small handful of genetic disorders. Epidermolysis bullosa has no cure, and people born with the condition are at increased risk for an extremely aggressive form of skin cancer. The Sema4 representative playfully told me not to fall in love with Finnish people, who are more likely to have the same skin condition. The call offered a window into a different world: where everybody is a carrier of disease, myself included. I was forced to confront a reality where I might pass on complex disorders to my children, ones I never thought I had. The clinic was not just assessing my predisposition for genetic disorders, it was also weighing up other attributes: my blonde hair, my blue eyes and my fair skin. Over screening calls, team members would subtly compliment and affirm descriptions of my body, personality and ivy league education. Altogether, I had concerns this was sanitized eugenics. But through what other language did I expect them to build a relationship with me? They were paying me $10,000 for my eggs. The very nature of our business revolved around my body. ••• In May, early on in the process, the clinic set me up to speak with their psychologist. Lounging in the hammock on my balcony, I was exposed to the philosophy of the clinic. My eggs weren’t “mine” and “my eggs” were certainly not synonymous with “my child”. Rather, they saw my eggs as a part of a larger gene pool, one that spanned generations and geographic locations. I was concerned the psychologist was assessing my mental health, looking to disqualify me from the process, but as our conversation flowed I realized she was actually trying to ascertain whether I was intelligent enough to make the decision to give away my eggs. She gave me an IQ test. It was New York state regulation. The idea that my eggs weren’t “mine” but rather some genetic tie to the past struck me as odd and uncomfortable at first, but over time I grew to prefer that framing to my own. I wasn’t giving up “my” child – I was giving up another period. This would help struggling parents conceive children of their own. There was something wholesome about that. The idea that a small child, that looked like me would roam the world while I experienced my early twenties never fazed me. The thought actually warmed my heart. I grew to realize I wanted children of my own one day, and part of me yearned for the experience I was offering to someone else. I imagined the mom who would take my eggs. Was she funny? What kind of school lunches would she pack? Was she compassionate and patient? Would she hold the child’s hand often? Did her moral values reflect my own? I would never know. My donation was anonymous end-to-end. ••• By summertime, the clinic had taken me off of my birth control and put me on their own. One morning when I went to their office to collect an envelope of the beige pills, the nurse handing them to me apologized, saying she didn’t understand why it was taking so long to match me with a family. “You’re a hot commodity,” she said. We paused for a moment, staring at one another. My hair had fallen in front of my eyes. I pushed the dirty blonde strands back behind my ear before erupting in uncomfortable laughter. We both knew what she meant. A few days away from my egg retrieval date I was sitting on the edge of my bed feeling truly unsettled. It was late, and in the quiet I felt the calm ripped away from me as I laid out one of the last packs of medication, a 250 microgram syringe of Ganirelix, on my table stand. It took some mental gymnastics to learn to inject myself with hormones twice daily. Each medication had a different ritual. In the morning, a yellow and blue plastic pen would deliver 225 ml of Follistim, clicking as I pushed the pen down to dispense the refrigerated serum. In the evenings, I would mix a vial of Menopur. Combined, these two drugs worked to stimulate the follicles in my ovaries, aiming to release anywhere between 10-20 eggs – normally, just one egg is released during ovulation. Days before retrieval, Ganirelix would prevent me from ovulating, giving the eggs a chance to mature and then be collected before being released from my ovaries. This final stage numbed me. The rigamarole of daily injections and 7 am ultrasounds had worn me down, and I was tired. On the horizon, I still had one more hurdle: retrieval. I ran my hand over my stomach, feeling the tender needle sites and the bloat underneath, not wanting to undergo the surgery but also knowing it was too late to turn back. I grabbed my first syringe of Ganirelix and took a deep breath. ••• I surveyed a dozen women of varying ages and backgrounds on their personal experiences donating. Unlike infertility forums for people going through IVF or surrogacy, there was no clear online location where donors could support each other through the process of egg donation. Instead, I found them scattered across private Facebook groups, WhatsApp chats and Reddit. Most donated during their early twenties and all participated for the financial compensation, at least originally. There was a pay scale, largely determined by geographic location and time of donation, ranging from $3,000 to $20,000. Women used the money to pay for bills, student loans or vacations. Some donors matched with intended parents or agencies through advertisements placed on Facebook or Instagram. Others found their matches on Craigslist, responding to blanket ads not dissimilarly phrased to those looking to sell a bicycle, apartment or car. “JEWISH WOMEN --- Earn $10,000 with the Gift of Egg Donation” “Chinese, Vietnam, Korean, Asian Egg Donors Earn $10,000” “Seeking a Highly Intelligent Egg Donor! Compensation up to $40K” Since these listings are sometimes posted directly by the intended parents, they may have shorter or less thorough initial application processes, and they can offer significantly higher monetary sums than agencies or clinics traditionally would. But applying to unverified listings poses obvious risks. In 2011, an Idaho woman was charged with fraud for stealing eggs from donors through Craigslist, never paying the agreed upon sums after receiving the eggs. Attempting, in part, to make the process safer, organizations began pairing donors and intended parents through their own vetted databases. Prospective parents, can now scroll through the profiles of thousands of potential donors, not unlike on a dating website. Circle Surrogacy offers non-anonymous pairings, where the donor has an opportunity to meet and interact with the families. Jordan Whaley Finnerty’s profile features an image of her then five-year-old daughter – all smiles beside her mom. Whaley set it up when she was 27. That was in 2018, after a wine night with a friend who had just undergone a donation herself – Finnerty was intrigued, especially by the $9,000 lump sum. She wasn’t desperate for the money, but she knew it would help her stop living paycheck to paycheck. She applied that night and forgot about it. “Four months later I was donating,” Finnerty said. Since then, Finnerty has donated four times. “It wasn’t until I was matched with a family, met them, [and] spoke with them that I realized the impact,” said Finnerty. “You don’t realize the lengths couples have to go through to have children.” She’s had contact with all of the families she’s donated to. Being exposed to the parents’ gratitude changed her mind. Now, the goodwill of element, not the money, is her favorite part: She plans to donate six times – the maximum advisable. Still, she acknowledges certain issues in the industry. “Speaking with intended parents, they express how weird it is to be going over girls’ profiles and looking into their health history, basing their preferences off of hair color or eye color,” Finnerty told me over Facebook one evening. But she also knows that people make these choices with their partners all the time. To prevent people from donating repeatedly (with the risks being unknown), or incentivizing people to withhold information to make themselves more attractive to donors, ethical guidelines suggest offering less money. In a recent opinion published by American Society for Reproductive Medicine – which dissuades agencies from compensating donors more than $10,000 – the society found that 88% of donors compensated up to $5,000 for their eggs answered in a self-report questionnaire that “being able to help someone” was their biggest motivation. “I think [people assume] there’s a sense of coercion out there, but there’s really none of that,” said Deborah Mecerod who runs MyEggBank, the largest egg donation bank network in the US. Their policy is to offer one flat-fee as payment, capped at $10,000. Mecerod feels the experience is very rewarding for prospective donors, through the education and free genetic testing, even if they choose not to follow through with the donation. “There’s always the option to leave the process,” she said. While many women admit to being pulled in by the amount they can earn from their eggs, most I spoke to still saw it as a choice. “The first and second time I was unemployed or barely employed, so in a way [I needed the money] but I wasn’t desperate for it,” explains Dolan Wells Gallagher, who has now donated her eggs three times. The first and second time she used the money to cover rent while she was between jobs, the third time, to pay tuition fees. Data and long-term research on egg donation is scarce. In 2016, new research suggested that fertility drugs may be linked to the development of uterine cancers. A 2017 report by The Donor Sibling Registry found suspicious occurrences of breast cancer in otherwise healthy young donors who showed no genetic predisposition to the disease, citing hormone therapy during donation as a possible cause. “The lack of information may be misleadingly interpreted as lack of risk,” the report warned. Four years later, there’s still no semblance of a long-term database to monitor the health of donors. Furthermore, while health data is monitored for those who donate organs, the same information is not required for egg donation: it is up to donation agencies to request past medical information on donors, and even then they are at the mercy of donors voluntarily doing so – and telling the truth when they do. Most are not asked for, and do not report, medical changes after starting the process. In the meantime, thousands of young donors every year undergo egg removal and hormone treatment, without anyone fully understanding the consequences. “Having a donor registry would be such a great tool for so many different reasons, because you could collect data from the donor, how she’s doing and follow up in years to come,” explains Mecerod, who believes legislation and federal government intervention would help solve this problem. But most women I interviewed didn’t seem too bogged down by the ramifications of long-term health complications. Most of them needed the money. When the cycle ends, the donors leave with the future impacts a mystery. ••• Up until the very end of my first donation, I felt positive about my experience. Despite fainting; feeling objectified and shuffled around; despite the laborious injections, I still liked it. I felt comfort and satisfaction knowing I helped people achieve their dreams. But in the final days ticking down to my surgery, I felt a slew of emotions that confused what I thought would be a rewarding end. I felt at the mercy of the clinic. Appointments were made at locations I’d asked not to be sent to, because they were out of my way. Some days I didn’t receive updates about how much medication I should take, leaving me to take a stab in the dark at the dosage. I didn’t find out when my surgery would be until two days before the event. On the day before my surgery, I asked a nurse point-blank why they scheduled surgeries with such little advance. She didn’t know. I felt disrespected and angry. The company was inconsiderate of my time, and I was suddenly left scrambling around to make sure someone could still pick me up from my surgery the following day. I was expected to have absolute flexibility. Appointments popped up and I was expected to be available. As the week wore on, my enlarged ovaries sat heavy in my abdomen as a thick and uncomfortable reminder. After my final appointment on Tuesday, I wrote in my journal: “At this stage I genuinely do feel left in the dark and I don’t really want to deal with these people anymore. I wonder if the woman receiving my eggs is more informed than I am.” Still, I looked forward to receiving the $10,000 check. Life in New York, one of the world’s most expensive cities, took unexpected tolls on my wallet on a daily basis. The arrival of this check would quell my anxiety for a handful of months, allowing me to return to my studies stress-free –– studies which would offer me stability and confidence towards my dream job. Every piece was a steppingstone towards a future I desperately wanted. My surgery lasted a total of seven minutes and laid me up in bed for a day and a half at home, as my stomach cramped and contorted. The clinic offered me no pain relievers, so I lived on a cocktail of Tylenol and Advil. Fortunately, my pain wasn’t too bad. Reflecting on the procedure as a whole, I jotted down a couple lines in my journal: “I would consider doing this again. I do worry about how it would impact my body, but the impact on my life would be so significant. I don’t know if I could deny that.” • This article was amended on 9 and 16 November 2021 to correct the cost of tuition at Columbia University, and to correct some medical details regarding the effect of Ganirelix.After Tuesday’s Democratic loss in the Virginia gubernatorial election and near-loss in New Jersey, I’m hearing a narrative about Democrats’ failure with white working-class voters that is fundamentally wrong. In Thursday’s New York Times, David Leonhardt pointed out that the non-college voters who are abandoning the Democratic party “tend to be more religious, more outwardly patriotic and more culturally conservative than college graduates”. He then quotes a fellow Times columnist, the pollster Nate Cohn, who says “college graduates have instilled increasingly liberal cultural norms while gaining the power to nudge the Democratic party to the left. Partly as a result, large portions of the party’s traditional working-class base have defected to the Republicans”. Leonhardt adds that these defections have increased over the past decade and suggests Democratic candidates start listening to working-class voters’ concerns about “crime and political correctness”, their “mixed feelings about immigration and abortion laws”, and their beliefs “in God and in a strong America”. This narrative worries me in two ways. First, if “cultural” messages top economic ones, what’s to stop Democrats from playing the same cultural card Republicans have used for years to inflame the white working class: racism? Make no mistake: Glenn Youngkin focused his campaign in Virginia on critical race theory, which isn’t even taught in Virginia’s schools but comes out of the same disgraceful Republican dog-whistle tradition. The other problem with this “culture over economics” narrative is it overlooks the fact that after Ronald Reagan, the Democratic party turned its back on the working class. During the first terms of Bill Clinton and Barack Obama, Democrats controlled both houses of Congress. They scored some important victories, such as the Affordable Care Act and an expanded earned income tax credit. But both Clinton and Obama allowed the power of the working class to erode. Both ardently pushed for free trade agreements without providing the millions of blue-collar workers who thereby lost their jobs any means of getting new ones that paid at least as well. They stood by as corporations hammered trade unions, the backbone of the working class. Both refused to reform labor laws to impose meaningful penalties on companies that violated them or enable workers to form unions with simple up-or-down votes. Union membership sank from 22% of all workers when Clinton was elected to fewer than 11% today, denying the working class the bargaining leverage it needs to get a better deal. The Obama administration protected Wall Street from the consequences of its gambling addiction through a giant taxpayer-funded bailout but let millions of underwater homeowners drown. Both Clinton and Obama allowed antitrust to ossify – allowing major industries to become more concentrated and hence more economically and politically powerful. Finally, they turned their backs on campaign finance reform. In 2008, Obama was the first presidential nominee since Richard Nixon to reject public financing in his primary and general-election campaigns. He never followed up on his re-election campaign promise to pursue a constitutional amendment overturning Citizens United v FEC, the 2010 supreme court opinion that opened the floodgates to big money in politics. What happens when you combine freer trade, shrinking unions, Wall Street bailouts, growing corporate power and the abandonment of campaign finance reform? You shift political and economic power to the wealthy and you shaft the working class. Adjusted for inflation, American workers today are earning almost as little as they did 30 years ago, when the American economy was a third its present size. Biden’s agenda for working people – including lower prescription drug prices, paid family leave, stronger unions and free community college – has followed the same sad trajectory, due to the power of big money. Big Pharma has blocked prescription drug reform. A handful of Democratic senators backed by big money have refused to support paid family leave. Big money has killed labor law reform. Democrats could win back the white working class by putting together a large coalition of the working class and poor, of whites, Blacks and Latinos, of everyone who has been shafted by the huge shift in wealth and power to the top. This would give Democrats the political clout to reallocate power in the economy – rather than merely enact palliatives that paper over the increasing concentration of power at the top. But to do this Democrats would have to end their financial dependence on big corporations, Wall Street and the wealthy. And they would have to reject the convenient story that American workers care more about cultural issues than about getting a better deal in an economy that’s been delivering them a worsening deal for decades. Robert Reich, a former US secretary of labor, is professor of public policy at the University of California at Berkeley and the author of Saving Capitalism: For the Many, Not the Few and The Common Good. His new book, The System: Who Rigged It, How We Fix It, is out now. He is a Guardian US columnist. His newsletter is at robertreich.substack.comThat’s all for tonight. Thanks as always for following along with us and be sure to check out Donald McRae’s full report and quotes piece from tonight’s main event. “I want to thank everybody here tonight,” Álvarez says in Spanish through a translator. “It hasn’t been easy to get to this point. But with in your support, my family, my team we’ve gotten really far. This is for everybody, especially from Mexico, it’s another one for our team. We did it tonight.” Asked whether he wants to remain at 168lbs or move up to 175lbs for his next fight, Canelo responds in his fastly improving English: “We don’t know. We want a rest. We need the rest we deserve.” Álvarez sends Plant to the canvas with a thudding left hook early in the 11th round. Plant beats the count but Canelo rushes in and quickly drops his opponent for a second time. This time the referee correctly waves it off and it’s over! Canelo Álvarez is the undisputed super-middleweight champion of the world! Round 10 Canelo really putting a lot of leather on Plant’s rib cage in this round, looking to chop down the bigger man before him once and for all. Plant’s work rate has seemed to drop off a cliff. Not sure Plant will make it to the finish line. Guardian’s unofficial score: Álvarez 10-9 Plant (Álvarez 98-92 Plant) Round 9 Canelo having a bit of trouble cutting off the ring on Plant, an issue that’s cropped up in previous fights from time to time. But Álvarez is still landing the harder, cleaner and more effective shots. Plant still gliding around the perimeter of the ring nicely and even lands a flashy combination in the final minute. Best round for Plant in quite some time – he’s making Canelo work for this – but Álvarez still did enough to nick it on our card. Guardian’s unofficial score: Álvarez 10-9 Plant (Álvarez 88-83 Plant) Round 8 More of the same. Canelo walking Plant down and hooking away to the head and body. Plant showing a pulse, doing enough to at least resemble being in the fight, but he appears more than content to make Álvarez miss. He’s giving the impression of a fighter who would be satisfied to go the distance. Who can blame him? Guardian’s unofficial score: Álvarez 10-9 Plant (Álvarez 78-74 Plant) Round 7 Álvarez picks up right where he left off in the sixth. Plant catches Álvarez coming in flush with a counter right, but Canelo takes it well and resumes throwing punches in combination. Álvarez seems to be running away with it, Plant without a reliable back-up plan. Álvarez spends the final minute of the frame trying to set a trap for Plant that he doesn’t walk into. Another easy one to score for the Mexican. Guardian’s unofficial score: Álvarez 10-9 Plant (Álvarez 68-65 Plant) Round 6 Álvarez’s power punches are more visibily taking their toll on Plant now and they’re only coming with greater and more brutal frequency. Plant’s shell has been broken down. An ominous sign. One thudding right hand after another to the body by Canelo. The most lopsided round of the fight so far. Guardian’s unofficial score: Álvarez 10-9 Plant (Álvarez 58-56 Plant) Round 5 Plant using the shoulder roll well to slip and evade Álvarez’s punches, then countering in spots with good effect. But enough of those Canelo thudding hooks are getting through. Plant is taking them well but they’re very much scoring punches. Another very competitive round but easier to score for Álvarez than some of the others. Canelo standing in his corner ahead of the sixth round rather than sitting, perhaps in a spot of gamesmanship. Guardian’s unofficial score: Álvarez 10-9 Plant (Álvarez 48-47 Plant) Round 4 Early on Canelo lands a massive left hook upstairs on Plant as he’s pinned on the ropes and the crowd springs to its feet. But he’s able to escape from danger under a hail of punches and resumes his game plan of jabbing away. He’s outthrowing Álvarez by a more than two-to-one margin. Plant is very slippery and making Canelo miss a lot, but maybe not doing a whole lot to win himself other than weather the onslaught. Close round. Guardian’s unofficial score: Álvarez 10-9 Plant (Álvarez 38-38 Plant) Round 3 Plant opens with a double jab. Canelo operating with a flagrant disregard for the Tennesseean’s power but Plant is blocking and parrying a lot of the punches and performing well despite the pressure. Álvarez lands a left hook but Plant takes it well. Plant continues to use the jab to set up shots to the body. Slick boxing, double and triple jabs. Álvarez hasn’t been able to translate his pressure into landed combinations, only opening up when he’s got his opponent on the ropes. Guardian’s unofficial score: Álvarez 9-10 Plant (Álvarez 28-29 Plant) Round 2 Álvarez now closing the distance. He lands a right over the top and a series of hooks to the body and head. Canelo marching right in as Plant is jabbing off the back foot. More hooks to the head and body by Canelo, who’s taking away the jab from Plant. Crowd whipped into a frenzy. Plant given no room to operate beneath Álvarez’s suffocating pressure, but he’s not given up on his game plan of trying to leverage his reach advantage. Guardian’s unofficial score: Álvarez 10-9 Plant (Álvarez 19-19 Plant) Round 1 Álvarez has become known for reserved starts as he collects data on his opponent and tonight is no different. Plant pecks away with the jab as he circles Álvarez. Canelo finally closes the distance and lands a chopping right hand nearly two minutes into the frame. Canelo doing some body work in the final minute. He traps Plant along the ropes in the closing seconds and opens up. Neither man landed a whole lot but Plant’s activity was enough to nick it on our card. Guardian’s unofficial score: Álvarez 9-10 Plant (Álvarez 9-10 Plant) Now it’s Canelo’s turn. And the four-weight champion makes his way to the ring in a gold Dolce &amp; Gabbana robe alongside Fher Olvera, frontman of the Mexican rock band Maná, who hail from Álvarez’s home town of Guadalajara. The song Olvera is performing: El Rey. Not a ton of subtext there. Álvarez looks calm and ready. Meanwhile, there’s Dave Chappelle! Chants of “Ca-ne-lo! Ca-ne-lo!” ring through the MGM Grand Garden Arena after signing of the national anthems of Mexico and the United States. Now after the months, weeks, days and hours of waiting, the fighters are making their entrances. First it’s Plant, who emerges from the tunnel in an all-white get-up amid a chorus of boos alongside the rapper Conway the Machine. In case there was any doubt, this is very much a Canelo crowd. Anthony Dirrell has just scored a sensasional knockout of Marcos Hernandez in the final undercard bout of the night. The two-time WBC super-middleweight champion, who is lobbying for a shot against tonight’s winner, detonated a right uppercut on his opponent’s chin early in the fourth round before the referee waved it off only 22 seconds in. That means our main event between Álvarez and Plant should be under way any moment now. Álvarez, who has won titles at every weight from 154lbs through 175lbs, enters tonight’s fight at the peak of his powers. The 31-year-old from Guadalajara is currently sitting as an overwhelming minus-1000 favorite, meaning a punter would need to wager $1,000 in order to win $100. Our Donald McRae spoke with Canelo ahead of tonight’s potential step into history. A few weeks earlier, during our interview, Álvarez had promised he would teach Plant the fundamental difference between watching him and fighting him. But, in Vegas, I reminded Álvarez of one of the great Marvin Hagler’s trademark insights into boxing. “It’s tough to get out of bed to do roadwork at 5am when you’ve been sleeping in silk pyjamas,” Hagler said years ago. It was a reminder that even the seemingly untouchable champions have to keep returning to a dark well of adversity to replenish themselves. How does Álvarez stoke this fire in his Dolce and Gabbana pyjamas? “The desire comes out of my love for boxing. I want to always get better and make history. That’s what matters to me.” He smiles. “There’s nothing wrong with the pyjamas, by the way. But Hagler is a legend.” Álvarez speaks in Spanish here but throughout our main interview he relies on his increasingly confident English, which has helped turn him into the biggest draw in American boxing. His fame and wealth have become astronomical but Álvarez retains his relish for fighting. He is contemporary boxing’s closest equivalent to Hagler, for, unlike so many fighters who step into the ring once a year, this will be his fourth world title bout in 11 months. Hello and welcome to the Las Vegas Strip for tonight’s super-middleweight title unification fight between Canelo Álvarez and Caleb Plant. Tonight’s main event at the MGM Grand Garden Arena pits Álvarez, the WBA, WBC and WBO champion at 168lbs, against Plant, who holds the IBF’s version of the championship. The winner will become the first man ever to unify all four major sanctioning bodies’ title belts in boxing’s super-middleweight division. It’s a rare feat. So rare in fact that only five male boxers have ever done it at any weight since the feat became possible in 1988. We’ve got just one more preliminary bout until Álvarez and Plant make their ringwalks. Plenty more to come between now and then. Bryan will be here shortly. In the meantime here’s Donald McRae’s lookahead to tonight’s main event.Former prime ministers tend to avoid engaging in personal criticism of their successors, particularly if they served as leader of the same party. Sir John Major’s verdict on Boris Johnson’s handling of the Owen Paterson affair – “shameful and wrong” and “politically corrupt” – is an extraordinary and devastating intervention that shows how low the prime minister’s reputation has sunk with senior members of his party. Major has even gone so far as to say that he would face a dilemma were he to have to consider voting for Johnson at the next general election. Johnson’s handling of the standard committee’s findings and recommendations on Paterson has been disgraceful. The Commons committee, comprised not just of cross-party MPs but members of the public, upheld findings by the parliamentary commissioner for standards that Paterson had egregiously breached the rules on several occasions, by lobbying ministers as a paid consultant for two private companies. It was a clear example of an MP using his elected office for financial gain to the benefit of private interests. Had the government not intervened, the Commons would have almost certainly voted to impose a 30-day suspension on Paterson, as recommended by the committee. Instead, the government interfered in what should have been a free vote to insist Conservative MPs vote to overturn the committee’s recommendations and support an amendment to reform the standards system, reportedly threatening that if they failed to back the government, they would lose funding for their constituencies. When it was clear the reaction this engendered even among the sympathetic press was far worse than the government expected, it U-turned. This unedifying episode merely confirms what we already knew of Johnson: that he is a man utterly lacking in integrity, with no regard for standards in public life. Johnson has already been investigated by Kathryn Stone, the parliamentary standards commissioner, more than any other MP in the last three years and has previously faced sanctions for breaching parliamentary rules around registering his financial interests. The Electoral Commission is investigating the redecoration costs of his Downing Street flat based on the fact there are “reasonable grounds” to think many offences may have been committed; once this concludes, Johnson could face his fourth investigation by Stone into the same matter. It was therefore a gross conflict of interest for the business secretary, Kwasi Kwarteng, to launch an attack on Stone in the wake of her thorough and impartial investigation into Paterson’s conduct and gives the impression of a government looking to neuter an independent system for monitoring parliamentary standards at the convenience of the prime minister. Johnson faces other questions over his personal integrity, including over the value of a free luxury holiday he accepted as a gift in recent weeks in Spain. His attitude infects standards right across government. When an investigation found Priti Patel had broken the ministerial code by bullying civil servants, it was not she who resigned, but the independent adviser on ministerial standards. The National Audit Office found last year that those with personal ministerial contacts were far more likely to win lucrative, pandemic-related contracts for personal protective equipment. This is not just about corruption in the processes of government. It goes to the very heart of what this government is about. Johnson was elected on a platform of getting Brexit done, after having led a referendum campaign that made deliberately misleading claims to voters: that leaving the EU would result in an extra £350m a week for the NHS (a claim the UK Statistics Authority later ruled was a clear misuse of official statistics) and a vote to remain in the EU was a vote to share a border with Iraq and Syria. These are the false promises of populism: abjectly disrespecting voters by pretending that there are easy solutions to big challenges facing the country. It takes a certain kind of charlatan, driven chiefly by the desire for power, not the national interest, to embrace this kind of politics as Johnson has done. Since becoming prime minister, he has expelled from his party his colleagues who disagree with him on Brexit, unlawfully shut down parliament to try to force through his Brexit deal against parliamentary opposition, lied about the consequences of the Northern Ireland protocol and has repeatedly threatened to break international agreements to get his way. A disregard for the rules and a lack of probity is not some byproduct of Boris Johnson’s tenure in No 10: it is the defining aspect of his character, his career and his politics. This means that tightening up the rules can only achieve so much. The UK has a more lax approach to lobbying than many other parliamentary democracies; there is no question that tougher rules should be introduced, including a comprehensive register of all political lobbying and an agency to regulate the revolving door between ministerial and government office and lucrative private sector contracts. Parliamentarians should consider introducing a cap on their additional earnings and an advance approval system for any additional income they earn. But the problem goes much wider: a culture of impunity within this government and the erosion of an unwritten honour code, which new rules cannot by themselves wholly fix. The damage goes beyond the ratings of a particular party or leader. Just as the expenses scandal did 12 years ago, the sleazy cronyism of this government will further erode public trust in our democratic institutions and the overall legitimacy of our political system. Boris Johnson serves at the pleasure of Conservative MPs: they have the power vested in them to topple him. They should be examining their consciences as to whether his rotten and corrupt leadership is really the best their party can offer Britain.Ministers have deepened the split between social care and the health service since the pandemic began, the chief executive of trade group Care England has said. In a devastating attack on the government, Professor Martin Green said that ministers tested out controversial policies on social care and treated it “like the child they are irritated with” while the NHS was “the favoured child”. Green, head of England’s largest care body, representing 3,800 homes and more than 50,000 residents, said policies introduced during the pandemic had “fragmented the two systems”. Ministers are reportedly planning to introduce mandatory vaccinations for NHS staff next April, after first introducing the policy for social care. From Thursday, all staff working in care homes need to be fully vaccinated. “If they introduced it when they introduced it for us, there would have been lots of staff in the NHS leaving,” Green said. “And that would then cause a problem for the NHS over winter. But they’re quite happy to cause a problem for us over winter. But of course, because the accountability trail goes back to the secretary of state’s desk, they don’t want it to be happening in the NHS. “Throughout this pandemic, the government has not understood the essential role social care has. We saw at the start of the pandemic that the entire focus was on an organisation, the NHS, rather than thinking about where the most vulnerable people were, which was in social care.” Green listed other ways that the system had become more fragmented: paying NHS trusts, but not care providers, up to £7,000 to help recruit nurses from overseas; asking care homes and their staff to pay more national insurance to fund the NHS without any financial support; and capping the cost of agency nurses for the NHS but not for social care. “If you look at what they’ve done, everything that causes a problem, they do it in social care first,” Green said. “Anything that enables more resources to flow, they do to the NHS. And they have never understood the link between the two systems. They treat one as the favoured child and the other as the child they are irritated with.” Many within the NHS, including its former chief executive Sir Simon Stevens, have pleaded with the government to fund care properly, so that people do not stay too long in hospital and do not need to return quickly because of a lack of care and support. Green said mandatory vaccinations were causing a “very big problem” for social care providers, which is in the midst of a workforce crisis with 160,000 vacancies. A total of 492 older adult care homes have more than one in five staff who have had no Covid vaccinations at all, according to the latest NHS figures. When the decision to make it mandatory for care staff to be fully vaccinated came into effect on 22 July, there were 470,712 staff working in older adult care homes. Only 412,815 have had a second dose by 31 October, and the total number of staff has dropped by nearly 9,000. The Care Quality Commission has said that it will implement the mandatory vaccination policy “fairly and proportionately”, and if it was made aware that some staff were refusing vaccinations, it would assess each situation individually. On Sunday Care England publishes its response to the government’s plans for social care, which include what it calls a “health and social care levy” (a 1.25% increase in National Insurance contributions) introduced next April. “None of that is going to social care – it’s all going to the NHS,” Green said. “Millions are being taken out of care providers’ pockets and the pockets of the people who actually work in social care because of the levy.” The increase in the minimum wage which providers will pay staff was not being accompanied by an increase in money paid by local authorities for care packages, he added. LaingBuisson, which provides independent sector healthcare market data to the Office for National Statistics, estimates that a nursing care home needs to charge up to £1,075 per week to generate a sustainable return, but average fees paid by local authorities and funded by Whitehall were £764 per week in 2020-21. “We want to increase salaries,” Green said. “But providers are getting less than £5 an hour to pay for 24-hour residential care, with three meals a day and activities. There’s no bandwidth to increase salaries.” The government plans also include a cap of £86,000 on personal care costs from October 2023, although accommodation costs will not be covered. An adult social care reform white paper is due to be published this year. “We appreciate the dedication and tireless work of health and social care staff throughout the pandemic,” said the Department of Health and Social Care. “We have provided record levels of investment to support them and we are providing another £36bn in health and care over the next three years – including £5.4bn for social care – which will allow us to begin a comprehensive programme of reform for the care sector.”Nick Cohen makes a persuasive case for unity candidates to overcome Tory electoral hegemony, at least in England, but an alliance needs to be based on a firmer foundation than simply a desire to get the Tories out (“Mock progressive alliances all you like, but they’ve never been more essential”, Comment). There are at least three prerequisites: an acceptance, principally by the Labour leadership, that an overall Labour majority at the next election is mathematically implausible; agreement with the Lib Dems and Greens on a minimum common programme that will be sufficiently attractive to the core voters of each party to convince them to set differences aside; and cooperation between the activists of the local parties in constituencies where the numbers suggest two of them should withdraw. Almost certainly, a fairer voting system would have to be an outcome of any such unity government, preferably combining the constituency link with a proportional top-up, as in the Scottish and Welsh parliaments, and backed by a constitutional convention to ensure popular support. Such a radical change cannot be achieved by a last-minute stitch up or the usual exhortations to vote tactically. Dr Anthony Isaacs London NW3 Can I add a modest example from local government to Nick Cohen’s thoughtful article in favour of progressive alliances? Swale borough council is led by a “rainbow alliance” of five groups – Labour, Liberal Democrats, Greens and two independent groups. Since 2019, we have successfully followed an agreed progressive agenda that focuses on tackling local inequality, providing more affordable homes, climate change and engaging more seriously with the community and voluntary sector. Electoral success did not come from explicit pacts, but each party went into the 2019 elections with a well-informed awareness of others’ target seats. Within our coalition, the need for tolerance is a strength and our only concerns come from party tribalism outside our council groups. Roger Truelove, leader of Swale borough council Sittingbourne, Kent Rigg remembered It was wonderful to see the lovely article about the late, great Dame Diana Rigg (“‘Ma didn’t suffer fools: she exploded them at 50 paces’”, The New Review). But, with her clever line – “no one ever sat on my ma” – Rachael Stirling somewhat inadvertently misled people as to the availability of memorial plaques at the Actors’ Church in Covent Garden. It is actually space for benches in the garden that we have run out of. Great stars of the profession are still awarded memorial plaques – and a very beautiful one has been installed in memory of Rigg. We also have a memorial book and can now dedicate our brand new pews – comfy at last! – to members of the profession. In this way, we hope we will be able to continue to remember the stars of our profession for many decades to come. The Rev Simon Grigg, rector St Paul’s Church London WC2 We need a local paper As a long-term resident of Harlow, I think a big barrier to cohesion in this sprawling town (“Revealed: the towns at risk from far-right extremism”, News) is the absence of a proper local newspaper, the sort of newspaper that includes obituaries, club news and civil announcements. The online offering of local news lacks the opportunity of lucky finds. So if a resident in one part of the town has no knowledge of the happenings in another, apathy, it seems, is all too easy. Elaine McCarthy Harlow, Essex Bring back joy to the office Torsten Bell is right to point out the value of control and respect in our careers (“A good job is about much more than pay. Workers also value respect”, Comment). But it’s not necessarily the job itself that is the deciding factor. It’s the ways in which roles are controlled that has disillusioned people. Human resources management has squeezed out the joy that used to be found in the workplace. Its practices shackle employees to an assembly line of appraisals, targets and endless data collection to prove their worth to the organisation. Perhaps employers could attract more high-calibre employees by eliminating the stultifying performance culture. Returning control and respect to employees could improve their quality of life; for the employer, it could improve retention, thus cutting employment costs, and raise productivity through the enhanced motivation of a happy staff. Yvonne Williams Ryde, Isle of Wight Too many flying visits How horrifying, at the beginning of Cop26, to read in Séamas O’Reilly’s column that his young son has already made a dozen journeys by plane (“Flight might be a fantasy, but to my three-year-old, a bus beats a plane any day”, The New Review). I know it can be difficult when families are separated, but there is a ferry between England and Northern Ireland. And if that doesn’t suit, perhaps a sacrifice or two could be made by reducing the number of visits to family abroad; we do have phones and Zoom. Perhaps Séamas could begin to teach his son the link between transport and climate change. After all, it is his little boy’s future that is at stake. Laraine Thompson Tamworth, Staffordshire Nature knows best In your article on tree planting (“‘How can we grow new forests if we don’t have enough trees to plant?’”, News), I was surprised to see no mention of the obvious solution… rewilding. If land is left to its own devices, it will pass through successional stages and eventually become forest all by itself. It’s cheap, efficient and ecologically coherent, more so than planting millions of young trees that need care and management. Tree planting makes us feel good, but nature has been planting her own forests for millennia. She just needs the space to do so. Miranda Davies, Wychwood Forest Trust, Kidlington, Oxfordshire My miaow for Margaret If there is such a thing as reincarnation, then I would like to return as a future cat of a reincarnated Margaret Atwood, just so long as Margaret Atwood is reincarnated as Margaret Atwood, of course, and providing, of course, that Margaret Atwood doesn’t disapprove of me being her cat (“Cats, a love story”, The New Review). Stefan Badham PortsmouthAn article about UK-France relations misrepresented an excerpt from a letter sent by the French prime minister, Jean Castex, to the European commission president, Ursula von der Leyen. We reported that Castex told her the UK must be shown that it causes more damage to leave the EU than to remain. He was referring to what the EU should make clear “to European public opinion”, not specifically the UK (France and UK told: end dispute or you’ll wreck Cop26 summit, 31 October, page 1). An interview with the actor Nicholas Braun misnamed Mark Mylod, a director on the TV show Succession, as “Mike Mylod” (“‘How is it that I have ended up here?’”, 31 October, Magazine, page 8). We misnamed Robert Aske, the leader of the 1536 Pilgrimage of Grace revolt, as Richard Aske and said that he was “hung, drawn and quartered”. According to the Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, he was hung in chains (Hilary Mantel tells a great tale – but our ruined abbeys tell another, says English Heritage expert, 24 October, page 7). A recipe for apple and sultana pastries omitted to specify the kind of pastry to be used – it is puff (“Nigel’s midweek treat”, 24 October, Magazine, page 36). Other recently amended articles include: Revealed: the towns at risk from far-right extremism 10 of Britain’s best castle holidays Write to the Readers’ Editor, the Observer, York Way, London N1 9GU, email observer.readers@observer.co.uk, tel 020 3353 4736Close to Me 9pm, Channel 4 “What the hell have you been up to, Jo, and who have you been up to it with?” That’s the question tormenting Connie Nielsen in the first of this six-part drama. After waking up in a pool of blood at the bottom of the stairs, she can’t remember any of the last year’s events. Has the gardener been tending to more than just her lobelia? Is the lumpy jacket of her suspiciously meek husband (Christopher Eccleston) hiding dark secrets? What’s with weird Wendy next door? And how did the damn dog really die? Determined to solve the puzzle of her former life, Jo draws up a timeline on the kitchen wall and fills in the gaps with anything that comes to her. Bring on the steamy flashbacks. Hollie Richardson Showtrial 9pm, BBC One Following the opener’s corker of a cliffhanger, the pace slows down a beat as detectives search for more evidence with which to pin down Talitha (Céline Buckens). What’s more intriguing here is the curious growing relationship of trust between stomach-churning brat Talitha and her seemingly no-nonsense, hard-working defence lawyer Cleo (Tracy Ifeachor). HR Doctor Who: Flux 6.15pm, BBC One The sci-fi drama continues with the Sontarans making an unwelcome return to the series, as part of a new faction in the Crimean war. With the British Army going into battle with them, the Doctor (Jodie Whittaker) and her companions seek help from renowned nurse Mary Seacole (Sara Powell). HR Sitting on a Fortune 7pm, ITV Gary Lineker hosts this new quiz where contestants sit in a line, with the person at the front answering multiple-choice questions. Get one wrong and you go to the back. Whoever’s in the hot seat at the end wins up to £100,000. As that point approaches, usually in the last five minutes, it gets fairly exciting. Jack Seale Shark With Steve Backshall 8pm, Sky Nature Explorer Steve Backshall’s new series aims to undo years of post-Jaws bad press. This is seemingly doable when he meets the docile Caribbean reef shark, but will the great hammerhead – which can smell a single drop of blood in an area the size of an Olympic swimming pool – be as cooperative? Hannah J Davies On the Edge: Mincemeat 10pm, Channel 4 The Bafta-nominated drama anthology returns with a triple bill. The first sees Sex Education’s Aimee Lou Wood as teenager Jane, terrorised by her troubled, fascist-adjacent mother (Rosie Cavaliero). Amid their small-town hellscape, however, there is a glimmer of hope in the shape of Nish (Nikhil Parmar), in Samantha O’Rourke’s brilliant, brutal one-off. HJD Film choice I Was a Male War Bride 3.55pm, Talking Pictures TV What a joy it is to see Cary Grant playing off a strong female lead. To the likes of Katharine Hepburn and Irene Dunne can be added Ann Sheridan in Howard Hawks’s 1949 comedy, set in postwar Berlin. Her US Army officer has a working relationship of “sexual antagonism”, as she dubs it, with Cary Grant’s French captain, which predictably leads to love. Grant’s often subversive take on masculinity in his roles is to the fore here – to the extent of him donning female clothing – in a hugely entertaining caper. Simon Wardell Live sport FA Cup Football: Sheffield Wednesday v Plymouth Argyle 11.30am, ITV. First-round tie from Hillsborough. Women’s Super League Football: Tottenham Hotspur v Manchester United 12noon, BBC Two. Action from the Hive Stadium. International Rugby Union: Scotland v Australia 2.15pm, Amazon Prime Video. Coverage from Murrayfield.Viña Aquitania Chardonnay, Maipo Valley, Chile 2018 (£16.48, Lay &amp; Wheeler) With the nights drawing in, our sunlight now strictly rationed, and the chill of winter already here, these late autumn days are red wine times for most of us. Robust and warming, these are the wines that are best suited to the heavier foods that match the conditions outside the window. But there are white wines, too, that can play the same mood-enhancing and rich food-supporting role; white wines with a bit more presence and heft than those we might turn to in high summer when thirst-quenching crispness is all. The chardonnay grape is behind many of my favourite autumnal whites, and one of the best I’ve tried in recent weeks is Viña Aquitania’s. The product of a Franco-Chilean project based in the Chilean winemaking heartland of the Maipo Valley, it’s by no means heavy: it’s all about the sun-filled, mouth-filling, luminosity of its juicy tropical fruitiness, which is underscored with a coursing freshness reminiscent of the chardonnays made in Chablis. Domaine de la Taille aux Loups Rémus, France 2019 (£19.99, The Wine Society) A rival to chardonnay for making complex, richer white wines, chenin blanc is at its best in two regions separated by 8,000 miles. The first is the grape variety’s traditional home, and especially in a cluster of appellations along the 100-mile section of the Loire between Blois and Savennières. Montlouis-sur-Loire is one such place, and it’s here that one of the world’s finest chenin exponents, Jacky Blot, plies his trade. Blot’s Rémus blends grapes for a dry wine with a twanging steeliness. Winemaker Adi Badenhorst is a modern master of chenin in the variety’s other standout region, the Cape winelands of South Africa, source of the scintillating Secateurs Chenin Blanc 2020 (£13.99, swig.co.uk), with its honey, white flowers and starburst of quince and Cox’s apple. Morrisons The Best Marqués de los Rios Rioja Blanco Reserva, Rioja, Spain (£13, Morrisons) One way of lending savoury flavour to white wines is to ferment and then age them in oak barrels, with the newer the barrel the more prevalent the oaky flavour. This is a method that requires a particular set of skills on the part of the winemaker, who will also need very good quality ripe fruit to work with if its flavours are not to be entirely engulfed in wood and toasty flavours. The outstanding best of the style, from producers such as López de Heredia or Marqués de Murrieta, are like nothing else, ageing forever and taking on all kinds of evocative flavours while somehow retaining their freshness. For a relatively modestly priced introduction to the traditional white rioja style, and a wine that is superb with pulled pork, mushroom risotto, or roast chicken, Morrisons’ truffled reserva works beautifully. Follow David Williams on Twitter @DaveydaibachL’Artisan, 30 Clarence Street, Cheltenham GL50 3NX (01242 571 257). Starters £6.95-£11.95, mains £12.95-£26.95, desserts £6.95-£7.95, wines from £22.95 In the early 1980s, as at various times over the following decades, there came upon the land a mighty fashion for drainpipes. Being a classic adolescent, which is to say, sodden with the desperate need to fit in, I duly pinned and stitched my black school trousers. This was a terrible idea for a fat kid with massive thighs and relatively thin calves. I ended up looking like Jeremy Hillary Boob PhD, from the 1968 Beatles movie Yellow Submarine. I love a contemporary reference, me. The message here is clear: beware the siren call of fashion. As with trousers, so with restaurants. I love the current vogue for distressed brick walls, filament light bulbs and Crittall window frames as much as the next tragic hipster. But it’s worth acknowledging that, just because we eventually get bored with one particular style and move on to something else, that doesn’t mean what we left behind was bad or wrong or, more importantly, less sophisticated. It was merely what came before. And so to L’Artisan in Cheltenham, a French restaurant that, whether consciously or not, channels another age and beautifully so. That age is, I think, about the mid-1980s, when Howards’ Way defined the grandly upholstered aesthetic. The walls here are rag-rolled in daffodil shades of yellow and there are high-backed velour chairs in candy-cane stripes. Some of the plates are square and the menu is a sturdy leather-bound affair written in a fine italic script. The sounds of La Vie en Rose waft across the small, brightly lit room. The clientele the night we visit is mostly couples of a senior age whose conversation will circle around whether their young adult children are safely launched or a bit of a worry, actually. We all settle back into a warm, soapy bath of a restaurant experience; one we adored the first time around and adore still. L’Artisan belongs to Yves and Elisabeth Ogrodzki, who left behind their restaurant in Provence 15 years ago in favour of a village in Leicestershire. I’d insert the literary equivalent of a raised eyebrow here over the decision to leave the sun-kissed, lavender-clad hillsides of Provence for the East Midlands, but I don’t wish anyone to think I’m insulting lovely rural Leicestershire. There they established what they described as a French country inn, which won many regional awards, before they decided to relocate here. Yves cooks. Elisabeth serves and works the room and makes sure everyone is happy, which they clearly are. When she asks whether you would like a small glass of calvados between starter and main to “clean the palate”, the phrase “It would be rude not to” takes on new meaning. Who could refuse such encouragement from Elisabeth? There is freshly baked bread, in various seeded and unseeded varieties, presented in a rugged basket, which is hooked over Elisabeth’s arm and with it, a butter whipped with capers and fresh herbs. That bread will become an ideal vehicle with which to chase down the last remnants of the garlic butter lakes that come with a platter of nine escargot in the shell. Having been spotted on the menu they must be ordered and adored. They bring me spring-loaded tongs. They bring me tiny forks. They bring me more bread. The snails are the very definition of “comme il faut”. Cheltenham is the home to GCHQ and full of linguists. They will understand this grand, fancy detour into extremely advanced French. Perched on a golden-brown pastilla filled with a mix of soft ewe’s milk cheese and butternut squash mousse, come two fat scallops standing sentry on a mighty king prawn. There is a little foamed and creamy sauce. There is a pile of bright vinegary roquette salad. It comes on one of those square frosted glass plates that knives scratch against. It’s an observation rather than a criticism. It fits the room. We sip our mid-course calvados, as soft and mellow as late autumn sunshine. Yves may have help preparing all of this, though – glimpsed in the kitchen – he appears to be flying solo. Clearly his solution is the same sides to every main: a deep square of bronzed and garlicky dauphinoise, a filo pastry basket filled with ratatouille, mangetout, squares of butternut squash and so on. The next table of six has ordered the rib of beef to share. They are each given plates with these items placed just so, awaiting the main event. The same is true with ours. One of our mains brings a leg of confit rabbit, smothered in a ripe, grain mustard sauce, so old school it probably sat common entrance. Another has a filo cigar filled with duck confit and a sliced duck breast which, being a little overcooked, is the only down note of the whole meal. Desserts focus around the thumping pun that is the L’Artisan HorseChoux. It is indeed a choux bun which, in a nod to Cheltenham’s racing heritage, is in the shape of a… well, you get the idea. It comes topped with a variety of creams, pistachio or lemon, hazelnut or raspberry and finished in turn with a milk or dark chocolate horseshoe. It’s not a bad gag, but it’s a much better dessert. It’s the kind of dessert that makes you smile involuntarily when it is placed before you. We also have a long rectangular plate of their sorbets, each a mixture of flavours: blackcurrant and strawberry, banana and mandarin and apricot and mango. They come dressed with tubes of meringue and halved grapes, with strawberries and mint leaves. It’s the culinary equivalent of a box-shoulder jacket in primary colours, the sleeves rolled up. With starters at around £10 and mains at £20, the bill in the evening may not be small, though at lunchtime there is a three-course menu for £20.95. It often includes French onion soup. Elsewhere the menu also offers a “genuine” beef bourguignon. It would be easy to roll your eyes at that one, but in truth you just know Yves and Elisabeth’s version of the old stager really would be the one you would benchmark all others against. They know what they are doing and they do it extremely well. Yes, L’Artisan feels at times like a love letter from the past. But boy is that letter beautifully written. News bites There was serious consternation within the restaurant world earlier this year when Waitrose announced that the Good Food Guide, which it had owned since 2013, was to cease publication. Now the guide, which has been advising diners on where to eat well since its foundation by Raymond Postgate in 1951, has been saved. It has been purchased by the restaurant networking group Code Hospitality, established by entrepreneur Adam Hyman. A new guide will be published for 2022 and long-serving editor Elizabeth Carter will remain in post. In Liverpool, chef Paul Askew of the Art School is uniting with a group of his one-time protégés to launch Barnacle on the mezzanine within the city’s Duke Street Market site. Askew, whose father was a captain on the Blue Star Line sailing out of Liverpool, describes the new venture, which opens next month, as a ‘Scouse brasserie… We are aiming to tell the story of the city’s food and cultural odyssey through its maritime history.’ Visit barnacleliverpool.co.uk. The British have traditionally looked down on tinned seafood, whereas in Spain, Portugal and Italy it is highly prized. Mitch Tonks of the southwest-based Rockfish restaurant group is looking to change that with a range of new products including Mounts Bay Sardines (escabeche or with chilli), Brixham cuttlefish, Lyme Bay mussels and Brixham Bay mackerel in olive oil. Tins start at £5 or you can get a gift pack for £24, available for delivery across mainland Britain. At therockfish.co.uk. Email Jay at jay.rayner@observer.co.uk or follow him on Twitter @jayrayner1The question My youngest daughter has ignored me since I divorced her mother some years ago. She didn’t even visit when I suffered from cancer and had chemotherapy. When she got married, my partner and I were not allowed to attend. I’ve never met her child, yet her husband’s father, who is in the same situation as me, widowed with a new partner, is allowed to visit and see my grandchild. I also have a married son with children and they all are fine with me and my partner. Now, before my elderly mother’s birthday, she says I can visit her so that the party won’t be the first time we meet again. I can’t get over the fact that she has been so selfish and ignored me for years, even when I was so ill with cancer. I’m livid that I’ve been treated this way. I don’t know what to say if I visit her. If I was a bad dad, I could probably understand it, but growing up they were short of nothing. It is possible I was not the favourite parent as my ex-wife often used me as a threat in a “wait until your father gets home” sort of way, a role I did not like. All through their childhoods I was away at sea for half the year and half the year based at home, doing my best to provide for my family. I feel so angry. What’s the way ahead? Philippa’s reply: Sorry you have been so ill, and I hope you remain cancer-free in future. Somehow your daughter has cast you in the “bad” role. You can only think of everything you did right and that you did for the best, but she is not looking at that side of you. For example, when you were working hard to share the fruits of your labour with your family, she may have concluded that, to you, your work was more important than she was. When you were the person who did the telling off she may have thought that was just down to you and didn’t realise it was at the behest of your ex-wife. When you and your ex set each other free she might have experienced that as you abandoning her mother. Your son-in-law’s father is not in the same situation as you – his wife died whereas you divorced yours, so she may see that differently, too. Often in divorces when one partner experiences the partnership as having run its course they assume the other partner feels the same way, but for that partner the ending of the marriage can be a shock, an unexpected loss, a traumatic event, a humiliating rejection. Your daughter may have had some of these reactions, too, and she probably felt upset on behalf of her mother. You must non-defensively look at yourself through her eyes. It will be necessary for you to listen to understand that she has experienced events differently to you. Give as much weight to her way of looking at things as you do to your own. If you hold on to your position of being the only injured party, believing her to be selfish, nothing will change. But imagine how she may feel injured, or how she feels for her mother, then a shift may be possible. Because you appear to be at a loss to understand why your daughter ceased contact with you it leaves me wondering whether you might have been in the habit of not attentively listening to her, or noticing how she felt. When you have this opportunity to meet up with her, ask her about her withdrawal, listen to her answers without defending yourself, and do your best to understand. Such an act will take all your strength and courage. But strength is about flexibility in seeing a situation from all angles, whereas it is a weakness to stubbornly insist it is only your interpretation of events that has any validity. Another clue you have given me about why your daughter may have been reluctant to have contact with you is your anger. You may have been raised in a culture where it was assumed that if men felt unsure or forlorn, it was unmanly. This can mean men do not get much practice being uncertain or sad and perhaps too much practice expressing themselves with certainty and anger. It seems your ex-wife even delegated the anger she may have felt on to you – “Wait until your father gets home” – pushing you further into the role of the angry one. Search beneath your anger for other feelings. Maybe there, you will find your sadness and hurt. I don’t know about you, but if someone is livid with me, I run away. I can’t hear what they say because all I hear is the anger. So to facilitate dialogue with your daughter, do not act out your angry side by blaming her or by raising your voice; perhaps dare instead to be the vulnerable person you also are. The party has been the catalyst for your daughter to take the brave step to try to be civil to you. This is not the act of a selfish person. And it is your opportunity to listen with no “buts” to what she has to say. I’m not asking you to collude with her, but to understand her. To lose contact with a child is heartache. You are more than someone who just provided; you are a man with a heart. Show her your heart by lovingly listening. If you have a question, send a brief email to askphilippa@observer.co.ukThe Observer Magazine of 10 March 1974 featured a very moving account by Rose Fitzgerald Kennedy of some of the tragedies that befell the Kennedys, serialised from her memoir Times to Remember. After her husband Joe’s debilitating stroke, she recalled a lunch between him and Herbert Hoover – ‘Joe, who cannot speak, and Mr Hoover, who cannot hear’ – in New York, 1962. ‘And so poignant, inexpressibly sad, when each of them from time to time through the meal wept silently.’ In 1957, Joe had predicted ‘that some day one of our sons would be president, another would be attorney general, and another would be a US senator – all this simultaneously’. Prescient yes, but it spoke more to ‘the grand design he had for his sons’. In retrospect, wrote Rose, ‘we entered a golden time’ – until that fateful day in Dallas. ‘Friday 22 November 1963 began as one of those perfect late autumn days at the Cape,’ she recalled, and had headed off to the golf course after breakfast. She was having a nap after lunch when she heard her niece Ann’s radio ‘blaring so loudly in her room down the hall that I got up and went to tell her to please to tune it down’. But it was to hear a news bulletin ‘that along the route in Dallas someone had taken some shots at the president and he had been wounded… And then soon the news came through that Jack was gone’. The family kept his death from Joe until the next day. ‘Joe not only took the tragic news bravely, but seemed to want to comfort their children. The doctor had already given him a sedative, and soon he went back to sleep.’ In 1968, Rose’s son Bobby was assassinated, too. ‘It seemed impossible that the same kind of disaster could befall our family twice in five years,’ she wrote. ‘If I had read anything of the sort in fiction I would have put it aside as incredible.’A Wisconsin health care organization has ended a nine-year partnership with Green Bay Packers star Aaron Rodgers after the quarterback detailed his reasoning for avoiding the three Covid-19 vaccinations endorsed by the NFL and criticized the “woke mob” he alleged is out to “cancel” him. A statement posted on Twitter by Prevea Health said the company and Rodgers mutually agreed to end their partnership, effective Saturday. Prevea Health and Rodgers had been partners since 2012. The statement said Prevea Health “remains deeply committed to protecting its patients, staff, providers and communities amidst the Covid-19 pandemic. This includes encouraging and helping all eligible populations to become vaccinated against Covid-19 to prevent the virus from further significantly impacting lives and livelihoods.” The move comes a day after Rodgers told SiriusXM’s Pat McAfee Show he had sought alternative treatments to Covid-19 vaccination because he is allergic to an ingredient in two of the FDA-approved shots. Rodgers, who turns 38 in December, did not say what ingredient he was allergic to, or how he knows he is allergic. Rodgers has strongly questioned the NFL’s Covid-19 protocols, along with any organization forcing health requirements on individuals. “I believe strongly in bodily autonomy and the ability to make choices for your body, not to have to acquiesce to some woke culture or crazed group of individuals who say you have to do something,” he said Friday. “Health is not a one size fits all for everybody, and for me it involved a lot of study in the offseason.” He added: “I consulted with a now good friend of mine Joe Rogan, after he got Covid and I’ve been doing a lot of stuff that he recommended.” The Covid-19 vaccines authorized for use in the US were tested in tens of thousands of people and proven to be both safe and effective at dramatically reducing the risk of serious disease and death. The vaccines now have been given to more than 200 million Americans and that real-world use plus extra government safety tracking have made clear that serious side effects are extremely rare – and that any risk is far lower than the risks posed by Covid-19. Rodgers, who has been tested daily as part of NFL protocols for unvaccinated players, found out he contracted Covid-19 on Wednesday. He can’t rejoin the Packers for 10 days and will miss Sunday’s game at Kansas City. He must have a negative test to return to the team on 13 November. The reigning NFL MVP, whose endorsement deals include a starring role in commercials for insurance company State Farm, hinted that his stance on vaccination could have consequences when he described himself Friday as a victim of “cancel culture”. In 2019, Prevea Health had announced it would extend its partnership with Rodgers another four years. “As one of the most respected athletes in the country, Aaron is truly passionate about improving the health and wellness of our communities,” Dr Ashok Rai, president and CEO of Prevea, said in a release at the time.We’re going to wrap things up for the day. Here are the day’s main events: Twin four-year-old girls died in a house fire west of Byron Bay. Investigations are under way but police said initial reports suggest a candle may have been left burning inside the home NSW recorded 244 new Covid-19 cases as the state prepared for further easing of restrictions for fully vaccinated people from Monday Victoria recorded 1,173 Covid-19 cases and the state government announced a $44m package to revitalise Melbourne’s CBD, including a plan to allow diners to claim 30% off their bills between Monday and Thursday each week The ACT became the first Australian jurisdiction to fully vaccinate 95% of its population The Northern Territory government announced the lockdown of Katherine would end at 3pm NT time and switch to a lockout for people who are not fully vaccinated. The Darwin lockout was extended to midnight tomorrow night, when the Katherine lockout is also scheduled to end. NSW woman Joanne Zhu was announced the winner of the Million Dollar Vax campaign Researchers in NSW have discovered a new species of frog in the Gondwana rainforests world heritage area. Thank you for joining us. We’ll see you again tomorrow. The Bureau of Meteorology has updated its thunderstorm warnings for NSW. There’s a severe thunderstorm warning for several parts of the state, including the Hunter, Illawarra, North West Slopes and Plains and parts of the Northern Rivers and the Mid North Coast. The earlier warning for the Blue Mountains, Hawkesbury and Sydney areas has been cancelled but the Bom says it will continue to monitor the situation. And a little more from the foreign minister, Marise Payne’s, visit to Malaysia: The Malaysian foreign minister, Dato’ Saifuddin Abdullah, said the pair had agreed to collaborate on a range of issues, including Covid-19 vaccines and health. He also flagged closer cooperation on cyber security, adding: “I think we both agree that cyber security is now the leading non-traditional threat of the world including our region.” On international borders, he said he and Payne were “pro-opening the borders as quickly as possible” although this had to be done in a staged manner. Payne said: “Australia, like Malaysia, has had very strict controls in place both domestically and in terms of our borders - they are gradually being opened up … We are enthusiastic, for example, to see the return of international students to Australia and particularly Malaysian international students. We know how much they value the opportunity, but we are also very welcoming of Malaysian students to Australia, so it’s not too far off. But we need to work through, as the Minister said, the various stages of both of our systems around vaccinations, around our health systems and take those steps, but hopefully not too far away.” Australia’s foreign minister, Marise Payne, has said during a visit to Malaysia that she hopes it won’t be long before Malaysian students can return to Australia. Payne flew out of Australia on Friday for a week-long trip to four countries in south-east Asia - with Malaysia being the first stop. One element of the trip is an attempt to reassure the region about the Aukus nuclear-propelled submarines plan, as we covered in our story yesterday. After meeting with her Malaysian counterpart, Payne reaffirmed that message of reassurance: “As our region goes through profound changes with strategic competition increasing, Australia’s Indo-Pacific vision remains consistent. We support an Indo-Pacific that is open, secure, resilient and prosperous … We’ll continue to work with our friends here in Malaysia and all of our partners to realise that vision and to ensure the security and the prosperity of our region as we recover together from the impacts of Covid-19 and look to a very positive future.” And with that, I will hand you over to Lisa Cox for the remainder of Sunday’s live blogging. Neighbours have left flowers at the entrance to a northern NSW property where twin girls died following a house fire thought to have started after a candle was left burning, AAP reports. Police and ambulance paramedics performed CPR on the four-year-old sisters but they were unable to be revived. Emergency services were called to the single-storey residence on Mafeking Road in the hamlet of Goonengerry, west of Byron Bay, just after 4am on Sunday after reports two children were suffering from smoke inhalation. Chief inspector Mick Dempsey said the girls had been asleep as the fire started. “They were found to be unresponsive,” he told Seven News. “CPR was performed by police and ambulance personnel but unfortunately the two children could not be revived and they have since passed away.” A woman was also being treated for shock. Dempsey said a number of adults were outside the premises, in the vicinity of the house, as the drama unfolded. There was limited damage to the structure of the premises. However there was some evidence of smoke having filled the bedroom, he added. The building is part of a multiple-occupancy community, police say. A bouquet of flowers was left outside the entrance to the property on Sunday afternoon with a note that read: “No words mourning with you.” Detectives will work with fire investigators to determine the cause of the blaze but say initial reports suggest to them that a candle may have been left burning inside the home. No new cases in SA today. Just a reminder that tomorrow restrictions will ease in NSW further for those who are vaccinated against Covid-19. Here’s a useful summary via AAP. Under the previously flagged changes, there will be no limit on home visitors and as many as 1000 people can gather outdoors. Hospitality venue density limits move to one person per two square metres, while stadiums, racecourses, theme parks, zoos, cinemas and theatres can operate at 100% of their fixed-seated capacity. Unvaccinated NSW residents, meanwhile, have to wait until 15 December or when the state reaches a 95% double-vaccination rate to enjoy roadmap freedoms. NSW is on the brink of hitting 90 % full vaccination of people aged 16 and over, with 89.7% now double-dosed. It’s still a couple more weeks for Victoria until we get similar easing. Yesterday was World Numbat Day, FYI. A stone valued at $100,000 has been stolen from a small museum in northern NSW, AAP reports. An unknown number of people entered the museum in Tingha at about 1am on Saturday, police have been told. The intruders then stole the stone which is estimated to weigh around 80 kilograms. The rock is described as being a dark brown smoky quartz grass stone. A crime scene has been established and police are appealing for anyone with information to come forward. A new frog species, one of only two in Australia known to carry its tadpoles on its body, has been discovered in the Gondwana rainforests world heritage area in northern New South Wales. The tiny frog measures 16mm and is found on one mountain in the Wollumbin national park. Severe thunderstorm warnings for parts of the Blue Mountains, with heavy rain. There has also been another anti-vaccination protest out in Parramatta, in Sydney’s west today. Worth noting, NSW’s full vaccination rate for people over the age of 16 is 89.7% as of the end of Friday. For those aged between 12 and 15, it is currently 80.1% single dose, and 68.6% double dose. People are leaving flowers outside the home where twin four-year-old girls died following a house fire in Goonengerry, west of Byron Bay on the far-north coast of NSW. Victorian opposition leader Matthew Guy has welcomed Liberal MP Tim Smith’s decision not to contest the next election, following his drink-driving crash last weekend. Gunner mentions there are new exposure sites in Katherine at Cotton On, Harvest Pressed Juice, Delaney’s Country and Western Stall and Coles Mitchell St in Darwin, Tab Bar in Darwin, Mendel Beach Casino, Shenanigans and Monthlies night club. Jetstar flight JQ 920 from Cairns to Darwin on 29 October is now an exposure site. There are eight exposure contacts with five still in the territory. There are 123 close contacts and 119 isolating. The lockdown in Katherine will end at 3pm NT time today, and switch to a lockout for people who are unvaccinated. It means people who are unvaccinated are effectively in lockdown and can only leave home for five reasons. The greater Darwin lockout has been extended and will end at midnight tomorrow night, when the Katherine lockout will end, too. NT chief minister Michael Gunner is holding a press conference on the three cases that caused a lockdown in Katherine and lockout in Darwin. Gunner says the third case in the outbreak was determined to be the index case of the outbreak, after she allegedly lied in her border entry form and had spent time in Melbourne, after flying from Cairns to Adelaide and driving to Victoria for four days last month before flying back to Cairns and then onto Darwin. The woman has been fined and will pay for her time in Howard Springs quarantine. Gunner said: These actions have put the territory at risk. They forced Katherine into lockdown and forced Katherine businesses to shot. While there were compassionate reasons for her decision to visit Victoria, there were not compassionate reasons to lie entering the territory from a hotspot. There are no new cases to report today. Tasmanian police are investigating how a shooter got the gun he used to kill a man and wound a woman before turning it on himself. Police were called to a house on William St in Devonport, north-west Tasmania, just before 1am on Saturday after reports of shots being fired. Two men aged in their 30s – one of whom police believe was the gunman – were found dead inside the house. A 38-year-old woman, who suffered a gunshot wound to her abdomen, went to her neighbours’ house to raise alarm. She remains in hospital in a stable condition. A 10-year-old, who police said was one of two child witnesses, was not physically injured but saw “a fair portion of what occurred”. Police say the shooter, named as Paul Carey, a 35-year-old man from Burnie, acquired the Winchester shotgun in the past three months. The gun was not registered and the man did not have a firearms licence. “We would like to hear from anyone who has information about how the offender acquired the firearm,” detective inspector Kim Steven said on Sunday. “The person who assisted the offender in sourcing the firearm is encouraged to contact detectives, without fear of prosecution. “It is important we establish the sequence of events which led up to the incident.” It’s believed the gun was imported legally in the 1970s, prior to the Firearms Act in 1996 and was never registered. Police said the shooter knew the victims, but their relationship with each other would be a matter for the coroner. Police also named Christopher Walters as his victim on Sunday, following permission from Walters’ family. Lifeline 13 11 14. beyondblue 1300 22 4636. Kids Helpline 1800 55 1800 (for people aged 5 to 25). A little more detail on Covid-19 cases and vaccination rates in Victoria. Yesterday, 13,913 vaccine doses were administered by Victoria’s state-commissioned services. The total number of doses administered through state-run services is 4,695,721. 93 per cent of Victorians aged 16 and over have now had at least one dose of a Covid-19 vaccine and 84.7 per cent have had two doses. 92.6 per cent of Victorians aged 12 and over have now had at least one dose of a Covid-19 vaccine and 83.6 per cent have had two doses. This excludes the most recent commonwealth data. There are 568 Covid-19 cases in hospital in Victoria. 96 of those cases are in intensive care, with 63 cases on a ventilator. Victoria was notified of 1,173 new cases of Covid-19 yesterday. All cases were locally acquired. The ten local government areas with the highest number of new cases are Casey, Wyndham, Brimbank, Hume, Greater Dandenong, Moreland, Latrobe, Whittlesea, Melton and Greater Shepparton. And with that, I’m just going to hand over to my colleague Lisa Cox for a little while. Big Bird tweeted overnight about being vaccinated against Covid and the quote tweet response is about as bad as you’d expect it to be. More storms in Victoria. They seem to have passed Melbourne for now. The search is underway for the 57-year-old man who went missing after a suspected shark attack at Port Beach in WA yesterday. WA fisheries minister Don Punch said police have deployed a number of vessels to the area. “I’d like to extend our heartfelt thoughts to the family of this man at this very difficult time,” he said. “This is a terribly sad and distressing situation.” The ACT has recorded 13 new cases overnight, bringing the total active cases in the capital to 135, and the total in this outbreak to 1,729. There is one person in hospital, who is also in intensive care and being ventilated. Queensland has recorded zero new local cases. One case from someone arriving from interstate who is in quarantine, and two cases in international arrivals, who are also in quarantine, premier Annastacia Palaszczuk has said. The two people from overseas were infectious on the flight, and normal contact tracing is underway. The woman who tested positive yesterday was not in the community while infectious. Similar for the woman who tested positive in the NT after being in Queensland. Victorian premier Daniel Andrews has rejected comparisons between outgoing Liberal MP Tim Smith not contesting the next election after crashing his car with a blood alcohol level of 0.131 to Burwood MP Will Fowles, who Smith previously called to resign after he kicked in a hotel door during an alcohol-fuelled argument with staff. Asked whether Fowles should also resign, Andrews said the two incidents were not the same. He’ll be a candidate next time and it’ll be up to the people of his electorate, as it will be for all of us, to fundamentally decide who they want. I don’t see any comparison. The only comparisons that have been drawn are rather self-serving comparisons from somebody today who has announced he’s not standing. There you go – I’ve said more than I intended to about [Smith]. It’s just not my business. A break down of the 244 NSW cases today, from NSW Health: 77 are from Hunter New England Local Health District (LHD). 37 are from South Western Sydney LHD. 22 are from South Eastern Sydney. 20 are from Mid North Coast LHD. 17 are from Murrumbidgee LHD. 15 are from Sydney LHD. 13 are from Western Sydney LHD. nine are from Western NSW LHD. nine are from Northern NSW LHD. eight are from Northern Sydney LHD. four are from Central Coast LHD. three are from Southern NSW LHD. two are from Nepean Blue Mountains LHD. one is from Illawarra Shoalhaven LHD. one is in a correctional setting and six are unassigned to a LHD. NSW Health has also warned that viral fragments have been detected in sewerage in Bermagui, Moruya, Young in southern NSW and Gulargambone and Cobar in western NSW, where there are no known cases. NSW is opening a Granville vaccination centre on Monday, and the Qudos Bank Arena vaccination centre will shut down tomorrow, returning the arena to sporting and entertainment functions. NSW health minister Brad Hazzard said there were 2,700 health and support staff at Qudos when it was open, with 26 vaccine doses per minute being administered at the peak of its operation: What NSW Health staff achieved not only at Qudos Bank Arena Vaccination Centre but across the state during the Delta outbreak has been extraordinary. They helped lift vaccination rates in western and south-western Sydney to the highest levels across the state but even if we surpass our new goals we must remain vigilant. If you’re confused by the news about CBA getting into crypto, my colleague Ben Butler has this explainer. Victorians dining in Melbourne will be able to claim up to 30% of their bills for meals between Monday and Thursday every week, AAP reports. A $44m package has been unveiled to revitalise Melbourne’s CBD as workers and visitors return after the city’s sixth lockdown. The Victorian government and City of Melbourne will jointly fund a number of initiatives to bring the city centre back to life, including a $5m midweek dining rebate scheme. From 15 November, diners will be able to claim 30% off their bills – up to $150 – between Monday and Thursday each week. The more than 200,000 rebates will be up for grabs at restaurants, cafes and bars in the CBD, Lygon Street, North Melbourne, Southbank, South Wharf and Docklands. The package also includes $10.4m to help businesses trade outdoors and at night, $15.7m to boost the city’s events calendar, $14m to revitalise public areas and $3.6m to provide an enhanced business concierge service. “This is about getting people back to the CBD,” Premier Daniel Andrews told reporters at Italian restaurant Becco in Melbourne’s CBD. Having people not only visiting but spending – and that’s all about jobs. Lord Mayor Sally Capp said the cash injection was the first tranche of a $200m fund to revitalise Melbourne. The cost to Australian taxpayers to hold a single refugee on Nauru has escalated tenfold to more than $350,000 every month – or $4.3m a year – as the government refuses to reveal where nearly $400m spent on offshore processing on the island has gone. Australia currently pays about $40m a month to run its offshore processing regime on Nauru, an amount almost identical to 2016 when there were nearly 10 times as many people held on the island. No refugees and asylum seekers have been sent to Nauru since 2014, and with numbers of refugees held there dwindling – through resettlement to the US, transfer to Australia for acute medical care, abandonment of a protection claim, or death – the cost to Australia to hold each person has increased dramatically. Meanwhile on Sky News, minister for emissions reduction, Angus Taylor won’t say if the UN climate change conference in Glasgow will achieve a deal to limit warming to 1.5C. AAP reports Taylor said it is a very difficult outcome to achieve and that everyone understood that from the start. I’m not going to predict the final outcome at the political level of this conference. What I am going to say is this conference is recognising, and the world is recognising that the way to actually achieve the best possible outcomes is by deploying technologies with good projects. Chinese president Xi Jinping has been criticised for not attending the Glasgow conference, particularly as his country accounts for one-third of the world’s emissions, but Taylor believes China is still being constructive. What is very clear, the Chinese focus on technologies on bringing down emissions in a way which reconciles economic growth with emissions reduction. They are not going to sacrifice economic growth for emissions reduction. That’s not just true of China, it’s India, it’s Southeast Asia. Asked about the ongoing dispute with France over the submarines contract, Bowen said prime minister Scott Morrison’s alleged lies are “now impacting national security”. Now we’ve seen the most inept foreign trip since Billy McMahon made a fool of himself in Washington 50 years ago this week and we’ve seen the prime minister’s fundamental dishonesty on display to the world. We know Scott Morrison is a liar. He lies in parliament about briefings for Anthony Albanese on Covid. He lies about whether he’s called EVs ‘weekend wrecking’. He lied about whether he used the term Shanghai Sam. He lies about Christian Porter’s disclosure. This guy is a liar and it’s now impacting on our national security. You’ve talked about the leaking of the text exchange with Emmanuel Macron, which was reckless and extraordinary and damages our credibility internationally but also the leaking of a classified national security committee document which also damages our relationship with the United States. How would anybody trust this bloke as prime minister of Australia? He says Morrison should have been open and transparent with the French. He has doubled down on his lack of integrity in his response. Emmanuel Macron did not attack Australia and he has just underlined his lack of honesty by asserting he did. We are not privy to all the details of the arrangements between France and Australia. We have not received all that information but I do know the government ministers have been for years getting up and saying how well the deal is going. I know the foreign and defence ministers said in a communique how well the deal was coming along. It’s understandable that world leaders are scratching their heads at Scott Morrison’s inept handling of this matter. Bowen is asked about the use of carbon credits to meet targets. Bowen says they will play a role, but it cannot be an excuse to avoid real action. Of course there will continue to be some emissions with the best will in the world and carbon credits can play a role, properly and carefully designed with proper verification and it’s an economic opportunity for Australia again with the right policy settings which this government is simply going to fail to deliver. He said there will, however, be no emissions trading scheme or carbon price under Labor. Part of how a Labor government would meet the target would be through the rewiring the nation policy to upgrade the energy grid to cope with renewable energy projects. He wouldn’t say whether Labor would expand the safeguards mechanism, and wouldn’t say what the 2030 target would be. We said we’ll have more to say post Glasgow. We’ve now got the Government’s alleged plan, in inverted commas. We don’t have their modelling. You don’t release a budget reply until you see the budget. ...We’re waiting on more detail from the modelling. Bowen also refused to say whether Australia should sign on to a pledge to phase out coal. He repeated that Labor would not fund new coal-fired power stations, but asked directly about supporting the pledge, he said policy interventions matter more than pledges. Asked whether he supports funding for carbon capture and storage, Bowen says Labor opposes using Arena and CEFC to fund carbon capture and storage, because it diverts money away from renewable energy projects: The government puts too much store in carbon capture and storage. They use it as an excuse to avoid reducing emissions in other ways. If it can play a role practically – and not just capture and storage, but capture and use – a wonderful entrepreneur won a prize in Glasgow for carbon capture and use. Labor’s shadow minister for climate change, Chris Bowen is on ABC’s Insiders program. He was asked why Labor hadn’t supported the announcement of other nations out of the Glasgow climate conference to reduce methane emissions by 30% in 2030. He said Labor wants to see government work with agriculture to develop a plan: What I want is a government that takes methane seriously, that has plans in place to reduce methane emissions, working cooperatively with industry and agriculture. That’s not about signing the pledge. It’s about dealing with the issue. Now, agriculture is responsible for 50% of Australia’s methane emissions. We are the 12th largest emitter of methane in the world and we want to see concrete plans to work with farmers and farmers want to work with government. During the week, I said that Australian governments could back Australian scientists who have done wonderful work in developing seaweed for example which reduces methane emissions dramatically. Barnaby Joyce ran out and said no, that’s outrageous. The only way to reduce methane is to shoot all our cows. That’s as patently ridiculous as everything else he says. It shows the government knows the cost of everything when it comes to climate change but the value of nothing when it comes to concrete plans working with agricultural. Farmers want to work with government to reduce emissions. It’s a great opportunity for them. Farm profits are down. Farm productives is down due to climate change and they want to work with a government that cares about climate change to get concrete results. He said the implications of the pledge need to be worked through before signing. He says Labor is promising no new coal-fired power stations, and Labor doesn’t support new gas-fired power stations. A fully vaccinated woman in NSW has become an instant millionaire after winning the Million Dollar Vax campaign, AAP reports. Joanne Zhu was announced the winner of the major prize, collecting $1m just for getting her Covid-19 vaccinations. She was one of 2,744,974 Australians who registered for their chance to win. “Am I dreaming, is this real? I cannot believe it,” Zhu said, adding that she planned to spend a portion of her winnings on her family. I want to fly my family out from China first class and put them up in a five-star hotel for Chinese New Year if the borders are open. I will buy presents for my family and invest the rest of the money so I can make more money in the future. The Million Dollar Vax campaign was created by the Million Dollar Vax Alliance – a group of philanthropists and corporations with the aim to increase Australian Covid-19 vaccination rates above 80% nationally. The 80% milestone was reached on Saturday. Alliance spokesman Craig Winkler said hearing Zhu’s reaction to winning was priceless. All of us behind the campaign are incredibly proud of what it has achieved; it’s excellent to finally announce the winner. We have collectively shown what can happen when Australians get on board. Let’s finish the job. Labor will create a national anti-scam centre and double funding for services helping aggrieved Australians get stolen IDs back to counter scammers if it wins government, AAP reports. Forcing companies to take down fraudulent ads faster, a review of the current penalties in place for scammers and a new ministerial portfolio for the issue will be introduced under its “scambuster” plan. The party’s cybersecurity policy also includes a new industry code for banks, telcos, social media giants and government agencies. These companies will need to clearly define how they will protect customers and businesses online and will be responsible for kicking scammers off their platform under the threat of heavy penalties if they fail to do so. Shadow assistant treasurer Stephen Jones said the government did not properly protect Australians from scammers and cyber criminals after online crimes cost the economy $33bn last year. Families and small businesses will be safer online ... with the creation of a new cop on the beat to fight scams and online fraud. Australia’s prudential and regulatory system is second to none but improvements can always be made. Cryptocurrency scams on social media, fraudulent text messages about deliveries and fake invoices to small businesses continue to hit hip pockets as more Australians head online. Scams in Australia have doubled each year for the past two years. Victoria has reported 1,173 new cases of Covid-19 and nine more deaths. There are 568 in hospital, 96 in intensive care, and 63 being ventilated. New South Wales has recorded 244 new Covid-19 cases overnight, and one more death. There are 269 people in hospital, including 52 in intensive care. Concerns continue over the number of new Covid-19 cases being detected in regional NSW, AAP reports. The state added 270 locally acquired infections to its caseload on Saturday, while a further three deaths were recorded. Some 270 patients also remain in NSW hospitals, 55 of them in ICU and 27 needing ventilation. Health officials say neither a woman in her 30s from Sydney’s west nor a Wollongong man in his 60s who died had been vaccinated. A western Sydney man in his 50s had received one dose. There were more than 72,000 tests conducted across NSW in the 24 hours to 8pm on Friday, while just on 90 per cent of NSW residents aged 16 or older are now fully vaccinated. However new cases beyond Sydney remain stubbornly high, sparking worry over Indigenous communities, and especially as travel around NSW resumes. Some 73 of the latest infections were detected in the Hunter New England health district, 37 were reported on the mid north coast, 21 were from Murrumbidgee and 10 in western NSW. The Central Coast had six cases and there were five in both the Illawarra and Blue Mountains. Ongoing sewage surveillance also found virus fragments in samples collected from Uralla and Byron Bay in northern NSW and at Dungog and Denman in the Hunter Valley. There are no known cases in any of these areas. This weekend marks the first since restrictions lifted on travel from greater Sydney to regional areas for the fully vaccinated. Twin girls have died after a house fire west of Byron Bay on Sunday morning. NSW police report emergency services were called out to the property on Mafeking Rd, Goonengerry after 4am, with reports two children were suffering from smoke inhalation. CPR was performed, however, the four-year-old girls were unable to be revived. A woman was also treated for shock. Detectives are working with fire investigators to determine the cause of the fire, but initial reports suggest a candle may have been left burning in the home. Hello, and welcome to the live blog for Sunday, 7 November. I’m Josh Taylor and I’ll be bringing you all the news this morning. Yesterday, the prime minister, Scott Morrison, said Australia is on track to “have one of the highest vaccination rates in the world”, after the vaccination rate for people aged 16 years and over reached 80% across the country. The ACT is the highest at 94.8%, followed by NSW at 89.7%, and Victoria at 84%. WA is at 66.2%, the NT is at 66.3%, Queensland is at 66.9%, South Australia is at 69.9%, and Tasmania is at 77.9%. From Monday, people who received their second dose more than six months ago are eligible for booster shots. NSW Health has been offering booster shots since the start of the month but it will be extended to the rest of the country. In other news, the NT town of Katherine will learn if its three-day lockdown will end today, and the lockout of non-vaccinated people in greater Darwin will also end after three cases have been detected in the community. Embattled Victorian Liberal MP Tim Smith also announced in a midnight email to party members in the seat of Kew that he will not contest the next election. The 38-year-old returned a breath test reading of 0.131 – almost three times the legal blood alcohol limit – after he crashed into a car and a Hawthorn home on the night of 30 October, narrowly avoiding a child’s bedroom. And in Western Australia, the search will resume at first light for a 57-year-old man reported missing at Port Beach in North Fremantle where it’s feared he may have been attacked by multiple sharks. All beaches in the area have been closed. Let’s get into it.Thousands of rare forest honeybees that appear to be the last wild descendants of Britain’s native honeybee population have been discovered in the ancient woodlands of Blenheim Palace. The newly discovered subspecies, or ecotype, of honeybee is smaller, furrier and darker than the honeybees found in managed beehives, and is believed to be related to the indigenous wild honeybees that foraged the English countryside for centuries. Until now, it was presumed all these bees had been completely wiped out by disease and competition from imported species. While feral honeybee colonies – usually created by swarms of non-native bees that have left a nearby managed hive – are occasionally found in the UK, there was no evidence that self-sustaining colonies of native, tree-nesting honeybees still existed in England, and no record of the wild subspecies living in Blenheim. Filipe Salbany, a bee conservationist who found 50 colonies of the rare honeybees in Blenheim’s 400-acre estate, said: “These bees are quite unique in that they live in nests in very small cavities, as bees have for millions of years, and they have the ability to live with disease. They have had no treatment for the varroa mite – yet they’re not dying off.” The varroa mite, a parasite that feeds on and attacks honeybees, arrived in Britain in 1992 and decimated the UK’s population. Salbany believes the bees he has found have evolved to survive. “We are not seeing the deaths we would expect to see with varroa.” Unusually, the bees swarm with multiple queens – up to nine in some cases – to ensure the colony’s survival, and have been recorded foraging for honeydew on the treetops in temperatures as low as 4C. Most bees will stop flying at 12C. “A wild bee that has adapted to the environment is called an ecotype, and this bee could be a very precious ecotype – the first wild bee that is completely adapted to living in the oak forest.” The results of DNA samples taken from the bees are expected within the next three to four weeks, but Salbany is confident it will show the bees are descendants of an ancient native species. “I think the majority of the genetics are going to be of an old English bee, of something that was here many, many years ago.” His preliminary analysis of the wings of the honeybees strongly suggests they are related to indigenous honeybees that once lived in Britain. “They are not from the imported stocks of bees that people bring in. The wings are smaller and their veins are very distinct.” The bees’ cubital index, a method for differentiating breeds of honeybees, also confirmed they are “more of an indigenous bee” than anything else, he said, but their adaptations have made them unique and peculiar, and they have very little banding. “Supposedly, wild tree-nesting honeybees which can sustain themselves do not exist, so nobody knows what type of wild, self-sustaining honeybee is actually left in the UK.” One of the nests he found was at least 200 years old and he estimates that the bees have been living on the Blenheim estate, which dates back to the middle ages, for “quite a few” centuries. Unusually, they have built their nests in tree cavities a quarter of the size of a normal beehive, 15 to 20 metres off the ground, and despite several ecological surveys over the years, “nobody knew they existed”. The entrances to the nests typically have a diameter of less than 5cm. There are no managed beehives on the estate, which Salbany thinks has played a critical role in the wild bees’ survival, while imported bees from hives nearby are likely to have been deterred from flying to Blenheim to forage by the landscape. “It’s a closed environment, in terms of bee access, because there are damp and humid valleys which form physical barriers.” The woodlands, which Salbany describes as a paradise of biodiversity, are not open to visitors and no planting or gardening takes place there. “There’s very little human interaction.” The wild bees seem able to live in balance with the environment and in harmony, not only with each other but with wasps and bumblebees that live in the forest. “For the 50 honeybee colonies that we have found, we probably have 500 empty sites for them to swarm into. They do not populate every single site: they’ve reached an equilibrium with their environment.” Remarkably, he found two colonies of wild bees living within five metres of each other, in a single tree – right next to a wasps’ nest. “That is quite unique.” He thinks wasps don’t try to rob the bees because the bees build their nests very high up the trees and make their entrances so small: “There’s enough forage for the wasps in the forest not to go and bother the honeybees.” As a result, the bees are extremely relaxed and he does not need to wear any protective equipment around them. “I can put my hand in the nest. They are very calm.” Their honey, he said, tastes “incredibly pure”. It is very floral as the bees like to feed on dandelions, blackthorn and sunflowers. “The smell of it is just extraordinary.” He now suspects there may be other colonies of wild, tree-nesting bees in the UK that have not yet been discovered: another reason, he says, that “we need to protect our ancient woodlands. Because that’s where we are likely to find these bees.” In total, about 800,000 wild bees have been discovered. Salbany hopes the news will have wide-ranging implications for Britain’s large, imported population of managed honeybees, which can “decimate the countryside” for native pollinators when they forage. “This species could be used as stock for beekeepers.” Dr Rob Stoneman, a director at the Wildlife Trust, said the discovery of the wild bees was “extraordinary” and demonstrated the value of the UK’s ancient woodlands. “These kinds of stories give us hope and motivation to create a wilder future.” What’s the buzz? Wild honeybees are resistant to the varroa mite, a deadly parasite for other bees They can forage in temperatures as low as 4C They’re happy to live near wasps and other honeybee colonies They nest in trees 15 to 20 metres off the ground They live in colonies eight to 10 times smaller than managed beehives They have multiple queens to ensure the colony survives, and the fittest queen rules They’re smaller, darker and furrier than imported honeybees, with smaller wings and more distinct veins.The first Sunday of November. One week in. When the sunrise for a short time returns to closer to 7am, though it sets ever earlier. Autumn edging on winter. Garden jobs now are – almost – a matter of inclination. Adapted to your style. To dig or not to dig? To leave well alone. To grow some green manure if you feel. To maybe plant garlic and onions, autumn-sown broad beans. Though this is likely the final sowing. It will soon be too late to leave it any longer. Meanwhile, Howard and Rose’s stewardship of Plot 26 slowly comes to an end. They were growing this year in memory of Rose’s grandmother. It has been an austere wonder to watch. More shaded than Plot 29, its planting lingered longer, sweet peas and astonishing chicory flowering deep into autumn. I have loved seeing the father-and-daughter flower care; admiring Rose’s increasing garden confidence. There is still stuff to harvest. Chard, chicory, beets, late lettuce (we have miraculous rocket), ‘oriental’ leaves. The tagetes hold on. The shed is filling with saved seed. Other packets pile up on the table where I write – a connection with the future. They are my hopes for spring and summer. I have ordered in autumn-sown sweet peas for Kala from Ben at Higgledy Garden. I might add more calendula. I am keen to sort through the bags and tins of seed that live on site during the growing season. I will soon take them home. Henri will be watching me warily in case I clutter. Sharpen anysecateurs, spades, trowels, other tools now, clean them up. There is still time to split (and plant) rhubarb. Put grease bands around the trunks of fruit trees. Prune back soft fruit bushes and apples and pears. Remove nets from fruit cages. Many plots from now will sleep more and rest. Perhaps try to do the same. Allan Jenkins’s Plot 29 (4th Estate, £9.99) is out now. Order it for £8.49 from guardianbookshop.comA Call to Action was published in January 2020 demanding a domestic abuse perpetrator strategy for England and Wales. Police and crime commissioners, academics and organisations including Respect, SafeLives and Women’s Aid, all added their signatures. The report pointed out that, shockingly, while there were at least 400,000 serious perpetrators, fewer than 1% received specialist intervention to challenge and change their behaviour. So why is there so little provision? As the Observer reports today in the latest article in our End Femicide campaign, the epidemic of male violence against women and girls (VAWG) makes up 40% of police business, yet prevention – stopping perpetrators before they inflict psychological, physical, sexual, economic and digital damage (utilising social media) – is given a low priority. Convictions for domestic abuse offences have dropped 35% in five years; a woman is killed by a man every three days, according to the Femicide Census, whose data has helped to inform our campaign, a terrible statistic unchanged for 10 years. Zoe Billingham, former lead inspector on the police’s response to domestic abuse at Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Constabulary and Fire &amp; Rescue Services, says that if this was organised crime, police would be using all the covert tactics at their disposal to arrest offenders. According to the Crime Survey for England and Wales in the year ending March 2020, there were an estimated 1.6 million female victims of domestic abuse, aged 16 to 59. Men are victims too, but women are far more likely to become victims of sexual and psychological violence. Data on police recorded crime based on information from 36 forces in the year to March 2021 shows that 82% of sexual grooming offences are against women and girls and 80% of victims of stalking, voyeurism and exposure are female. This month, the government will publish its first statutory domestic abuse strategy. Influenced by the Call to Action, it also addresses perpetrators. That is welcome – if the strategy is comprehensive, well funded, properly evaluated and monitored and does not drain resources from victims. Prevention begins in early childhood to counter the toxic culture that breeds misogyny and male sexual entitlement. Sex and relationship education is compulsory in schools, but what works best to engender respect and empathy is far from understood. A teenage boy who is concerned about his behaviour will find few resources if he seeks help. Perpetrators are hugely diverse, but missed opportunities for intervention include childhood trauma, mental ill health, a history of criminal behaviour and substance misuse. The abhorrent actions of police officer Wayne Couzens, killer of Sarah Everard, have triggered several investigations into our institutions, including the police and army, which reveal the appalling scale of abuse of women and a shameful lack of action by those in authority. BBC research revealed that UK police forces received more than 800 allegations of domestic abuse against officers and staff in the last five years, yet only 5% were prosecuted. What does that say about our culture and a shameful lack of accountability? Femicide and abuse won’t end until misogyny is recognised for what it is and eliminated. Two steps would make a difference. First, VAWG must be included in the new Serious Violence Duty, part of the police, crime, sentencing and courts bill, which requires public bodies such as police, health, housing and education to work together to end violence. Second, VAWG needs to be included in the strategic policing requirement that dictates the top priorities for all 43 police forces in England and Wales, along with counter-terrorism, serious organised crime and child sexual exploitation. As Billingham says: “If this opportunity is squandered now, we all lose.”It’s hard work maintaining the macho image of the Spanish man. But help is at hand in the shape of Barcelona’s new Centre for Plural Masculinities, which offers men the chance to cast off the machista straitjacket. “This isn’t a place for men to come and beat themselves up for being bad men,” says Laura Pérez, the Barcelona councillor for feminism and LGBTI, who has overall responsibility for the project. “It’s a place to talk about sexuality, without taboos, a place to explore masculinity. It’s all to do with how boys are educated to be men. Men have to be heroes, they’re not allowed to be afraid, boys don’t cry. This doesn’t allow for the many different versions of masculinity that are possible.” While the centre aims to confront misogyny and homophobia, the emphasis is on encouraging men to explore other ways of being, beyond traditional role models. Spain, after all, is the country that gave us the word “machismo”. While the centre’s staff of 10 arrange group and individual discussions on the premises, perhaps the organisation’s most important function will be the outreach work it does. Through exhibitions and events in museums, libraries and other cultural institutions it hopes to raise the debate about masculinity. It will also be active in the city’s numerous sporting associations. Pérez sees sport as being one of the last areas where men cannot be open about their sexuality, a point borne out by the media attention given to Josh Cavallo, the young Australian footballer who came out as gay last month. The centre will also attempt to fill the void of discussion about gender roles and identity in school by involving parents and teachers. Pérez says there is little sex education and almost no discussion of sexuality in the Catalan education system. “We have taboos about talking about sex but, at the same time, we have access via the internet to every kind of sexual activity,” she says. “The only access young people have to sex education is via pornography and this is very dangerous.” Some of the programmes pre-date the centre and one of the most successful and popular of them prepares fathers-to-be with discussions about fatherhood, childcare and sharing domestic chores. A survey by the national statistics institute shows that Spanish men spend an average of 23 hours per week on childcare and 11 on household chores, compared with 38 and 20 hours respectively for women. On gender issues, for some time Spain lagged behind other European countries because of the legacy of Franco’s dictatorship, says Viviana Waisman, president of Women’s Link Worldwide, a not-for-profit organisation that uses the law to advance women’s rights. “Increasingly, we see young Spanish men and women understanding the need to break with gender stereotypes,” she says, but adds that some of the country’s institutions lag behind. This was thrown into stark relief in 2018 with the so-called la Manada [wolf pack] case when three judges acquitted five men of gang-raping an 18-year-old woman at the running of the bulls festival in Pamplona on the grounds that the video the men recorded on their phones showed the woman offering no resistance. One judge even said they should only be found guilty of stealing the victim’s mobile.“The case marked a turning point in Spain, especially as Trump was in power, and when someone is so blatantly misogynist it helps people to understand how laws and policies are so anti-women,” says Waisman. “Here was a young woman who was the victim of a crime and the judges’ focus was on her and not the defendants. She was being asked to explain her behaviour although she was the victim. It broke the collective silence about how women experience violence and discrimination in society.” The sentence provoked a huge outcry with tens of thousands of women and men taking to the streets all over Spain in protests that forced the government to introduce new legislation on consent. Old ideas remain entrenched, however, and have found their champion in Vox, the far-right party that espouses traditional family values and whose leader, Santiago Abascal, has a penchant for Putin-style photo ops on horseback and is a supporter of pursuits such as hunting and bullfighting. “The ideas about how women can be have advanced a lot. Not so much in the case of men,” says Pérez. “Gender stereotypes affect us all,” says Waisman, who supports the Barcelona initiative. “If we only focus on women being feminists and fighting for equality and don’t do the same for men, we’re leaving out half the population.” Pérez agrees. “Barcelona has been promoting feminist policies since 2015, and it’s important we consolidate the topic of masculinity within these,” she says. “If not, it’s just the sound of one hand clapping.”Right now, the beauty look du jour is leaning towards understatement and away from full-on makeup. But I’ve never really believed in trends. A more modern approach – see Dior’s AW21 smoky eyes meets barely there skin and lips – is much more interesting. This is a great way to combine minimalism with maximalism. Don’t be too concerned about keeping eyes pristine; the smudgier the better. You can achieve this easily. Just run a kohl liner across and around your eyes. To up the ante – we are coming up to party season after all – add a touch of metallic gold. 1. Violette_FR Yeux Paint in Scarabée d’Or £27, violettefr.com 2. Dior Rouge Dior Universal Lip Balm £32, dior.com 3. Sisley Phyto Kohl Star Mat £29, sisley-paris.co.uk 4. Jones Road The Best Pencil £20, jonesroadbeauty.com 5. Beauty Pie Everyday Great Skin Foundation from £12.76, beautypie.com I can’t do without... An old favourite that makes skin look fabulous in seconds I’ve always had a bit of a bugbear about the beauty industry’s obsession with the ‘new’. Invariably it cultivates a disdain for the ‘old’ – which is never a good thing, on any level. Hence I like to also feature products many may have forgotten about. Like this Sensual Skin Enhancer. Recently made waterproof, it has been kicking around for a few years, but I’ll be honest, when it first came out, I had no idea exactly what it was. Was it a foundation? A concealer? What exactly did Sensual Skin Enhancer mean? Turns out it is a multi-hyphenate that was way ahead of its time. It’s the lovechild of the polyamorous relationship between a foundation, concealer, contour palette and non-sparkly highlighter. And it is a beauty. The thick-ish creamy texture – comes in 16 shades and a tiny pot – is so intensely concentrated, I am convinced it will last a century. Dab on a few dots, simply blend across your face and you are left with a very natural, skin-like finish. Anyone who has struggled to find a base that evens out skin tone without masking the skin will love this. Anyone who wants skin to look healthy and reflect light will love this. Anyone who wants to look ‘done but not too done’ in seconds will love this. And for anyone who has sidelined this product in favour of something new, remember that new is not always better. Kevyn Aucoin Sensual Skin Enhancer, £27, cultbeauty.co.uk On my radar... Clever shampoo, super serum and a celeb nail bar Curl power This clever oil-based shampoo is not oily at all. Instead, it gently cleanses curly and coily hair while locking in moisture and protecting it. Twist by Ouidad Gentle Oil Infused Shampoo, £13, asos.com She’s nailed it Celebrity manicurist Pria Bhamra is one of the industry’s favourites – her clients include Serena Williams. She’s at Brown’s Fashion until 20 November. Book while you can. Nail Bar by Pria Bhamra, from £68, brownsfashion.com In the clear If you suffer from dark spots or hyper-pigmentation, this fast-acting serum, which also includes glycolic acid to resurface the skin texture, is just the ticket. Murad Rapid Dark Spot Corrector Serum, £75, murad.co.uk Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFettoDescribe your Sunday morning… I tend to get up early and work. I’m incapable of sleeping past 7am – I lost that skill in my 20s – and see no point in just lying there. I used to write late into the night, but now I find I’m more productive before breakfast and my daughter appearing. How do you relax? Taking my dog, George, for a walk or my daughter to the playground. After a very urban life, enjoying being in nature has been a discovery from my first experience of semi-rural living. And I try to play my guitars, although I’m out of practice. I dream of a retirement returning to, and building on, my young self’s musical abilities. The perfect Sunday lunch? Food doesn’t play a huge part in my life. I like to eat, but don’t watch Bake Off or enjoy cooking. I sometimes feel today that’s barely allowed: Eighty per cent of television is of no interest to me – it makes you something of a social pariah. Sundays growing up? I had lots of siblings. We were always together, playing out on our estate, climbing hills and trees, or watching television. And then came the point when the fun had to end – I was never a child to do my homework before the last minute. It’s funny, back then my relationship with work was probably healthier. Sunday night? Once my daughter is in bed I’m back in the office preparing for Monday. I don’t drink, so I unwind in the garden with my partner. And then I’ll sit and read: right now that’s Orwell’s The Lion and the Unicorn, Afropean by Johny Pitts, and Peter Mitchell’s Imperial Nostalgia. Last thing you check on your phone? The news, just to make sure there’ve been no terrible global developments. It’s not hugely relaxing, but I’m trying to reduce my screen time before bed, because I have chronic insomnia. I just feel this urge to check for major disasters. It’s a hangover, I think, from the days of Donald Trump. Black &amp; British: An Illustrated History is available from the guardianbookshop.com for £14.78Taxing deer and grouse estates for failing to ensure their land properly locks up carbon dioxide could play a crucial role in fighting the climate crisis, a leading conservation group has said. The John Muir Trust, a charity set up to protect wild places in Britain, says such a plan could help to absorb millions of tonnes of carbon every year, and help the UK – in particular Scotland – achieve its goal of reaching net zero emissions as soon as possible. The trust argues that many grouse and deer estates are run in ways that minimises the carbon dioxide the land could absorb. In the case of deer estates, stags and hinds eat shoots that would otherwise grow into carbon-absorbing plants and trees. Other landowners have farmed intensively, damaging peatlands and cutting back woods that would otherwise lock up carbon dioxide. A solution would be to impose a carbon emissions land tax – with estates banded according to the land type and size. The poorer an estate’s ability to lock up carbon, the greater would be its tax bill. This would force landowners to make major improvements in the way they run their estates and could have a major impact on the battle against climate change, argued the trust’s policy adviser, Alan McCombes. “In the long term, we could save up to 13m tonnes of carbon being emitted every year by repairing our damaged peatlands and restoring woodlands, and that could be achieved by taxing estates for the carbon they produce. Such a reduction would equate to taking every vehicle in Scotland off the road.” The impact of a carbon emissions land tax would have a particularly marked impact in Scotland, added McCombes: “Proportionate to its population, Scotland has an exceptionally large land mass. It has six and a half times as much land per head of population as England. “Crucially, much of that land is not agriculturally productive. As a result, a lot of Scottish land has ended up being used for grouse-shooting and deer-stalking. The tax we are proposing would make them improve the way that they absorb carbon dioxide.” The trust argues that only estates and farms bigger than 1,000 hectares would be liable for the tax. This means that, with the average farm size in Scotland standing at around 270 hectares, most would escape the tax. The trust says a pilot scheme that would target estates larger than 10,000 hectares should be started, and it is pressing the Scottish parliament to discuss the proposal next year. However, Stephen Young, head of policy at Scottish Land &amp; Estates, which represents estate owners in Scotland, dismissed the proposal. “Such a tax would be hugely costly to administer and would almost certainly be unworkable due to the need for extensive soil sampling, woodland and peatland surveys, and would almost certainly cost far more to measure than the tax income it would potentially generate. “By measuring the ecological value of land purely on the basis of the carbon it sequesters, there is a danger that biodiversity habitats suffer by simply measuring success through a single metric,” said Young, who argued that owners of rural land were already playing a huge role in helping Scotland to meet climate change targets. “Encouraging further progress on good environmental outcomes from hugely valuable sectors such as agriculture would seem more sensible than introducing punitive tax measures,” he added.Executives at big oil and gas companies, at least the European ones, have spent the past two years trying to change the narrative. The likes of BP and Shell have trumpeted their net zero plans, declared themselves to be “transitioning” to a cleaner energy future and talked up the historical significance of new targets. Think of us as part of the solution, was the message. To climate activists and politicians demanding faster decarbonisation, the industry’s reply has been that switching off investment in oil and gas too quickly would create a supply crisis: instead what’s needed are “integrated” energy companies that can recycle cashflows from hydrocarbons and build the green infrastructure of tomorrow. And, up to a point, the pitch has worked. The heaviest pressure has been directed instead at those industry giants viewed as disengaged laggards or refuseniks. Remember how tiny hedge fund Engine No 1 managed to get transition-minded candidates on to the board at ExxonMobil, while at Chevron, 61% of investors backed a proposal from Dutch campaign group Follow This to force faster cuts in emissions. But a year on from BP and Shell’s big announcements, their boards are mistaken if they think they now have a clear run to 2050 and that it’s just a matter of executing shareholder-backed plans. Trouble is bubbling on at least three fronts. First, note the absence of oil executives, even the transitioning sort, in formal roles at Cop26 in Glasgow. Executives were confined to side meetings because their net-zero goals aren’t deemed to be science-based. That’s because the measurement methodology doesn’t yet exist, the companies would argue. But they are open to the charge of marking their own homework. Governments or voters may yet conclude that last year’s grand declarations simply don’t go far enough. Second, Shell has been challenged on its integration-is-best thesis. High-profile US hedge fund Third Point says the company has “too many competing stakeholders pushing it in too many different directions, resulting in an incoherent, conflicting set of strategies attempting to appease multiple interests but satisfying none”. It suggests an alternative: split Shell into several standalone units and allow the renewables-focused arm to invest more aggressively, backed by a united set of shareholders. The climate would benefit, it argues. That last point is debatable, it should be said. The legacy upstream and refining business wouldn’t necessarily cut capital expenditure, as Third Point assumes. And Shell’s renewables business isn’t yet large and may require years of backing from oil and gas cashflows. Jessica Uhl, Shell’s chief financial officer, also argued recently that 120 years of accumulated technical expertise in energy is vital for delivering complex technological projects such as integrated carbon capture, biofuels and hydrogen facilities. An activist hedge fund like Third Point primarily just wants, one suspects, a higher share price, but it has ignited a debate. Its argument that “sentimental” attachment to a “super major legacy” results in “incrementalism” may run and run. Third – and far less nuanced – it’s impossible to miss the vast sums of cash currently being generated by oil companies when a barrel of Brent fetches $85. “We’re a cash machine at these types of prices,” said BP chief executive Bernard Looney last week, promising investors $1bn-a-quarter share buybacks as long as the price remained above $60. According to this script, none of the spoils of the unexpected cash bonanza will be redirected towards extra investment in renewables, beyond the increase to $5bn a year by 2030 that BP has already pledged. Is that fair? It’s what was agreed with investors, Looney might argue, but that answer would appear very self-satisfied. Expectations change. What sounded like a big strategic reset a year ago feel less impressive today. Even under its own definition of transitioning, big oil can afford to pick up the pace. To properly change the narrative, it should. Bailey needs to learn how to lower and raise expectations Andrew Bailey went on a media blitz after Thursday’s meeting of the Bank of England’s monetary policy committee. It wasn’t just the usual short clips either; Threadneedle Street’s governor did a long turn on Radio 4’s Today programme the next morning. Nothing unusual in that, it might be thought. But the Bank normally goes to these lengths only when it has actually done something, whereas Bailey was popping up everywhere to try to explain why he and his colleagues had left policy unchanged. That’s a measure of how bad the Bank’s communications have been. At one point in the press conference announcing the decision to leave interest rates at 0.1%, Bailey said it was “not our responsibility to steer markets on interest rates” – a comment that would raise eyebrows at the US Federal Reserve and the European Central Bank (ECB), where managing expectations is part of the job description. What’s more, when Bailey said last month that the Bank would have to act to curb inflationary pressure, it was a clear attempt to steer markets. As it turns out, a rather ham-fisted one. Nor is anything much clearer now. After surprising the markets by its inaction, the Bank’s current message is that interest rates will need to rise in the coming months – but only if post-furlough data from the labour market is strong enough to warrant such a move. Bailey deserves to be cut some slack. He is still relatively new to the job and deciding what to do about interest rates is not easy when the economy is both slowing and being hit by cost increases for the most part beyond the control of the Bank. That said, he needs to study how other bank governors communicate. Mario Draghi, former head of the ECB, was an absolute master at getting his message across. By comparison, Bailey looks a novice. London’s flotations look a lot less buoyant Two months ago, London’s crop of newly floated businesses appeared in fine fettle. In September, THG, Britain’s great e-commerce hope formerly known as The Hut Group, was valued at £8.3bn, while Darktrace, the cybersecurity firm set up by mathematicians and former spies, had a market capitalisation of £7bn. Today, investors value both combined at barely north of £6bn. Shares in loss-making Manchester-based THG, which runs retail websites such as Lookfantastic and Zavvi, have cratered as investors reassess the prospects of the business model and the level of control held by its leader and 22% shareholder, Matt Moulding. From a high of 800p in January, the shares hit a low of 198p last week, far below last September’s 500p launch price – at the time the biggest London Stock Exchange debut since Royal Mail in 2013. The gyrations suggest investors are struggling to value tech plays on the capital’s market. The same is true of Darktrace, which floated in April at a conservative 250p, before racing in value from £1.7bn to £7bn. However, a recent critical analysts’ note and fears of a mass sell-off of stock by insiders have seen its share price almost halve. While the LSE still has some winners – notably fintech firm Wise, which has held its value since becoming the largest-ever listing of a UK tech company earlier this year, and the stellar debut of biotech firm Oxford Nanopore in September – there is now caution in the air. Last week, industrial products provider Rubix Group canned a planned IPO in London, citing “difficult ongoing conditions”, having announced the intention to float only last month. Similarly Marley, the biggest producer of roof tiles in Britain, abandoned its £500m IPO – blaming “market volatility” – less than three weeks after announcing it. Add the experience of Czech fleet services firm Eurowag, described as the Uber of trucking, which endured a disastrous debut last month, and it would appear that investors fuelling the red-hot IPO market could be leaving London in the cold.A Conservative MP who entered parliament in 2010 began to receive what he described as a series of “unusually persistent” texts from his Tory whip last week. The member in question had been part of the Conservative intake that followed the parliamentary expenses scandal of 2009. The arrival of this new group at Westminster – many of them with impressive previous careers outside politics – was supposed to demonstrate, as David Cameron said at the time, that his party was reforming its ways, ridding itself of sleaze. By Sunday the MP in question says the texts became phone calls and the level of pressure he was being placed under was becoming uncomfortable. In parliament on Monday and Tuesday he was pulled aside, to have his arms twisted in a way he had not experienced before. “I was told this was coming direct from the chief whip. The message was, if you don’t back the government you will be one of very few who will be letting your colleagues and your party down. It was the full treatment.” But it was not the pressure that concerned him so much as the cause he was being asked to support. To his astonishment, the whips were telling him and other backbenchers to back the government in moves aimed at blocking the suspension from parliament of their colleague, the former cabinet minister and Tory old-stager Owen Paterson. “It was all about how appallingly Owen had been treated by the standards commissioner,” he said. “I replied saying, but hang on I need time to look at this. Have we not had a formal procedure that is pretty conclusive here?” He and everyone in parliament, irrespective of party, knew that an official two-year inquiry by the parliamentary commissioner for standards, Kathryn Stone, had just found Paterson guilty of some of the most “egregious” breaches of parliamentary lobbying rules seen in many years and that parliament’s own standards committee, set up in the aftermath of the expenses scandal, had examined the case and recommended that Paterson be suspended for 30 days. On a personal level there was plenty of sympathy for Paterson. Last year his wife, Rose, who ran Aintree racecourse, had taken her own life as the investigations into her husband continued. But despite the tragedy it seemed to most MPs that due process had been followed and the evidence against him was pretty conclusive. Paterson had repeatedly lobbied ministers on behalf of two companies – the clinical diagnostics firm Randox and Lynn’s Country Foods – who were together paying him more than a £100,000 a year. His actions breached rules which ban MPs from taking part in paid advocacy. In addition, Paterson had, on 16 occasions, used his House of Commons office for meetings relating to his private business interests, and failed on a number of occasions to declare those interests. So given the list of breaches what, MPs wondered, was going on? By Tuesday there was little doubt who was driving the “save Paterson” effort. It was coming from No 10. Since the weekend, after his old boss at the Daily Telegraph Charles Moore had written a piece saying his pal Paterson had been terribly treated by Stone’s investigation, Boris Johnson had been determined to act. On Tuesday evening Johnson and Moore had dinner at the Garrick Club and the Paterson issue was discussed. Things were moving at pace. The chief whip, Mark Spencer, and the leader of the House, Jacob Rees-Mogg, were already hatching a plan to hold off Paterson’s punishment and reform the parliamentary standards committee, now chaired by Labour MP Chris Bryant, replacing it with a new committee with a Tory chair and majority. There were also vicious briefings taking place against Stone by some senior Tories, who questioned whether she should stay in post given what they alleged had been her failure to give Paterson a fair hearing. A former Conservative minister who had become aware by Tuesday that an operation was under way to overturn the findings of the investigation into Paterson said: “When it became clear what was going on it was one of those moments where you want to encourage the whips’ office to take a step back, take a walk round the block, get some air and a sense of perspective. It was so unethical. I thought do I really want to be associated with these people?” Accusations have also emerged that Tory whips threatened MPs with the loss of local funding unless they fell into line. On Wednesday afternoon the plan was put to a vote of MPs. Johnson ordered his own troops to be put on a three-line whip. The government won by a margin of 250 to 232, but several dozen Tories refused to back the government. The damaging rebellion saw 13 vote against and 60 abstain, including former prime minister Theresa May, having been encouraged to stay away. Chaos ensued. Labour and the other opposition parties quickly said they would have nothing to do with the new committee that they said would inevitably be a Tory-run sham. Without opposition MPs, parliamentary standards would be upheld and investigated by a body on which only Tories would sit. It was unsustainable and everyone except those who masterminded the idea knew it. On Thursday morning the Daily Mail turned on Johnson and his party. “Shameless MPs sink back into sleaze,” it said, declaring it a “dark day for democracy”. The next morning, amid predictable levels of public uproar, Rees-Mogg stood up and announced a complete U-turn, dropping the plan to pause Paterson’s suspension and, it seemed, the idea of setting up a new standards committee. “It was a total farce,” said a former minister. “The stench of sleaze and the mindblowing incompetence could be massively damaging to us.” Paterson heard the news that the plug had been pulled on him after all, despite Johnson’s efforts, while shopping in a supermarket and quickly announced that he would step down as an MP. Conservative backbenchers who had been pressed to vote for the plan against their better judgment and had taken flak for doing so in their constituencies were furious. Senior ministers were also tearing their hair out. “This has gone straight into my top 10 fuck-up chart,” said one. Conservative backbenchers railed at the prime minister and what they said had been a small old guard of ageing hardline Brexiters whose sense of entitlement knew no bounds. “Owen Paterson was from a certain group of MPs from a certain period of time who had a sense of entitlement and large majorities who thought they could browbeat parliament into doing what they wanted,” said a Tory backbencher who voted against the government. “You don’t use an 80 majority in this way. They are out of touch. A lot of us are very pissed off about it. Many of those who abstained now think they should have voted against. It backfired massively.” But if a desire to help a fellow hardline Brexiter who suffered personal tragedy was part of the motivation, and part of what tempted Johnson down such a disastrous path, many MPs believe there may have been other important and arguably darker factors at play. Early on Thursday – after parliament had voted but before Rees-Mogg announced the U-turn – business secretary Kwasi Kwarteng appeared to call into question Kathryn Stone’s suitability to stay on as parliamentary commissioner for standards. Kwarteng told Sky News: “I think it’s difficult to see what the future of the commissioner is, given the fact that we’re reviewing the process, and we’re overturning and trying to reform this whole process, but it’s up to the commissioner to decide her position.” Labour immediately cried foul again, suspecting an effort to force Stone out. Deputy leader Angela Rayner leader fired off a letter to Christopher Geidt, Johnson’s independent adviser on ministers’ interests, saying: “For the business secretary to use this entirely corrupt process to bully the independent parliamentary commissioner is disgusting. This type of behaviour has no place in our democracy.” She suggested Kwarteng could be in breach of a section of the code which requires ministers to “treat all those with whom they come into contact with consideration and respect” and for working relationships with civil servants, ministerial and parliamentary colleagues and parliamentary staff to be “proper and appropriate”. The suspicion in Labour circles, and some Tory ones, was that Johnson wanted Stone out of the way because she is known to have been considering whether to launch a separate investigation into the refurbishment of the prime minister’s flat, which reportedly cost £200,000 and was initially funded by a Tory donor. Stone has said she will decide whether to launch a separate probe into “wallpapergate” once the Electoral Commission has completed its own investigation into the matter. The commission’s report is understood to have arrived at the headquarters of the Conservative party on Monday. Former Tory attorney general Dominic Grieve said on Friday that replacing the entire standards procedures as they exist at present “might be quite convenient because the prime minister himself might be the subject of its scrutiny shortly over his issues of non-declaration”. Just as concerning for Johnson’s government would be investigations – now being demanded by all the main opposition parties – into Paterson’s other lobbying activities, particularly his work on behalf of Randox during the pandemic. While Paterson was still being paid more than £8,000 a month by Randox for 16 hours’ work, the company won more than £500m of Covid-related contracts from the government. Labour is leading calls for all his meetings and contacts with ministers to be made public. The former Northern Ireland secretary forged connections with executives at Randox Laboratories, a global healthcare company based at Crumlin, County Antrim, because of his interest, while he was still in government, in the campaign for a lower corporation tax rate for Northern Ireland. The proposal was unsuccessful, but the veteran MP and the company’s founder, Peter Fitzgerald, struck up a friendship. When Paterson was sacked from the cabinet by David Cameron in July 2014, there was some consolation: a plum consultancy role with Randox that would allow him to use his connections spanning the corporate and medical worlds and politics. Fitzgerald and Paterson shared a love for racing. It was while they were out riding that the MP raised the question of sponsorship of the Grand National. Randox has sponsored the event for the past four years. Paterson’s wife was also on the board of the Jockey Club, which owns Aintree, along with Dido Harding, who became head of the government’s test and trace programme. Matt Hancock, the former health secretary whose West Suffolk constituency includes Newmarket, has been referred to as the MP for horse-racing and has received significant donations from the industry. In March last year when the Covid pandemic was declared, Randox emerged as one of best-placed companies for landing contracts. Hancock had visited its hi-tech new headquarters at the Randox Science Park in Antrim in March 2019 and one of its senior executives had participated in a “war-gaming” exercise in Downing Street shortly before lockdown. On 30 March 2020, Randox was awarded a £133m contract to test for Covid-19. The government said it awarded the contract without being advertised because of the urgency of the situation. The company said Paterson was not involved in winning the contract, but 10 days later Lord Bethell, then a health minister, had a telephone meeting with Randox and Paterson to discuss Covid testing. The government has declined to give further details of this meeting under freedom of information laws. Hancock has singled out Randox for praise. “Randox has played a vital role in building our global-scale diagnostics capacity,” he tweeted in summer 2020. In October last year, the firm was awarded a £346.5m testing contract. Again, the contract was awarded without being advertised. Jolyon Maugham, a barrister and founder of the Good Law Project, a campaign organisation which is taking legal action over some of the contracts awarded during the pandemic, said: “Randox was given the red-carpet treatment and the government must now provide full disclosure on how the contracts were awarded. “The government has been far too contemptuous for far too long of the public interest in ensuring that public money is spent for public purposes. Every time you try and establish how a contract was awarded you are blocked by this government.” Martin Bell, the former BBC correspondent and independent MP for Tatton from 1997-2001, who beat the Tory MP Neil Hamilton on an anti-sleaze ticket, said the government would pay a “heavy price” over Wednesday’s vote. On Friday there were suggestions from opinion polls and the Tory shires that Bell may be right. In the affluent heart of Rees-Moggs’s Somerset constituency, there were stirrings of discontent among the previously loyal. Next to a handsome parade of honey-coloured stone shops in Chew Magna, Mike Brooks, 75, explained how he was considering – for the first ever – not voting. “It was an enormous error of judgment for Boris Johnson. I think he’s done a lot of damage to the credibility of parliament and the Conservative party,” he said outside the post office. “It was obviously partial. They were changing the rules to suit their friends.” Johnson and Rees-Mogg had gone down in his estimation. “Normally I vote Conservative. But I’m quite likely to withhold my vote,” he said. “I think Johnson is a buffoon. This is just confirmation of what I think of him and his cronies.” The village’s younger voters were troubled but not completely shocked by the latest scandal to hit the government. Clare Foster, 37, who was taking her son for a hot chocolate at a local cafe, found it all very depressing. “It’s just one thing after another. I find it frustrating and miserable really but I don’t expect anything better,” she says. “They are looking after their own.” After a disastrous and embarrassing week for both the Conservative party and Downing Street, it is views such as these that will worry Tory MPs most, as the allegations of sleaze mount up against Boris Johnson, his friends, and his government.The Power of the Dog is the first feature film Jane Campion has directed in 12 years. That it happened at all is down to her picking up Thomas Savage’s 1967 novel of the same name and not being able to put it down. “I was actually thinking of retiring before I did this film,” she says, matter of factly, “but then I thought, ‘Oh man, this is gonna be a big one.’ I’d read the book and loved it and afterwards I just kept thinking about it. When I made a move to find out who had the rights, that’s when I knew it had got me. I needed to do it.” Campion’s disillusionment with the mainstream thrust of contemporary Hollywood film-making is not new, but, of late, it seemed to have reached a tipping point. In the 00s, she didn’t make a feature film at all, instead co-directing two acclaimed series of the television drama Top of the Lake, starring Elisabeth Moss, finding it energising. “I loved the fact that you can explore complex and controversial work and the audience in their homes are totally up for it,” she says, “whereas with film it’s hard to do work like that, because as soon as some exec says they don’t understand it, you’ve lost the game. But, to be honest, I was so exhausted after Top of the Lake that I thought, ‘Oh my God, making a two-hour film seems like heaven.’” The Power of the Dog certainly packs a lot into its two hours: filial tension, machismo, toxic masculinity, gaslighting, repressed homosexual desire and revenge, all played out against a 1920s western landscape and a way of life threatened by encroaching modernity – cities, trains and automobiles. Partially drawn from Savage’s experience of growing up in a troubled ranching dynasty in the vast cattle lands of Montana, the novel’s then daring homosexual subtext was all but ignored by contemporary reviewers. In Campion’s film, it hides in plain sight, not least through her audacious casting of Benedict Cumberbatch, the most English of actors, as Phil Burbank, a hard-bitten cowboy with a mean streak and a vicious tongue. In her afterword to a recent reissue of the novel, the novelist Annie Proulx describes Phil as “one of the most compelling and vicious characters in American literature”. He is also one of the most complex: cruel and sentimental; macho and thin-skinned; college-educated and determinedly uncouth. “He’s torn apart with the pain of his inner self and a childish jealousy that drives his need to upset and hurt,” says Cumberbatch, who tells me he underwent Jungian psychoanalysis “to dig deep into my own psyche” as part of his exhaustive preparation for the role. Given the ferocity of his onscreen anger in certain scenes, it obviously worked. “Well, when you go that far into yourself, stuff surfaces,” he says mysteriously. In one way, then, the film touches on familiar Campion terrain: the clandestine desires and longings of a troubled individual whose true nature is suppressed by the rigidly conformist values of family and community. In another, it is a radical departure for a director whose previous films have exclusively explored female experience, desire and self-expression. Apart from Ben Whishaw’s co-starring role alongside Abbie Cornish in Campion’s drama Bright Star, which traced poet John Keats’s doomed romance with Fanny Brawne, it is the first of her films to feature a male lead. Was she at all intimidated by the uber-masculine world in which the story is set? “Oh, God, yes, right from the beginning!” she says, throwing back her head and laughing. “But I also knew from the moment I decided to do it that it was going to be a departure for me. That’s really what was so exciting about it. Plus, I don’t actually make conscious choices about what I’m going to do. It’s more that an energy comes up in me when I get inspired by something. I didn’t try to figure it out, I just go with the feeling.” She pauses for a moment, deep in thought. “And, you know, the #MeToo movement probably had some bearing on my decision. It was such a powerful force that I think it opened up a whole different space to explore this kind of subject matter. It was like those women, young women mostly, had peeled away so many layers of the onion as regards masculinity, that it created a space for old warriors like myself to explore a very male story like this one.” Has she actually noticed a cultural shift in the film business post-#MeToo? “Well, I think Hollywood is running really scared. Hollywood was the heart of it and I think it’s petrified because it does matter and it does count. It’s not fashionable to be misogynistic. It’s not going under the radar any more. It is the radar.” How prevalent was that misogyny in her experience? “I don’t know for sure, but I did hear stories about Weinstein and from people I believed. A young woman told me a story and I was disgusted and just thought, ugh, what a creep, but I didn’t know how exploitative he was. I knew he was aggressive and unpleasant and it was like a shark attack when he got angry about something. He could cancel someone if he didn’t like you. If he thought they might say something about him, he would make it impossible for them to ever have a job. He could do that. That was certainly true.” She pauses for a moment. “Look, I’m just so glad that’s over. It has cleaned up the toxicity in this business. And now we’re getting films like Promising Young Woman, which is, above other things, a great provocation to have in the world. We know things like that happen, but usually films stay away from that kind of material and now they are going for it. Women are going for it. They are sharing a tough reality. I’m loving it and I feel really excited about it.” I meet Campion in a posh hotel near Whitehall, where both of us chat, masked and safely seated a few metres apart, in a vast and airy lounge. Even with her face half-covered, she looks formidable, with her mane of white hair and naturally inquisitive gaze, but, from the off, she exudes an easygoing charm and slyly irreverent humour. It is not hard to see why she elicits such devotion from actors used to more controlling directors. “Jane creates a tribe,” says Kirsten Dunst, who shines in the film as Rose, a hardworking single mother who marries Phil’s more upright, taciturn brother, George, played by her real-life husband, Jesse Plemons. “You feel part of her family. She constantly wants to give you a hug but you also know you have to get down to the nitty gritty of your character. Jane has such an amazing creative curiosity about her characters – she wants to see all their ugly parts but also understand them.” Campion, in turn, describes the actor as “a great pal to have on board”, citing her willingness to do “the in-depth work that really matters”. Until Rose arrives at the Burbank ranch, the brothers’ everyday lives and destinies are so entwined that they even share the same bed. Her unwitting disruption of their resolutely masculine domestic dynamic so incenses Phil that he wages a campaign of psychological abuse against her with terrible consequences for her marriage and her sanity. It is the even more unsettling presence of her defiantly effeminate son, the luminously beautiful and slightly sinister Peter (played brilliantly by Kodi Smit-McPhee), which shifts the narrative towards its much darker denouement. Throughout, in a plot that at times feels overworked, it is the sustained mood that Campion creates in the wondrously elemental landscapes of her cinematic Montana – it was actually shot on New Zealand’s South Island – that impresses, alongside the powerful performances she draws from every one of her leads. “Sometimes, actors arrive on set and they have their performances all figured out,” she says. “They don’t want to unpack it, they just want to film it as if they are the only person in the scene. That is just so disturbing to me.” Campion’s pre-shooting preparation is famously rigorous. Dunst prepared by workshopping scenes that were not in the script as a way of further understanding her character’s inner life. At one point, she even found herself cleaning the director’s apartment. “Jane’s pretty untidy,” she says, laughing, “so it was hard work. Basically, she wanted to see if I could properly make the bed, set the table and wipe the floor with the kind of old-fashioned mop and bucket that Rose would have used.” Dunst, though, had it easy. At Campion’s urging, Cumberbatch went full method for the duration of the role, not even slipping out of character on his days off. The director even introduced him as Phil to the crew on the first day of shooting. “Jane is incredibly generous,” says Cumberbatch. “She wanted to facilitate anything that would help me get inside a character that was so far away from my experience. She allowed me to go there and to go deep – not washing for a week, living in Phil’s clothes, getting the dialect right.” Before filming began, Campion also suggested that Cumberbatch travel to Montana to immerse himself for several weeks in the ways of modern ranching. “I lived for a while with a cowboy called Randy and his partner, Jenn,” he tells me, still sounding enthused by the experience. “I learned how to ride and rope as well as how to whittle and play the banjo. I can even roll a cigarette with one hand.” Although he omits to mention it, he also learned how to castrate a bull for a scene that will have many viewers watching through their fingers, if at all. (Savage actually begins his novel with the grisly ritual in one of the most graphic, and potentially off-putting, opening sentences in American fiction.) “I learned it all,” says Cumberbatch, “including the various peripheral skills that Phil has in his life, including rope-braiding and taxidermy. It all helped put armour on the character, but what Jane gave me, above all, was time, which is an incredibly luxury for an actor to have.” The director and the actor bickered a lot on set about his character, but playfully and productively, with Cumberbatch sometimes insisting on small changes that, Campion says, made a huge difference to the character’s complex inner life. In one pivotal scene, she and her cinematographer, Ari Wegner, dispensed with the rest of the crew and filmed him alone in a wooded glade for a revealingly intimate interlude. In a moment of almost Lawrentian homoeroticism, he strips off and tenderly rubs his torso with a cotton scarf, a cherished memento of his ranching mentor-cum-idol, the late Bronco Henry, an invisible but powerful presence in the story. “Oh, the scene with the scarf!” says Campion, sounding excited, when I mention it. “That’s something we actually made up and Ben helped me a lot in that. I initially thought Phil would have kept the scarf inside his shirt, but Ben said, ‘No, I think he keeps it inside his pants. That’s so much stronger.’ And he was right.” * * * Now 67, Jane Campion has always walked to her own offbeat rhythm, a sensitive, single-minded woman who has somehow managed to enter the predominantly male Hollywood mainstream while creating work that showcased difference: the otherness of loners, dreamers, outsiders, the misunderstood and mentally ill people, with all their rare beauty and their often brutally exposed “ugly parts”. Born into a creative family – her parents founded the New Zealand Players theatre group – she studied anthropology at university in Wellington, before moving to London and enrolling at the Chelsea School of Art. In 1980, as much out of frustration with painting as anything else, she made a short called, Tissues, finding it so liberating that she began studying film at college in Sydney. Suddenly, her restlessness was assuaged. “Film-making set me free,” she says. “Before I found it, I had a lot of energy, but I was lost as to how to express it or even be in the world. I found the challenge of making a film so exciting, it was as if I had found myself.” She directed her first feature, Sweetie, in 1989, the protagonist an unstable young woman who daydreams of being an actor, but wreaks havoc on those closest to her with her destructive volatility. It was followed by An Angel at My Table, which traced the turbulent life of the author Janet Frame, who survived childhood poverty, mental illness and incarceration to become one of New Zealand’s most celebrated writers. The film was heaped with praise by critics and caused a small storm of protest at the Venice film festival, where it elicited a sustained ovation from the audience, but didn’t win the Golden Lion. Suddenly, Campion was the name to drop in indie film circles, her female characters seeming to exist entirely in their own interior worlds, their off-kilter lives intimately observed and rendered with an almost daydreamy style that, by Hollywood standards, seemed almost transgressive. Kerry Fox, who shone as the adult Janet Frame in An Angel at My Table, was about to give up acting when she attended the audition for the film that changed her life. “I remember being immediately impressed by this very stylish woman with a red beret and a fantastic bob haircut underneath, who lived in Sydney and was obviously very sophisticated,” she says, laughing. “But sadly she was not that impressed with me because I hadn’t bothered to read Frame’s autobiographies before the audition. I thought I’d blown it until she came around with a big bunch of yellow roses and said: ‘I’d really like you to play the role.’ I was actually speechless, because I thought the flowers were her way of apologising for not giving it to me.” What was the young Campion like to work with? “Well, I remember that we rehearsed for a month and she really wanted me to be in character all the time, which is really not my style, so I just did it when she was around,” says Fox with a laugh. “What I loved about Jane was that she never thought she knew it all, like a lot of directors do. Instead, she worked with me and we ended up going deeper and deeper into the character. It was meticulous. She’s the most rigorous director I’ve ever worked with in terms of the minutiae of building a role – and the most loyal.” In 1993, Campion made The Piano, which changed her life and remains her most revered film by many fans and critics alike. Watching it again, I’m stuck by how unsettling it is, both in its isolated New Zealand setting and its heightened atmosphere, and how eccentric its characters are: Holly Hunter’s strong-willed, musically gifted mute, Ada; Harvey Keitel’s oddball sailor with his tattooed face and obsessive nature. The US critic Roger Ebert wrote that it was “as austere and haunting as any film I’ve ever seen”, noting Campion’s ordinary ability to evoke “a whole universe of feeling”. It remains a touchstone of late 20th-century film-making and a totemic film for many female directors who have followed Campion. “It was while watching The Piano in my early 20s that I decided to follow my growing desire to make films,” says Sarah Gavron, the British director of Brick Lane and Suffragette. “From the early image of the world refracted through the fingers of Ada, to the shot of her skirt billowing as she stumbles and sinks to the ground after the act of violence against her, I was stunned. I found the film deeply disconcerting, emotional, unlike anything else in cinema.” The film’s success – it was nominated for eight, and won three, Academy Awards and she became the first female director to win the Palme d’Or at the Cannes film festival – pitched Campion into the big league, but also pointed up the shockingly patriarchal nature of the film business. At a celebration for the 50th anniversary of Cannes, she found herself standing on a crowded stage, the only woman among the 50 directors who had won the Palme d’Or. “If it had been all male, they probably could have gotten away with it,” she says now, “but because there was one woman, the optics were just so shocking. And, you know, it was only later when I saw the photographs, that I thought, ‘This is so wrong. So wrong.’ And yet they were still saying things like, ‘What can we do – women aren’t making very good films?’ Or, ‘We just can’t include films just because they are made by women.’ It was the same old self-serving stuff from all the guys.” And, unbelievably, it continued for another 28 years until, this year, the French film-maker Julia Ducournau became the second woman to win the Palme d’Or. “The industry certainly didn’t wake up over night, but Jane Campion contributed to a shift in the culture of film-making,” says Gavron. “For me, the way she talked in interviews about her process and how it intersected with her personal life somehow made me feel I had permission to try. It took the idea of being a female film-maker out of the realm of the unthinkable.” Since her Cannes triumph, Campion has made five films, including her big-budget Hollywood adaptation of Henry James’s The Portrait of a Lady, which starred Nicole Kidman and John Malkovich, and the controversial erotic thriller, In the Cut, the first of her films to draw almost across-the-board negative reviews, though, as she has been quick to point out, mostly from male critics. How much the mauling influenced her decision to take a break from directing is hard to say. By then, she and her husband, Colin Englert, who she had met when he worked as second unit director on The Piano, had divorced. Campion’s first voluntary hiatus from film-making, during which she home-schooled her daughter, Alice, now a successful actor, lasted six years. Her most recent one – pace Top of the Lake – stretched to 12. I mention something she said in a recent American interview that intrigued me: “I’m looking at emptiness, that’s my dream.” What did she mean, exactly? She hoots with laughter. “Well, that’s totally the truth, but I was actually talking about meditation. To me, that’s probably what I love most. I’ve been doing it since I was about 20. I find it gives me an equanimity that’s very helpful to the creative process. If you are too anxious or panicky about things, that’s the real stopper for the creative flow. In my experience, you’ve got to trust processes you don’t even understand, in creativity and in life, because the brain is always a few steps behind the instinct.” I ask if she has undergone a shift of consciousness as regards the medium that made her name and which she has done so much to re-energise? She thinks about this for a moment. “Well, I’m not thinking in terms of what’s next any more, that’s for sure. It’s more, if something takes my fancy, I’m going to do it. Is that a shift of consciousness? Maybe. I am certainly going to use my energies differently from now on. For one thing, I’m starting a pop-up film school, because I really hate how unequal education is for people with money and people without money. I really hate it.” For the first time today, Campion sounds fiery. “It wasn’t like that for me,” she continues. “I had a very different experience growing up and I don’t see why that experience shouldn’t be the experience of people who are young now. It’s disgusting and we’ve got to care about it and do something about it. So I’m going to work for free and start this film school and Netflix are going to support me.” Who knows, then, where Campion’s singular creative journey will take her next. What is clear is that the passion that fired her younger self has been tempered by age and experience. I ask her, in conclusion, if the challenge of making films has in any way dented her faith in film. “That’s a hard one in a way,” she replies. “When I was young and starting out, making films was just so invigorating and it seemed to help me live in a good way. I felt I needed to do it. But over the years, that need has changed. I don’t really have it any more. I don’t need it for myself any more. So I’m just going to direct my energies in all sorts of different ways. I really don’t know how that’s gonna work out, but for me that’s exciting in itself.” The Power of the Dog is in select cinemas on 19 Nov and on Netflix from 1 Dec • This article was amended on 8 November 2021. Benedict Cumberbatch lived with a cowboy called Randy and his partner Jenn – not “Jane” as an earlier version said due to a mishearing of the actor’s words.This week’s appalling parliamentary shenanigans prove the saying about bad apples. As Benjamin Franklin put it, “the rotten apple spoils his companions”. That’s exactly what happened with Owen Paterson. Nobody doubts that what he did was wrong. He took more than £9,000 a month – more in a year than the average cost of a house in the Rhondda – to lobby on behalf of Randox and Lynn’s Foods. Dozens of Tory MPs – including some of his closest friends – told me that my committee’s report was crystal clear and he was caught “bang to rights”. Yet 250 MPs voted for a motion that would suspend judgment on the matter. Let’s leave aside for a moment the fact that the motion changed the rules in the middle of a disciplinary process, which is surely the polar opposite of due process and natural justice – and that it did so for a named individual (ditto). Let’s focus on the bullying and determination with which the government machine set about trying to give Paterson a “get out of jail free” card. For months, they lobbied anyone they could find. They spread noxious rumours about members of the committee. They tried to get the speaker to block the publication of our report. They endlessly misrepresented the process, claiming that witnesses statements were ignored (they weren’t), that Paterson was denied a fair hearing (he wasn’t), that the commissioner decides the sanction (she doesn’t), and that there was no appeal (there was). They lobbied individual members of the committee – which is itself a breach of the rules of the House, which can lead to a suspension. Apparently some Conservative WhatsApp groups are full of libellous comments about the commissioner, who has been repeatedly and viciously calumniated in the press. I have worked closely with some of these MPs. A tiny part of me even admires their loyalty to their friend and political ally. But I say this to them: your friendship has blinded you to the truth. In the eyes of the public, this may have damaged the whole of parliament and not just the Tories who voted for the nonsensical. I tried to warn the house that the government was leading us into a quagmire. Some brave Conservative souls warned the prime minister. But he doubled down and dragooned his MPs through the lobbies, spoiling 250 MPs with the Paterson rottenness and tarnishing parliament. Even after Paterson resigned, again preposterously claiming his innocence, Downing Street refuses to rule out the idea that he has been or may be offered a peerage. Clearly that would be appalling. What needs to happen next? The bare minimum is that the Commons rescinds Wednesday’s motion and approve the standards committee’s report on Paterson. That may seem unnecessary. Paterson is no longer an MP, so the House can’t sanction him any longer. When Denis McShane resigned after an adverse committee finding in 2012, that report was never put to the house. But in this case the house has considered the report – and parked it in an ambiguous layby. The Commons must now declare beyond doubt that Paterson’s conduct was corrupt and unacceptable and abandon the ad hoc committee the government wanted to set up under John Whittingdale. I hope that can happen on Tuesday. The prime minister has to admit that he got it badly wrong and call off the troops, who still seem intent on attacking the commissioner. Jacob “grand old duke of York” Rees-Mogg needs to apologise for the damage he has done to parliament’s reputation. Otherwise what remains of his reputation will never recover. As for the standards system, my guess is that voters want more independence, not less. We have few enough checks and balances in the British political system as it is. The standards committee has been looking at proposals and will produce a report on possible changes before Christmas. The house can consider them in the new year. But above all everyone needs to respect the rule of law and the independent process. Chris Bryant is chair of the standards committee and MP for RhonddaIn the long run-up to Ghislaine Maxwell’s now imminent trial on charges of procuring teenage girls for her late friend, Jeffrey Epstein, her lawyer has repeatedly objected to the accused’s living conditions. Last week, Bobbi C Sternheim returned, again, to similarities between the Metropolitan Detention Center in Brooklyn and conditions invented by Thomas Harris for his imaginary psychopath. “The surveillance,” she wrote, in another bid for bail, “rivals scenes of Dr Hannibal Lecter’s incarceration as portrayed in the movie, Silence of the Lambs, despite the absence of the cage and the plastic face guard.” No offence to Maxwell’s lawyer, but you wonder if Lecter’s made-up ordeal is the ideally telling comparator and not only because in Harris’s book we meet the affected cannibal lounging cell-side with “the Italian edition of Vogue”. Further equipped with a fabulous fictional brain, Lecter is able, regardless of glossies, to “amuse himself for years at a time”. The idea of some connection between Lecter and Maxwell could be, even for the purposes of outrage-generation, unhelpful to a campaign portraying her as a lovable innocent whose martyrdom has lessons for us all. “Kindness is spreading sunshine in other people’s lives regardless of the weather,” her family, tweeting @RealGhislaine, volunteer. More prosaically: “Have a great family recipe that reminds you of Fall? Why not share that recipe with a friend or neighbor and spread some good? #SAK.” (SAK stands for Simple Acts of Kindness.) Also: “Expressing gratitude regularly is an easy way to bring kindness into play on a daily basis. Have you expressed gratitude to someone today?” And: “Be a friend. Be Thankful. Be Positive. Be Supportive. A #SAK comes in many forms.” Very true. Though this does seem to be the first time the invocation of kindness, a theme that has become a little threadbare since its emergence in the 1990s, has been urged by campaigners advancing, as Maxwell’s siblings are now doing, the interests of an alleged madam for whom Epstein was “a thoughtful, kind, generous loving man”. Scattered between bits of legal argument and pointed references to miscarriages of justice, the many maxims of RealGhislaine might still, I suppose, be inspiring for anyone who knows little about Maxwell’s family and less about the sex offender. But given the rarity, as stressed earlier by her defence, of people unfamiliar with that association, and unaware of or unmoved by the photograph of Maxwell beaming as Prince Andrew rests his paw on a teenager’s bare midriff, the kindness homilies might be better saved for after her trial. Even a guilty verdict might not preclude a future narrative that combines the spiritual insights of De Profundis and twee sententiousness of The Water Babies with the wellbeing offer of Gwyneth Paltrow’s Goop. In fact, everything, if she’s cleared, points to a future Maxwell lifestyle site. Kindness, says @RealGhislaine, “eases anxiety, is good for your heart and reduces stress”. Something to bear in mind if you’re ever unexpectedly tracked down to an obscure New Hampshire address by federal agents. Offer them a favourite fall recipe? But there’s still the question, with the Maxwell siblings reinvented as kindness missionaries, of what their involvement could do to a movement shortly to be celebrated in World Kindness Day. After all, David Cameron’s simple act of pocket-lining was enough to close down further consideration of the “big society” in which people better than himself were to run libraries for nothing. Outside the kindness cult, its extinction courtesy of the Maxwells might seem a conclusion yet more desirable than its rival appropriation by Simple, the Unilever-owned cosmetic business. Before watching Succession the other night, I was urged in a commercial that might have been scripted by team Ghislaine to select and perform a “Simple act of kindness”, thus virtuously internalising its brand. Not unusually for these campaigns, the kindness bar is set low – so very low that you might find you’ve been inadvertently kind for years, banking enough credit after all the smiling, litter disposal, cooking meals, paying compliments or bringing others a “hot beverage” that you could probably live the rest of your life very kindly without further exertion. By, in this way, reducing acts of kindness to virtually the minimum of civic or neighbourly behaviour, Simple’s and @RealGhislaine’s campaigns cheapen the very quality they supposedly promote. If smiling is a noteworthy act of simple kindness, what does a more complicated one, such as volunteering in a charity shop, make you? Little Nell? Over at @RealGhislaine we discover it probably does: “Hold the door open for a stranger and wish them a kind day!” But well before Simple and @RealGhislaine adopted, unhappily for at least one of them, this identically unchallenging approach, kindness was in difficulties and not just because of the perceived success of “a kinder politics”. The popularity of #BeKind as a Twitter synonym for “shut the fuck up”, sometimes from individuals underlining this kindly message with, for instance, a raised baseball bat, confirms its meaning has become, at best, infinitely adaptable. Returning to its old-fashioned sense, anyone who can persuade the authors of @RealGhislaine to cease lecturing people who have never personally hung out with a sex offender would, however, be entitled to claim this as a bona fide kindness, with appropriately spectacular health benefits. Edifying as it is to see Maxwells identifying the family name with kindness, rather than with their father’s unforgivable theft from UK pensioners, this philosophy has so far been, judging by their public interventions, only modestly translated into action. If the Maxwells aspire, as on @RealGhislaine, to make “kindness the norm”, the project should embrace Epstein’s underage victims, as Maxwell’s attorney did not want them called in the trial. Unkindly, she also wanted these victims named: also overruled. “A hint of a smile, a dash of warmth, a few kind words – the perfect recipe for a simple act of kindness,” we were recently advised on Ms Maxwell’s behalf. Her trial promises to be a moral education. • Catherine Bennett is an Observer columnistThe photographer Antanas Sutkus was born in Lithuania in 1939 and by the age of five had witnessed more traumatic history lessons than most people experience in a lifetime. His father killed himself in 1940 after being coerced by Soviet authorities to make a public speech in praise of the October revolution. His mother fled to the west and Sutkus lived with his grandparents through first Nazi occupation, then a return of Stalinism. He started taking photographs in the 1950s and wanted to find a way to make his camera “a weapon for the underground” in portraying resistance to the USSR. One way was to take photographs of children, who represented a kind of freedom: “Children have a world with its own laws, rules, its own happiness and sadness,” he observed. “To enter it, you need to feel that you are a kid. Adults and children are different stories.” This picture was part of a series Sutkus took in the mid-1960s, many of which are now collected in a new book of his portraits of children. The girl staring into his lens, with her severe fringe and incongruous bow, is characteristic of a style that quietly undermined Soviet propaganda pictures, simply by looking hard at the realities of life in Lithuania. The adults in the shot are pointedly faceless and irrelevant. It was not long after that Sutkus took the most famous of his pictures, of a communist “Young Pioneer”, shaven-headed and inexpressibly sad, which caused him to be called before the central committee and denounced as “photography’s Solzhenitsyn”. Sutkus co-founded the Lithuanian Photographers’ Association in 1969 and remains its honorary president. The children he photographed grew up to witness the fall of Soviet occupation and the re-establishment of independence and democracy. Looking at his pictures, you might convince yourself that you can see that future in their eyes. Antanas Sutkus: Children, published by Steidl (£41), is out nowIn 2015, Hillary Clinton’s brains trust deliberately elevated the stature of the “extreme” Republican contenders, the “pied pipers”, Donald Trump included. On election night in 2016, Clintonworld stared into the abyss. “It was sheer disbelief,” Huma Abedin writes in her new memoir. “More like shock.” Clinton, Abedin as campaign vice-chair and other aides failed to grasp that Trump was spearheading a movement, his mien his message. Clinton branded half of his supporters “deplorables”. Not surprisingly, in her memoir Abedin shows a blind spot to Clinton family shortcomings. When the Monica Lewinsky scandal broke, for example, “it seemed very likely” to her that it “was untrue”. Somehow, an intern who rose to become one of Hillary’s closest confidantes forgot that even before Lewinsky, Bill Clinton’s sexual conduct had almost throttled his White House ambitions. Bill and Hillary even appeared on CBS’s 60 Minutes to salvage his viability. “I’m not sitting here some little woman standing by my man like Tammy Wynette,” Hillary said. Not surprisingly, as Hillary’s so-called “second daughter”, Abedin has a problem coming to grips with an immovable likability deficit that cost her boss both times she ran for president. “Why was HRC not likeable?” Abedin asks. “This was particularly difficult to understand for those who knew her, since as far as we were concerned that was a quality she had in abundance.” Others have plumbed such waters – and found Clinton wanting. Carol Leonnig of the Washington Post, for example, a Pulitzer Prize winner, portrayed Hillary sporting a “foul mouth” and being loathed by the agents who protected her. After members of her Secret Service detail overheard Chelsea Clinton calling them “pigs”, Leonnig wrote, the first daughter was reminded that their job was to “stand between you, your family and a bullet”. Chelsea reportedly responded: “Well, that’s what my mother and father call you.” Abedin does not discuss how, out of office, Hillary scooped up windfalls in the commodities market and easy millions in Wall Street speaking fees, all while doing her best impersonation of Mother Teresa. Clinton’s second run for president tarnished her image. In December 2017, a Gallup poll pegged her favorability at 37%. But unlike Mandy Grunwald, an adviser to both Clintons, Abedin refuses to admit that Hillary has foibles. According to Grunwald, Clinton could sound like she “DOESN’T think the game is rigged” against normal Americans, mustering only recognition that the “public thinks so”. Said differently, Clinton conveyed obliviousness to the Great Recession of 2008-09, its casualties and anxieties. In April 2015, nearly half of the US self-identified as working- or lower-class. Between November 2007 and late 2016, white Americans in that bracket lost more than 700,000 jobs. Abedin describes sitting with Clinton in Iowa, watching Trump “ramble incoherently about himself”. She captures Clinton saying: “I just don’t get it.” Similarly, Abedin mocks Bernie Sanders’ call for a “revolution” and glosses over the fact that Clinton only beat the Vermont senator to clinch the nomination in early June 2016, more than a week after Trump wrapped up the Republican nod. “With each contest, she methodically racked up the number of delegates she needed to secure the nomination,” Abedin writes. That’s pure spin. It was supposed to be a coronation. They didn’t plan on winning the Iowa caucuses by a razor-thin margin or getting walloped in New Hampshire, where Clinton won on her first go-round. A youth-driven movement helped propel Sanders’ rise. Aspiration and grievance counted. The bankers had gotten their bailouts. Sanders supporters were staring at a future bleaker than their parents had known. Clinton had gone from the “beer track” candidate of 2008 to the pick of the wine drinkers, the coastal establishment. And yet, according to Abedin, defeat by Trump still came as a bolt from the blue. Both/And lets the reader play voyeur and counselor too. Abedin delivers the skinny on her courtship by, marriage to and traumatic estrangement from the former congressman Anthony Weiner. She shares that they attended couples’ therapy, and that he possessed darker secrets than she first thought. She also describes how an unnamed senator shoved his tongue down her throat and pinned her against a couch while the pair were in his apartment for late-night coffee. Abedin writes that she repressed memories of the event until they came rushing back amid Brett Kavanaugh’s confirmation hearings, when the supreme court nominee was accused of, and denied, sexual assault. Asked by CBS if the senator had committed a sexual assault, Abedin paused. “Did I feel like he was assaulting me in that moment?” she told Nora O’Donnell. “I didn’t, it didn’t feel that way. I was in an uncomfortable situation with a senator and I didn’t know how to deal with it.” This does not appear to be the final word. Members of the Senate worry about who else the unnamed senator may have abused. Philippe Reines, a former Clinton aide, says it is up to Abedin “alone to decide what to share, with whom, how and when”. Abedin’s eye for style asserts itself throughout her memoir – even as she deals with how her husband made damaging headlines. In May 2011, she woke up in Buckingham Palace and surveyed the room. Her “long, fitted gown for the evening’s white-tie dinner hung on the bathroom door”. An “elegant chestnut-brown writing desk” stood at the “foot of the bed”. The same weekend, Weiner alerted his pregnant wife to his sexting habits. Weiner went to prison but he and Abedin are not completely estranged. Both/And is also a story of Abedin’s life before and outside politics. She tells of being born in Kalamazoo, Michigan, of spending most of her youth in Saudi Arabia, a father and mother who held doctorates, of family ties in the Middle East, the subcontinent and the US. It is the strongest part of the book, a tale of an immigrant, of an upward arc. Both/And: A Life in Many Worlds is published in the US by ScribnerIn 1963, when he was 29, Leonard Cohen gave a speech in Montreal’s Jewish Public Library: “I believe that the God worshipped in our synagogues is a hideous distortion of a supreme idea – and deserves to be attacked and destroyed,” he said. “I consider it one of my duties to expose the platitude which we have created.” Cohen had come to imagine himself as part of an underground “catacomb religion” of poets, a new kind of “cantor”, “one of the creators of the liturgy that will create the church”. At that time, Cohen had never sung on a record or a stage. He had published two narrowly acclaimed volumes of poetry and a experimental novel. His speech, part of a symposium on the future of Judaism, carried weight in part because he was a son of one of the most notable Jewish families in Canada – his paternal grandfather was the founder of the Canadian Jewish Times, whose uncle had been unofficial chief rabbi. His maternal grandfather had written A Treasury of Rabbinic Interpretations. Cohen himself resolved to go “into exile” from his faith, to think up other possibilities for spiritual life like “love and sex and drugs and song”, for which there was little room in the synagogue. In this book, Harry Freedman examines that spiritual journey, which took Cohen not only through a storied succession of lovers and more than his fair share of narcotics but also deep into Bible study, and, over several decades, into the rigours of Zen Buddhism, in which tradition he became an ordained monk. Pop music has always explored the shifting borders of sacred and profane devotion, from Elvis’s spirituals, through the gospel roots of Motown to Madonna’s raunchy confessionals, but Cohen found his own way to reconcile what he called his “lifelong obsession” with earthly love with his more mystical urges: “I decided to worship beauty the way some people go back to the religion of their fathers.” The first vivid expression of that impulse came a few months after he made that library speech when he met the young avant-garde dancer Suzanne Verdal. The pair never became lovers, but Cohen was among the friends that Verdal would invite to her cheap apartment in one of the abandoned warehouses on the St Lawrence waterfront. She served him jasmine tea and little mandarin oranges from nearby Chinatown, and the pair of them would walk along the river past Notre-Dame-de-Bon-Secours where sailors went to be blessed before heading out to sea. Cohen used the elements of these encounters almost verbatim in his first hit song, Suzanne, which became a blueprint for lyrics that shifted between conversation with a lover or with a God or with both, and allowed him to find his unique voice. Freedman, whose previous books include The Talmud: A Biography and Kabbalah: Secrecy, Scandal and the Soul, suggests that Cohen became a reincarnation of a fifth-century Israeli tradition of the “paytan”: poets who were also prayer leaders, who wrote allusive verses to be recited alongside traditional liturgy. In workmanlike fashion he deconstructs the Talmudic and New Testament references in a series of Cohen’s most familiar songs to show how the poet’s songwriting circled back to the scriptural study he had undertaken with his grandfather in his teens. The exercise works best with those songs that have almost become modern incantations to rival the Lord’s Prayer or the Kaddish. Notably, Anthem, the centrepiece of Cohen’s 1992 album, The Future, which provides the seminal line “there’s a crack in everything, that’s how the light gets in” (“the closest thing I have to a credo,” Cohen said) and, of course, Hallelujah, the song that launched a thousand X Factor auditions. Cohen spent five years writing Hallelujah, famously filling notebooks with 80 potential verses before he found those six that might best please the Lord, and his concert audiences. Freedman is lucid on the ways in which the songwriter identified himself directly with King David (who Cohen called the Bible’s “sweet singer”, “the embodiment of our higher possibility”) and on the consummate expression of Cohen’s synthesis of the sensual and the divine (“I remember when I moved in you and the holy dove she was moving too…”) but in chasing down every biblical reference, he risks losing that balancing irreverence in Cohen’s lyrics, which rhymes God-fearing Hebrew with breathy pillow talk. “I wanted to push the hallelujah deep into the secular world,” Cohen once said. “I wanted to indicate that hallelujah can come out of things that have nothing to do with religion.” Freedman mentions a favourite quote, which Cohen attributed to Ben Jonson, a couple of times – “I’ve studied all the philosophies and all the theologies but cheerfulness keeps breaking through” – but that wisdom is not always at the forefront of his own quest for the roots of the poet’s genius. You rather hear it in passing in some of the book’s better anecdotes. For example, when Cohen’s son Adam was critically ill, in a coma following a car crash, Cohen sat by his hospital bed for months. Sometimes, he read to his son favourite passages from the Bible. When Adam eventually came round the first thing he said was: “Dad, can you read something else?” In part because of his longevity as an artist, Cohen’s own life became a gift to parable. He had trouble finding a record deal in 1967 because everyone thought he was too old, at 33, to ever be a hit. He enjoyed the irony that the album he released 45 years later, Old Ideas, came closest to topping the charts. He told Jarvis Cocker that most of its reference points were “about 2,614 years old”. That final hallelujah was itself a kind of dark joke on the part of his Gods. In 2005, he brought a lawsuit against his manager Kelley Lynch for cleaning out $5m from his bank account, partly while he was studying to be a monk. In 2008, at the age of 74, he was therefore obliged to resume his touring career, playing 387 concerts in five years, and securing his legend. Cohen died on 7 November 2016, the day before the election of Donald Trump as US president. His final album came out a few weeks earlier, pointedly titled You Want it Darker, with no question mark. Having forged his own spiritual path, Cohen inevitably returned, in a voice now lower than Johnny Cash’s, to where it had begun. As Freedman points out, the title track of this album was accompanied by Gideon Zelermyer, cantor of the synagogue in Montreal that Cohen had attended as a child. Zelermyer utters the song’s last word, “hineni”, which Cohen translates as “I’m ready, my Lord”. Listening to it again, you also hear something unspoken: a powerful sense of mission accomplished. • Leonard Cohen: The Mystical Roots of Genius by Harry Freedman is published by Bloomsbury (£18.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyThe Home Office has failed to release its annual stop-and-search data, prompting concern that the figures will reveal a further increase to disproportionate targeting of black people. At the same time, the department is refusing to publish the results of its own public consultation into its heavily criticised “anti-refugee” legislation. Campaigners said the withholding of key data appeared to be an attempt to avoid negative headlines while the Home Office’s two controversial legislative proposals – the policing bill and the borders bill – pass through parliament. The government’s official stop-and-search statistics, covering the year up to April 2021, should have been published last month. The Home Office has failed to do so, saying that the three-week delay is because of a change in the level at which recorded data has been collected, meaning extra time is required to check it and to “resolve data quality issues”. Critics believe the real reason is because the statistics show that the use of stop and search that disproportionately affects black communities has widened – findings that would provoke fresh scrutiny on the policing bill, which seeks to expand the use of the contentious measure at a time when trust in policing is under scrutiny. Black people are already nine times more likely to be stopped and searched by police than white people, official figures for England and Wales show. Emmanuelle Andrews, policy and campaigns officer at human rights group Liberty, said: “Transparency over the use and abuse of police powers is critical, yet this government has shown time and time again that it will do anything to evade scrutiny and undermine accountability.” Meanwhile, the Home Office is refusing to share the results of its own research into what the public think of its nationality and borders bill, which has been heavily criticised and recently was found to breach international and domestic law in at least 10 different ways. The unveiling of the borders bill was preceded by a public consultation asking people to forward their views on its proposals, which include the provision to send asylum seekers overseas. The bill has been described as ruthless and pernicious. Despite almost 7,500 responses from the public – compared to 1,120 stakeholders – the Home Office is refusing to publish the results, raising questions over what it is trying to hide. Using a Freedom of Information exemption, officials argue that the “balance of the public interest lies in… withholding the information”, seeming to overlook that the data is from a public consultation on an issue of widespread national debate. However it did concede: “Disclosing the full reports would increase public awareness of the issues, accountability and transparency.” Sonya Sceats, chief executive at Freedom from Torture, which submitted the FoI, said: “Opposition to this government’s cruel and law-breaking anti-refugee bill is growing. The Home Office’s refusal to publish findings from its own public consultation begs the question: what exactly has the British public told them that they want to keep hidden from us? “It is an affront to caring people across this country who are horrified by this vicious political agenda designed to distract us from this government’s failing.” Sceats called on the home secretary, Priti Patel, to release the report, adding that her group has instructed solicitors to draft an internal review into the decision. Solicitor Carolin Ott, from law firm Leigh Day, said Freedom from Torture believed “there are clear and cogent reasons why disclosure of the requested information is essential to allow scrutiny” of the borders bill. The policing bill has also come under recent and sustained criticism, including from former police leaders, with Patel keen to add new protest-related stop-and-search powers. Andrews added: “The government is facing growing opposition to its policing bill, which will expand stop and search in a way it knows will lead to more discrimination, more dangerous interactions with the police for people of colour, especially black men, and will exacerbate the underlying conditions that lead to serious violence. The government must listen to these warnings and scrap the bill before it puts more people in danger.” The Home Office says that the release of the stop-and-search data has been put back to 18 November with the policing bill currently passing through the vital committee stage in the Lords where every clause has to be agreed and votes on any amendments can take place. The unpublished data covers part of the first lockdown when the Metropolitan police increased its most discriminatory form of stop and search – section 60 – despite a fall in crime. Liberty has warned that plans to ease restrictions on the use of blanket stop-and-search powers would disproportionately affect black people, who are already up to 18 times more likely than white people to be subjected to “suspicionless” stop and search. The government announced in July it will be expanding section 60 powers but so far has not published any evidence to support its decision. Habib Kadiri, research and policy manager at StopWatch, said: “The reason given for delaying the annual stop-and-search dataset implies that a record number of street searches took place in 2020/21. This holds a special irony when you consider that crime levels fell during this period primarily because of lockdown rules that mandated the nation to stay indoors. “The government seems committed to helping the police avoid scrutiny over the effectiveness of their actions while increasing their stop-and-search powers.” Katrina Ffrench, founder and director of Unjust-UK, said: “Without transparency there cannot be proper accountability or scrutiny. Ultimately, police legitimacy will continue to be undermined if the government persists with enacting the bill and ignoring its own data.” • This article was amended on 10 November 2021. An earlier version quoted the Home Office saying the delay was due to a “record level” of data. After publication the Home Office explained that when it referred to checking “new record level” data, it meant that data had been collected for the first time at the level of an individual stop and search record, rather than in aggregate.It was catalogued as an “antique carved wooden bird” when it was auctioned for £75 in 2019. Now it has been identified as Anne Boleyn’s heraldic emblem, the 16th-century royal falcon that probably adorned her private apartments at Hampton Court Palace – only to be removed after Henry VIII ordered her execution and the eradication of all traces of her. Its true worth is believed to be about £200,000. The exquisite and richly decorated oak carving is in such extraordinary condition that it even bears its original gilding and colour scheme. In 1536, barely three years after it was made, Boleyn was beheaded on bogus adultery charges – just because she could not give Henry a male heir, only a daughter, the future Elizabeth I. The falcon is to be placed on long-term loan to Hampton Court by Paul Fitzsimmons, a Devon antiques dealer, who spotted it in an auction. Tracy Borman, a leading Tudor historian and joint chief curator for Historic Royal Palaces, the charity that manages Hampton Court, said: “The irony is that Anne Boleyn is the most popular of the six wives and she’s probably the one with the least surviving evidence … because she was obliterated by Henry. So that makes this really quite special and obviously I’m very excited about it. When I realised how this absolutely would have fitted with the decorative scheme, I had a shivers-down-the-spine moment.” Boleyn was the second of six wives of England’s most famous king, a marriage that led him to break with the Roman Catholic church and brought about the English Reformation. Borman believes that, after Boleyn’s fall from grace, it would have been taken down and kept by one of her supporters: “It is a remarkable survivor. The really interesting thing is that somebody obviously wanted to save it for posterity. So it’s likely to have been a supporter of Anne.” She noted that two falcons in the Great Hall ceiling at Hampton Court are so high up – and would have been blackened by smoke from the roaring fire – that Henry would not have noticed them, but that this one is more likely to have been in Anne’s private apartments, within easier reach of whoever wanted to save it. She said: “They’re not exactly the same as this one, but similar. This is a crowned falcon. It’s fascinating because all of this decorative scheme was before Anne actually became queen. But it’s when she and Henry had absolute ambition that she was about to become queen. “So they set to work, busily decorating Hampton Court, ready for that glorious day. Of course, it all went rather horribly wrong. “It’s lovely because it’s not only crowned but it’s carrying a sceptre. What’s really interesting about it is that – unlike the Great Hall examples – this one wears an imperial crown. That was an absolute nod to the fact that Henry by now had got imperial ambitions. He was trying to supplant the pope’s authority, promoting himself as some kind of emperor rather than just a king. There are other crowned falcons that we know about, that were used for example at Anne’s coronation in the pageant. But there’s no mention of imperial crowns, so this is very much Henry and Anne doing their very best for a kind of PR stunt. The decoration of Hampton Court was all about their ambitions and their defiance of the pope.” Fitzsimmons, of Marhamchurch Antiques in Buckfastleigh, specialises in furniture and art from the 15th to 17th centuries. In spotting the carving, he “knew it was a good thing”. “I didn’t know immediately that it was the badge of Anne Boleyn, but I knew that it had some sort of royal connection because it had the crown and sceptre, and it was a royal bird.” It too was quite blackened, possibly with soot, so it may also have been above a fireplace. Noting its delicate restoration by Ian Crick-Smith, he said: “What’s amazing about it is the condition, which is almost like the day it was made … That’s so rare for a Tudor piece.” Measuring 20cm by 20.5cm, it is quite a size. Its discovery will be included in Borman’s forthcoming book, Crown &amp; Sceptre, a comprehensive history of the monarchy, to be published on 18 November.She writes: “The woman for whom [Henry] had overturned the entire religion and government of his kingdom had become utterly abhorrent to him … Anne was beheaded after being found guilty of adultery with five men … The charges, which were almost certainly false, were devised by Cromwell, now an implacable enemy of the queen … Although [Henry] ordered all traces of Anne to be removed from his palaces, a few can still be seen today. One of the most extraordinary is a richly decorated falcon (Anne’s heraldic badge) that once adorned Hampton Court.” Fitzsimmons said: “It needs to go back to the institution from where it came … It was the property of Henry VIII, [who] ordered them to be made for his new wife, but equally ordered them to be removed. “This could have been removed literally as Anne Boleyn was about to have her head cut off.”If there is one truism of modern American politics, it’s that good fortune is a fleeting thing. Almost a year to the day after Joe Biden defeated Donald Trump in the 2020 presidential election, his Democratic party was dealt a body blow on election day 2021. In Virginia, former Democratic governor Terry McAuliffe lost to Republican candidate, Glenn Youngkin, as the Republicans won every statewide race and took control of the state’s house of delegates. In New Jersey, incumbent governor, Phil Murphy, barely held on in a state that went for Biden by 16 points. Meanwhile, the powerful Democratic president of New Jersey’s state senate was defeated by a Republican truck driver who spent a mere several thousand dollars on his campaign. Does this mean that the bloom is off the rose for Biden and America is on its way to another Trump presidency? It’s too soon to tell, but it does not look great for Democrats, even though the House passed the $1 trillion infrastructure bill on Friday. While social media sizzled with red-hot takes on why the party underperformed in Virginia and New Jersey, the reality is more boring. For 40 years, the candidate of the president’s party has gone down to defeat in Virginia’s off-year gubernatorial election. From that perspective, McAuliffe losing in Virginia was the expected outcome. Moreover, the approval ratings of the president have a trickle-down effect on party candidates and, right now, Biden is deeply unpopular. His approval ratings, at this point in his presidency, are the lowest in modern polling history, save one past president – Donald Trump. That’s not good company to keep. Since the end of August, Biden has been buffeted by one bad news story after another. The image of ignominious US withdrawal from Afghanistan cast a pall over his presidency and punctured his aura of competence. As Covid vaccinations levelled off, cases again began to rise, forcing many Americans, who believed just a few months ago that the pandemic would be soon over, to go back to masking and social distancing. Meanwhile, in Washington, Democrats bickered among themselves about the size of Biden’s “build back better” agenda, and the president who ran on his ability to get things done in Washington looked like a helpless bystander. In short, this White House has not had a good story to tell for months and in Virginia and New Jersey they paid the price. But if there is one silver lining for Democrats, it’s that midterm elections are a year away and there is time to right the ship. For all the sturm und drang in Congress over the president’s massive, multitrillion spending packages, a second major bill is also likely to pass, joining the infrastructure bill. The second would devote an estimated $1.75tn to much-needed social safety net programmes, including universal pre-kindergarten subsidies for childcare, an expansion of Medicare benefits for senior citizens and Medicare coverage for the poorest citizens and, potentially, billions for the country’s first paid family and medical leave programme. Half-a-trillion dollars are also budgeted for fighting climate change. Passage of both bills will not only thrill Democratic voters but could spur further economic growth. While September was the worst month for Covid cases and deaths since vaccines became readily available, there was a significant decline in new cases in October. More than 70% of eligible adults are now fully vaccinated and vaccines for children aged five to 11 were rolled out last week. However, the combination of strong economic growth, a return to pre-pandemic normality and legislative success will not guarantee political success. Indeed, the same traditional political forces that contributed to Democratic underperformance on Tuesday will weigh on the party next year. Historically, the party in power gets shellacked in midterm elections, losing an average of 26 House seats. With Democrats holding a razor-thin majority in the House, it’s hard to imagine the party outrunning that history. And as much as Biden’s legislative agenda might seem like a winner for Democrats, voters don’t always reward the party in power for getting stuff done, particularly if they don’t feel it. The 63 House Democrats who lost their seats in 2010, months after the passage of Obamacare, can attest to that. Democrats also face a larger set of structural problems: a constitutional system that favours small rural states (usually won by Republicans); a rival political party that is restricting voting rights and aggressively gerrymandering congressional maps to maintain power; and an energised Republican electorate. Ultimately, what should perhaps be most disturbing for Democrats about Tuesday’s elections is that their voters came out in droves, but they couldn’t overcome huge Republican enthusiasm. All this may change in 2022, when Trump will probably play a more prominent role and Democratic candidates can use him as a foil to attack Republicans. In fact, one of the likely reasons Youngkin prevailed in Virginia is that he successfully distanced himself from Trump and made it difficult for McAuliffe to link him to the ex-president. That may be harder to do for Republican congressional candidates, many of whom regularly boast about their support for Trump. Trump is likely to remain the gift that keeps on giving for Democrats – the living, breathing bogeyman under the bed who keeps their voters up at night. As much as Democrats may want to run on their legislative agenda, the spectre of Trump could be their most effective strategy for maintaining power and is probably Biden’s best hope for re-election. The structural impediments to electoral success will remain, however, particularly as Senate Democrats, led by West Virginia’s JJoe Manchin, seem unwilling to enact the kind of far-reaching political reforms that would undo them. Moreover, the Republicans’ unabashed assault on democratic norms and voting rights is likely to continue. The short-term road ahead for Democrats is rocky. Still, as John Maynard Keynes famously quipped, in the long run we are all dead and if Trump is the path to Democratic success, so be it. After all, there is one other important truism of all politics – winning is better than losing. Michael Cohen’s most recent book, co-authored with Micah Zenko, is Clear and Present SafetyOn the outskirts of the Białowieża forest – which bestrides the border between south-east Poland and Belarus – a group of seven Iraqi Kurds make their weary way towards the Polish hamlet of Grodzisk. The latest miles of their journey have been from Belarus – crossing back and forth twice, deported after their first and second attempts. Now a third time: through sub-zero temperatures, across the primeval forest’s marshy terrain. Among them are two children: an eight-month-old girl and a two-year-old boy. When we came upon them, they were afraid to get up off the ground and begged us not to call the police, whispering: “They’ll kill us.” The infant was still, though not asleep. They looked like waxen figures, their faces blank, though one woman’s face was covered in bruises. This is one group among the thousands of migrants trapped in a perilous purgatorial terrain between Belarus and Poland, as gateway to the European Union, where they seek refuge and asylum. That gate has slammed shut, claiming eight known migrant lives so far. Poland’s rightwing government has secured parliamentary authority to build a Donald Trump-style wall the length of its frontier with Belarus, and meanwhile patrols the territory with a force of some 17,000 border police reinforced by military personnel. The Polish government argues that it is a deliberate policy by Belarus to undermine the EU’s south eastern border by encouraging refugees to pour in. The government has also established a two-mile militarised zone adjacent to the frontier, from which medical services, volunteer aid workers and reporters are banned. Crystal van Leeuwen, a medical emergency manager with Médecins Sans Frontières, told the Guardian last week that NGOs must urgently gain access to the secure zone for migrants’ claims and international protection to be respected. The migrants are part not only of the exodus in flight from war and other tribulation where they began their journeys – across the Middle East and Africa – but also pawns in a game between Belarus and Poland. Many are lured by Belarusian travel bureaux, controlled by the authoritarian government of Alexander Lukashenko, which, as middlemen, organise trips from the Middle East to Minsk, promising passage to the EU. The Iraqi Kurdish group is from Duhok, near the Turkish border. It is the scene of intense recent intra-Kurdish fighting, and Turkish strikes against the Kurdish PKK organisation. The mother of the children, 28-year-old Amila Abedelkader, said that the group was lured to Belarus by a travel agency that would arrange travel by plane from Istanbul to Minsk, and access to the Polish border. Migrants are charged €15,000-€20,000 when they reach Belarus. Airport photos show their arrival wearing shorts and T-shirts, clearly unaware of the temperatures awaiting them. They are then installed in state hotels managed by the regime, from which officially assigned buses and even taxis transfer them to the Polish or Lithuanian border. Belarusian border guards then shove them past the fence. “Some migrants we saw had their faces sliced with barbed wire,” says volunteer aid worker Katarzyna Wappa. “We have amateur films showing how the Belarusians drive the migrants forward. The border guards stand there with snarling attack dogs in full battle gear.” Abdelkader says her group had made their first crossing into Poland in early October, but were forced back by guards. Trapped between borders, they were given nothing to drink or eat. “The Polish guards caught us and pushed us back. They said: ‘Go back to Belarus.’ And the Belarusian soldier said: ‘No, no go back to Poland.’ When the water was all finished, my brother asked Polish soldiers for some water to drink. Every day we asked about water. They say: ‘No, no.’” The guards refused to supply milk for the baby. The migrants drank rainwater or from puddles. This was their third attempt. Whether they have since been successful is unclear. But every morning we receive news on WhatsApp from people held in the border guards’ cells. Bulletins such as: “Yesterday a family and their sick son staying with us were taken by the police back to the border.” And: “We are so frightened of going to the border because my baby is too small. Please help us.” Back home in the nearest town of Hajnówka, Wappa says: “We are creating a network, trying to do what we can, but it’s too much to bear. People are dying in the forest and the Polish state offers no help apart from bringing in more troops, rounding them up, and deporting them back to no man’s land. And if we reach those people, what can we give them? A flask of tea, some warm clothes, then leave them in the darkness and cold?” In the forest last week, volunteers found Mustafa, a 46-year-old man from Morocco, taken in by a volunteer named Mila. Speaking Spanish, Mustafa told us: “As I made my way through the forest, I saw a man lying on the ground. I don’t know if he was alive or dead. I walked two nights until I could go no further. I was walking at night, trying to sleep during the day. I was in a vacuum. “Belarusian soldiers beat people,” he continued. “They beat me in Belarus. There are gangs that stand behind the army and attack us. They beat you, take your money, and split it 50-50, part for the gangs, part for soldiers. This border is like a river of death. What are you to do? Where to go, I do not know.” Mustafa’s fate remains in the balance. Once on the Polish side, migrants are tracked down by border guards, police, army, and territorial defence forces; in the Hajnówka region, practically every second car on the road belongs to law enforcement officers. Others have darkened windows – either protecting or smuggling the migrants. “We’re in a parcelled-off, isolated world,” adds Kamil Syller, initiator of the Green Light project, which aims to put green lights in windows to signify homes where refugees can find help, discreetly, and not be handed over to the police. At the Mantiuk Hospital in Hajnówka, a boy from Somalia tells how he watched his two brothers freeze to death. “It’s impossible to say where it happened,” he says. “Apparently he’s losing contact with reality,” say the doctors. “He often asks: ‘But where am I?’” The refugees who reach the hospital receive professional medical care, yet the hospital is patrolled by border guards, and as soon as someone’s health is restored, guards take them back to the border and leave them in the forest. Medics on the Border, a group of doctors with an ambulance, operates in the “open” areas, but are not allowed in the off-limits zone. Asked how they can be of help, they say: “We need passes to the zone,” says Jakub Sieczko, a paramedic. “But this is impossible.” “We have no access to the off-limits zone,” says a Polish Red Cross workerfrom the border area. “We can’t hand over aid packages ourselves.” Syller says that the refugees are freezing, succumbing to hypothermia and shaking from fear and cold. “The children are having reactions similar to epileptic attacks. The suffering and terror here can only remind you of wartime,” he explains. Wappa feels that she is “witnessing scenes like out of a war, but at least in a war things are clear. “This is worse, because here half the society denies what’s going on. They think it’s all a big sham, that there are politics behind it. People say of the refugees: ‘Why did they even leave home and why take their children?’” This land is steeped in dark history of flight and deportation. And there are few reminders so cogent as in the village of Narewka, where a row of houses from before the second world war is adorned with enlarged photographs of the Jewish residents who lived here until the Holocaust. The pictures show people posing in their finest clothes: an elderly couple, an Orthodox family, a girl in a polka-dot dress with bows in her hair, a sophisticated lady wearing a cap. Now, past those houses in memoriam for Jews deported from here, military and police vehicles pass, carrying migrants for deportation.Andy*, 30, a painter and decorator, says he has known violence for much of his life. “I want a relationship but I don’t know how,” he says. “I was told if you want someone else to be comfortable in your company, you first have to be comfortable in your own company. It’s hard, but I’m trying.” He has been in and out of prison since he was a teenager. On one occasion, he was jailed when he found his then girlfriend with another man – “I saw red.” He attacked the man and bit off his ear. He says she intervened: “I grabbed her by the throat and pushed her to get her off me. She banged her head.” Six months ago, Andy denied any responsibility for hurting his ex-girlfriend. Now, he says he was wrong and he shouldn’t have done it. Denial, minimisation and victim blaming have been established for more than 40 years as the standard male perpetrator’s response to violence towards women. On another occasion, Andy was recalled to prison because he cheated on a different girlfriend, she confronted him and, Andy says, attacked him. No charges were brought but he was recalled. “It was my chaotic lifestyle. Always drinking, always fighting,” he says. He served another three years and acquired a drug addiction, but is now clean. Andy has just completed an innovative 12-week programme for men who are assessed as a moderate risk to women and have expressed a willingness to change. Turning the Spotlight, (TTS), run by Cumbria Victim Support also offers help for the men’s families. The course is skilfully led by female and male facilitators, Joanne Nelson and Richard Cupid, a therapist who previously worked as an engineer in Barrow-in-Furness shipyard. “The men believe they should be ‘a man’, which causes damage and prevents them from being themselves,” Cupid says. At the end of the programme participants are assessed on their ownership and understanding of their behaviour and why change is required. “The course has been massive for me,” Andy says. For the first time, this month he has completed his licence in the community without recall to jail. “Women bear so much pressure,” Laraine Carr, TTS coordinator, says. “They are told to leave. If they don’t leave, they risk their children being put into care. If a couple want to make the relationship work, and many do, we need to make that possible if we can, in a safe way.” Data drawn up by the Femicide Census, founded by Karen Ingala Smith and Clarrie O’Callaghan, covering the period 2009 -2018, found at least 1,419 men killed 1,425 women in the UK in the period 2009-2018. Almost half the perpetrators were known to have histories of violence against women. Ryan Ingham, 27, killed Caroline Finegan, 29, in 2014, with “a devastating blow”. He had 23 previous convictions, many for domestic abuse. Twenty-nine perpetrators had killed previously. Gary Arthur Allen, 47, killed two women 21 years apart, in 1997 and 2018. Allen first strangled and inflicted 33 injuries on Samantha Class, 29, including driving his car over her. In 2018, Alena Grlakova, 38, also suffered multiple injuries. “The pleasure of hurting builds from the planning stage,” he told a probation officer. “Prostitutes are easy targets.” “Too often we risk assess victims but not the perpetrators,” says campaigner Ingala Smith. “Factors such as mental ill health, addiction, loss of status, unemployment could be potential intervention points if prevention counted. We know from the evidence that it doesn’t.” “Femicide is not just homicide of women by men,” adds O’Callaghan. “It’s about how and why women are killed and abused and how this is different to the circumstances in which men are killed.” Frank Mullane, founder of the charity Advocacy After Fatal Domestic Abuse (AAFDA), supporting families, has quality assured more than 900 domestic homicide reviews (DHRs) for the Home Office. DHRs examine the role of agencies after a death. “Where the alleged or convicted perpetrator has mental health issues and/or addiction there are too few interventions,” he says. “If we don’t act early enough, the conveyor belt of men who abuse and kill will keep on coming.” Wayne Couzens, the killer of Sarah Everard, unlocked the scale of largely unpunished misogyny and abuse within the police, not the only institution in which perpetrators operate. “When it comes to reports of men killing, abusing and controlling women, the passive voice prevails. Women are assaulted, women are threatened. The perpetrator has disappeared,” says. Davina James-Hanman, a specialist for over 30 years in the reduction of male violence against women. “When the victim-survivor is the only one visible, it is she who is judged, blamed, held accountable. We need to flip the switch so that instead of, ‘Why doesn’t she leave?’, we ask ‘Why doesn’t he stop?’” In England and Wales, three out of four domestic abuse offences reported to the police resulted in no further action. Convictions have dropped 35% over five years and convictions for coercive control and rape are minuscule. Approximately 400,000 perpetrators per year cause medium and high levels of harm, yet fewer than 1% received specialist intervention that might stop the carnage. Perpetrators have a passport to offend. Currently, a myriad uncoordinated taskforces, inquiries, initiatives, strategies and small pots of funding are flowing out of government to address male violence against women and girls. This month, the government’s first domestic abuse strategy is published that also contains a “perpetrator pillar”. In the budget, the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, allocated £185m to tackle domestic abuse and rape, described as “a drop in the ocean”. Jo Todd, founding chief executive of Respect, a charity that has worked with perpetrators over 25 years, says: “Violence against women and girls costs £66bn a year. A £66bn problem needs a £66bn solution.” It’s not just a question of funding and resources as the police, refuges and charities fight deep cuts, it’s also about a move from flawed risk management of victims and abusers to a serious investment in prevention. The government’s serious violence strategy does not define domestic and sexual abuse as serious violence, even though it makes up 40% of police work. The police, crime, sentencing and courts bill contains a new serious violence prevention duty which will require a range of public bodies such the police, health, housing, education and probation to work together in a public health framework to prevent serious violence. Violence against women and girls was not included. In the House of Lords, Tory peer Gabrielle Bertin and crossparty peers successfully included it in an amendment to the bill. Campaigners hope that by December, the government may have made what Nicole Jacobs, the first domestic abuse commissioner for England and Wales, calls “an historic shift”. Currently, home secretary Priti Patel prefers local areas to make their own decisions about prevention strategies. Only half of 18 violence reduction units set up as the forerunners of the new duty have domestic abuse and violence as part of their strategy. Zoe Billingham was lead inspector on the police’s response to domestic abuse for 12 years at Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Constabulary and Fire and Rescue Services, until her tenure came to an end in September. She is now free to speak her mind as a campaigner. “Whether it’s in Cumbria or Camden, there is no excuse for such extraordinary variation in the police response to domestic abuse across the country. We have to end the postcode lottery that costs women’s lives,” she says. Billingham’s final report on the police response to violence against women and girls, published in September, praised some improvements and innovations but it said that police needed “clearer focus, better funding, a relentless pursuit of perpetrators and a sense that these are urgent national policing priorities”. For the report, a small number of forces were each asked to identify their five highest risk perpetrators. Thirty-four of the total of 40 men identified as repeat offenders of violence against women and girls were not being tracked by the police. Fourteen had offended against three or more women, some as many as nine; over half had been offending for more than five years. “Why haven’t all the forces homed in on what their intelligence is telling them and taken out these high-risk offenders?” asks Billingham. “If this was organised crime you would see strongly focused covert tactics to apprehend the offender. You don’t see those tactics used for violence against women and girls. You have to ask yourself why?” The report called for a statutory duty on all agencies to prevent such violence, including schools, health, housing and social care. “That’s the really big prize.” Billingham says. “What could be better than that? We need a joined-up strategy and a set of minimum standards. What gets measured gets done.” Crucially, the report recommended that violence against women and girls is included in the strategic policing requirement that dictates the top priorities for all 43 police forces in England Wales along with counter-terrorism, serious organised crime and child sexual exploitation. “That signals to chief constables and police and crime commissioners the government’s prioritisation. The broad spectrum of crimes that disproportionately impact on women don’t get anywhere near top priority,” Billingham says. “If this opportunity is squandered, we all lose.” On a wet Tuesday evening in a community centre in Barrow-in-Furness, Cumbria, five men, including Andy, discuss the issues they have covered during Turning the Spotlight’s previous two-hour sessions. They include “the Man Box”, the negatives and positives of how boys are taught to be men; the Power Wheel, devised in the 1980s, which illustrates the tools men utilise including isolation, intimidation, physical abuse and threats to control women; the red flags that trigger conflict; and, through role play, what a healthy, equal relationship might look like. Nelson is also lead for They Matter, a 27-week Cumbria Victim Support pilot for high-risk men, mainly mandated to attend by the police and other agencies. “A lot of the men we see go from 0 to 100 like a Ferrari,” Nelson says. “We help to join up the dots between thinking, feelings and behaviour. It’s about being comfortable with the uncomfortable. That’s where the anger comes out. A lot of the men are on the defensive, in attack mode. They say, it’s because of how people see them, but it’s often how they see themselves.” Andy is now attending the six-month They Matter programme. “I witnessed domestic abuse from a young age,” he says. As a child, his mother left him with his father, taking Andy’s sister. His violent father was later jailed for the sexual abuse of his daughter. “My dad taught me that emotions are a sign of weakness,” he says. “I wasn’t shown values towards women. When I was five years old, my dad taught me the five ‘Fs’ – ‘Find ’em, feel ’em, finger ’em, fuck ’em and forget ’em’. I used to sleep with women so I didn’t have to be on my own. Now, I want to have kids one day and a stable relationship. “I’ve only dipped my toe in the water of all this stuff. I’ve got a lot to learn,” he says. Respect, the charity SafeLives and the not-for-profit Social Finance, in 2016 set up the Drive Partnership, a three-year pilot programme for high-risk, high-harm perpetrators unwilling to change . Drive worked with the police and a range of agencies to disrupt perpetrators’ opportunities to abuse and control. “Men who have experienced childhood trauma and who want to change, we can help,” Todd says. “The ones who are calculating, cold and controlling and get off on it, require a different response.” An evaluation of the impact on 506 perpetrators and whether change was sustained over 12 months showed significant reductions in physical and sexual abuse and jealous and controlling behaviour. In another study by the University of Northumbria, an intervention was found to have caused a 65% reduction in domestic and violent offending and a social return of £14 “saved” for every £1 spent. But programmes are scarce and the unanswered question is “does change last?” In England and Wales only one in five women report partner abuse and one in six report sexual assault to the police. Police Scotland’s campaign Don’t Be That Guy highlights casual male sexual entitlement and underlines that it’s the responsibility of everyone to call out and act to end men’s violence against women. But that will still not be enough. “We are only at the edges of understanding,” Jo Todd of Respect says. “Society and every institution in it has to change, otherwise the difference made will be time limited and small. We’ve yet to see those in power really willing to take on misogyny.” “Men who harm and kill have to be held to account and assisted to change in a way that does not put women at risk,” Ingala Smith adds. “It’s not useful to hear that perpetrators had difficult upbringings, if we cannot explain why women who were also damaged in childhood have not abused on the same scale. And then we need to act on what we have learned.” *Some names have been changed Aims of the Observer End Femicide campaign Name it The government to formally recognise femicide – the killing of women by men. Know it Data on the killing of women to be gathered in an accessible central repository; the domestic abuse and victims commissioners to have the power and resources to ensure recommendations to tackle femicide are implemented. Stop it An ambitious cross-party, long-term strategy to be established to tackle femicide and all forms of men’s violence against women and girls. Read more on the End Femicide campaign on theguardian.comHe quickly apologised for his crassness but the archbishop of Canterbury’s comparison of politicians who fail to tackle climate change with those in the 1930s who appeased the Nazis was not simply crass. It illustrated how many imagine that the best means of arousing political concern is by painting as dark a picture as possible of social problems. And few things today speak more of evil than the Holocaust. The kind of facile optimism that a figure such as Boris Johnson exudes is deeply obnoxious. It’s a way of avoiding the issues, of pretending that we can resolve our problems by not thinking deeply about them, but by simply asserting “we can do it”. There is something equally objectionable about unthinking pessimism. About the insistence that a social problem is so beyond control that we cannot avoid catastrophe or so deeply rooted that it cannot be dug out. Yet this often seems to be the default setting for so many political discussions, from racism to the refugee crisis. And on no issue more so than climate change. Roger Hallam, the co-founder of Extinction Rebellion, has given “Advice to Young People as They Face Annihilation”. Describing social collapse after unchecked climate change, he warned in graphic terms that “this is what is going to happen to your generation”: “A gang of boys will break into your house demanding food. They will see your mother, your sister, your girlfriend and they will gang rape her on the kitchen table… They’ll take a cigarette and burn out your eyes with it… That is the reality of climate change.” It’s difficult to know what such nihilistic despair is supposed to achieve or how imagining the world as a Mad Max film would make people more willing to take action. The novelist Jonathan Franzen insisted in the New Yorker magazine that people need to stop “denying reality” and tell “ourselves the truth” that climate change “can’t be solved”. “Every day, instead of thinking of breakfast,” he suggested, “they have to think about death.” Not surprisingly, this sense of bleakness and futility has seeped into wider culture. A recent international survey of young people found that 75% believed “the future is frightening”, 56% thought “humanity is doomed” and 39% were “hesitant to have children”. Climate change is a critical issue and one that will require considerable political will and social resolve to challenge. Hallam and Franzen and similar thinkers insist that only an apocalyptic vision will persuade people to take action. In reality, as the environmental journalist Hannah Ritchie has observed: “Once anger transitions into hopelessness, we struggle to achieve much at all.” Telling people that there is no future is hardly conducive to getting them to act to change it. It’s not just on climate change that pessimism has colonised the debate. Consider discussions of racism. From the widening scandal over Yorkshire County Cricket Club’s treatment of former player Azeem Rafiq to the trial in America of three white men for the death of jogger Ahmaud Arbery, racism dominates much of the news. Central to the debate is the insistence on the need to root out “institutional racism”. And yet, for all such talk, many, whether columnists or corporations, see racism as the property not of social structures but of white people. Once racism is rendered the product of whiteness, it becomes, in the words of Robin DiAngelo, author of White Fragility and doyenne of the “white people are the problem” school, “unavoidable”, something that will endure as long as white people exist. That is why “progressives” confronting racism “cause the most damage to people of colour” because of their dreams of eradicating racism. DiAngelo has a nice line in monetising white guilt, but serious black thinkers have equally made the case for taking a bleak view. The US writer Ta-Nehisi Coates was acclaimed by the late Toni Morrison as the new James Baldwin for his challenging arguments and exquisite prose. White supremacy, Coates suggests, is like a natural force beyond reach of human solutions. “The earthquake cannot be subpoenaed. The typhoon will not bend under indictment”, as he puts it in his book Between the World and Me. Coates is part of a school of thought, sometimes called “Afropessimism”, nurtured by writers such as Frank Wilderson and Patrice Douglass, who argue that little can change for black people and that, in Wilderson’s words, “Blackness is coterminous with slaveness”. Such arguments are not, of course, part of everyday, mainstream discussion. Yet the success of figures such as DiAngelo and Coates and the entrenchment of the view of racism as an issue of whiteness show how these ideas can infect wider circles. It might seem odd to talk of pessimism or despair in the age of Black Lives Matter and Extinction Rebellion. However, a paradox of our time is that passionate protest often coexists with a sense of fatalism about possibilities of change. Much has been made of the disruption caused by Insulate Britain’s tactics of closing off motorways. All protests cause some disruption. The real problem with Insulate Britain is that it has become an end in itself, protesters seemingly unconcerned about alienating people, rather than winning them over to their side. Underlying much of this is a sense of despair about human beings, who, in the the words of philosopher David Benatar, not only constitute “the most destructive species” but whose lives are “filled with dishonesty, betrayal, negligence, cruelty, hurtfulness, impatience, exploitation”. It is, he says, best that no human is born because of “the harm that the created person will (likely) do”. Again, most people probably abhor the better-never-to-have-been-born argument and yet that sense of cynicism about human activity finds a wider hearing. There is a long history of misanthropic pessimism, largely within the conservative tradition. For them, the flaws of human nature are reason to shun what they regard as utopian schemes for social change. “Those who struggle to change the world,” the philosopher John Gray suggests, are merely seeking “consolation for a truth they are too weak to bear”. What is different today is that such pessimism and misanthropy have come to colonise much of the left, too. This, as much as climate change or racism, is an issue to confront. Otherwise, despair about challenging such problems will become a self-fulfilling prophecy. • Kenan Malik is an Observer columnistTwo blocks from the oak and boxwood trees slowly turning amber in the downtown Charlottesville park that saw one the most violent political confrontations of the Trump era is the tightly secured federal courtroom where the origins of the racist mayhem that struck over that mid-August weekend in 2017 are now being forensically examined. Close to four years after the event, a sprawling civil lawsuit alleging a conspiracy to commit racially motivated violence against nine residents of Charlottesville during the white supremacist Unite the Right march and rally is drawing together some of the most notorious figures of America’s alt-right movement. The case, Sines v Kessler, alleges that 14 people, including Richard Spencer and podcaster Chris Cantwell, white nationalists who are representing themselves in court, and 10 far-right groups, among them Vanguard America, Identity Evropa and the Traditionalist Worker party, violated an obscure federal law known the Ku Klux Klan Act of 1871 citing “conspiracy to interfere with civil rights”. A diverse jury, identified only by numbers, has been hearing evidence that the white nationalists violated the constitutional rights of nine plaintiffs who were left injured or emotionally scarred, and now seeking compensation. Jurors need only find “a preponderance of the evidence” to assert the defendants’ liability. But some of the defendants are missing, most say they are now broke, and some are using the case as a stage to promote their views. The statue of the Confederate general Robert E Lee, to which the white nationalists rallied, has been removed, but political amplification of the mayhem over that weekend, which left a young woman dead and 14 injured, continues. Last weekend, a political stunt orchestrated by the Lincoln Project designed to tie Glenn Youngkin, Virginia’s Republican governor-elect, to the riot appeared to backfire. Charlottesville’s Democratic city council later condemned organizers for regarding their city “as nothing more than a political meme, and parading mock white supremacists around our city as nothing more than political cosplay”. But the case and its outcome may have more political than legal purpose. A Democratic lawmaker has filed a similar lawsuit aimed at those involved in the Capitol riot that names Trump, his lawyer Rudy Giuliani, and members of the far-right Proud Boys and Oath Keepers as conspiracists. Yet last week defendants in the Charlotttesville case, some airing intra-white nationalist grievances, others describing Charlottesville as a defensive dust-up with the anti-fascist group Antifa, have at times pushed the presiding judge, Norman Moon, to rub his eyes in exasperation. An inexact reading of the US neo-Nazi movement is that the ones with shaved heads and swastika tattoos you can see approaching, while the preppie extremists, in suits or uniforms of dark shirts, khaki pants and New Balance sneakers, are more problematic because, as the lawsuit contends, they plan ahead. It’s those of the second order being sued in Charlottesville. An imposing security detail for the plaintiffs and lawyers for Integrity First For America, stands outside the courthouse. That speaks to alarm over apparent contacts between Cantwell, who has pleaded guilty to charges related to pepper-spraying counter-protesters and is serving a federal prison sentence for extortion, and Matt Hale, the former leader of the World Church of the Creator, a 90s racist skinhead group. Hale is currently serving a 40-year sentence for soliciting the murder of a federal judge. Defendants claim the Unite the Right rally and march, granted license to congregate by Charlottesville, was designed to protest against the city’s plan to remove Gen Lee and his horse, Traveller, from its towering plinth. After a series of prequel confrontations with Antifa counter-protesters, they came prepared for violence. But so too did Charlottesville authorities, deploying 1,000 law enforcement officers to keep the peace – and failing – before then governor Terry McAuliffe declared a state of emergency. Last week, the court heard vivid witness testimony of their experience of what far-right planners and promoters call “Charlottesville 2.0”. Natalie Romero, a plaintiff and the first witness to testify in the case, recalled that neo-Nazi James Fields fractured her skull in the same attack that killed the 32-year-old counter-protester Heather Heyer. Fields was convicted of first-degree murder along with multiple counts of aggravated malicious wounding. He was sentenced to a life term plus 419 years. Romero testified that she had witnessed the torchlight parade and heard chants of “Blood and soil” as “almost like thunder. Like the earth was growling.” Another University of Virginia student, Devin Willis, also a plaintiff, could hear the white supremacists chanting “you will not replace us” before they came into view in an “ocean of light and flames”. He added that the column “looked like a lynch mob”. The court heard from Holocaust expert Deborah Lipstadt, recently appointed a US special envoy to combat and monitor antisemitism by Joe Biden. (Biden launched his presidential campaign with a video denouncing the Charlottesville rally he called “a defining moment” for the nation.) Lipstadt was asked to identify phrases and symbols used by organizers and marchers, some to covertly signal alt-right extremism in online forums, others using heraldic-reminiscent shields to signal the bearer’s particular shading of neo-Nazi ideology. “I don’t surprise easily, but I was taken aback,” Lipstadt testified. The horror of the day has been relived in court. “At a moment of rising extremism, this case makes clear that violent hate won’t go unanswered – that there must be accountability and justice. And I’m in awe of our plaintiffs, who are choosing to relive their trauma in order to hold accountable those responsible,” said Amy Spitalnick, executive director for Integrity First. But the nationalists’ deep attachment to racist symbolism does not, legally, always establish racist conspiracy. Cantwell had advised that tiki torches, to be used in the torchlight parade, could be purchased inexpensively at Walmart. Richard Spencer, founder of the National Policy Institute, a white supremacist thinktank, said claims that such parades were uniquely evocative of the Third Reich were “ridiculous”. “The general sentiment is the mystery and magic of fire and darkness,” he explained. Defendants claimed that prejudiced pre-Charlottesville conversations at the heart of the case were superficial and hyperbolic. Nazi salutes, comments that “portable ovens are where it’s at” and other inflammatory remarks is a “subcultural thing of being outlandish and stupid”, Spencer testified. Matthew Heimbach, a founder of the neo-Nazi Traditionalist Worker party, testified that members of the far right went to lengths to consider “the most outrageous things we could do to troll and create outrage in the media and get reaction”. “They absolutely fell for it,” he added. The sometimes comedic squabbles and betrayals between white nationalists, or their use of semantic decoys like “See Kyle” for “Sieg Heil”, should not be misunderstood, testified Samantha Froelich, a former member of the white nationalist group Identity Evropa and girlfriend of its founder Elliot Kline, AKA Elliot Mosely. Even their humor, alternately horrific, grandiloquent and bickering, was a “way that if someone were to call you out on it and say, ‘Hey, that’s really disgusting ideology,’ you could turn around and say: it’s just a joke, we don’t mean it. Even though they did.” In an exchange last week, Heimbach described the suit-wearing, Nietzsche-invoking Spencer as “bougie”. “I kind of always viewed you as a bit of a dandy,” Heimbach said. “Did you ever see me wear boat shoes?” Spencer asked. “Not off top of my head, but it wouldn’t surprise me,” Heimbach shot back. The outcome of the lawsuit may prove, like any subsequent action based on the 1871 Ku Klux Klan Act case around the Capitol riot, more useful for entering neo-Nazi stirrings of the Trump era into the official federal court record than in exacting monetary compensation from the defendants. According to Christina Rivera, co-president of Congregate Charlottesville, a supporter of the plaintiffs: “We want people to remember that being actively anti-racist and anti-fascist is the reason why we are doing this work.” The case has also been key in financially crippling some defendants – a longstanding tactic of taking on racist groups. The court has already entered default judgments against seven defendants, including neo-Nazis Elliot Kline and Robert “Azzmador” Ray, who refused to comply with court orders to turn over electronic devices. Authorities have been searching for Ray, described by the Southern Poverty Law Center as a tough-talking brawler, since June 2018. Andrew Anglin, who publishes the hate site the Daily Stormer, is subject to a $14m judgment for orchestrating an antisemitic harassment campaign against a Montana real estate agent, is missing and believed to be out of the country. Jeff Schoep, former commander of the neo-Nazi National Socialist Movement, said his cellphone “accidentally” fell into the toilet, making it impossible to recover potential evidence, and claims to have reformed his views. But in a phone call to the Guardian on Thursday, defendant Heimbach dismissed the proceedings as a “show trial”. He claimed that trying to link Nazi Germany to America in 2017 showed that “the plaintiffs were trying to make a Hollywood production out the courtroom”. He admitted that those on trial were not much of a unified threat, at least, not since they had marched together. “The far right is fundamentally ideologically fractured, and can hardly sit in the same room together.” • This article was amended on 8 November 2021. The group Congregate Charlottesville is a supporter of the plaintiffs, not a plaintiff itself. And “See Kyle” is a semantic decoy for “Sieg Heil”, not for “Heil Hitler” as an earlier version said.The coronavirus pandemic has proved an experiment in educated guesses. Experts in nearly every field, from public health and real estate to economics and labor, have offered predictions about how the virus would affect the world, well-meaning prophecies that were all but assured to transpire. The first, in April 2020 came from Dr Anthony Fauci, the United States’ leading infectious disease expert, when he forecast the end of handshakes: “I don’t think we should ever shake hands ever again, to be honest with you.” Physical greetings were only the beginning. As the pandemic wore on, experts predicted the end of hugs, offices, cities, office wear, in-store cosmetic samples, co-working, ball pits, blowing out the candles on a birthday cake. While some conjectures have come to pass – Covid-19 would be a years-long battle and not a two-weeks-to-flatten-the-curve speed bump in the annals of human history – but others (see: the downfall of handshakes) have shown otherwise. With more than 18 months of hindsight, the same experts who foresaw the demise of various aspects of life look back on their predictions and reflect on what panned out, what didn’t, and what they never expected. Predictions that never came to pass The end of candles on a birthday cake Dr Susan Hassig, an associate professor of epidemiology at Tulane University, was never a fan of blowing out candles on a birthday cake. As Hassig told the New York Times last August, she believed the pandemic would be the end of that “disgusting” tradition. Now, she recognizes her wishful thinking as just that. People are so invested in this time-tested tradition that TikTok users and inventors have shared creative workarounds to keep birthday candles alive. In New Orleans, where Hassig lives, she has observed an increase in outdoor children’s birthday parties over the past year, mostly through pictures on Facebook, complete with cake and singing. But Hassig’s prediction wasn’t completely off-base. She’s observed that, instead of a cake awash in candles, the birthday kid will often get their own cupcake with a candle. “They’re blowing out the candle on the cupcake and not the cake that everyone is going to eat,” Hassig says. The demise of co-working spaces As the first wave of the pandemic shuttered offices around the world, some experts forecasted doom for co-working companies like WeWork and The Wing. Peter L Curry – a partner at Farrell Fritz, a New York law firm that works on real estate cases – was one of them. “There will always be a need [for co-working space] but not to the extent that it was being leased and presented to the public,” Curry told Marketplace in April 2020. Instead, the rise of flexible work has fed an upswing in demand for co-working spaces. Commercial real estate services and investment firm CBRE found in a survey last year that 86% of surveyed companies anticipated using flexible office space in the future. Speaking at the Bloomberg Businessweek virtual summit in May, the head of WeWork said that customer demand was higher than it was pre-pandemic, with revenue matching 2019 and 2020 levels. In cities like New York, remote workers looking for a change of scenery are filling up tables across an expanded selection of co-working spaces. Still, Curry is sticking by his early pandemic prediction. “People being able to walk in and out of co-working spaces and sharing space and crowded offices, I think that’s a real thing of the past,” Curry says. Getting workers back into the office has proven difficult for employers, despite mask and vaccine mandates, he said, and some co-workers might be wary of entering a shared space where they can’t ensure what precautions their office-mates are taking, if any. “I think it’s going to be very difficult for the co-working space to continue to be that viable.” Forget sampling cosmetics in-store When the virus was believed to be primarily spread via surfaces, it made sense to eschew high-touch objects like doorknobs, subway railings and cosmetic samples at beauty stores. But alas, the testers have returned to the likes of Ulta Beauty and Sephora. “I still feel that we need to be cautious with a lot of things in terms of in-store sampling of products,” says Dr Nada Elbuluk, a board-certified dermatologist and assistant professor of dermatology at the USC Keck School of Medicine. Last summer, Elbuluk told Allure that she expected beauty sampling was done for good. While that didn’t quite pan out, she says that the pandemic did nudge many companies to create more hygienic sample products. “There are companies that have made a lot of individual, disposable-type samples,” says Elbuluk. “That’s changed the way sampling is done, whereas before it may have been one bottle or two people might squeeze on one individual brush.” The death of cities Early in the pandemic, the prevailing real estate narrative was that people were fleeing cities for greener, suburban pastures. Omer Reiner, licensed realtor and president of FL Cash Home Buyers, predicted that with the rise of remote work and a craving for more space, many would ditch city living for good. He was wrong. A handful of cities, including Jacksonville, Memphis and Atlanta saw rent growth in offices and apartments during the pandemic, while restaurant traffic has jumped considerably in the Bay Area, New York, Los Angeles, Chicago and Boston. “Not only are cities coming back,” Reiner says, “but even New York and San Francisco are coming back after claims they would become ghost towns.” Predictions that panned out A slow return to air travel Early in last year’s lockdowns and travel bans, some travel experts predicted a sluggish return to pre-pandemic jet setting – a contradiction of initial optimism that “flattening the curve” of the pandemic within a two-week window would bring life back to “normal”. One such expert was Gary Leff, founder of the travel blog View from the Wing. In his blog, Leff hypothesized that travel – for both business and leisure – would not reach pre-pandemic levels at least until a vaccine was widely available. Leff was largely correct. TSA checkpoint numbers are still under 2019 tallies and remaining travel restrictions make flying internationally difficult. “In the beginning, I was saying it wasn’t two weeks,” Leff says. “That was what was most right, we were going to have a lot of upheaval.” Formal office attire is a thing of the past Pre-pandemic, offices were already adopting more laid-back dress codes, trading suit jackets for sweaters, and sneakers in place of heels. Some fashion experts predicted that the shift to remote work, and the ensuing embrace of all-day loungewear, would officially end the days of suiting up for the office. Stylist and personal shopper Jessica Cadmus was among those who voiced initial doubts about the survival of stuffy workwear, in an interview with CNN. Many of her clients, who are senior level financiers and hedge fund managers, have told Cadmus their offices’ post-pandemic style is a hodgepodge: some employees are in jeans, others in business wear. Across the board, she doesn’t foresee that a critical mass of workers will dress up for the office any time soon. “I don’t think we will ever return to pre-Covid levels [of formal office dress],” Cadmus says, “which is distressing to me.”In 2013, respected German film-maker Oliver Hirschbiegel (director of Downfall) turned the Princess of Wales’s stormy life into a farce with Diana, a tatty soap opera featuring a tilt-headed, big-haired Naomi Watts reciting platitudes lifted wholesale from the pages of Hello! magazine. In stark contrast, Chilean director Pablo Larraín’s thematic companion piece to his 2016 hit Jackie offers a bold and somewhat mysterious portrait of a woman searching for her own identity, conjuring “a fable from a true tragedy” that, for all its dramatic invention, feels remarkably truthful. Playing out over three excruciating days at Sandringham – from Christmas Eve to Boxing Day – and carried shoulder high by a note-perfect Kristen Stewart, Spencer (the very title of which seems to present a challenge to the House of Windsor) dances between ethereal ghost story, arch social satire and no-holds-barred psychodrama, while remaining at heart a paean to motherhood. “Keep Noise to a Minimum: They Can Hear You” reads an ominous sign in the Sandringham kitchens, to which vast amounts of food are delivered in the film’s opening salvo. That this food should be delivered like military supplies merely emphasises its weaponised presence for Diana. From the scales on which festive guests are weighed in and out of Sandringham (a bit of traditional “fun”) to nightmarish feasts where cinematographer Claire Mathon sharply captures the claustrophobia of royal stares, Spencer traps its bulimic subject in a web of royal rituals that strip her of agency and identity. Every move Diana makes is monitored – by the press, whose lenses are more like microscopes; by the dressers, who sew Diana’s curtains shut as if to preserve some vampiric legacy; and by the Lurch-like Major Alistair Gregory (Timothy Spall), the Queen Mother’s equerry who was once in the Black Watch and who now watches so that “others do not see”. Meanwhile, Diana’s gowns are labelled “POW” - Princess of Wales or prisoner of war? “Past and present are the same thing,” Diana tells her beloved young sons of this coldly traditional world, in which a secret candlelit cuddle provides a rare moment of warmth, adding (with a hint of Sex Pistols-style anarchy) that in this house there is “no future”. Little surprise that Diana longs to return “home” to nearby Park House, a childhood idyll now sealed off behind barbed wire, eerily shrouded in moonlight and mist like Wuthering Heights. Despite being ordered to stay away, Diana slips her bonds to revisit old haunts in a scene that recalls Alejandro Amenábar’s maternally themed ghost story The Others. There’s a hint of Daphne du Maurier, too, as pearls tumble from Diana’s neck down a flight of stairs, recalling the gothic-inflected screen adaptations of My Cousin Rachel. At times, Steven Knight’s script over-eggs its imagery, not least in a recurrent motif about pheasants being “beautiful but not very bright” birds bred for shooting or a subplot about Bertie the scarecrow wearing the coat of Diana’s “Papa”. There are also visions of Anne Boleyn, who was beheaded so that her royal husband could replace her with another woman; amid the madness of royal life her presence seems weirdly unintrusive. More affecting is an ecstatic montage in which Stewart dances her way through the chapters of Diana’s life, ballet and bops breaking into a running canter as the whiff of freedom presents itself. Underpinning it all is a magnificent score by Jonny Greenwood that brilliantly accompanies and amplifies the drama. From the lilting motifs of the main theme, with its melancholy major-minor modulations, to the sounds of a baroque string quartet collapsing into jarring terror, or the skittery free-form jazz of Diana’s inner turmoil, the mood changes are remarkable, throwing a touch of Krzysztof Penderecki modernism into the cheeky echoes of Italian baroque composer Tomaso Albinoni. In the supporting roles, Sean Harris is superb as kitchen stalwart Darren, who longs to make something his princess actually wants and who addresses his staff as a “brigade” heading “once more unto the breach”. Plaudits too to Sally Hawkins who adds a much-needed note of love as Diana’s favoured dresser, Maggie, breathing vibrant life into a role that in other hands could have fallen flat, but which Hawkins gives wings to fly.We all fear our smartphones spy on us, and I’m subject to a new type of surveillance. An app called TapCounter records each time I touch my phone’s screen. My swipes and jabs are averaging about 1,000 a day, though I notice that’s falling as I steer shy of social media to meet my deadline. The European company behind it, QuantActions, promises that through capturing and analysing the data it will be able to “detect important indicators related to mental/neurological health”. Arko Ghosh is the company’s cofounder and a neuroscientist at Leiden University in the Netherlands. “Tappigraphy patterns” – the time series of my touches – can, he says, confidently be used not only to infer slumber habits (tapping in the wee hours means you are not sleeping) but also mental performance level (the small intervals in a series of key-presses represent a proxy for reaction time), and he has published work to support it. QuantActions plans to launch features based on those insights next year. But further into the future, Ghosh would like to use the technology for medical reasons, including to predict seizures in people with epilepsy. This year Ghosh published a small clinical study of people with epilepsy that shows how subtle changes in smartphone tappigraphy alone could be used to infer abnormalities in their brainwaves. “Our hope is that some day we can forecast upcoming episodes,” says Ghosh. Ghosh’s work and my taps are part of the new but rapidly developing field called digital phenotyping. It aims to take the huge amounts of raw data that can be continuously collected from people’s use of smartphones, wearables and other digital devices and analyse them using artificial intelligence (AI) to infer behaviour related to health and disease. If symptom-related digital signals – called digital biomarkers – can be properly teased out, it could provide a new route for diagnosing or monitoring a range of medical conditions, particularly those relating to mental or brain health. Early research suggests patterns in geolocation data may correlate with episodes of depression and relapses in schizophrenia; certain keystroke patterns could predict mania in bipolar disorder; and the way toddlers gaze at a smartphone screen could be used to detect autism. Data streams include smartphone activity logs, measurements from any of a phone’s built-in sensors (such as the GPS, accelerometer or light sensor) as well as user-generated content, which can be mined for words or phrases. “It is classic big-data analytics… repurposing data for reasons other than it was primarily collected,” says Brit Davidson, an assistant professor of analytics at the University of Bath, UK who has been critically watching the field develop. The technology is attracting big tech companies’ interest. In September, the Wall Street Journal reported that Apple is working on iPhone features to help diagnose depression and cognitive decline. Others, such as Google, are also reportedly interested. Apple is probably hoping it is going to be able to correlate various phone indices with other indices it considers show mental health disorders, says Helen Christensen, a professor of mental health at the University of New South Wales in Australia who also leads the nonprofit Black Dog Institute, focused on the diagnosis, treatment and prevention of mood disorders. Meanwhile, Silicon Valley-based consumer health and wellness startups are already incorporating aspects of the technology into their products, albeit not yet for clinical diagnosis. Mindstrong provides therapy and psychiatry services virtually and has received tens of millions in funding, including from Jeff Bezos’s venture capital firm. It claims to use patented technology to track how clients tap, scroll and click on their phones so its clinicians can provide “more personalised care”. Though it isn’t described on its website, a spokesperson for Ginger, which offers on-demand mental health support, confirmed the company uses a “relatively rudimentary form” of digital phenotyping algorithm to analyse text conversations between users and its coaches to provide insights. Transparency about what some companies are doing can be lacking, notes Nicole Martinez-Martin, a bioethicist at Stanford University in California who focuses on digital health technology. Traditionally, diagnosing mental illness has relied on self-reported experiences and medical assessment conducted at a clinic. But it captures just one point in time and can be highly subjective. Digital phenotyping offers the possibility of collecting continuous behavioural data capturing a person’s lived experiences. “It could give us a more accurate way to diagnose people,” says Jukka-Pekka Onnela, a biostatistician at Harvard University, Massachusetts, who has helped pioneer digital phenotyping and has a number of ongoing projects in the area including with industry (Onnela is also part of the leadership team of a large research collaboration with Apple to study women’s health including by tracking menstrual cycles via the iPhone). It could also – in a world where mental health problems are increasing and services are stretched – make things cheaper, quicker and more efficient. People could manage their own mental health better and those who aren’t aware they have a problem could be alerted. “It is worth investigating,” says Christensen. “If we can find that this data is relevant… it would be a big breakthrough.” Cogito Companion illustrates how the technology might one day be used. It is an experimental decision support tool intended for use by clinicians to help diagnose mood and anxiety disorders. Developed by the Boston-based startup Cogito with funding from the Pentagon’s research agency, the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (Darpa), the company is working towards being able to use it medically for veterans and military personnel and it is currently being clinically trialled in 750 sailors returning from overseas deployments. (Cogito has also fed the technology into an AI coaching product to help call centre staff be more empathic, which it sells commercially.) Installed as an app on a participant’s phone, the tool passively looks for signs of collapses in social interactions and indications that activities are being avoided by examining changes in text and call patterns and mobility data. It also looks for signals of depressed mood by analysing not what is said but the way participants speak in short voice diaries they record. About 200 different signals from the voice, from energy to pauses to intonation, are analysed, says Skyler Place, chief behavioural science officer for Cogito, adding that an overall “risk score” is then sent to the person’s clinician to aid diagnosis and support. Yet while there is a lot of promise, the science of digital phenotyping has a long way to go; there are questions about privacy and whether it is a technology that will best serve society. First, much work is required to prove that meaningful medical information can be derived. Many of the published academic studies have been very small pilot studies. Ghosh’s epilepsy study, for example, involved only eight people. The only scientific work Mindstrong’s website cites to support its product is a single study of 27 people. If the algorithms are to be used for medical purposes, studies will need to involve many thousands, says Christensen. And pilots are now giving way to some larger studies. The current trial of the Cogito Companion builds on a smaller proof-of-concept study. Some research is beginning to include healthy people too (the pilot studies often include only those who already have certain conditions). The BiAffect study, a research effort focused on keystroke behaviour to predict bipolar episodes run by researchers at the University of Illinois at Chicago, has an open science component that allows the public to download an app and take part so that differences between healthy adults and those with bipolar disorder can be better understood. It has about 2,000 participants. Apple’s interest in smartphone diagnosis appears to stem from previously announced research collaborations to study digital biomarkers of depression and anxiety with the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) and mild cognitive impairment with pharmaceutical giant Biogen (which also has a controversial new drug to treat it). Both are gathering a wide range of data from participants’ iPhones and Apple Watches and combining them with survey responses and cognitive tests. The UCLA study started with a pilot phase of 150 people and is due to continue with a main phase tracking 3,000 participants, which will also include healthy people. The Biogen study, which began in September, plans to enrol a mix of participants – 23,000 in total – and includes recruitment from the general population. The primary scientific challenge for the field, experts say, is that the data is so noisy. People use their phones so differently, it can be hard to compare behaviour between individuals or even in the same person over time. Links between online and offline behaviour can also be unclear. As Brit Davidson points out, a sudden drop in smartphone-based communication could be a sign of social withdrawal, or it might mean someone is communicating face-to-face instead. There is also the potential for bias in algorithms – well documented in other AI-based technology – that can mean certain groups of people are affected in negative ways or don’t end up benefiting from the technology. A lot of health-related research tends to use white, more affluent and educated populations, notes Stanford’s Martinez-Martin. “How it transfers is a big question,” she says. Privacy issues also loom. While data gathered for academic research studies follows strict protocols, things can get murkier with data gathered by private companies. Data that includes predictive inferences made with digital phenotyping approaches can be shared by companies in ways that not everyone is aware of but that could have impacts, says Martinez-Martin. “These inferences could be of interest to employers, insurers or education providers and they could use them in ways that are detrimental,” she says. And just because data is “deidentified” – made anonymous – doesn’t mean it can’t be reidentified in some way. And while there is protection under US law for sensitive health information, it generally relates to that collected in healthcare systems only – not by tech companies. In any case, it is unclear that established definitions of sensitive health information include the kind of information that digital phenotyping strives to collect. “The old system of protecting what we thought of as sensitive data is not really appropriate for this new digital world,” says Martinez-Martin. There is also the possibility that digital phenotyping will disrupt or compete with doctors. What if an algorithm’s assessment comes to be viewed by doctors or patients as more objective? What happens if a tool’s recommendations differ from a physician’s? Technology does have a place within mental health services and using software to help spot signs of mental health problems is interesting, says Rosie Weatherley, information content manager at the mental health charity Mind. “[But] human interaction and professional clinical judgment are not replaceable and should remain an essential component of a patient’s experience of diagnosis, accessing treatment and support.” Lisa Cosgrove, a professor of counselling psychology at the University of Massachusetts, Boston who studies social justice issues in psychiatry, raises a more philosophical issue. Digital phenotyping’s intense focus on the individual deflects attention away from what can be the upstream socio-political causes of mental health issues such as job loss, eviction or discrimination. “Certainly there’s a place for individual care… but digital phenotyping misses the context in which people experience emotional distress,” she says. Ghosh, however, is hopeful that the field can be beneficial to society. To have the data available for research is such a new phenomenon; time and effort are needed to study it. “We need to make sure we are actually helping people and not disturbing their lives,” he says.A counter climate summit kicks off in Glasgow on Sunday amid mounting criticism from activists about greenwashed solutions and stalled action from corporations and rich nations inside Cop26. The People’s Summit for Climate Justice will bring together movements and communities from across the world to amplify voices, ideas and solutions it believes are largely absent from Cop – including the global green new deal, polluters’ liability, indigenous ecological knowledge and the gulf between net zero and real zero emissions. Organisers hope that sharing expertise on equitable and transformative non-market solutions to the climate emergency will help create a powerful grassroots collective to force governments to be more ambitious and less beholden to big business. The summit comes after world leaders last week failed to commit to phasing out fossil fuels fast enough to contain global heating to 1.5C. It follows several days of protests in Glasgow, London and another 200 cities globally, with tens of thousands of people taking to the streets to demand bold, fast and fair climate action. “Building power outside the Cop is essential if we are to hold world leaders to account inside the Cop, and force them to do what we know needs to be done,” said Asad Rehman, the director of War on Want and co-founder of the Cop26 Coalition which organised Saturday’s global protests and the summit. “We’re creating a movement of movements in order to deepen and reshape the understanding of the climate crisis in the global north through a climate justice lens.” The four-day summit includes participants from indigenous and frontline communities, trade unions, racial justice and migrant rights groups, youth strikers, landworkers, NGOs, feminist movements and faith groups, as well as progressive lawmakers such as Caroline Lucas, Mercy Barends and Rashida Tlaib, who support the green new deal. It opens with a People’s Tribunal in which activists and former Cop negotiators will hear evidence on charges against the UNFCCC, including the failure to come up with appropriate climate finance for planetary and social survival and a failure to regulate corporations. Participants will share personal stories about the impact of climate-related land loss, water shortages and forced displacement, which they argue will get worse if governments and corporations forge ahead with unjust climate solutions such as carbon capture and mass reforestation. “Putting a price on natural resources is an act of colonialism and inhumanity. But there are other ways, humanity-based alternatives that we’ll share so they can’t say that they didn’t know,” said Calfin Lafkenche, a Mapuche organiser from Chile in Glasgow with the Minga movement, an indigenous solidarity network taking part in an event on false climate solutions. While some summit delegates are also participating at Cop26 as observers or panelists, the Minga movement refuses – arguing that the terms and conditions of participation violate their rights as autonomous peoples. Still, organisers hope the people’s summit will help build bridges between civil society groups inside and outside the UN talks in order to create a more unified and powerful movement. Another central theme will be net zero – the concept of offsetting or neutralising greenhouse gas emissions (rather than ending them) through carbon markets, new as-yet-undeveloped technologies and massive reforestation programmes. Pledges to achieve net zero by 2050 have been heavily promoted by world leaders at Cop26 as signs of progress, despite warnings that the numbers don’t add up, and that in any case this would be too little too late to avoid catastrophic climate disasters in some parts of the world. “They are trying to sell net zero as a Cop26 success, but it is nothing more than the next more sophisticated phase of climate denial to protect business as usual. It’s mitigation denialism,” said Scott Tully from Glasgow Calls out Polluters. At the people’s summit, the Real Zero, Real Solutions panel will also focus on liability, and why countries and corporations responsible for greenhouse gas emissions should compensate communities who’ve lost their homes, land and livelihoods to rising sea levels and climate disasters such as floods and drought. Rich countries including the US and UK oppose the inclusion of liability in negotiations about averting and minimising loss and damage associated with climate change impacts, even though many communities are already living with the consequences of greenhouse gas emissions they did not contribute to. Hellen Kaneni, the Africa region director for the US nonprofit Corporate Accountability, said: “People want big polluters to be held to account, and liability measures to guide governments exist but it’s not being discussed at Cop because of conflicts of interest. Polluters should leave the room when we’re creating checks and balances to regulate them, instead it’s like they own the UNFCCC (United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change) space while we cannot get in.” Kaneni, who is based in Kampala, Uganda, was unable to attend in person as she could not access a Covid vaccine. About two-thirds of civil society organisations who usually send delegates to Cop have not travelled to Glasgow due to “vaccine apartheid”, changing travel rules, extortionate travel costs and Britain’s hostile immigration system. Migrant rights groups will also be heard at the summit. The climate crisis and environmental destruction are already fuelling internal displacement and forced migration in communities around the world, yet such stories have been largely absent inside the Cop negotiating rooms. “Talking about climate change in terms of fossil fuels is a Eurocentric perspective, it should be viewed through a human rights lens which recognises that everyone has the right to thrive, not just survive,” said Yvonne Blake, social justice advocate at Migrants Organising For Rights and Empowerment (More) in Glasgow – a dispersal city for refugees and asylum seekers in the UK. “Unless we shift the focus to people, we’ll replicate the same colonial structures in which black and brown people’s bodies and lands will be sacrificed,” added Blake. In all, more than 200 events – panels, people’s tribunals, workshops and artistic performances – will take place at venues across the city and virtually, covering diverse yet interconnected topics such as health, indigenous traditional knowledge, gender, nuclear power, land rights, food sovereignty and green jobs. In a virtual all-day event on Sunday, a people’s health hearing will hear the voices of those who “embody the impact of extractivism, corporate greed and climate change,” said Tammam Aloudat, a Syrian doctor and director of the Global Health Centre in Geneva. Speakers from India, West Papua, Ecuador, Nigeria and the Philippines will describe the health impacts of mining, toxic waste, oil drilling and climate disasters in their communities. Aloudat added: “The people’s summit is not only about shifting power, it’s a pronouncement of mistrust in our leaders. This is a symbolic act of dissent.”Do you ever get that thing, that slightly psychedelic thing, when you hear an idea so good that it changes how you encounter the rest of the world? When it installs itself like a migrainous aura in your vision, colouring unrelated thoughts, its simplicity offering whispered suggestions for other ways a problem might be solved? It happened for me with porn. An essay by Oxford professor Amia Srinivasan offers a solution to the many problems with pornography, and rather than the suggestion that people just switch off their phones or even that schools teach “porn literacy”, it is to offer young people a kind of “negative” sex education. “It wouldn’t assert its authority to tell the truth about sex,” but remind them that, “the authority on what sex is, and could become, lies with them.” Lessons in the lost power of sexual imagination. I could not love this more. There is something about the suggestion that the very shape of our education – not just the content of lessons – must be adapted and remoulded in order to improve modern lives, that keeps speaking to me, whether in discussions about policing, the politicisation of masks or choices on what to have for lunch. And the one I keep coming back to is fertility. A few weeks ago, Dorothy Byrne, the president of Cambridge University’s all-female Murray Edwards College, announced she was planning to introduce fertility seminars, to teach women they should start planning to have children by their mid-30s. “Young women are being taught that they all have to do well in school, get a degree, be successful in their career and be beautiful,” Byrne said in an interview. “The thing that is getting lost along the way is that you forget to have a baby.” I was not the only person to scoff at this, and scoff quite rudely, too, at the idea that fertility rates might be at their lowest level since records began in 1938, because busy women are simply forgetting to procreate. No, across my borough of the internet at least, there was a collective scoff so loud that I believe a couple of laptop screens shattered. It is true that fewer babies are being born. A substantial fertility decline in Britain over the past decade is largely driven by a drop in “first births” – people remaining child-free, many by choice. According to a YouGov survey of people who are not parents, more than a third say they never want to have children, with 19% saying, while they have no plans for children soon, they might change their minds – “age, cost and lifestyle” being cited as the main reasons for not doing so. So there’s that. There’s the way the world has tilted, which means both that becoming a parent is no longer a compulsory part of growing up and that societal changes mean it’s increasingly hard to create a home for a child that feels secure. These seem to me far more realistic explanations than “I forgot”, closely followed by Byrne’s basic point that many of us are trying to have children later in life, which can influence fertility. Except, her solution (which assumes, it’s worth pointing out, everybody wants to be a parent, rather than simply strive for a fabulous life of freedom and decent conversation) ignores 50% of the population. She is not alone, of course, in placing the responsibility of family-planning solely on women’s shoulders. Apart from being taught how to prevent pregnancy, boys and men are encouraged to remain blissfully ignorant in matters of fertility, loud orchestral strings traditionally playing over conversations about dwindling eggs or indeed sluggish sperm, in order perhaps, to maintain the romance. There is a thriving fertility industry aimed solely at women, from period apps to IVF, the path between them littered with ads for fertility MOTs and egg freezing. Would so many women need to invest in these services if, instead of simply being shown how to roll a condom on to a banana, their boyfriends had learned more about the effect of lifestyle choices and their age on sperm quality? If, as well as being taught about women’s fertility, we had all been educated about the many different ways people today end up building a family, whether they’re single, or trans, or in same-sex relationships? Not only would men be more informed, but they’d be able to take more responsibility for choices typically left for women to navigate alone. The aim of improving our country’s handle on fertility should not simply be to increase the numbers of babies born, it should be to empower everybody to make educated choices. It’s not just about more – more babies, more education – it’s about better. It’s not just about what is taught, it’s about who it’s taught to. Our lives spin on, and the lessons that did for then will not do for now. Srinivasan’s elegant suggestion sums up for me the thrilling possibilities of education. How much better could our futures be if lessons moved like this, fast enough to truly understand and encompass the modern world? How much happier could we be? Email Eva at e.wiseman@observer.co.uk or follow her on Twitter @EvaWisemanKatherine Ryan has named her autobiography The Audacity, a word (she explains) most commonly used to indicate disapproval. “Like, ‘HOW DARE she carry herself with that wicked abundance of self-belief? How AUDACIOUS!’” It is the perfect title. The absolute perfect title for a memoir by a comedian equal parts louche and lurid, famous for her uncompromising attitude, convincing invulnerability and refusal to self-deprecate. Her cover photo, shot when she was nine months pregnant, sees Ryan lucent and blonde in an ice-blue gown trimmed with marabou feathers, holding aloft in her left hand her favourite of her three tiny dogs. It is these small dogs that greet me at her front door, and an entirely other lady. Instead of TV’s Katherine Ryan, be-lashed and dazzling, a happy cross between Christine Baranski and Taylor Swift, I’m welcomed by real-life Ryan, makeup-less in leggings, immediately offering me a plate of halloumi salad and a selection of milks for my tea. A breast pump sits on the counter beside a bag of golden hair extensions and outside, by the dainty heated swimming pool, her 12-week-old baby Fred sleeps gently in his pram. The atmosphere is one of Californian tranquillity in the London suburbs, only punctured slightly by her description of a man lowering his anus on to a bed post. I had asked what people think of her and she had answered like this: “There are men who think I’m a dominatrix. And they ask me for a bank account so that they can send me money, or ask me to step on their balls, or to eviscerate them in some way. One man sent a picture of himself lowering himself on to the post of his bed, saying, ‘Please retweet this to humiliate me.’” She gets a lot of that, “because they view me as alpha. The reason why people say women aren’t funny is because it’s alpha to be the only person in the room allowed to speak. And I think we’ve only recently accepted that women can be alpha, too. Which is where the misunderstanding comes from, why people think only men are funny.” She pauses to check on the baby. “And that’s why some men think that I want to stand on their balls.” But we are getting ahead of ourselves, because this version of Ryan, the one who hosts panel shows and receives evisceration requests, was shaped by careful accident over 38 years, beginning in Sarnia, a small petrochemical town in Canada. She was restless and popular, and at 19 worked as a waitress with a friend called Jessica. In her book, Ryan calls this chapter “How To Let Your Friend’s Murder Define All Your Relationships”. One day Jessica didn’t turn up to work and soon Ryan heard she’d been killed by her ex-boyfriend. “That’s how it happens,” Ryan’s mum told her that evening. “If you leave them, they sometimes kill you.” “I felt guilty writing about that,” she says, “because when you write your own book, you really centre yourself. She wasn’t my best friend, she wasn’t my sister, but it affected me, and it affected all the young women in our town, too. It was a lesson. When your brain is still growing, the events of your life write on the canvas of who you are. Without even knowing it I learned, ‘If you piss them off, they’ll kill you.’” Years later she’d joke on stage, “Things like, ‘Men are nature’s gun. You’re statistically most likely to be killed by the one in your house. Haha.’ And until recently I didn’t even realise myself, how scared I was.” A man tiptoes into the room, and wheels the baby away. Not only is her husband Bobby one of the first good men Ryan has dated – in the past she had a habit of going out with, “the kinds of dudes blind dogs bark at” (in standup shows she’d laugh that her dad would meet them and think, “Did I molest her and forget?”) – but he was the actual first man, too, her high school boyfriend. They were reunited in 2018 when she visited Canada to film BBC show Who Do You Think You Are?, and married a year later. They hadn’t seen each other since she’d moved to Toronto for university, where she took a job at Hooters – a sports bar known for its waitresses’ skimpy uniforms – and started to have the time of her life. “I know in retrospect it’s maybe not the most aspirational thing that you can do, because it is positioning yourself as being for decoration, which is not ideal, but I was always a student of what I was doing. I thought it was fascinating to hold that position as a young woman.” She performed in their bikini pageant and visited the Playboy mansion. “I wanted to exploit that reverence given to delicate innocent youth.” She also wanted bigger tits and started to research plastic surgery. “It was such a specific time in pop culture, wasn’t it? With an interesting kind of feminism. When I was in high school, I certainly knew about plastic surgery and I valued being beautiful. I thought plastic surgery was an aspirational, very Hollywood thing that rich people could do.” While many comedians asked about early idols might namecheck perhaps Monty Python or Richard Pryor, Ryan was a fan of celebrities like Jessica Simpson and Britney Spears. “I thought it was so amazing that they could change the way they looked with science. I had a checklist of surgeries, all part of my plan for becoming a nice girl who’s pretty and tanned. I wanted to alter things, not for any deep dark body dysmorphia. Just… curiosity. I wanted to be feminine, and I wanted to be liked. So I got breast implants. And they were great.” This proves unbelievable for some audiences, unable to align her imperious glamour with her modern feminism. “They don’t like the fact that I’m not hiding it. But I don’t feel that I should be ashamed about it – I think that’s what irks people. I haven’t had as much done as people think, but if that’s fun for them to talk about and there’s a punch line, I don’t mind.” She really doesn’t. “The only thing that makes me a little frustrated is that people don’t know the difference between Botox and filler. That frustrates me from a point of just being a pedant.” Her implants have served her well, but despite this, she says, she’s planning on getting them removed. “The only thing that’s preventing me from getting them out now is finding the time – I was pregnant for 18 months and now I’m breastfeeding. But now I think they were such an emblem of the noughties – they’re like a lower-back tattoo.” Fair. There are moments during our conversation, while her tiny dogs snore gently on my lap and her large cat (she’s called Sara Pascoe) prowls across the kitchen, that I find myself speechless. Not at what Ryan says so much, but with a sweet and awe-filled shock at how little she cares about what people think of her. Trolls, hecklers, critics, people who reel at the way she paints a picture of single motherhood in pastels and glitter rather than concentrating on exhaustion or shame. We keep coming back to this, the “audacity” of it, and she shrugs. “If I’m entertaining people then I don’t mind what Linda from Leeds wants to write about me in her blog.” I wait. “I think it’s unrealistic to hope that everyone’s going to like you or even that everyone is kind. Many people are unkind, lots of people love to take offence. Lots of people are wrong, and that’s fine with me.” She grew up far more concerned with being liked than she is now, but the years have thickened her skin, or better, taught her how to prioritise opinions. “My mother would say: ‘If we all liked the same thing we’d all be married to your father.’ But it’s wonderful to be able to do a job where you connect with people. I don’t want a family to waste money on a babysitter and come out to my gig and hate it – I want people to have a nice time. I also want to inspire and empower people, and I think I do that for a lot of women.” And those she doesn’t? She shrugs again, good luck to them! The not-caring – it’s like a superpower. “Well, I’m trying to teach it to you, but you’ve read the book and it doesn’t seem to have worked!” I promise to read it again, the hardback this time. The year after winning Miss Hooters Toronto, Ryan hosted the pageant, asking contestants questions like, “Alicia, where do we keep the bin bags?” on their turn around the stage, and silencing hecklers with sharp one-liners. She’d been getting into trouble for her sense of humour – it disrupted the pretty and non-threatening image she’d been cultivating and sometimes in the evenings she’d tell herself off. “I would echo the things that my Hooters manager would say, ‘Why does my brain work this way?’” Round the corner from the restaurant there was a comedy club and one day she signed up for its amateur night. “Not because I wanted to be a comedian, but because it would be fun for me, my secret. And then in the rest of my life I’d be a good girl, well liked, a good wife. It was a little exorcism of, well… audacity.” When she came off stage after that first set, where she joked about being a “dumb, useless girl”, she realised nothing had made her feel so shit and so alive all at once. She couldn’t wait to do it again. At 23, when she moved to London with a boyfriend, she got sick. It took months before she was diagnosed with lupus, but once she was prescribed hydroxychloroquine (the anti-malarial drug made famous by Trump) she found a new calmness. “That,” she writes, “was the infancy of the Zen ‘no fucks given’ mantra that I live by happily and manage lupus with today.” And soon after that, she got pregnant. After Violet was born and she split up with her boyfriend, Ryan would joke that they’d wanted a “save the relationship” baby, but ended up with a regular one instead. “I believe that Violet was the driver of that fateful event,” she grins. “I do believe that you can be a soul somewhere who moves chess pieces together so that you can be born. So I don’t begrudge her that she had to do what she had to do to exist on Earth.” But it did mean that at 24, Ryan was a single parent in a foreign country whose office job did not cover nursery fees. “I thought, ‘What have I done? I’d had a great life, a fun life. I was working at Hooters and making lots of money and going to the Playboy Mansion, then all of a sudden, though I’m lucky enough not to be considered an immigrant, I’m a foreign, destitute, single mother. So I needed to rescue that somehow. And I’m really lucky that I did.” She forced herself to say out loud the elements of her life she was grateful for, and then, “I just slowly moved forward in baby steps until one day I kind of looked around and was like, ‘Oh my gosh, we’re safe.’” Those baby steps were standup gigs, where her fellow female comedians would babysit Violet backstage while she was performing, and then panel shows, and then tours, and later presenting jobs, Netflix specials and a sitcom about a single mother called The Duchess. “But, of course, I can still be cancelled,” she sings. The most controversial of her stories I think, and the one sure to raise a number of hackles, far more than her “man-hating” jokes, is the story of how she’d potty trained her daughter by 10 months. I can hear parents’ jaws clicking open from here, the sweep of eyes narrowing. “Remember, the absence of training,” she says, her head on one side, “is still training. By putting them in a nappy you’re training them to go in a nappy. People can disagree, I don’t care. But I do care when I have to share a space with a four-year-old in a nappy.” Before she reunited with Bobby, she’d planned to have a second child using donor sperm, but the week after she wrapped filming on The Duchess, in December 2019, she got pregnant. At the 10-week scan, they were told there was no heartbeat. Three weeks passed and she felt, she said, like “a walking tomb”. She’d be telling her body, “You’re having a miscarriage, you need to just let it go.” To which her body would reply, “‘Fuck off, I’m FINE. You need to give me as many gin and tonics as you can and get into a fight with a rapper in front of everyone at the NME Awards.’ I did that. Then I actually fell down the stairs.” She discussed the miscarriage on her podcast, Telling Everybody Everything – “I have felt,” she said, “this collective grief.” One tabloid ran a story about it beside a photo of Ryan and Bobby at Jonathan Ross’s Halloween party, covered in blood. “It looked like we were just leaving the hospital in a terrible state.” A few months later, in May, she was pregnant again. At a nine-week scan she was ushered into “the Crying Room” and told the baby had a problem with its abdominal wall and at the start of her second trimester, miscarried again. She had decided to be open about her first miscarriage in case it helped other people feel less alone, but the emotional toll – the griefy messages, the vulnerability – meant she was not prepared to do it for a second time. It takes a lot of skill and strength to continue telling jokes through a year like that. She just, she writes, “quietly moved forward”. And then, after 18 months of pregnancy, she had Fred, who vibrates gently in his chair beside her now, legs like ice-cream. She plans to potty train him as soon as possible. In the past she’s made jokes she regrets. In one of her specials she starts the show by asking everyone on the front row individually whether they’ve raped anyone. “I wouldn’t do that today. Because it can be very triggering for other people in the audience to hear something like that. At the time, I thought that it was a good way of demonstrating that if you haven’t raped anyone, then it’s a ridiculous question. But for Bill Cosby at the time, you weren’t able to ask him that because obviously, he had.” She thinks for a second. “I don’t think I’d even use the word rape now in a crowd setting. I like being provocative. But if that’s a triggering word for people in the audience who’ve been survivors of abuse, I wouldn’t want to use it.” Ryan’s is an industry swamped in conversations about “cancel culture” – Chris Rock blamed all the “unfunny TV shows” he sees on the fact that “everybody’s scared to make a move”, joining a chorus of voices concerned that cancel culture is killing comedy. To Ryan though, it’s quite simple. “I just started articulating myself more thoughtfully, because if I didn’t, it might be hurtful to people. And when that’s explained to you we evolve as a society. I feel like ‘cancel culture’ has become about hurting people. It’s not even to make things better. I ’m all for taking accountability and giving someone a chance to say, ‘I misspoke.’ But I think there’s a new thirst for exposing people – I even see with my daughter and her friends on TikTok, so worried about being cancelled, that they point the finger first.” She shivers slightly in the heat. “I always articulate myself the best that I can with the knowledge that I have at the time. And then if I have to reassess what I’ve said, or apologise, then I’ll do that.” The world changes – this is something she is keen to teach the young people in her life. “Violet might look at me and say, ‘Why work at Hooters, that’s not very feminist?’ Well, I was just living in the world that I was in, and it was different. And we didn’t have smartphones, Violet, and this was still acceptable. It’s not like I was misbehaving – that’s what the world was.” She exhales meditatively. “If I was the same person 10 years ago that I am today, that would be horrible. Don’t you think?” Honestly? We could do worse. Hair by Narad Kutowaroo at Carol Hayes using GHD and Unite Hair; makeup Fiona Eustace using Suqqu and Tom Ford The Audacity by Katherine Ryan is published by Bling at £20. But it for £17.40 at guardianbookshop.com. She is also touring the UK with Missus (livenation.co.uk)Long waiting times in emergency departments are becoming normal, with some patients spending days in A&amp;E wards before they can be moved into other hospital beds, emergency physicians have warned. Leaders of the Royal College of Emergency Medicine (RCEM) and the Society for Acute Medicine (SAM) said that some hospitals had effectively run out of space, meaning patients could not receive the right care until a bed became free. NHS figures for September show that 5,025 patients waited for more than 12 hours to be admitted to hospital in England. That is only 1% of the 506,916 admitted via A&amp;Es, but it is more than 10 times as many as the 458 waiting more than 12 hours in September 2019 and nearly twice as many as the January peak of 2,847. Scientists at the Zoe Covid study said last week that UK cases of coronavirus may have peaked. But the React study at Imperial College found that the R number was between 0.9 and 1.1 with Covid cases at their highest levels. Pressures on hospitals have prompted the Royal College of Nursing to call for a return to compulsory mask-wearing, while Sadiq Khan, the mayor of London, said that ministers should reimpose a legal obligation to wear masks on public transport, allowing police to enforce the law. Last week, Roland Sinker, chief executive of the trust running Addenbrooke’s hospital in Cambridge, told his staff that the situation was so serious that it was “ceasing to function as a hospital” and that they were “thinking about restricting access to care”. Leeds Teaching hospitals trust also cancelled a large number of planned operations last week because of Covid pressures. Dr Ian Higginson, RCEM’s vice-president, said that the national picture was grim. “Our staff are still turning up for work and still doing their best to provide the best care they can. But we are in a vicious spiral. We’re seeing more patients than we can cope with.” Hospitals have seen ambulances queuing outside waiting for patients to be treated, and when they arrive in emergency departments, more are facing long waits for treatment. “Now, in some parts of the country, patients are waiting days before they can be admitted to hospital,” Higginson said. “There are patients in emergency departments for one, two, and in some cases, many more days. And that’s becoming accepted as the norm. It’s totally wrong.” Dr Susan Crossland, the president of the SAM, said the annual winter crisis affecting the NHS was getting longer and longer. “Since Covid, it’s been like one long, eternal winter. Our members are reporting that their trusts are running at over 100% capacity. All the beds that they normally have available are full. Most of the wards that we would normally open in winter are full. And they’re scrabbling around looking for other places.” Hospital bed occupancy was at 85% for England between April to June, as the second wave of Covid reached its lowest point. Even then, nine hospitals reported that more than 95% of their acute beds were occupied, and the trusts running Leeds and Addenbrooke’s were among a further 34 at above 90% occupancy. Higginson said: “Certainly, many of us work in hospitals where occupancy is declared to be much higher than that, and feels much higher than that.” Diverting patients from hospital into clinics might relieve some of the pressure, Higginson said. Doctors at University Hospitals of Leicester NHS trust are about to conduct a trial of new telemedicine “robots” that may speed up diagnoses. The machines will enable several specialists to remotely join a bedside consultation of a patient with complex needs. Saffron Cordery, the deputy chief executive of NHS Providers, said: “While staff continue to work extremely hard to address the significant backlog of care, trust leaders across the country are telling us they are under significant pressures, and they are increasingly concerned as we move further into a difficult winter.” She said that rising demand and staff shortages combined with Covid were causing capacity problems, and the NHS had lost 4,500 beds since the pandemic due to infection control measures. Social care problems were “having a major impact on whether patients can leave hospital in a timely way when they are medically fit to do so”, she added. The government’s decision to end all Covid restrictions on 19 July was criticised at the time by the Royal College of Nursing. Rose Gallagher, the RCN’s professional lead for infection prevention and control, said: “It was extremely shortsighted of the government to end compulsory public mask-wearing, and they can’t say they weren’t warned – it must be reinstated without further delay to prevent avoidable transmission.” Sadiq Khan said: “While most Londoners continue to do the right thing and wear [a mask], it is clear the changes brought in by the government have given passengers mixed signals and affected compliance. “The evidence that face masks can make a substantial contribution towards lower transmission is getting stronger all the time. I continue to urgently lobby ministers to bring back this requirement and enable British Transport Police officers to enforce the wearing of face coverings across all TfL services.” Covid cases among 10- to 14-year-olds in England have been the highest of any age group since 9 September, shortly after the start of the autumn term, but began dropping when most schools started half-term on 22 October. In the north London borough of Enfield, cases began falling earlier after some schools took matters into their own hands. St Anne’s Catholic High School for Girls in Palmers Green had seen cases rise sharply, so that by 4 October there were 117 positive cases, according to Emma Loveland, the headteacher. “That was over 10% of our student population,” she said. “The figures were getting quite scary.” Loveland convened a meeting of the school leadership team, and after consultation with Enfield public health team, they decided to introduce three measures. “Masks became compulsory again, unless exempt of course, so students wear them in class, in corridors, queuing up – and staff as well,” she said. They also increased the amount of cleaning, and asked the children and their families to pay much more attention to symptoms. “We saw our cases drop over the following three weeks to 55,” Loveland said. “I don’t think masks in isolation would have changed things, but they were a big part of it. Half-term is always a concern because usually you see a spike, but we haven’t experienced that, and we are now on less than 20 students with Covid.” Case rates in Enfield have been on an upward trend over the last three months, according to the government’s dashboard, rising from a seven-day average of 74.1 cases a day on 15 September to 125.7 by 27 October. The highest rates have been among schoolchildren and 40- to 49-year-olds. Among 10-14s, cases peaked at 840 per 100,000 on 8 October but had dropped to 443 by 31 October. Jim McManus, the acting president of the Association of Directors of Public Health, said that although numbers had fallen since half-term, they were likely to rise again. “Cases remain at very high levels and are disrupting education and business. We know that the combination of face coverings, ventilation, plus vaccines and testing is the key to keeping numbers low. “What matters is the action we take – a combination of measures that directors of public health and schools and workforces are advising people to take. These are not restrictive measures – they are simple preventative tools that will avoid the need for further restrictions.” The NHS said: “Staff have gone above and beyond over the last year, contending with record levels of A&amp;E attendances, all while treating more than 470,000 seriously ill Covid patients, and this has inevitably lead to increased pressure on emergency departments. “The NHS has set out a 10-point action plan to support hospitals with the significant demand ahead of winter, so anyone who needs the NHS should come forward through the appropriate route so staff can help you with the best option for your care, and it remains as important as ever to get your lifesaving Covid jab and flu jab if you are eligible.”Have you noticed that there are a few horticultural ideas that are ubiquitous staples in books, blogs and catalogues, yet you barely ever see in gardens? These range from outdoor aubergine plants loaded with fruit on our blustery North Atlantic islands, to advice on getting poinsettias to reflower year after year instead of inevitably giving up the ghost before the Christmas decorations are down. In my experience at least, I feel I am more likely to see a unicorn than any of these in reality. However, sometimes – just sometimes – you meet an excellent gardener who gives you a simple tip that changes everything. So here is why I no longer count the notoriously finicky indoor maidenhair ferns (Adiantum sp) on my “unicorn plants” list. A few years back, I was lucky enough to be invited to record a feature for Radio 4’s Gardeners’ Question Time at fellow panel member Anne Swithinbank’s house in Devon. Now, Anne has been one of my horticultural heroes since I was a child, so, for me, going to see her famous collection of houseplants was a bit like going to Poison Ivy’s supervillain lair. However, of all her indoor gardening wonders, I was truly spellbound to see her indoor adiantum. In a large bowl, its feathery locks cascaded down in perfect emerald green, giving me a flashback to seeing the same species in the wild in mossy jungle gorges. Just magical. But how did she do it? What makes maidenhair ferns so tricky to grow as houseplants is that their ideal habitat just isn’t that easy to replicate in most our homes. Their common name in Latin America, Culantrillo de Pozo (literally, “well coriander”), gives you an indication of their perfect habitat: the stone walls of wells are often entirely clothed in their fresh green fronds. The perfect growth spot is a cool, shady and exceptionally humid area, with moisture-laden air and a root zone that is perpetually damp but never waterlogged. Sadly, our homes usually offer the exact opposite conditions, with centrally heated winter air holding less moisture than the Sahara. And they are sold in small pots of peat-based growing media that dry out incredibly quickly, so you need to check on them almost daily to ensure they don’t collapse from prevent drought stress, with their leaves crisping up almost before your eyes. Anne’s ingenious tip was two-fold. First, she had a generous group of them in a large china bowl. The glazed vessel wasn’t subject to the wide swings in moisture than can happen in small, porous ones, and grouping loads of plants together created a bubble of localised humidity which helped seal a layer of protective moisture around their delicate leaves. Anne says that even she finds adiantums tricky when they are small, but they get easier as they become more established. A super easy way to speed up this process from day one is to plant up a group of three, or preferably five, store-bought plants, in as big a container as possible. The second tip: Anne has hers in an unheated sun room, and this lack of radiators will make for far higher air moisture. Not everyone has a sun room, but kitchens and bathrooms do have naturally higher humidity. I really couldn’t believe such a simple idea would turn one of the very hardest to grow houseplants into one of the easiest, so here’s to learning from your horticultural heroes. Follow James on Twitter @BotanygeekThe 1962 premiere of Benjamin Britten’s War Requiem marked the consecration of the new Coventry Cathedral after the original building was destroyed in the Luftwaffe bombing raids of 1940. The monumental choral masterpiece was inspired by the traditional Latin mass and the war poetry of Wilfred Owen, who was killed in the last days of the first world war. Now, as part of Coventry’s city of culture year, leading British composer Nitin Sawhney has been commissioned to compose a requiem to mark the 60th anniversary of the cathedral. Titled Ghosts in the Ruins, it is a work of remembrance for all contemporary conflicts. In a spirit of postwar reconciliation, Britten had originally intended that the solo parts would be performed by singers from Germany, Britain and Russia. Sawhney’s composition will itself draw on different cultures. He told the Observer: “Music is without borders or boundaries. It’s a universal language, while spoken languages are much more restrictive. Music can touch us in so many different ways, even with different traditions.” Sawhney is a composer, guitarist and pianist, who has won many international prizes, including an Ivor Novello lifetime achievement award. He has scored more than 60 films and his collaborators have ranged from Sir Paul McCartney to the London Symphony Orchestra. His latest commission – from Coventry Cathedral and Coventry City of Culture Trust – has its world premiere in January. Following the destruction of the old cathedral in the Blitz, its provost, Richard Howard, vowed not to seek revenge, but to strive for forgiveness. Sir Basil Spence designed the new cathedral alongside the old, symbolising destruction and resurrection. Ghosts in the Ruins takes its inspiration from Coventry as a city that rose from the flames and as a place of sanctuary, helping refugees and migrants. Sawhney, who was born to Indian parents in London, went to school in Rochester, Kent, and experienced racist bullying growing up in the 1970s. “The ways in which people are trying to justify blatant racism is horrific. I grew up watching that. Now I feel, sadly, that we live in a time where people think that this is actually quite acceptable.” Ultimately, through music, he believes that “people from many different backgrounds can come together and find a collective voice”. His own music transcends cultural barriers and styles, from Bach to Bollywood, flamenco to funk. “I’ve always spent time trying to understand and work with different traditions and see how they can work in a new context,” he says. “There’s so much to learn from them.” His new composition also embraces all faiths, he said: “When I visited the cathedral and wandered round the ruins [of the old cathedral], I was really moved. I don’t really have a faith as such, apart from I think I’m quite spiritual. I grew up reading a lot about Christianity and Abrahamic faiths as well as Hinduism. For me, it felt like a place that was quite spiritual. So I want to respect that. “Ghosts of the Ruins sounds quite morbid in a way, but it’s about rising from the ruins.” He added: “We’re going to be incorporating local choirs. Some of those people will be walking around within the cathedral itself and singing. The idea is that they’re like ghosts.” Artist Mark Murphy will also project old photographs, collage and text on to the walls. • This article was amended on 11 November 2021 to include detail about Mark Murphy’s contribution to the project.Boris Johnson is a law unto himself. His housemaster at Eton noted his belief that he should be treated as “an exception, one who should be free of the network of obligation which binds everyone else”. He rarely encounters a rule without feeling the urge to break it. Know this and you are well on the way to understanding why the government engaged in grubby scheming to undermine parliament’s anti-corruption safeguards, then brutish bullying of Tory MPs to make them follow the prime minister’s orders, before the intensity of the backlash forced an abject retreat over the Owen Paterson affair. For what cause did Mr Johnson bring so much opprobrium, humiliation and recrimination on his government’s head? The independent commissioner for parliamentary standards found Mr Paterson guilty of serial and egregious breaches of the rules when he lobbied ministers and officials on behalf of two companies together paying him more than a £100,000 a year. The all-party standards committee agreed that he had brought parliament into disrepute. Three of its four Conservative MPs endorsed that verdict. The fourth recused himself because he was a close friend of the accused. The committee recommended a 30-day suspension from the Commons, a sanction that many looking on from outside will consider lenient. In the normal world, bringing your employer into disrepute is customarily a sackable offence. The suicide of his wife engendered sympathy among MPs and perhaps his constituents too. Had he expressed contrition and accepted his punishment, rather than defiantly insisting that he was innocent and would do it all again, many of his colleagues think Mr Paterson would have stood a good chance of carrying on as an MP. This could have been a very small footnote in the life of this parliament. It was choices made in Downing Street that turned a lobbying affair involving one former cabinet minister into an utterly disreputable episode for the entire government. “The chief whip is not to blame,” says a Tory MP who has held the position himself. “The decisions on these things are always made in Number 10.” First came the preposterously outrageous scheme, fronted by Andrea Leadsom and Jacob Rees-Mogg, the most lethal comedy duo since Arsenic and Old Lace, to secure a reprieve for the prime minister’s friend. This sought to retrospectively rewrite the rules under which Mr Paterson was convicted by setting up a sham committee chaired by a Conservative MP for whom the prime minister’s wife once worked. Many Tories understood how appalling this looked and were queasy about supporting such a shabby trick. So next came highly aggressive whipping, which is alleged to have included threats to cut funding to the constituencies of any Tory MP who refused to fall in with the plot. That’s not parliamentary government – that’s government as an extortion racket. Mark Harper was once the Tory chief whip. Privy as they are to parliament’s darkest secrets and dirtiest deeds, former chief whips are hard to shock. So you know really ugly stuff went on when Mr Harper describes it as “one of the most unedifying episodes I have seen in my 16 years as a Member of Parliament. My colleagues should not have been instructed, from the very top, to vote for this.” Note “from the very top”. It was predictable to anyone living outside the Boris Johnson bubble that fiddling with the rules in this nakedly partisan fashion would trigger a tsunami of condemnation. Lord Evans of Weardale, the former head of MI5 who chairs the committee on standards in public life, rightly called it “a very serious and very damaging” attack on “the best traditions of British democracy”. Tory MPs became highly agitated by the public outrage flying into their inboxes. The opposition parties united to denounce the government, as did newspapers of every political complexion. Someone extremely close to events says: “I think it was when he saw the headlines on Wednesday night that Boris decided he had to order the retreat.” Conservative MPs seethe with fury. “The whole thing is a total fuck-up of the first order,” says one senior Tory who voted with the government and now feels “like a complete twit”. He’s got lots of company. All those Tories who went along with the attempt to subvert the standards regime have been left looking stupid for making themselves complicit with the squalid scheme, only to see the government retreat less than 24 hours later. They are going to remember that next time they are ordered to support something they don’t like. Some Conservative MPs saw how dreadful this was from the start and appreciated how vulnerable it made them to the charge of corruption levelled by the opposition. The 51 who did the right thing may feel vindicated, but that is the only reward they are likely to get. When a party gets a reputation for being sleazy, voters don’t tend to discriminate between the saints and the sinners. The taint clings to all. So the rebels also have reason to be furious with their government. Then there are the friends of, and apologists for, Mr Paterson, largely older Brexiters like himself, who are bitter that he was abandoned to his fate and has now quit as an MP. “Support for Boris from that lot has evaporated pretty much,” remarks one senior Tory. Another source of anger among Conservative MPs is that this affair will sharpen questions about why they are permitted to moonlight for commercial interests at all when the public might reasonably expect them to be fully devoted to the interests of their constituents. The multi-jobbers are cross because they fear that the government’s grotesque handling of the affair makes it more likely that one day there will be an outright ban on MPs trousering nice big earners from outside interests. “Boris now has enemies on two sides of the parliamentary party,” says one Tory. “He’s made enemies of people who have been terrified by their postbags. He’s made enemies of people who think he has abandoned an essentially decent man. This could be the start of a serious fracture in the foundations of Boris’s support.” People close to Mr Johnson confirm that he ditched the attempt to meddle with the anti-corruption rules because he was taken aback by the scale of the opposition. That is very telling. He failed to appreciate why others would attach importance to standards in public life because he cares so little about them himself. His personal history is punctuated with instances of bending, flouting or ignoring rules whenever they get in the way of his appetites, ambitions or interests. Dominic Cummings has popped up to allege that the plot to discredit the policing of standards was “really about the PM and his own lies” over the lavish refurbishment of the Downing Street flat. The commissioner, Kathryn Stone, has conducted three investigations in the past three years into Mr Johnson, twice finding him in breach of the rules on declarations of benefits. The makeover of the Number 10 pad is widely expected to be the subject of another inquiry, once the Electoral Commission has completed its separate delve into that murky business. I hear that it handed the findings of its preliminary inquiry to the Conservative party last Monday, just before the government launched its attempt to nobble the standards regime. This contemptible episode is not a one-off, but the latest exhibition of the pathology of the Johnson government. There’s a pattern of trying to bend the guardrails designed to keep our democracy clean and undermine independent scrutiny of the government’s conduct. The examples are piling up. When an ethics invigilator finds Priti Patel guilty of bullying civil servants, ignore the report. When the Electoral Commission has discomfited you and your chums, plan to compromise its independence by placing it under the heel of a Conservative-dominated committee. When courts repeatedly rule that the government has acted unlawfully, seek to weaken judicial review of ministerial decisions. This is a government that chafes against restraints on the abuse of its power led by a man who has never grown out of his schoolboy habit of behaving as if the rules should never apply to him. In comparison with many other democracies, and in the absence of a written constitution, Britain lacks all that many checks and balances to curb bad behaviour by the ruling party. The forced retreat over the Paterson affair is not only a very deserved humiliation, it is also a very necessary defeat. • Andrew Rawnsley is Chief Political Commentator of the ObserverIt’s Sunday morning on the Aeolian island of Salina, and Giuseppe Mascoli is cleaning mushrooms with his friend Sergio. “We’ve got about 5kg of porcini from the forest,” he explains. “I’ll freeze them so we can eat them through the winter.” Mascoli has slowly been giving up a life in London as the co-founder and now brand director of pizza chain Franco Manca in favour of a slower pace of life on Salina. North of Sicily, the island is known for its lush volcanic landscapes and the bounty this fertile earth delivers, from grapes to olives to its world-class capers. “I came here originally to buy the capers for Franco Manca,” says Mascoli. “At first, I tried to communicate with people over the internet, but that didn’t work, so I came myself, and made friends.” Home here is a farmhouse dating back to at least the 17th century that Mascoli bought in 2014. The house itself was in a poor state – “It just about had the roof on” – but was surrounded by vineyards that had been much better cared for, as well as a space for winemaking, which was the real draw. With the help of friends, he spent four months making everything habitable, renovating the four-bedroom main house and creating three adjacent apartments. It’s quite the social hub of the island now, with an open-door policy for visiting family and friends, as well as for neighbours stopping by on a whim. “It’s like an unofficial restaurant. People just drop by to see what’s going on.” Mascoli has not been too precious about the architectural accuracy of his restoration work. He says the house is “a historical fake, made in the name of authenticity”. New elements include a brick fireplace in the living room for the winter months, and moulded concrete basins in the bathrooms. The accoutrements of winemaking have been remade as appealing design features, with grape-collecting crates repurposed as bookshelves in the study and green glass demijohns that are now colourful outdoor lights. Non-wine-related objects have also been playfully reimagined. Friends made the swirling sculptural light fitting above the dining table, created from a couple of old hunting horns and some brass tubes, while Mascoli’s daughter came up with the idea for converting the front of a vintage TV set into the frame for a mirror. The interiors are a snapshot of Mascoli’s life and family history. Some pieces are from London, such as the Arts &amp; Crafts chair that sits amid mismatched neighbours around the dining table, and others from his former home on the Amalfi coast. Small paintings by his artist great-grandfather Arturo Rietti are grouped on the living room wall, while the large dining table – which took 12 people to carry inside – is, according to family folklore, from a ship’s deck, recovered from a wreck by a relative at the beginning of the 20th century. Plenty of other things here have been made on site from what was lying around, or even collected off the streets in the case of the faded rattan chairs around the outdoor dining table, which itself is an old door sitting on an iron workbench. In the kitchen, the island is another workbench, this time in timber, given to Mascoli by a carpenter. “There’s a ‘gift economy’ here,” he explains. “You have to give something back at some point, but it’s very important that what you give back is not the equivalent thing.” Mascoli’s taste is for the informal and the mismatched – there is barely a coordinating set of anything, from the Victorian patterned plates to the patchwork of old tiles on the floor (some are original to the house, others are similar antique ones from Naples). He cooks on the original tiled coal-fired stove, with a gas cooker balanced on top, while coffee comes from one of a row of coffee pots, including a traditional Neapolitan cuccuma. This being the Mediterranean, the outdoor living spaces are just as important as the indoor ones. There are bougainvillea-draped tiled terraces with sea views, and an outdoor working area where Mascoli meets locals to do business – he grows vegetables as well as making 6,000 bottles of wine a year, including two simply called Vino Uno and Vino Due because no one knows quite what some of the ancient grape varieties are (“I am my own appellation,” he states). The wines are made in traditional terracotta amphoras, a technique that is thousands of years old, which allows some oxygen to reach the contents, adding to the complexity of flavour. Mascoli says he never expected to end up here, as a “playboy turned farmer” – but then he never expected any of his other careers either. He was an academic before he opened a Soho private members’ club in London, Blacks, in the early 1990s, and then founded Franco Manca in 2008. “I became an entrepreneur by chance, so for me it was important to move closer to something I can do. Which is basically nothing,” he jokes. In fact, he has 3.5 hectares to farm, and is planning to open an agriturismo next year with Franco Manca co-founder Bridget Hugo, to welcome paying guests. For today, though, there are mushrooms to clean, books to read and the sea to swim in – and that’s plenty.Saúl ‘Canelo’ Álvarez paid tribute to Caleb Plant after he had knocked out the American in the 11th round of their world super-middleweight unification title fight in Las Vegas on Saturday night. Álvarez ended the fight in brutally conclusive fashion but he admitted that Plant had been a difficult opponent who had shown great skill and made the first half of the bout a highly competitive and absorbing contest. Asked at the post-fight press conference at the MGM Grand in Las Vegas if he had felt frustrated by Plant, who was the busier boxer at the outset and won at least two of the early rounds, the 31-year-old Mexican said: “To be honest with you, yeah. I was a little bit frustrated – especially in the first five rounds. But then the second half of the fight was exactly how we envisaged it. We don’t have to take anything away from Caleb Plant. He’s a great fighter and he made a great effort tonight. But in the end we came out with the win. That’s all that matters really, So even though we had that frustration in the first five rounds the second half of the fight was ideal.” Álvarez said that his trainer, Eddy Reynoso, whose birthday it was on Saturday, had played a key role in his victory. “Eddy calmed me down whenever I got to my corner and I was feeling a little anxious because the first few rounds were tough,” he said. “He always told me the right thing and kept me on the right path and the game plan came to fruition and, thanks to him, I was able to come out with the win.” Plant and Álvarez had stoked their personal animosity in a bitter build-up to the fight after, at the first press conference in September, they had traded insults and a few blows. A small cut had opened under Plant’s eye and harsh words were said in the subsequent weeks as they spoke separately to the media. There was sufficient concern that they might become heated again this past week – and so they did not engage in the usual face-off at either the final press conference or after the weigh-in on Friday when they merely taunted each other verbally at a distance. Late on Saturday night in Las Vegas, while Plant was being examined at the University Medical Center as a precaution, Álvarez spoke warmly of their post-fight embrace in the ring: “He told me afterwards that he wanted to keep fighting and he also wanted to apologise to me and he didn’t mean what he said about my mum. He was truly sorry about that. I told him: ‘Look, it’s OK. It’s water under the bridge.’ I told him he was a great man and also that some day I hope he will have a great family as well. I can only wish the best for him. In the fight we have to hurt each other but, in the end, we’re all human and we want the best for each other.”The government’s much-hyped information campaign targeting perpetrators of violence against women will not be launched until next year, the Observer has learned. This comes just as new research indicates the vast majority of females have experienced unwanted violent, aggressive or sexual behaviours on UK public transport. As part of the home secretary’s strategy to tackle violence against women and girls launched in July, Priti Patel promised a “multimillion communications campaign with a focus on targeting perpetrators and harmful misogynistic attitudes”. However, concern is growing that the campaign will not be up and running until 2022, with sources saying it remains at a “concept” stage more than three months after it was unveiled. The delay means it will not be launched until after Christmas – a period that tends to witness a rise in domestic violence – but also comes against a backdrop of concerted calls for the government to start prioritising measures to tackle violence against women and girls. “When it comes to domestic abuse, you see increases around holiday periods, and we know the Christmas party season can be fraught with dangers,” said MP and chair of the women and equalities select committee, Caroline Nokes. “So if I was the government, I’d be looking at the opportunities right now and thinking this could be a really good time to launch a public awareness campaign.” Meanwhile, new research reveals a “concerning prevalence” of unwanted violent, aggressive or sexual behaviours against women and girls travelling on public transport over the last five years after a survey by the Suzy Lamplugh Trust. In the absence of official statistics chronicling the scale of the problem throughout the public transport network, the trust says the findings offer a strong indicator of the true scale of the problem. Kathleen Spencer Chapman, head of policy, advocacy and research at the children’s charity Plan International UK , said the findings, released on “national personal safety day” on 9 November, were sobering. “These findings paint a stark picture of the relentless public sexual harassment that women and girls face. Sadly, they confirm what we already know – girls as young as 10 are being harassed, followed and touched. As a result, they are missing school, avoiding exercise, staying indoors and carrying keys between their fingers when they walk home.” Chapman added: “We also know that one in six are avoiding public transport at night – all to shield themselves from the constant tide of public sexual harassment.” Indications that the Home Office’s information campaign – believed to be the first one to explicitly target perpetrators – will not be ready this year has prompted disquiet. A source said: “The reality is that it is still at concept stage and isn’t in the right place at the moment.” Saskia Garner, head of policy and campaigns at the Suzy Lamplugh Trust, said there was a pressing need to act but also conceded that the messaging needed to be correct. “There is an urgent need to address these issues that have been deprioritised for so long. However, the messaging needs to be right, it’s about getting that balance.” Garner added that it was essential the Home Office was consulting with organisations across the sector on the campaign, but also to ensure that the voice of survivors was central. She added that the campaign messaging needed to speak to the perpetrators of different crimes against women. “A stalker will respond very differently to certain messaging than perhaps a perpetrator of a different type of a crime because of the underlying triggers,” said Garner. A Home Office spokesperson said they were working to launch the campaign by the end of March next year at the latest: “As part of the tackling violence against women and girls strategy, the government committed to launch a communications campaign this financial year that targets and challenges perpetrators of these heinous crimes and ensures victims can recognise abuse and receive support. “We are working closely with stakeholders, including the women’s sector, academics and victims’ services, and greatly appreciate the expertise, insights and experience they have shared. This will help deliver a campaign that provides value for money and delivers the lasting change required.”If you could press a button and eliminate social media platforms from the world, would you do it? Listen to the testimony of Facebook whistleblower Frances Haugen over the last month and it might appear that turning back the clock is a no-brainer. Haugen revealed to legislators in the US and UK how Facebook pursued policies it knows to be harmful – algorithms that push out a diet of misinformation, rage and hate – in the cause of profit. Many of us feel the toxic impacts of social media even as we enjoy its benefits: the natural inclination to harden your position after being subjected to a torrent of abuse from people on the other side. The attraction of reading and liking content that shores up, rather than challenges, your beliefs. The knowledge that much of your motivation in sharing those holiday snaps is showing off. But it’s unhelpful to talk about social media harms as though its users are a homogenous mass. Not everyone is equally susceptible and an emerging research base points to traits such as low self-esteem, insecurity and anxiety that might make some people more vulnerable to social media’s darkest corners: radicalisation into ideologies such as the far right, Islamist extremism or violent misogyny; the social contagion of self-harm; and the conspiracy theories that underpin contemporary anti-vax sentiment. However, this only takes us so far in understanding social media harms. One of the most worrying aspects in terms of the polarisation of political debate is its interplay with a psychological trait not typically associated with vulnerability: narcissism. People with narcissistic traits tend to have an inflated sense of self-importance and entitlement, crave admiration, expect special treatment, don’t take criticism well and lack empathy. Narcissism manifests in two forms: grandiose narcissism, typified by the charming and charismatic extrovert, and vulnerable narcissism, characterised by anxiety, hypersensitivity to the perceptions of others, insecurity and shyness. In its most extreme form, it is a personality disorder. A dash of grandiose narcissism in our public sphere is not a bad thing. Saintliness is a rare character trait: most good in the world is achieved as a result of mixed motivations, people who want to do good things because of how it makes them feel and what it does for their status, as well as what it does for others. But social media has elevated narcissism far beyond what is healthy. Social media is the narcissist’s playground. Through likes and shares, it re-engineers their social feedback loop towards the superficiality they thrive on, fuelling a sense of superiority and rewarding manipulative tendencies. Perhaps it is little wonder that narcissists are more likely to become addicted to social media. Interestingly, studies suggest that narcissists on the right show greater tendencies towards entitlement and those on the left towards exhibitionism, craving validation. Narcissists are also, perhaps unsurprisingly, more likely to engage in online bullying; for those purporting to be in it for moral causes the ends justify the means. And there is evidence that a platform such as Facebook itself increases narcissistic tendencies in people. This online elevation of narcissism has profound real-world consequences. People with narcissistic traits have always been more likely to be politically engaged; social media has amplified these effects, affecting who dominates the public discourse within political parties and media debates. The ability to command vast numbers of likes is often seen as a reliable indicator of someone’s level of insight and potential contribution. On the left, it plays into an emerging divide about how to bring about progressive social change. One way is to build solidarity between different groups in a way that emphasises common belonging and making people feel good about themselves for joining socially just causes. Another is to make imperfect people feel guilt and shame for their moral ineptitude, for their failure to see the world through the right lens. Social media narcissists pull left-leaning movements towards the latter model of hating on people perceived to think the wrong way, which is destructive to social change but much more thrilling than the boring, old-fashioned work of building alliances across divides. Victory is people being shamed and bullied for minor or nonexistent transgressions, rather than winning hearts and minds. No matter if the punishment far exceeds the crime: a narcissist’s moral certainty dehumanises those who fall foul of their creed. Not only that, there is a risk that performative virtue-signalling becomes a displacement activity for working to achieve real change. Liking a post or signing an online petition delivers the feelgood hit of being on the right side of history, without any of the real-world impact. And the more that activists model this form of brand-driven campaigning, the more it lets the rest of civil society off the hook. It helps multinational corporations to get away with signalling their commitment to LGBT inclusion in Pride month or to antiracism in Black History Month on social media in countries where this is brand- and sales-enhancing, while doing no such thing in countries where human rights abuses are rife. A core tenet of political liberalism is that the only way for societies to arrive at the right answer is to air all sides of the debate. A long underemphasised aspect of this is that changing people’s minds is almost always more about how an argument is framed than its content. Take the successful referendum campaign for abortion reform in Ireland: the case for liberalising abortion was presented to those who were sceptical in pragmatic, rather than rights-based terms; the terrible cost of an abortion ban for people’s mothers, sisters and daughters, rather than an abstract woman’s right to choose. The most successful campaigns for social change win people round by making the case in terms that resonate with them, not with a campaign’s most ardent backers. But in a world where the economics of social media platforms are increasingly driving a more narcissistic form of campaigning that is characterised by a lack of empathy and generosity, that becomes ever harder. • Sonia Sodha is an Observer columnistNathan Harris, 10, Leeds I first heard about the Cop conference watching the news with my dad; it felt really good that we were taking some action. We’ve been focusing on it in school at Moor Allerton Hall Primary for a long time now, and on Friday we had a day when we had a whole-school strike against the curriculum, because there’s nothing in the national curriculum about climate change, and there needs to be. Climate change is a really big problem, and especially for my generation, and we can’t solve problems without knowing what they are. Of course, we talk about it in our school, but it should be a requirement. As well as learning about what’s happening in Glasgow, we made individual promises: mine are to turn off the taps while I’m doing my teeth, and to turn off the lights whenever I can. We have to do things individually, and we have to do things together. In the afternoon, we had a march around the playground – we had chants like “No more coal, no more oil, keep your carbon in the soil”. I know there are lots of dark and worrying things around climate change, but I’m learning how I and my friends can work to make a difference, and that makes me hopeful. I think, together, we can turn this around. Petra Todd, 18, Guildford I think Cop was set up to fail and I think it is failing: some of the stuff they’re talking about sounds OK, better than nothing, but in general it’s all talk and no action. The targets they’re talking about are nowhere near good enough, and we all know this is the last Cop that can make a difference. So this has to be good, but it doesn’t seem to be going well at all. I’m a trustee of Zero Carbon Guildford – we’re about to open a community space which will be a focus for action on climate change. I’ve taken part in eight school strikes over the last two years, and this week I took part in a mock Cop. So yes, I’m very involved: but one thing that frustrates me is when people, especially in the media, think it’s all young people who are working like this, that we all care and we’re all taking action. A lot are, but a lot more don’t care – and we all need to care. And it really winds me up when politicians say things like, thank goodness the young people are sorting things out – because, as Greta says, “it’s all blah, blah, blah”. This week I said to my mum, I don’t think I’ve ever felt so depressed. We are not going to meet the 1.5C [target] – and yet we have to, there is no other way. I’ve been asking friends and some of them say: “It terrifies me – and it terrifies me so much I can’t even engage with it.” Matthew McLennan, 12, Glasgow My mum cares a lot about climate change – she’s always telling me to put things in the right bin. But what I really feel is that I can’t do a lot by myself – this is about everyone combining to change things. And everyone is affected now, so world leaders need to figure out what to do. It’s good that Cop is making everyone think about the issues, but it annoys me that world leaders aren’t taking a lot more action – it’s not their world that’s being destroyed, it’s our world. It seems they can’t be bothered spending the money and doing the right thing because they won’t be around for when the bad things happen. It’s been cool being in Glasgow through this, there’s a real buzz about the place – and all these cool people around like David Attenborough, Emma Watson and Leonardo DiCaprio. I’ve never seen so many helicopters. One thing I think we need is more on the media about the progress that’s being made: they’ve gone in hard on the gloom and doom, but we need the stories of success as well, to give us hope that we really can change things here.Sarah Moss is no stranger to pandemic fiction. She made her novelistic debut in 2009 with Cold Earth, an apocalyptic story of six archaeologists on a remote Greenland dig who come to realise that a virus circulating when they set off has mutated into something altogether more catastrophic in their absence. As communication with the outside world breaks down and hopes of returning home falter, they’re forced to confront their inner demons. For the quartet whose minds Moss inhabits in her new novel, The Fell, what’s longed for amid the pestilence is escape from home and family. Set in the Peak District, it begins one dank November dusk in 2020, as Kate, a fortysomething single mum and furloughed waitress who’s been self-isolating with her son, Matt, for 10 days, finally snaps. She’s tried decluttering, yoga and pacing the garden path trailed by the cat, but it’s the landscape just beyond their gate that she craves, that she needs. Kinder Low, Swine’s Back, Edale Rocks: there’s poetry in those place names, and their varied terrain and ever-changing weather provide a sharp contrast with the static indoors world, a place captured through a series of claustrophobia-inducing observations about stale air and oppressive aromas. Even endlessly refreshed web pages are stubbornly unchanging. When Kate puts her hiking boots on and breaks quarantine, promising herself it’s just for “a sip of outside”, you can’t help feeling for her. But, as is so often the case in Moss’s work, it’s destined to be an ill-fated expedition. Matt, 16, a touching character despite himself, is oblivious at first, and though Kate is spotted by their widowed neighbour, Alice, the older woman has been shielding for months so doesn’t stop her. Only the fourth of Moss’s characters, divorced Rob, has licence to be out and about; the fact that he soon will be, with night falling and the fog closing in, is a very bad sign indeed for Kate, because he is part of the mountain rescue service. Moss has always been adept at plumbing the psyche’s inkier depths, and as she flits between people, channelling the free indirect style that gave her last novel, Summerwater, such polyphonic momentum, their anxieties heighten a gathering sense of existential doom. Interestingly, though these span everything from the climate emergency to the degradation of language and zombie mink, Covid itself is way down the list, functioning more as an intensifying trigger. Likewise, even to Kate herself, the suspenseful organising drama – her potentially lethal misadventure in the hills – can seem but a minor diversion in the larger metaphysical spectacle that is, well, life in the 21st-century. It’s no surprise, then, that the novel’s ending doesn’t provide quite the release or comfort that might be expected, despite its outcome. Indeed, one of the most profoundly unsettling attributes of The Fell is the way it questions that elemental source of human succour: storytelling. As Kate reflects: “One of the things we’re learning, we of the end times, is that humanity’s ending appears to be slow, lacking in cliffhangers or indeed any satisfactory narrative shape; characterised, for the lucky, by the gradual vindication of accumulating dread.” “Accumulating dread” is what Moss atomises so brilliantly here but it should be added that this is also a very funny book. All of the characters share a certain doomy drollness, with Alice musing on how there’s nothing quite like cooking to put you off your dinner, for instance, and Kate wondering of a raven that accompanies her on her illegal hike: “Are you a spirit guide or my mother? Oh God, what if it’s both.” There is an abundance of generosity, too. Though they’re kept apart (in another kind of narrative, surely romantic sparks would flicker between Rob and Kate), by the time the novel ends the following dawn, all of the quartet, in their own way, have come to appreciate that to be human is to be blameworthy – through error, if not intent. With its unwavering interiority and meticulously excavated disquiet, The Fell is a novel certain to be seized upon by scholars in the future. But what of readers in 2021? Lacking the dystopian romance of Sarah Hall’s Burntcoat, say, or the glamour and verve of Gary Shteyngart’s Our Country Friends – both of which are also set against the backdrop of the pandemic – The Fell is almost too faithful an artefact. For the time being, many readers, such as Moss’s own Alice, may prefer to reach for a dog-eared Lord Peter Wimsey than this intense time capsule of a tale. • The Fell by Sarah Moss is published by Picador (£14.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyIt doesn’t look like a place of legend, but the narrow Carrer de la Cera is the birthplace of la rumba catalana, the infectiously rhythmic stepchild of flamenco created by Barcelona’s Gypsy community in the 1950s and popular today throughout the world. It is now also home to a Gypsy museum, which opened its doors on Sunday, in the multicultural el Raval neighbourhood that was once the heart of the Barcelona community. The museum is the work of the Gypsy cultural organisation Carabutsí, a Catalan Gypsy word meaning terrific. Sam Garcia, its president, says the aim is to preserve the memory of the now-disparate community. Documents suggest that there have been Gypsies in Catalonia since the early 15th century and, in common with other Spanish Gypsies, they have long ceased to be itinerant. Most live in large cities, while some have been forced into shantytowns such as the Cañada Real, near Madrid, or the rundown La Mina estate in Barcelona. “We realised there was a really big Gitano population here in el Raval, which is disappearing because of gentrification,” he says. “Three hundred years ago there were 1,500 Gypsies living in this one small street.” A group of seven women set about collecting oral histories from elderly residents and accumulated an archive of 7,000 interviews, photographs and documents – all from the one street – many of which are on display in the museum while the rest will be available online. “We’re not archivists or anthropologists so it’s been hard to organise all this information,” says Garcia, adding with pride that within a year their work had won them an award from the city council. Prominent space in the new museum is given to celebrating la rumba catalana, a blend of flamenco, Arab music and Caribbean rhythms. Peret (Pedro Pubill Calaf), the most famous rumbero, performed at the closing ceremony of the 1992 Olympic Games in Barcelona. The museum will host workshops and study groups and has organised two tourist itineraries, the Carrer de la Cera and the ruta de la rumba catalana. The photographs and artefacts that cover its walls reflect the joys and sorrows of a people who have been persecuted in Spain ever since the Catholic reconquest in 1492, when they were given 60 days to leave the country. Hostility to Gypsies in Spain is so entrenched that racist comments scarcely raise an eyebrow. When Philip Alston, then the UN special rapporteur on extreme poverty and human rights, visited Spain last year, he was damning about their treatment, citing one “segregated school in a poor neighbourhood with a 100% Roma student body and a 75% rate of early leaving”. Alston said an independent, comprehensive review was needed to ensure that Roma children were “not doomed to repeat the cycle of poverty and exclusion”. A 2012 Eurobarometer survey showed that 26% of Spaniards felt “totally uncomfortable” about their children sharing a classroom with Gypsies. “We have this reputation for being bad, lazy, dirty, thieves and criminals,” says Garcia, who comes from a family of scrap merchants. “We’ve been dragging around these stereotypes for years. You hear it all the time. If you try to rent an apartment, as soon as they find out you’re a Gypsy, that’s that.” As well as these stereotypes, Gypsies’ resistance to assimilation means they are viewed as outsiders, the “other”, not really part of society, and were not recognised as citizens until 1978. They are even sometimes accused of “auto-exclusion”, the implication being that they have chosen a marginal existence. Not so, says Garcia, who says non-assimilation is a form of resistance. “We resist through the family,” he says. “When the Catholic kings banned us from speaking our language and broke up families, we knew we had to move on, get together and start again. The family is what protects us. For us, the family is fundamental. That’s why we mostly don’t intermarry, although these days marrying a non-Gypsy is more common and it’s not such a problem.” “We want to educate people about the life of the Gypsies who have been here for 600 years. We hope if people understand our culture better they might see we’re not that different from them.”It was during a night in June that two radiators exploded in Luca’s house, jetting scalding water across the bedroom of his six-year-old son and bringing down the ceilings of the ground-floor rooms. By a fluke the family was away. “If my son had been in his bed he would have been severely burned,” says Luca. “The disaster was inevitable. In the 10 years since I bought the house, not once have the pipes and radiators been serviced, and similar things have recently happened in neighbouring properties.” The London housing estate where Luca lives is supplied with heating and hot water by a district heating network (DHN) operated by Southwark council. DHNs generate heating from a central source to a whole community via a network of insulated hot water pipes, eliminating the need for individual household boilers. There are about 14,000 in the UK run by councils, housing associations and private companies, supplying nearly 500,000 homes. They’re considered to be a cheaper, greener alternative to traditional systems, and the Climate Change Committee has estimated they need to account for 18% of the UK’s energy supply if the country is to meet its 2050 net zero target. Many DHNs have successfully cut emissions and prices for households. However, those that are poorly designed and inadequately maintained have left some customers enduring freezing homes and enormous bills. They are unable to switch supplier because they are locked into contracts of 25 years or longer, as soon as they buy a property supplied by a DHN. And they cannot get redress for poor service via the energy ombudsman because the sector is largely unregulated. Campaigners have warned that thousands more people risk being trapped with unaccountable providers, as more networks are rolled out without statutory regulations. Currently there are no controls on consumer tariffs and no technical standards to which new networks must adhere. Developers who are required to install DHNs as a planning condition are free to choose the cheapest option, which may not be suiable, and some councils, which run their own networks, lack resources and expertise. “There are good, well-run networks, but we cannot be confident this will become the norm, even when legislation is belatedly brought in to cover this growing sector,” says Ruth London of the campaign group Fuel Poverty Action. The damage to Luca’s home was so extensive because DHNs operate at higher pressure and temperatures than ordinary systems, and already leaking pipes were overwhelmed. Since the flood, the family has been living in temporary accommodation funded by their insurer. He says that he heard nothing from the council for the first three months, until the Observer intervened. Southwark has now offered to replace the radiators, but until the malfunctioning network is overhauled, the family fears they could burst again. Luca asked to be disconnected from the scheme so he could switch to a private supplier, but was told that, as a freeholder, he would have to pay a £39,500 fee. With this type of scheme, leaseholders and social housing tenants are not allowed to switch because their share of the costs would have to be passed to other residents. Councillor Stephanie Cryan, Southwark’s cabinet member for council homes and homelessness, told the Observer: “I am very sorry this issue has taken some time to resolve for this family. “While we identified a leak back in January, and we can replace all of the radiators, the wider issue is much more complex and, to date, we have been unable to come to a solution in terms of disconnection from the district heating system.” Seventeen other Southwark residents who approached the Observer reported spending weeks in unheated homes during winter, and five-figure bills to maintain the system that let them down. Giancarlo Niccoli was asked to pay £13,700 towards repairs of the network on his estate, after his one-bedroom flat was left without fully functioning heating for six months. He was still billed the annual tariff of £1,000, plus a 10% administration charge, while paying for electric heaters to see him through the winter. “The council sends multiple engineers to do the same job poorly, and then it needs repair again, at our expense, months later,” he says. “I once had to move out while my flooring was pulled up because a botched repair caused leaks.” Southwark insists the costs are allowable within the terms of his lease, irrespective of service standards, a fact supported by a tribunal to which Niccoli took his complaint. In April, the council launched a compensation scheme which awards residents £3 for each day the system isn’t working, a sum residents claim is inadequate to cover electric heaters. Jack Lewis, from the Southwark Group of Tenants Organisation, says any added heating costs are particularly concerning given the recent cut in universal credit and rising energy prices. “We will continue to lobby the council to implement immediate payments to compensate for the cost of additional heating measures,” he says. Southwark council, which supplies a number of council estates via DHNs, admits its systems are not of a good enough standard. It is estimated that it would cost £350m to modernise its networks, some of which date back to the 1960s. The council told the Observer that the money was not available, partly because of government policy. Increased discounts to encourage council tenants’ right to buy their homes, and the abolition of “rent convergence” – which allowed councils to increase social housing rent – have dented its budget. The borough has the largest concentration of social housing in the capital. “We have always played catch-up on maintenance across a huge housing stock,” it says. “The government could cap the bills for leaseholders and pay the difference to councils – then the investment for works can continue, because the money has to come from somewhere.” DHN customers in other local authority areas have reported similar problems. The government recently pledged £300m for new low-carbon heat networks, and £4.175m of grants to overhaul existing infrastructure. It’s also developing an additional funding scheme to improve the efficiency of networks. Three years after the Competition and Markets Authority called for regulation of the sector to protect customers, the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (BEIS) told the Observer that it was a work in progress. “The government is committed to legislating to implement heat networks regulation within this parliament,” it says. “This will include consumer protection rules which ensure all heat network consumers receive a fair price, a reliable supply of heating, and transparency of information.” According to Ruth London, government funding is welcome but insufficient to remedy the problems with existing networks. For Luca, the promises are too late, and he is fearful of moving back into his house when repairs are complete. “My trust in the heating network has gone,” he says. “I really feel I’m being held hostage by a system that doesn’t deliver on what it should, and literally endangered my son’s life.”There have been a few times over the past 10 years or so when, feeling as grey as London skies and walking with eyes down to the pavement, I’ve spotted a hard little dazzle of primary colour and felt immediately cheered. Those little spots of intricate brightness are the work of the city’s “chewing gum artist” Ben Wilson, who, since 2004, has spent most days painting whimsical miniatures on some of the millions of flattened blobs of gum that are spat out on the city’s paving stones. Each of Wilson’s paintings is unique; most are dedicated to passersby who ask him to celebrate friendships, or to memorialise lost loves, or just to say “I live here”. I don’t know how you would measure such things, but it’s my hunch that no living artist gives more tiny moments of delight or comfort to a greater number of Londoners on a daily basis than Wilson. I got talking to him back in 2005 and he ended up doing a painting for my young daughters. In the years that followed it was a little secret they shared with their high street, and a cause of tears one day when they discovered “their” paving stone had been pulled up and replaced. Since then, Wilson has made several thousands of these pictures; he keeps a photographic record of them and most of their dedicatees, goes back and carefully touches up those that have been scuffed or damaged. The result, for those who know where and how to look, is a kind of alternative trail of blue (and green and yellow and red) plaques, not to the famous dead but to the diversity of the living city. Sometimes, if you are lucky, you might catch Wilson in the act of making his art. He has regular haunts, the Edwardian streets around Muswell Hill and Crouch End near where he lives, favourite corners of the older city in Shoreditch and Hackney, and the Millennium Bridge, where he has done a series of trails of hundreds of chewing gum paintings that have ended up with surreptitious artistic invasions of the Turbine Hall at Tate Modern. I caught up with Wilson, now 58, one morning last week in Muswell Hill, where he was renovating some pictures outside the Everyman cinema. A tall man, with an irrepressible grin, he was wearing, as ever, bright orange industrial overalls decorated with layers of paint and lying flat out on the pavement on a piece of thick matting that he carries rolled up in a rucksack, along with his toolbox of materials. The technique is very precise. He first softens the oval of flattened gum a little with a blowtorch, sprays it with lacquer and then applies three coats of acrylic enamel, usually to a design from his latest book of requests that come from people who stop and crouch and talk. He uses tiny modellers’ brushes, quick-drying his work with a lighter flame as he goes along, and then seals it with more lacquer. Each painting takes a few hours and can last for many years. Wilson’s eccentric acts of daily creation make more sense the more he explains them. He is energetically interested in the threatened idea of public space. Technically, in painting gum – as he has established in the courts – he is not painting public property or commercially owned real estate. His pictures are designed to create a tiny stepping-stone mosaic of common land across the city. Gum, he suggests, is the ultimate consumer product: it has no food value at all, it hardly biodegrades, and attempting to remove it is a costly and laborious full-time job. “So there is some symbolism in transforming something thoughtlessly spat out into something meaningful.” Beyond that principle, Wilson is interested in cheerfully modelling an idea of intimate local connection, celebrating community. Outside the Everyman he is cleaning and touching up a picture that shows in tiny detail a murmuration of starlings over Brighton Pier. “I always felt bad about this one,” he says. “It was on my list to do, but the man who had asked for it sadly died before I’d got to it. I happened to get talking to his son in a cafe near here, and he asked if I might do it in memory of his dad, who really liked those murmurations, so at least I was able to do that. And he loves the picture.” He cleans it up meticulously, adding a little paint to the edge where it has been damaged. He then talks me through some of the others by the nearby kerbsides. “This is for a man I see around here – Ivan – he wanted Ivan the Terrible, so I did that.” We walk over the road to a row of shops. He cleans up a picture outside the local Ryman, reads its inscription: “This is for Nadia, who worked here.” Outside the post office, there is a tiger in honour of a postal worker who is from Sri Lanka. To mark the closing of the Woolworths a couple of years ago, Wilson managed to fit every redundant employee’s name on to a piece of gum as a lasting reminder. While we walk he is frequently stopped by people for whom he has made paintings. Rose, the Big Issue seller outside Sainsbury’s, is an old friend. “Rose and I have a good working relationship,” he says, “she watches my stuff if I need a loo break, and I watch hers.” A man called Ahmed Garrad, a painter and decorator, greets Wilson with a broad smile. He explains to me how Ben made a picture for him in 2014 when he had returned to Britain from his original home in Syria, during the civil war. He and his three children had British passports, but it took him nearly three years, battling with the Home Office, to bring them and his wife over to join him. Wilson had painted him the Syrian flag, the symbols of the Free Syrian Army and the names of his children. It was a nice little badge of hope for Garrad during his legal battles, he says, one he was eventually able to show to his family when they arrived. “The longer I lie here, all sorts of situations will unfold,” Wilson says, restoring a picture of a pigeon. A gruff man peers over his shoulder. “In Singapore they’d cut your hands off for doing that,” he says. “I don’t think they would,” Wilson murmurs. A woman stops with her granddaughter in a buggy and explains how Wilson made a painting for her daughter when she wasn’t much older than the baby. “You make Muswell Hill,” she tells him. During lockdown he worked when he could; he had Covid early on, and then gave blood for antibody treatments. He’d been invited to do a series of gum pictures along the Parkland Walk – a narrow ribbon of woodland that was once a railway line through north London – and though a promise of council funding for the project fell through, he did it anyway. We walk along a section and he shows me some of the paintings that can be followed with a geolocation map – a rescue dog called Peggy, a ghost station from the original railway, a jogger in a glade of light, each with a minute inscription. “If people feel isolated, as they did so much in the last year, a painting gives them a point of reference,” Wilson says. “It says: this is your environment. Once you get that idea, then anything is possible.” Wilson lives where you might imagine him to live, in the ground-floor flat of a rambling Victorian villa, with an antique Pashley bike in the hallway and his art – canvases and painted tiles and photographs – piled on every available table and surface and stacked against every wall. Outside in the back garden there are monumental wooden sculptures that rise out of the undergrowth; the biggest – which Wilson made as a kind of goddess spirit of place, out of scrap timber – is 15ft tall. In one corner of a tiny sitting room are shelves of battered notebooks where Wilson has jotted down gum picture requests over the years like a shorthand births, deaths and marriages column. Thumbing through them, he seems on the verge of tears. “I’ve had to deal with people memorialising people who have been murdered,” he says. “People who have been so lonely, or remembering favourite pets; people who are destitute in all sorts of ways. It goes from proposal pictures, ‘Will you marry me?’, to people who I drew when they were kids and they now have their own kids.” He likes how everyone has a picture in their head: “Some want cheese and crackers, or nicknames. Easter Island statues. English breakfasts…” If he has an inspiration it is Henry Mayhew’s Victorian encyclopaedia of people on the margins of society, London Labour and the London Poor. “Right at the beginning of doing the pictures, I came across the original three volumes of it in a charity shop in Archway,” he says. “It felt like a sign to carry on.” Sometimes, people who see him lying out on the street imagine he is passed out, drunk; ambulances have blared to a halt beside him. He has been wrongfully arrested a couple of times. He is still traumatised by the manner of his arrest in 2010, when he was working on the Millennium Bridge. “I was doing a picture of St Paul’s for some school kids who were really excited,” he says. “The police arrived and tried to arrest me for criminal damage and I asked if I could just finish the picture. They pulled me along the bridge by my feet, threw me in a cell, and took my DNA, taken by force.” Wilson won his case in the City of London magistrates court, with the help of letters from supporters. One was from John Maizels, publisher of the art magazine Raw Vision, which has featured Wilson’s work many times. “Ben Wilson is an artist with tremendous commitment and integrity,” Maizels wrote. Penny Northway, meanwhile, the children’s minister at a Muswell Hill church, told how Wilson painted a gum picture for her son, Max, in memory of his grandfather. “My respect for him grew after I noted how sensitively and patiently he dealt with Max and translated his (slightly muddled) wishes into a pocket-sized painting,” she said. These days when he works on the bridge, Wilson carries with him a letter from his local police force explaining his work. He has done two trails across the bridge (the first was painstakingly removed by teams of cleaners). “It’s funny,” he says, “Tate Modern is pretty much the only institution I’ve worked outside where someone has not brought me out a cup of tea and had a chat.” He Blu-Tacked a hidden sequence of gum pictures inside the gallery when he completed a trail, and invited friends to the “opening”. “I met a curator and invited her along, but she just laughed in my face and said, ‘I know who you are!’” Wilson thought: “Actually, you don’t really.” Over the years, he has been called an environmental artist or an outsider artist, but he’s mostly allergic to labelling. That spirit started early. He was brought up in Barnet, he says, in “the spirit of dadaism”. His father was a ceramicist who did experimental theatre as a member of Jeff Nuttall’s radical 1960s collective People Show. His mother was an illustrator who once had tea with Salvador Dalí. “I was working with clay from about the age of two,” he says. “I remember when I was about 11, at my junior school, being thrown out of the class for doing pottery wrong.” That idea hadn’t occurred to him before. He was saved at his comprehensive school by art and English teachers; he was offered a place to study art at Goldsmiths but decided to go his own way. His work first came to public attention in the mid-1980s, when he secretly made a series of wood sculptures, including a vast sleeping giant, in Hadley Wood, near to where he grew up. The wood came from a beech tree that had been smashed by lightning and brought down two hornbeams. Wilson made the prone sculpture by weaving the fallen branches, working when it was raining, or at night. “This whole sleeping figure arose,” he says. “There were newspaper and radio reports, but no one knew who did it.” He left the giant for two or three years, then late one night dismantled it, leaving no trace. From there, he made different kinds of “sculptural environments” in woodland in Canada and New Zealand. He shows me pictures of an elaborate wooden shrine he made to the spirit of free foxes, next to a high fence surrounding one of Finland’s intensive fox farms. He was commissioned to work at LeHigh University in Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, but a mix-up in paperwork led to him being deported, a fact that still prevents him going to the United States. Wilson has always refused to take any money for his gum pictures, because it seems against the spirit of them, though he is thinking of letting people give a donation if they can afford it. Though he lives on his own now, he has three children in their 20s, pictures of whom are on his walls among his art. How, I wonder, has he supported himself, working long days on the streets? “It’s been really hard,” he says. “I have sold other work in galleries – [he recently had a show at the Hoxton Gallery in east London]. I’ve been commissioned to do trails in different cities – Zürich, Brussels, Amsterdam. I have done loads of workshops with schools.” He has lately developed a technique where he melted the gum pictures on to a house brick so people can buy them. “I feel certain organisations could help with funding,” he says. “But they never do.” As it is, he worries constantly about how he will pay the rent on his flat. Even so, he plans to carry on with his never-ending trail until he can no longer lie down. He flicks through a book of photographs of his pictures, recalling their stories. “This one was for an amazing woman who runs a charity for children rescued from fire in South African townships.” He peers at another inscription above a pictured handshake: “To the common unfolding humanity who cross this bridge,” he reads, and smiles. “I liked that line.” See more of Ben Wilson’s work hereBorn from a 2019 Africa Express collaboration between the sinuous, storied New York singer-songwriter Joan Wasser and the late Afrobeat don, Fela Kuti drummer Tony Allen, The Solution Is Restless is an album that worms its way under your skin, reminding you of half a dozen records you love while sounding unlike anything else around. “Are you afraid to hear a gospel so unholy?” enquires Wasser on opening track The Barbarian. Allen’s slinky jazz percussion occasionally trips up the listener – indeed, you’d call the classy, wise murk of these tracks “trip-hop” if that genre hadn’t been so devalued. Wasser built this subtle, intense album during lockdown, using the raw material of the 2019 sessions with Allen and arch-collaborator Dave Okumu: Take Me to Your Leader was inspired by New Zealand’s PM, Jacinda Ardern. The album is not about the pandemic, though: another track already available, Geometry of You, operates at the intersection of maths and sensuality, with Wasser cooing about “sticky wickets”. Get My Bearings tries to come to terms with Allen’s death in 2020; throughout, Wasser tackles how to continue to live and feel, through, she says, “a poetic understanding of quantum physics”.Back when I was a teenager, and revising for my A-levels at my friend Sandra’s house, we would toast marshmallows on her parents’ electric ‘gas’ fire. We overdosed on them, of course, and I think the foundations of my A-level failures were set that day. Marshmallow promises much but often fails to deliver, but when it succeeds it hits a glorious spot (one day I will tell you about my attempt to make homemade, mallow-containing Wagon Wheels, which went a bit too well, recipe on request). So I approach marshmallow with caution. Solkiki make something called Mellows (the name may change to Rocks). The flavours vary – ‘they are last minute projects of passion whenever we get time to play with flavours’ – but they are basically chocolate-covered marshmallows (all totally vegan as are all its products). The ones I tasted were organic golden raspberry pâté de fruit and redskin roasted peanuts, covered in 63% Gran Nativo dark ‘milk’ chocolate. Other flavours have included caramel coffee and Italian orange, smoked bourbon with roasted pecan, peanut banana, passion fruit and ginger, spiced candied apple. Their availability is fleeting, announced via the Solkiki newsletter and any left not sold are announced via social media. They cost around £9.50 for four. They sell out. To say they were glorious is an understatement. I ate three of the four with dedication, concentration and reverence. Looking forward to Christmas in 48 days time, these would make wonderful stocking-fillers. Follow Annalisa on Twitter @AnnalisaBWith two byelections coming in Conservative seats, Labour should be happy. Byelection campaigns against a government mired in scandal are normally a dream come true for the opposition: a chance to mobilise discontent and demonstrate its own electoral credibility. While the two forthcoming contests – in Old Bexley and Sidcup and North Shropshire – are both in safe Conservative seats, safer seats than these fell in the 1990s, when opposition parties profited from simmering discontent with a long-running Tory government. Perhaps that time can come again. And yet and yet. Despite serial government scandals and blunders, and a once-in-a-century health crisis, Labour is still trailing in the polls. Voters are not happy with the government yet complain they do not know what the party opposing it would do differently. Keir Starmer is more popular than his predecessor but remains less popular than past opposition leaders who have gone on to win. Boris Johnson is untrusted, unpredictable and unpopular, yet voters still prefer him to his Labour rival when forced to choose. Labour, it seems, needs a bolder, clearer, more ambitious vision to take to the electorate. The problem with this theory is that it ignores the brute reality of the electoral map Labour must fight on. The past two elections have reshaped the political battle lines. The Conservatives’ gains in both 2017 and 2019 have come by uniting Brexit backers, a strategy that can deliver majorities because, while the Leave vote is not drastically larger than the Remain vote, it is much more efficiently spread across seats. Remain voters are concentrated in big-city seats; Leave voters are spread across the country. As a result, while only a narrow majority of voters backed Brexit, a large majority of constituencies have Leave majorities. A party that can win 80% of the Leave vote, as the Conservatives did in 2019, is well on the way to victory in most of these seats. While Brexit opened up a new route to victory for the Conservatives, it closed the jaws of an electoral trap for Labour. For years, a divide in outlook and values has been opening up between Labour’s past and present voters. Brexit drastically worsened this problem by placing the two groups on opposite sides of a tribal divide – the diverse youthful, university-educated, big-city dwellers who are becoming Labour’s new core vote became Remainers, while the ageing, socially conservative, small-town residents drifting away from the party became Leavers. Yet, while the Conservatives can win by focusing on one side of this divide, Labour cannot. The Remain vote is concentrated in too few seats and the Leave vote is too large and too evenly spread. Polarisation is a winning strategy for Conservatives. Bridging divides is the only winning strategy for Labour. This is politics on hard mode. To see just how hard it is, recall how attempts to bridge the Brexit divide defined and defeated Starmer’s predecessor. Many of Jeremy Corbyn’s most senior advisers saw the problems the new electoral map posed for their party and urged their leader to make a credible offer to the Leave voters who dominated the electoral battleground. But this argument never convinced Labour Remainers, who instead demanded a second referendum and began defecting to other Remain parties when Labour failed to deliver. Corbyn was trapped. He could not ignore Labour activists’ demands for a “people’s vote”, yet acceding fully to Remainers’ demands would commit Labour to a policy that was toxic in the Leave-leaning seats that would decide the election. Corbyn tried to square this circle by offering something for everyone – a new, Labour-flavoured Brexit deal for Leave supporters and a referendum on that deal for Remainers. But this attempt to appease both sides proved credible to neither. Corbyn’s compromise failed badly, but a more decisive stance might have been even worse. Labour lost equal numbers of Leavers and Remainers in 2019, but the Leave defections hurt more because they were congregated in marginal seats. Labour needed a stronger offer to compete with “get Brexit done” in these seats, yet a fuller embrace of Brexit would have risked an exodus in the party’s Remain heartlands. Although the Brexit crisis is now in a less acute phase, Starmer faces the same electoral dilemmas. Voters still divide into Leave and Remain tribes, these identities are still more widely shared than loyalties to any political party and Leave support is still better spread across seats. Labour cannot hope to win without finding a way to engage the Leave tribe while not alienating the Remain tribe. Can it be done? There are some reasons for hope. Issues that unite Leave and Remain voters – the economy, the NHS, public services – are higher on the agenda now, while immigration, the issue that polarises them most, has less resonance than at any point for a generation. Johnson’s magnetic attraction to tribal Leave voters disguises broader weaknesses – he has never been popular or trusted and his already weak ratings are in decline. The current Labour leader is less divisive than his predecessor and thus better able to put his case without having his message derailed by past or present controversies. Voters are more volatile than ever and decide who to back later. Labour will take heart from the recent German election, where an unfancied centre-left moderate rode a late polling surge to victory. While recent scandals will put a spring in Labour’s step, it cannot pin its hopes solely on a change in the public mood. The Conservatives know that polarisation remains the best route to victory on a Leave-leaning map and will keep seeking new “culture war” controversies to reopen the old Brexit divide. They have an unlikely ally in such efforts – committed progressives who want Labour to focus on an uncompromising socially liberal message and are as eager for divisive arguments over values as the Conservatives. Many of Labour’s own culture warriors do not see the risks polarisation poses for their party and see Starmer’s efforts to woo more socially conservative voters as an erosion of progressive values. Purity is always appealing to true believers, but purity cannot win Labour an election on today’s map. To win again, Starmer must instead help a divided party and a polarised nation learn to love compromise. • This article was amended on 7 November 2021. One of the upcoming byelections is in North Shropshire, not North Somerset as stated in an earlier version. • Dr Robert Ford is professor of political science at the University of Manchester and co-author of The British General Election of 2019Ballet Black, formed to celebrate and improve diversity in classical ballet, celebrates its 20th anniversary with a programme that reveals how surely it has developed its own style over those years. It’s not just a company with a purpose, but one with character and with a brilliant eye for ballet that is both popular and challenging. Its new double bill opens with Then or Now, a sophisticated, moody piece by choreographer Will Tuckett to a score that is a blend of the poetry of Adrienne Rich and Biber’s Passacaglia for solo violin arranged and recorded by Daniel Pioro. That blend of history and the urgent themes of black lives today is richly resonant and Tuckett responds with choreography that sometimes picks up the exact words (a head turned, a kiss blown) but more often mines the raw honesty of Rich’s verse. The dancing is elegant, emotional and superb. Mthuthuzeli November is one of the dancers and he’s a rising choreographer as well. His second piece for the company, The Waiting Game, also relies on language for part of its score. November has written an absurdist meditation on the things holding us back in life and matched it with fluid, detailed steps that bring the words to life. It opens with an amazing image of Sayaka Ichikawa peering over the top of a door, watching a hunched November as he broods on his future. That door (cleverly designed by Richard Bolton and Phil Cristodolou and lit by David Plater), opens to reveal a world of possibility and doubt as a slightly threatening chorus line attempts to entice him through it. Once tempted, he emerges glittering in sequins and everyone dances their heart out to a rousing number by Etta James. Exhilarating in effect and full of ideas, the piece feels like a hit, confirming November’s talent and this remarkable company’s strong sense of itself. Ballet Black will perform Then or Now and The Waiting Game at the Festival theatre, Edinburgh, on 18 November This article was amended on 9 November 2021. The original version described Mthuthuzeli November as an aspiring choreographer; this was changed to ‘rising choreographer’ to better reflect his experience.Ministers and civil servants took nearly 107,000 domestic flights in Britain in just one year despite a drive to reduce carbon emissions, reveals a new official report on “greening government”. The environmental audit reveals 22 Whitehall departments and government agencies took 106,824 internal flights in the year to 31 March 2020, an average of 293 flights a day. Some departments have increased the number of flights they take across the country compared with a decade ago, including the Department for International Development (DfID); the Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO, as it was until September 2020, when it became the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office); and the Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport (DCMS). The figures are published as Boris Johnson came under fire last week for flying by private jet from the Cop26 summit in Glasgow to London. New departmental guidelines will now “require lower carbon options to be considered first as an alternative to each planned flight”. Norman Baker, a former transport minister and an adviser at the Campaign for Better Transport charity, said: “The government is becoming increasingly good at lecturing other people while doing the opposite itself. There is no excuse for this number of internal flights.” The Campaign for Better Transport has called for a ban on all UK domestic flights where the equivalent journey by rail can be completed in under five hours. It says cheap domestic flights are a “climate disaster” and can generate about seven times more greenhouse emissions than the equivalent rail journey. The Greening Government annual report for the year to 31 March 2020 says that the government has cut the number of domestic flights taken by 38% since 2009/10, but 12 departments missed their targets. The number of domestic flights taken by the DfID rose from 3,610 in 2009/10 to 4,098 in 2019/20; the number taken by the Office for National Statistics (ONS) rose from 1,517 to 2,055 over the same period; the number taken by the FCO rose from 735 to 791; and by the DCMS, from 169 to 303. The government published new “greening government commitments” alongside its annual report on departmental performance. It wants departments to reduce emissions from domestic flights by 30% by 2025 from a 2017/18 baseline, and to start reporting the distance travelled by international flights. The new figures have been published after the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, announced in his autumn budget that he was halving air passenger duty to £6.50 from April 2023. Labour said the cut was “astonishing” and would be cheered by bankers on short-haul flights “sipping champagne”. A government spokesperson said: “Officials are required to make domestic and international trips to conduct government business. We are setting the world’s most ambitious climate change target to reduce emissions by 78% by 2035 compared with 1990 levels.” A spokesperson for the Office for National Statistics said: “The ONS has successfully reduced its carbon emissions by 58% over the past five years and we’re on course to achieve another 38% by 2025. Air travel is occasionally the only practical option for a UK-wide organisation, but we aim nevertheless to reduce it substantially.”‘Annie the puppy!’ my son screams as we enter my father’s house, making a bee line for the black Labrador who is, conversely, making a bee line for him. My father’s dog, for she is a puppy no more, has grown tremendously since we last saw her. ‘Daddy, what the hell are you feeding her?’ I ask, before being shown a nondescript silver dish filled with dry dog food pellets, where realistically a platter of zebra steaks and protein powders would have made more sense. My son first met Annie when she was six weeks old, and Annie the Puppy is simply her name now – a three-word soubriquet enshrined in permanent fact, like Kermit the Frog or Henry the Eighth. Annie is the size of a small bear, ‘and still growing!’ my sister’s fiancé Eddie adds with pride, as Annie licks my son with a tongue twice the length of his head. We’ve landed at my dad’s house for two events for my memoir, one in my hometown of Derry, and another in Ballyshannon, across the border in Donegal. I’ve talked my dad into attending the latter, which will be the first time he’s been to any of my book events, at which I mostly talk about him throughout. On Sunday afternoon, my son, Daddy, Eddie and I pile into the car to make the trip. Donegal is wildly picturesque and the journey evokes memories of family holidays and school trips taken through winding hills and deep, green valleys. My father doesn’t recall me going on any school trips because I forged his signature on all school correspondence, a practice he wholeheartedly endorsed as a father of 11 kids who had long since outgrown a passion for scrutiny by the time I, his ninth child, started thrusting permission slips and teacher’s notes in front of his face. We arrive at the venue to find some old friends of my father’s have crossed the border for the event. It is the 30th anniversary of my mother’s death and, with gentle alarm, one woman works out that she hasn’t seen us since the funeral. I am told I look like just like my mother and, with a gasp, that my son looks like me or, at the very least, the me they last saw in that church in 1991. The event is a great success, marred only by my son’s decision to blare Paw Patrol at max volume for a few seconds near the end. But my father is to have the last laugh at the signing afterwards, when all present work out that he is the self-same Daddy mentioned throughout the text, and begin thrusting their copies of the book into his hands. Slowly, a growing circle of devotees flocks in his direction and, for a solid 20 minutes, every book I receive to sign arrives already blotted with the self-same chicken scratch I remember aping throughout my childhood. ‘I could have done you a better one than that,’ I try to tell them once I’ve signed, but no one hears. They are already making their way over to shake his hand. Did Ye Hear Mammy Died? by Séamas O’Reilly is out now (Little, Brown, £16.99). Buy a copy from guardianbookshop at £14.78 Follow Séamas on Twitter @shockproofbeatsDuring the 1990s, the Chicago Bulls dominated US basketball, winning six championships, never losing a final, and helping to propel the NBA into becoming a multibillion-dollar global business. But behind the scenes, the dynastic partnership of Michael Jordan and Scottie Pippen, presented at the time as harmonious and brotherly, was anything but, Pippen reveals in an unusually bitter memoir, Unguarded, published this week. As with many sporting disputes before it, Pippen’s anger arises from the sense that he was only partially credited for the team’s success during its historic run. The Last Dance, last year’s 10-episode Netflix-ESPN documentary, he writes, “glorified Michael Jordan while not giving nearly enough praise to me and my proud teammates”. “I was nothing more than a prop. His ‘best teammate of all time’, he called me. He couldn’t have been more condescending if he tried,” he fumes, according to an extract published in GQ last week. “Michael deserved a large portion of the blame” for the omissions, he writes, saying that the producers of the series had granted the player editorial control. “He was the leading man and the director.” “Michael was determined to prove to the current generation of fans that he was larger than life during his day – and still larger than LeBron James, the player many consider his equal, if not superior.” “How dare Michael treat us that way after everything we did for him and his precious brand,” Pippen writes, adding, “to make things worse, Michael received $10m for his role in the doc, while my teammates and I didn’t earn a dime.” But the player rationalised the characterisation of Jordan in an interview with the New York Times. “I think he’s always separated himself a little bit from what I consider the traditional team concept, in some sense. And I think The Last Dance just put the icing on the cake. “Each episode was the same: Michael on a pedestal, his teammates secondary, smaller, the message no different from when he referred to us back then as his ‘supporting cast’.” Pippen’s accusations, to which Jordan has yet to respond, is not the first to expose the reality behind creative, competitive relationships once thought to be harmonious. Newscaster Katie Couric came out with a stinging autobiography depicting rivalry and backstabbing during her time in TV news. Paul McCartney’s The Lyrics: 1956 to the Present opens up about a rough patch in his relationship with John Lennon. “When we broke up and everyone was now flailing around, John turned nasty,” McCartney writes. “I don’t really understand why. Maybe because we grew up in Liverpool, where it was always good to get in the first punch of a fight.” “I don’t know what he hoped to gain, other than punching me in the face,” McCartney says. “The whole thing really annoyed me. John would say things like, ‘It was rubbish. The Beatles were crap’. Also, ‘I don’t believe in the Beatles, I don’t believe in Jesus, I don’t believe in God.’” “Those were quite hurtful barbs to be flinging around, and I was the person they were being flung at, and it hurt,” he added. But Pippen has gone farther than most in unburdening himself of his disappointment with his creative partner, and there are undercurrents of other, more entrenched differences. Jordan grew up with three siblings and a stable family life: his mother, Delores, a bank teller turned author; his father James, a maintenance worker turned manager at General Electric. Pippen, by contrast, grew up in Arkansas with 11 older siblings. His father worked in a paper mill until he was paralysed by a stroke. Early in his career, in 1991, Pippen signed himself into a seven-year contract that eventually made him only the 122nd highest paid player in the NBA. “I felt like I couldn’t afford to gamble myself if I got injured,” he says in the film. “I needed to make sure that people in my corner were taken care of.” In the 1997-98 season, Pippen took time out for tendon surgery and Jordan accused him of being “selfish”. Pippen hits back: “You want to know what selfish is? Selfish is retiring right before the start of training camp when it is too late for the organisation to sign free agents” – a reference to Jordan’s unexpected first retirement, aged 30, in 1993. “It’s not because I don’t love the game. I love the game of basketball,” Jordan said at the time. “I just feel that, at this particular time in my career, I have reached the pinnacle of my career. I have achieved a lot in that short amount of time, if you want to call it short. But I just feel that I don’t have anything else for myself to prove.” To Pippen, abandoning his team was selfish. “Seeing again how poorly Michael treated his teammates, I cringed, as I did back then.”My father, Sukarno, the first elected president of Indonesia, was put under house arrest in March 1967 a few days after I was born. He was 67. In the months before, there had been a bloodbath in the country in which he lost many trusted friends and allies. The year before, he had sent my mother, who was pregnant with me, to Japan, her homeland, advising her to return to Indonesia when the situation improved. It never did. Three years later, in 1970, I saw my father for the first time, on his deathbed. My mother and I had not been allowed to return to the country and we had been living in France. My father died a few hours after our plane from Paris landed. Thanks to the despotic rule of the second president – General Suharto – I was not able to see my father alive, although my mother had tried repeatedly to enter Indonesia. I am now 54 and still suffering deep pain at the thought of my father’s lonely years under house arrest, being denied medical care and family visits because Suharto did not want to take any chances by giving him the opportunity to speak out. Suharto had seized control of the mass media and my father, whose voice was once regularly heard over the radio, was silenced. His voice was so muted that he could no longer communicate with the members of his own family. After the Second World War, we can argue that colonialism in Indonesia was replaced with US and British imperialism. They saw the non-aligned movement, of which my father was a founder, as a threat to their empire-building and business interests. The US government refused to see the difference between nationalism and communism. The British government wanted the removal of my father due to its business interests, as did the Americans and their allies in the region, which is rich in natural resources. (West Papua has the biggest gold mine in the world.) My father had also angered the British by launching “konfrontasi”, a limited military border campaign to show Indonesia’s opposition to the newly formed Malaysia, which he saw as a colonial creation and threat. The American strategy in toppling my father was so successful that the US government later replicated it in Chile under the codename “Operation Jakarta”. The tragic fate of my father was shared by millions of Indonesians whose lives were destroyed by the 1965 bloody military coup, which I believe was backed by the American, British and Australian governments. From the documents recently declassified, we found out that, starting in the 1950s, the CIA had kept Sukarno under surveillance. In 1965, the United Kingdom incited the mass killings under the pretext that the communist people were responsible for the murder of six leading Indonesian generals. Today, there is still debate about who was behind these murders. My father knew the communists did not kill his six generals; he also knew the intent of the British and American governments to see him toppled. He had been very outspoken with his rather aggressive motto, “Amerika kita setrika, Inggris kita linggis” (Let’s iron out America and bash the English). However, he was somehow powerless when facing his own countrymen. Thus, when an unknown military general, Suharto, took over and ordered the killings of all communists and Sukarno’s followers, many civilians who did not even know the meaning of the communist ideology were also arrested, tortured, murdered. For generations, the victims’ family members were also persecuted. They were marked out with a symbol on their ID cards that prevented them from finding employment. They could not attend public schools and it was difficult for their children to attend private schools except for several Catholic ones. Even my own sister, Megawati Sukarno Putri, was not able to finish her university studies. When talking about Suharto, we would whisper, out of fear that the walls could listen, such was the reach of his surveillance state. The press was heavily censored, with redacted passages covering the “negative” press about his dictatorship. We had to ask for special permission to pray at our father’s grave. Our names were called one by one by the military officers guarding the fences of his grave as we approached to pay our respects. Some cynical western views may look down on newly independent countries because they did not know what to do with their freedom. However, they seem not to be aware that several western governments have played a major role in destroying millions of lives under a fake communist propaganda threat. Communism was allowed in European countries, but in so-called third world countries civilians related to communism or suspected of being communist were killed. Unfortunately, this dark history of Indonesia remains largely hidden. The European and American history curriculums do not mention their role in the dark periods of colonialism and western imperialism during the cold war. Instead, most textbooks still largely offer self-glorifying roles in this history. As the Observer story showed, the British were complicit in the mass murders and enabling the 32-year reign of the despotic Suharto. It is time that the British government apologised to the Indonesian people for the enormous harm it did.Ian McDiarmid, 77, has distinguished himself as a theatrical all-rounder. He made his name on stage as an actor of incisive authority and is internationally known as Emperor Palpatine in the Star Wars films. Between 1990 and 2002, he ran – with Jonathan Kent – the Almeida theatre in London with tremendous flair. He is touring a one-man show, The Lemon Table – his adaptation of a pair of acerbically funny Julian Barnes stories: one about Sibelius in old age, the other about a sixtysomething concert-goer with zero tolerance for coughers, chatterers and mobile-phone users. What first drew you to Julian Barnes’s stories? I recorded The Silence for Radio 3 for an interval in the Proms in 2004 and thought there was dramatic potential in it. I had a nice letter from Julian Barnes encouraging me to think about it more. But it wasn’t until two years ago, pre-pandemic, that I came across the book again at home and hit upon a second story, Vigilance. The attraction was not only that both stories have first-person narratives but that I would not have to alter the words because they’re perfect. Julian has his own music. His words are rhythmic, precise and roll off the tongue. And the stories are funny – I thought there might be a way of combining them on stage. I talked to Michael [Grandage, the show’s co-director with Titas Halder] and he said: let’s see what we can do. What’s your own worst experience of a mobile phone disrupting a performance? I’ve not suffered as much as my late friend Richard Griffiths who, in The History Boys, used to stop the action whenever a phone went off. If it went off a second time, he’d tell that member of the audience to leave, saying that that until they did the performance would not continue. I’ve never been that extreme. I also remember Kevin Spacey, when he was in an O’Neill play at the Almeida, saying: “Tell them we’re busy,” before carrying on seamlessly. The Barnes stories involve a testy resistance to age. What do you see as the most positive thing about getting older? In old age you know a bit, don’t you? Although sometimes you know less than you think you do… I’m lucky to have a place in north-east Scotland – on the North Sea. It’s very peaceful… the only sounds I hear are birds and the sea. There’s no interruption. It’s bliss. And, fortunately, it’s not completely isolated; people pass with their dogs so I don’t feel completely cut off. What’s the most troublesome thing about getting older? As an actor, it’s the dread of losing your memory. The part of the brain that learns lines is, I’m happy to say, different from the part that thinks: “God, where are my keys?” But for many actors of my generation, that part of their brain ceases to function. Michael Gambon has been frank about this: he is an incredible loss to British theatre. Of all the old men you’ve played who have you most enjoyed? I remember a casting director saying: Ian will come into his own when he is older… Playing Einstein in Terry Johnson’s Insignificance was particularly enjoyable – involving an imagined relationship with Marilyn Monroe. More recently, I was in Chris Hannan’s What Shadows as Enoch Powell when he had Parkinson’s. That was interesting to do. Is it important to think about death as one gets older? We should think about it. Death has been with me most of my life because my mother died when I was very young so I encountered death early – I was 10 and discovered her body and didn’t realise she was dead. It has always been in my mind. In common with everyone else, I’ve had other tragedies. But that was the starting point to my thinking about death. What does Emperor Palpatine in Star Wars contribute to the subject of ageing? As he gets older, he gets more destructive. In the last movie he defied death, which was great to play… What’s fascinating is that he never went away from those movies; his ghastly presence ran them. I get a strange satisfaction from that. What does it take to play a villain? I’m not sure why playing villains is so satisfying. As a kid, I always wanted to be the baddie. We played Robin Hood and my friends said: “You can be the sheriff,” and I said: “No, I want to be King John because he is worse.” There is plenty of irascibility in the Barnes stories. Are you irascible? No, although we’re all angry about certain things. I wish I were less angry about some things. What riles you most? The incompetence of contemporary politics. How optimistic are you about the post-pandemic future of theatre? It’s tough at the moment. Theatres are doing everything they can to ensure people’s comfort and safety but it’s going to take time, they have lost a lot of revenue. You must be relieved you are no longer running the Almeida. Jonathan and I are relieved yet profoundly sympathise. What do you like to do to relax? I like to walk near where I live – the scenery is appropriate to Star Wars with black rocks that look like the Fifth Kingdom. When I eventually got my lines, I sat on a rock to learn them and it helped. There’s much about music in the Barnes stories – what music do you enjoy most? A wide mixture, including Sibelius – not just to plug the show. Michael [Grandage] and I have a passion for Shostakovich. You and Michael Grandage are long-term collaborators – is that a luxury in the theatre nowadays? It is a luxury – because you develop a shorthand over the years. We got to know each other when we were both actors. We have a shared aesthetic and sense of humour. And could I ask, as it is relevant to Barnes’s stories, about the value of silence? I am very good at silence. I long for it and now I have it. The Lemon Table plays Yvonne Arnaud theatre, Guildford, 9-13 Nov; Home, Manchester, 16-20 Nov; Malvern theatres, 23-27 NovDoctor Who BBC One | iPlayer Showtrial BBC One | iPlayer How Green Is the Government? Channel 4 | All 4 Dalgliesh Channel 5 | My5 The first episode of series 13 of Doctor Who splattered on to the screen like an intergalactic custard pie. Written by Chris Chibnall (Broadchurch)and directed by Jamie Magnus Stone, The Halloween Apocalypse kicked off Jodie Whittaker’s final run as the first female Time Lord. After this six-parter, and three specials, there’s a new Doctor and the return of the original modern Who showrunner, Russell T Davies (It’s a Sin, Years and Years), the latter a behind the scenes “regeneration” that has the Who faithful panting and drooling like oversexed Daleks. Some of the criticisms aimed at Whittaker since she took over in 2018 have verged on “Hello deranged, meet sexist”. I’d reluctantly agree that Whittaker, a talented, naturalistic actor, was a trifle miscast here: the Doctor has to hold the sonic screwdriver with supreme conviction that the universe is at stake, not as though they’re trying to find their vehicle in a multistorey car park. Still, the show has bigger issues. I’ve found yoghurt pots at the back of my fridge that provoked more gasps than this opener. From the first scene featuring the Doctor and sidekick Yaz (Mandip Gill) dangling over an ocean of boiling acid (CGI by Robert Dyas?) to the Tardis decor (think: interstellar freshers’ disco) to new threat, the Flux (some misty stuff that makes planets dissolve like budget bath bombs), the keynote is “blah”. You want Doctor Who, not Doctor Whatevs. It’s cluttered too: there’s everything from the Arctic Circle to newcomer John Bishop’s everybloke character to subpar monsters (including a dog-alien that looks like it should be nodding at the back of a Ford Fiesta) to lame jokes to Victorian flashbacks to explosions to food banks. On that last point, it’s bizarre that Doctor Who should be pilloried, as it is, for having a social conscience (oh gosh, I’m sorry, is the poverty ruining your sci-fi?). The real problem with the show is that there’s a lot going on and it’s still underwhelming. Whoever becomes the new Time Lord, an urgent change of tone is required. The new five-part BBC One drama Showtrial, written by Ben Richards and directed by Zara Hayes, is from the producers of Line of Duty and, more recently, Vigil, the submarine thriller that was scuppered by endless plot convolutions (psst, next time, sink the sub, not the viewer). In Showtrial, based in Bristol, university student Hannah (Abra Thompson) is murdered and the chief suspect is her former friend, Talitha (Celine Buckens), a wealthy screw-up with green nails and blazing, furious eyes, who delights in alienating the detective (Sinead Keenan) and even her own coolly competent solicitor, Cleo (Tracy Ifeachor), who has messed up herself and been bounced off the professional fast track. A few episodes in (all are available), and without wishing to give away early twists, Showtrial is impressive: composed, intriguing, layered. While the question mark hovers overs Talitha’s innocence, the drama travels elsewhere, from the police to the Crown Prosecution Service to Talitha’s jittery friend Dhillon (Joseph Payne), to the bereaved mother (Claire Lams) to Talitha’s wealthy parents (James Frain and Camilla Power), whose chilly vileness gives Talitha her backstory and then some. Showtrial isn’t perfect. At times, there are jarring echoes of real-life cases, such as when Talitha (laughing, behaving inappropriately) recalls Amanda Knox. Elsewhere, it overstretches, encompassing many “issues”: class, trolling, abuses of power, exploitation in academia. Talitha herself ticks hackneyed rich bitch/poor little rich girl boxes – she even does sex work as “Lady Tease”. Even so, watching as the trial gets under way, I’m finding Buckens quite brilliant: bridling, savage, audaciously dislikable. Ifeachor is equally strong, in a different – patrician, controlled – way. These are performances that hum alongside each other in separate powerful solar systems. Against the backdrop of the Cop26 climate conference in Glasgow, the Channel 4 documentary How Green Is the Government?, directed by Callum Macrae, asks: do you trust Boris Johnson on climate issues? Personally, I don’t trust Johnson to put matching socks on in the morning, but Macrae goes further, rigorously delving into the government’s much-trumpeted 10-point green plan, which aims to achieve net zero carbon emissions by 2050. Prepare to be enlightened, albeit horrified. According to assembled experts in the documentary, far from being a “global leader”, the UK hasn’t invested sufficiently in green areas (wind, water, rocks), while spending billions on incentivising fossil fuel production. Meanwhile, belching clouds from the burning of biomass (trees/tree waste scrunched into pellets) isn’t even counted in the UK, as these emissions are officially the responsibility of the biomass supplier: China. Which sounds a bit like stabbing someone in London but not being arrested because the knife was manufactured in Germany. There was more – so much more – interspersed with footage of Johnson behind assorted microphones, at one point raving: “‘Cake, Have, Eat’ is my message to you” like a deluded eco Yoda. This timely and thorough documentary does a fine job of pointing out that, climate-wise in the UK, “cake is crumbs (at best)”. The new Channel 5 series Dalgliesh stars Bertie Carvel (Doctor Foster, Matilda, Ink) as the late crime novelist PD James’s detective character, Adam Dalgliesh, in the first of three two-part dramas, starting with Shroud for a Nightingale. Directed by Jill Robertson, with lead writer Helen Edmundson, and also starring Natasha Little and Helen Aluko, Shroud… details murders unfolding at a nursing training college. A period piece, set in the 1970s (you could almost smell the boiling cabbage and disinfectant), this was a festering miasma of blood-splattered gingham, secret resentments, illicit liaisons and Nazi war criminals. Following in the sombre overcoats of previous Dalglieshes Roy Marsden and Martin Shaw, Carvel did a sterling job of portraying the detective-cum-poet-cum-bereaved husband, staying immersed in the still, deep waters of character, whether interviewing witnesses or sitting in dark pubs beside crackling fires. This is a solid, old-school production, no bells and whistles, which these days feels hysterically radical. Sometimes it just works to have a good story plainly told. What else I’m watching Joanna Lumley and the Human Swan (ITV) Joanna Lumley follows eco-activist Sacha Dench, AKA the Human Swan, paramotoring around Britain. This documentary poignantly includes a tribute to Dench’s fellow pilot, Dan Burton, who died after an in-air collision with Dench (herself badly injured) during filming. What We Do in the Shadows (BBC Two) Third series of the cult vampire comedy. Laszlo (Matt Berry) sulks at being appointed a Vampire Council “pen-pusher”: “I became a vampire to suck blood and fuck for ever!” The show’s co-creator Taika Waititi appears in a cameo. Blair and Brown: The New Labour Revolution (BBC Two) Last episode of the political docu-series finishes with Gordon Brown losing the general election in 2010, signalling the end of New Labour. Engrossing, cutthroat, this series has equalled Thatcher: A Very British Revolution, which came from the same team. • This article was amended on 9 November 2021. It is Camilla Power who plays the role of Talitha’s mother in Showtrial, not Mika Simmons as an earlier version said. And Claire Lams’ surname had been misspelled as “Lam”.Ministers are being urged to allow low-cost, paint-only zebra crossings on side roads to encourage more walking, after research showed they made drivers significantly more likely to stop for pedestrians. A study commissioned in Greater Manchester, where the transport commissioner has spent more than two years trying to persuade the Department for Transport (DfT) to approve the idea, found that when the markings were installed, 70% of drivers stopped for people waiting to cross the road, against 40% without them. With parallel polling showing three-quarters of parents would be more likely to walk their primary-aged children to school if such markings were in place, groups including Living Streets, Guide Dogs, the Ramblers and the AA have called for them to be introduced. Under current UK law, zebra crossings are allowed only if they have zigzag markings along the road before and after, and main-wired flashing lights on poles, meaning they cannot be installed at a junction and they cost up to £40,000 each. As part of wider plans to encourage more people to walk and cycle, the Greater Manchester mayor, Andy Burnham, and his transport commissioner, the former Olympic and Tour de France cyclist Chris Boardman, have been trying to persuade the DfT to approve the simpler version, as used ubiquitously in many cities around Europe, which cost an estimated £1,000 each. The duo, who hope other UK cities could follow the lead, commissioned the independent Transport Research Laboratory to carry out limited on-street trials in Manchester and London of what are officially termed “non-prescribed zebras”. These found a significant increase in the proportion of drivers who gave way, although this was lower when drivers were turning into a side road rather than turning out, and that pedestrians were more likely to feel safe to cross. Burnham and Boardman, who say they could install hundreds of the crossings in the next 12 months, mainly in lower-traffic residential areas, as part of the region’s new Bee Network for active travel routes, have written to the transport secretary, Grant Shapps, seeking his support. Burnham said: “Every year in the UK around 2bn trips under one mile are made by car, the equivalent of a 15-minute walk or a five-minute bike ride. Those trips by car are releasing approximately 680,000 tonnes of carbon. We wanted to see if a method used widely across the world could offer us a practical and cost-effective option to make crossing side roads safer and, importantly, feel safer.” In a joint statement, Living Streets, the AA, British Cycling, Guide Dogs, the Campaign for Better Transport, the Ramblers, Sustrans and Playing Out said: “In the face of a global climate crisis and worsening obesity and physical inactivity levels, the need to enable millions more people across the nation to make local journeys on foot is not a choice – it’s an absolute necessity. “The evidence for side-road zebras is compelling, the benefits are overwhelming. It’s time to take a step towards better health; a step towards decarbonation; a safer step in the right direction.” A DfT spokesperson said: “We are aware of the report but will carefully consider its findings before making any further decisions.”The Home Office should climb off its “high horse of oppression and prohibition” and stop pursuing the “fantasy” of a drug-free society, the chair of an influential international consortium on drug policy has said. As a new global index is set to rank each country’s approach to tackling narcotics, former New Zealand prime minister and chair of the Global Commission on Drug Policy, Helen Clark, said that the UK was fixated with a “self-defeating” strategy to the issue that bred misery. Clark also said that the Home Office’s approach to drug policy meant it deterred police and crime commissioners in England and Wales who might otherwise advocate for a more liberal strategy. “The Home Office is a major problem. It’s not thinking outside the box. In the UK, you have crime commissioners and there’s more scope for discretion at the local level with some prepared to push the boundary,” Clark told the Observer. “But to get that consistently across the United Kingdom, you need the Home Office to get off its high horse of oppression and prohibition and say: ‘Look, we’ve had this wrong, our prisons are thronged with people on drug offences, marginalised swathes of people. It’s costly and self-defeating,” added Clark, whose commission is made up largely of world leaders. By contrast, she praised Scotland for recognising it had problems – the country has the highest per capita number of deaths relating to drug use in Europe – and signalling that it wanted to look for new solutions. “Scotland knows it’s shameful. After the last set of [fatality] figures came out, the Scottish government wants to [make a] move,” said Clark. Her comments come just before the inaugural edition of the global drug policy index which ranks countries according to indicators such as health and harm reduction rather than the traditional law enforcement measures of the numbers of arrests or amount of drugs seized. According to the latest National Crime Agency annual report, more than 150 tonnes of drugs were seized at a time when deaths from drug poisoning in England and Wales have hit a record high, prompting charities to warn of a public health emergency. The index, headed by the International Drug Policy Consortium, a global network of 192 organisations, is intended to question the ambition of achieving a “drug-free society”, which Clark says is futile. “It’s a fantasy, the total elimination of drugs? Dream on, there’s never been a time in human history where human beings haven’t resorted to some kind of substances that will take them out of their current reality for whatever reason,” she said. The index arrives 50 years after the UK’s Misuse of Drugs Act came into force, which still forms the basis of its anti-drug strategy – separating illicit substances into classes which carry different penalties – but which is facing increasing calls for reform. A number of prominent campaigners are pushing for the decriminalisation and regulation of drugs with more than 60 MPs supporting a campaign to review current legislation. Despite this, the UK is expected to sit in the top 10 of the index’s most progressive countries when it is launched in London on Monday, a ranking that Clark says articulates the current failures of global drug policy. The index is composed of 75 indicators including criminal justice and extreme responses of the state to the issue. Of the 30 countries featured in its first iteration, eight had decriminalised drug use and just three managed to divert people away from the criminal justice system. A Home Office spokesperson said: “Drugs damage communities and ruin lives. We must prevent drug use in our communities, support people through treatment and recovery, and tackle the supply of illegal drugs.” They cited Project ADDER, which it said was “taking a wide-ranging and integrated approach to prevent drug use and support people dependent on drugs through treatment and recovery”.A weary raised eyebrow is the usual response to the ideal vision of a prison, where inmates can take stock and improve themselves. We hear enough, after all, about the poor mental health, the violence, the cramped conditions and the illicit substances that circulate. But one persuasive voice is about to take to a public platform to argue that a prisoner really can press the reset button during a sentence – and, furthermore, that the outside world could learn lessons from the successes achieved inside. George the Poet, the award-winning podcaster and spoken-word performer, has been working with prisoners across Britain for much of his 20s. As a broadcaster, a visitor and a speaker, he has gained insight into the minds of incarcerated men and believes the time is right to point out how much could be done with a new approach. “Instead of assuming these guys have nothing to contribute, my lecture is about asking what assumptions we can make that would lay a foundation for them to optimise their time; so they will look back, not with shame, but with gratitude and relief,” George explains. On Thursday, the 30-year-old from Neasden, real name George Mpanga, is to give the annual Longford Lecture, staged by the trust that works to develop the education of prisoners. Before the event – which is entitled “Change from the inside: what is possible in prison that is not possible outside?”, and is to be livestreamed and broadcast on prison radio – the poet and activist spoke of his hope of affecting government thinking on prisoners. “We can’t afford to lose the potential of all those younger people who are not yet engaged with education. So much richness has come out of ex-offenders it indicates that there is so much more,” he said. And the suggestion from Westminster that mere positive thinking can provide the answer worries him. “That is exactly what an Oxbridge-graduate MP would say, someone who is not under the kind of pressure that makes them desperate. You can’t meet someone’s desperation with theory. You have to live it with them.” George will call instead for investment in training that will inspire – “in other words, not training in things that make people feel they are at the end of the line and these are the scraps that are left for them”. The poet will also explain the way prisons have shaped his views on rehabilitation, as well as on creativity and the true value of learning. “When I talk to prisoners about creativity now, I talk about it not only as a human right, but as a human condition,” he said. For him the old, romantic idea of pent-up talent inside a prison cell is more than just cant. “I’ve seen a lot of it. But it is difficult to understand the relationship between creativity and struggle. I don’t know that struggle inspires creativity, but I am certain human beings are innately creative and I do suspect harsh conditions force people to look inwards for solutions and that drives creativity.” When it comes to education, the path is clearer, he argues. “There are two ways to think about education: either as a means or as a lifestyle. Getting a qualification in plumbing or bricklaying is a respectable thing, but some people are uninspired by that kind of education. “In contrast, education as a lifestyle means getting into the notion of learning and of transforming your thought patterns by reflecting on other people’s experiences and reaching for the wealth of knowledge available to us through books.” George regularly finds a receptive crowd when he visits prisons. “When you talk to ex-offenders or prisoners, you are meeting people who have already spent a lot of time reflecting. My work is written from deep reflection, so that actually helps. Outside, it is difficult to have those conversations, because people are not often ready for it.” George has worked with the organisation Key4Life, visiting Feltham Young Offenders Institute and honing his own craft with broadcasting shifts on National Prison Radio. “These kids at Feltham feel like they could be rappers. They are obsessed with music. And that is less and less of a pipe dream. Rap is big business now in this country,” he said. “It bothered me for years that Feltham didn’t have even the most basic radio training provisions. Now these things are changing. Building up professional careers in music is under way, not just for performers. It is not just me dreaming alone.” The sport and music industries can offer a route out, he believes. “There is a trope that it is an insult for black people to be pigeonholed into these things. And obviously pigeonholing is a problem, but the potential we see in those industries is unparalleled as far as the black diaspora is concerned.” George, who has Ugandan parents, says lessons from the black world can be transposed into other prison cultures. “When I come into prison, my messaging isn’t the same as it is in the podcast. That focuses primarily on black culture, as I am at a point in my life where this needs explaining. But if I’m speaking to a mixed audience, I talk about the universal opportunities for transformation.” His own early experience, at a selective London grammar school and then at Cambridge, give him an instinct about not handing down life lessons in a patronising way. “That top-down approach to education, the idea that smart, cultured, well-off people are going to share with you how to be like them, does not work. I can say that because that was almost imposed upon me, and I struggled with it for a long time. “It did not make as much sense as sticking with what I started with. I was in a school that was very different from the environment I grew up in and the messaging I received was that the way guys like me talked, and what we valued, was just not going to cut it. If I hadn’t stayed in my own environment and discovered a form of music that kept me rooted there, it would have been hard to remain connected, and to champion the culture I came from.” Before offenders can start to express themselves they must tackle what George describes as invisible or subconscious barriers. “What you see are patterns, reasons why school did not work, why the job market could not receive them or why they ended up in prison.” His first prison visit was at the suggestion of a deacon and he recalls it as a “pivotal moment”. “Many of my black leadership heroes spent time in prison, unfortunately, and their influence across the prison world is still felt today. They provided a space for people who were outlawed, or outcast, in their darkest moments, and I wanted to continue that tradition.” It is the scope for providing this supportive space that makes prison a place to make plans, he argues. “What matters is being part of a social scene that provides the emotional stability and hope that enables someone to lean into their better nature.” Religion is one way to offer positive framing inside a prison, but not the only way. George believes any consistent set of rules can work in prison. But he is wary of the notion prison is ever “an easy ride on the taxpayers’ dime”. “It’s just not true. Being locked up with people whose lives have not panned out as they’d hoped is not fun. And if your preference is for being in prison, then fun is no longer in the equation: it is probably a question of life or death.” He experiences guilt from memories of walking away from prisoners he has begun to work with: “I do not want to do the ad hoc thing any more, where I come in and we talk and are all inspired and practically in tears, then I’d have to go.” George is working on a PhD with University College London’s Institute for Innovation and Public Purpose about how to fund a better system. “People have come and gone for decades and said nice, clever things about prison. If you got all those people over the past 200 years of prison reform together, we would all agree for the most part. But it is about not letting that consensus just exist in the space of ‘people who care’.” Rather, he wants to “accelerate to a public investment conversation”. “It is now about what government is willing to commit to. We need the budget to reflect a transformed vision of the prison system.”On 1 November, news organisations reported the global Covid-19 death toll had exceeded 5 million. But, as these articles highlight, this figure is likely to be a massive underestimate. Johns Hopkins University collates official daily statistics on Covid deaths, but there is no unified global definition: Belgium’s high reported death rate partly reflects its including all probable Covid deaths in all settings, while Hungary only publishes hospital deaths with a positive test. Turkmenistan and North Korea have, apparently, not experienced a single Covid death. The UK surveillance death count based on positive tests was around 140,600 on 1 November, but the number of death certificates mentioning Covid is considerably higher, at about 164,500. Even that higher figure could be too low, with under-diagnosis of this new disease in early months. A more robust method is to estimate the “excess” over the number who would have died in normal times. Of course, pandemics may increase deaths from other causes, say through disruption to healthcare, although restrictions and behavioural changes can reduce deaths too. The Office for National Statistics uses an average between 2015 and 2019 as a baseline and in recent weeks finds a worrying excess of many hundreds of deaths not involving Covid. However, the Institute and Faculty of Actuaries adjusts for a changing population to create an alternative baseline, which yields fewer than 100 non-Covid “extra” deaths in the latest week. To get an uncertain answer to the right question, the Economist built a model to estimate global excess deaths. Russia has reported 230,000 Covid deaths, but may have about four times as many excess deaths. Devastated by the Delta variant, India’s estimated excess mortality is around 10 times higher than its Covid surveillance death count of 460,000, although the uncertainty interval is wide (three to 16 times higher). Inadequate death registration hampers this analysis – the UN statistics division estimates fewer than seven in 10 territories have over 90% coverage. The Economist’s model estimates 10 to 19m extra deaths around the world during the pandemic. Five million deaths is a grim milestone, but humanity passed that long ago. • David Spiegelhalter is chair of the Winton Centre for Risk and Evidence Communication at Cambridge. Anthony Masters is statistical ambassador for the Royal Statistical SocietyCannabis has been widely used in traditional Asian medicines for more than a millennium but before its now widespread legalization in the United States it was seen among many Asian-American communities as a frowned upon illicit drug. However, a new generation of Asian American business people have emerged as trailblazers in the rapidly growing legal marijuana sector in the US, entering the industry with hopes of pushing for further legalization while expanding it to include traditionally marginalized communities. At the same time, many are seeking to challenge social misconceptions about the plant within their own communities and beyond. The history of cannabis is one rooted extensively in prohibition. Since Congress passed the Marijuana Tax Act of 1937, which effectively banned the sale and use of cannabis across the country, the plant has been illegal under federal law. According to the American Civil Liberties Union, although Black and white people use marijuana at roughly equal rates, Black people are 3.73 times more likely to be arrested for marijuana. Nevertheless, the sector has significantly expanded over the years, with public support for legalization increasingly on the rise. Recreational marijuana is now legal in 19 states, along with Washington DC and Guam, in turn leading to a giant boom in legitimate businesses. As a result, Al Ochosa, director of insurance, risk and safety compliance at Curaleaf, one of the nation’s leading medical and wellness cannabis operators, seeks to not only destigmatize the plant but also to support the participation of people of color in the rapidly emerging industry. Ochosa,51, is the oldest of four siblings and was born in the Philippines to a devout Catholic mother and a US Navy father. “The upbringing, although very loving and supportive, was definitely fairly strict, especially when it came to, you know, ‘illegal activity’,” he said. “I was definitely a child of the 1980s. I still have my DARE [Drug Abuse Resistance Education] sticker at my parent’s home,” he added with a laugh. In 2015, after 20 years of being a commercial insurance professional, Ochosa pivoted to the cannabis industry after a college friend introduced him to the co-founders of Curaleaf. “I was a corporate professional back then but, in the background, I had always been an advocate of the plant and what it could do for folks,” Ochosa said. “It was over Christmas where I basically took my dad aside … ripped the Band-Aid off and pulled out my cannabis stash and told him about what I was looking to do in the industry.” The conversation with Ochosa’s mother was a little more difficult. “She expected me to graduate with a 4.0 from high school, expected me to get a degree from a four-year college … I even took piano lessons and played the violin,” Ochosa said. “I tried to be that model Asian child … but you know, cannabis has been a part of who I am for several years now.” At Curaleaf, Ochosa is part of the company’s diversity, equity and inclusion leadership team, where he focuses on social equity and sustainability, as well as food insecurity, health and wellness, and cannabis education. “You gotta fight disinformation with facts and just education,” he said. In addition, Ochosa co-leads Curaleaf in Color, a resource group aimed at creating a safe space for employees of color while amplifying their experiences in the industry. Earlier this year, for Asian American Pacific Islander Heritage month, Ochosa hosted a panel on the experiences of Asian American cannabis leaders which highlighted their destigmatizing efforts, as well as the challenges they faced when they entered the industry. During his research, Ochosa discovered that there was very sparse cannabis educational content portrayed through an Asian American lens. “I was actually kind of surprised at how whitewashed [the industry] was back at the beginning and even today, just because there are so many people in the communities that have been traditionally impacted by the war on drugs,” Ochosa said. *** Yoko Miyashita also seeks to undo the damage of the war on drugs. As CEO of Leafly, a widely used online platform focused on cannabis use and education, Miyashita strives to destigmatize the plant through education and social equity. From an early age, Miyashita, who was born in Japan, saw the struggles that her immigrant parents faced, including feelings of otherness in some of the many states where she lived. Miyashita pursued a bachelor’s degree in ethnic studies at Berkeley and then a law degree from the University of Washington. She then established a successful career in corporate and digital media. In 2019, Miyashita became a general counsel and later CEO of Leafly, which is based in Seattle. “For me, it was watching this industry emerge in one of the first recreational states … that experience of walking into a dispensary and just sort of seeing an industry in the making and really feeling that sense of opportunity to create an industry out of prohibition,” Miyashita said. As one of the world’s leading resources for cannabis information, Leafly has more than 125 million visitors annually, who learn about strain consumptions, growing methods, history and more. “You need to surface the data and science of the plant, but you also need to surface this unique history of prohibition that this industry comes out of. When you look at that, you see that that unique history begets a unique obligation in terms of how we give back to and repair the communities that have been so disproportionately harmed by prohibition.” At Leafly, Miyashita helped launch Seeds of Change, a comprehensive report that aggregates state data and measures their efforts in integrating communities of color within cannabis legalisation campaigns. Miyashita has worked with cannabis organizations from various states, advocating for legalization and for increased funding for communities of color, which have been especially marginalized because of federal prohibition. “Black and brown business owners already receive very little financing that’s available out there – it’s even less in the cannabis space. So what are you left with? Personal savings, family and friends to start a business. And if you have systemic issues, you don’t have generational wealth to back you up, so the deck can be stacked against you,” Miyashita said. “It takes a certain level of intentionality across the industry to say, ‘Hey, who are the businesses that aren’t getting the attention they deserve … and let’s make sure that those of us that have a spotlight shine that light there,” she added. As Miyashita advocates for socially driven cannabis consumerism, Los Angeles-based Geraldine Mae Cueva seeks to destigmatize the plant through its products, particularly by working with smaller retail businesses. A self-declared ‘chillanthropist,’ Cueva is a Filipino-American who grew up in New Jersey and the founder of Art &amp; Times of Chill, a consulting platform that functions as a showroom for purpose-driven, plant-forward products. Cueva, whose eclectic background includes experiences in nursing, fashion and e-commerce, works with various cannabis companies to help them understand the modern-day cannabis user while connecting brands to drive conscious commerce. As a second-generation Asian American, Cueva takes deep pride in connecting with the elders in her community. “My family’s mindset and their perceptions are always in my mind, and I deeply respect the sacrifices they’ve made for me, so it’s part of my identity,” she said. Cueva’s parents, who were initially wary of their daughter’s entry into the industry, have over time become some of her biggest supporters. “They were helping me create my first trade show experience. My mom was like my intern, making sure I was fed while I was talking to people for three days straight … My dad knows how to grow hemp and cannabis. He’s such a green thumb.” Cueva is constantly looking for ways to expand cannabis accessibility. “I really try to make sure that we are not only marketing to millennials and people with disposable income, but also to people that are 50 and up,” she said. “I feel very strongly that you have to learn from the people before you.” In addition to running her own consulting company, Cueva is the co-founder of Sesh-ins, an online smoke space that emerged last year during the peak of the pandemic and social movements across the US. Past discussion topics include accountable and intersectional allyship, white saviorism and the industry’s challenges surrounding inclusion, diversity and equity. “When I was a younger girl, it was much harder for me to find someone that looked like me and I hope that young Filipino girls can see that anything’s possible. You could still do what your parents want for you,” Cueva said. “But if you don’t love what you are doing and what you want, it’s not going to serve you.” Above her on her bedroom wall hung a print of a New York Post headline: “$20K Hermès Birkin Bags Smell Like Marijuana,” it read.The jubilation of the Paris climate agreement, where delegates from around the world triumphantly declared the climate crisis would finally be tamed, will have felt very hollow to many in the US in the six years since. Following the landmark 2015 deal to curb dangerous global heating, the US has experienced four of its five hottest years ever recorded. A drought of a severity unprecedented in modern civilization has tightened its grip upon the American west, parching cities and farms, fueling the eight largest wildfires on record in California and smothering much of the rest of the country in a choking pall of smoke. Enormous storms, again spurred on by the rising heat, have ravaged Puerto Rico and the Gulf coast. Many of these calamities are overwhelmingly likely to have been caused by climate change, scientists have found. Between 1980 and 2020 the US has been struck by an annual average of seven disasters that caused at least $1bn in damage, according to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. The average for the most recent five years, 2016 to 2020, is a huge leap – at more than 16 such disasters a year. In those five years, within the span of the Paris climate deal, the US has experienced more than $600bn in damages from climate change-fueled disasters, a new record. With governments gathering again in Scotland for crucial UN talks intended to further the progress made in Paris, Joe Biden is representing a country wounded like never before by the escalating emergency. Michael Oppenheimer, a climate scientist at Princeton University who grew up in New York City, said it was “personally wrenching” to see dead bodies floating in basement apartments in the city after Hurricane Ida crunched into Louisiana with 150mph winds in August and then continued an extraordinary journey as a tropical storm northwards to New Jersey and New York. “That people can’t go to sleep in the richest city in the richest country and feel safe from drowning is abominable on so many levels – we are far, far behind in assuring safe habitation for poorer people, including safety from a climate gone rogue,” Oppenheimer said. Beyond the financial loss, these cascading disasters have caused huge pain and suffering, mental anguish, displacement and bewilderment among Americans. We asked a number of writers from around the country to share what the climate catastrophe looks like from their vantage point. Along with submissions from Guardian readers, their stories are below. – Oliver Milman ••• Glacier Bay, Alaska ‘The cold is gone’ By Kim Heacox I remember the cold. I remember standing on the shore in Glacier Bay, thinking this is the wildest and most beautiful place I’d ever experienced. Bear tracks the size of pie plates in the low tide mud all around me. Giant icebergs stranded on shore, luminous. Birds speaking in dialects of kittiwake and tern. Harbor seals patrolling the frigid waters, their obsidian eyes taking my stare and turning it back on me. And the glacier itself, only half a mile away, whispering echoes of the Pleistocene. Not just any river of ice, but a tidewater glacier that descended all the way from tall, snowy mountains down to the sea where it calved blue minarets into a rock-ribbed fjord. A steady five-knot wind blew; my little jacket thermometer read 39F. That was May 1979, when I first arrived in Alaska. It changed my life and set me free. It taught me how to survive, and more – to be fully alive. Fast-forward 40 years, to July 2019. My wife Melanie and I have made our home in the little town of Gustavus, next to Glacier Bay, where we have moose in our driveway and ravens in the treetops, and where our 20-year-old nephew, Tanner, comes to visit. Record high temperatures break everywhere. Anchorage, Alaska’s largest city, hits 90F, five degrees more than its previous all-time high. When I take Tanner up the bay to see the sights, something stuns me: a warm wind off the glacier. The cold is gone. The whole place feels wrong. It’s eerily quiet. No kittiwakes or terns. Not a single harbor seal. Tanner has no reference point. But I do, and am alarmed. That summer, salmon die in river mouths. Whales wash up dead. Permafrost melts and threatens infrastructure across much of the northern part of the state. As it melts, it releases methane, a much more potent greenhouse gas than carbon dioxide. Add to that a warming north Pacific that’s roughly 30% more acidic than it used to be. Now, in 2021, the six warmest years on record have been the last six. The first Gustavus snow that used to arrive at Halloween may not appear until January. And soon thereafter, wrath-of-God rains wash it away. Floods happen much more often than they used to. Last year, in the nearby town of Haines, heavy rains caused a landslide that killed two people. Up north, Native villages are washing into the sea. What will happen to our livelihoods, futures and homes? Gustavus has built a new community center to house townfolk during emergencies. Soon, a new root cellar will be finished. One day we may all gather there with our children and guitars to eat potatoes for every meal. In Glacier Bay, many glaciers no longer reach the sea. As such, more of the bay’s waters are ice-free, and harbor seals must go elsewhere to find icebergs on which to give birth to their pups, safe from predation. I think of glaciers as the architects and finish carpenters of Alaska; how they shape entire landscapes, and have shaped me as well. I grieve their passing, and try to find hope among my neighbors that despite all of humanity’s wrongdoing, we have a remarkable capacity to learn and to change, and that when we do – if we do – it won’t be too late. ••• Houma, Louisiana ‘If you do move, you scatter the people’ By Kezia Setyawan Driving through Terrebonne parish, you can see how the trees have bent or snapped; the root systems upturned. There are always questions after the storm of whether deeply rooted residents will be able to stay. Outsiders ask why they’d even want to. After Hurricane Ida, I was displaced for 50 days from my home in Houma in south-east Louisiana. It is a strange experience to work as a reporter and face disaster as an individual. More than 60% of my apartment complex was deemed uninhabitable. I don’t reject disaster relief meals or cleaning supplies for the sake of objectivity and neutrality. For two and a half weeks after the hurricane, I drove four hours most days from Lafayette to Houma to report. I’d ration gas each day to make sure I had enough for the trip and back. There was no gas in Houma. I covered Indigenous communities down the bayou who took recovery efforts into their own hands. “Everybody wants to come back,” one mother said of the people displaced by the storm. “Our ancestors have lived here for generations.” One disabled fisherman said that it was time to get a fresh start in Mississippi. The gulf had reached the bayou, he said. “You see how the road shakes when cars drive over? There’s no land here any more.” You think about what’s lost when people leave. “I know it’s dangerous to live on the bayou because it can happen again,” one woman told me. But “it hurts to pull your roots out. If you do move, you scatter the people.” I am very fortunate to have housing again in Houma. But many of my neighbors are still houseless, sleeping in tents, cars and hotels hundreds of miles away. I have watched state and federal agencies fail my neighbors every day. Last year was the most active hurricane season on record. Residents in Lake Charles still have blue tarps on their roofs, waiting for recovery relief. Scars from the oil and gas industry leave abandoned canals that exacerbate land loss. Louisiana loses a football field of coastline every 100 minutes. The dead oak trees that line the Pointe-aux-Chenes marina serve as a graveyard. What can you do when you watch your community erode, when the first signs of temporary housing appear more than a month after the storm? Why are we treating these spaces as expendable? ••• Sonoran Desert, Arizona ‘The desert cannot possibly hold us all’ By Debbie Weingarten We left our home in the Sonoran Desert of southern Arizona at the end of May, just as it was getting too hot to sleep at night, and moved to the Blue Ridge Mountains of western North Carolina. In a way, leaving southern Arizona was a pandemic decision. But in larger part, it was a climate one, a response to years of mounting anxieties that reached a fever pitch. I love the heat and the sun, the dry, unapologetic desert. We’ve fried eggs on the sidewalk since my kids can remember, baked cookies and cakes on the dashboards of our closed-up summer cars. We know that in certain months, midday hours are better spent mimicking the sleeping desert creatures than attempting errands or productivity. But at some point, the scale tipped – too many triple-digit weeks in a row, summer nights that would not cool, bone-dry weather forecasts, wildfires licking at the horizon, and predictions of more extreme conditions to come. In 2020, a measly 4.17in of rain fell in Tucson. In contrast, the 2021 monsoon season swept in like a monster, causing flooding and overwhelming stormwater systems. This summer, Lake Mead fell to its lowest level since it was filled in the 1930s, triggering water cuts that reduce Arizona’s supply of Colorado River water by 18%. Meanwhile, increased groundwater pumping has led to land subsidence and earth fissures – giant irreversible cracks that spider across roadways and private property, one of which was reported to have swallowed a horse. Several Arizona counties could become uninhabitable in the next 20 to 40 years, according to one study. And still, somehow, the human population continues to explode. Between 2010 and 2020, Maricopa county – which contains the city of Phoenix – grew by nearly 16%. Conversations with family and friends have taken on pre-apocalyptic tones: we’re living beyond our means. The desert cannot possibly hold us all. How long will the water last? When is it time to leave? Here in North Carolina, we live on a mountain, everything soft and moss-covered and fog-laden and damp. My desert children, who have never experienced true fall before, are fascinated by the concept of leaves piled high enough to kick through. But of course no place is immune to climate change – in August, Tropical Storm Fred dropped as much as 17in of rain in the span of three days, causing our county to declare a state of emergency. I feel like a person cleaved in half. I love it here, and I am also homesick. The desert is a permanent stone in my chest, a heartsick ache. I miss the alleyway prickly pears growing like weeds, the mesquites with their crowns of thorns, saguaros bursting with fruit, palo verdes dropping yellow flowers over the sidewalks, those wily coyotes hunting stray cats, all the rusty human treasures washed and buried in the arroyos, the smell of creosote just before it rains, heat like a hairdryer, the Windex-blue sky that goes on forever. ••• Grass Valley, California There is a heavy grief that many of us in affected regions feel when special and sacred places burn, friends and strangers are displaced, animals perish and the sun is an eerie blood red in the sky. It’s jarring and sad, watching precious things being lost. The upshots, though, are true testaments to our community: neighbors checking on neighbors, friends rushing to help evacuate livestock or chainsaw and rake and pack trucks, strangers opening up their homes and guest bedrooms, and people showing up to help without ever being asked. – Amie Ferrier ••• Penobscot River, Maine ‘The Earth is not composed of resources to be endlessly exploited’ By Sherri Mitchell I was born to the Penawahpskewe (Penobscot Nation) and raised in a culture so deeply entwined with the Penobscot River that there was no clear point where the river ended, and we began. Our people see the river as a beloved member of our community. In fact, the Penobscot River is recognized as the first citizen of the Penobscot Nation, to acknowledge that we all draw our lives from her waters. My grandfather brought me to those waters at a very young age, teaching me to paddle a canoe before I learned to ride a bike. There, I learned my place in creation, in connection to the subsistence lifestyle that had supported our people for millennia. Our way of life is not measured in economic terms, but through sustained relationships with our local environment. For more than 500 generations our people lived in relationship with the plant and animal species living in and along the river, relying on them for food, medicine, ceremony and our overall wellbeing. Over the last five generations, industrial pollution has ravaged that relationship. Paper mills arrived on our shores in 1901. The pulp and paper industry has some of the highest fossil fuel consumption and CO2 emission rates on the planet. They locate along waterways, create hydro dams and then dump wastewater in the form of hot leachate into the water, increasing both water and surface temperatures. This and other industrial activity exacerbates global warming, causing upset to ecosystems that are integral to our cultural survival. Warming and damming in the river brought the Atlantic salmon and other fish to near extinction. And the damage is not limited to the river. A 2018 study, for example, showed that approximately 70% of new moose calves had died from winter tick disease, a direct result of a warming climate. Each year the water gets warmer. As a child, ice-out was one of my favorite annual events. I loved to watch the river shrug off her winter layer and signal the shift toward spring. But twice in the last five years the ice has gone out in the middle of winter. This should concern everyone. The Penobscot River is one of the last refuges for cold-water fish in the United States. Changes in our water temperature have a devastating impact on all eastern fisheries and the surrounding ecosystems. Yet, even as I write this, a new paper mill is legally dumping mass amounts of steaming wastewater into the river. People write about climate change as though it were a specter looming on the horizon. Yet, when we look closely, we see that the specter is human, a species that would benefit greatly from the simple truth that my grandfather taught me on the Penobscot River – that the Earth is not composed of resources to be endlessly exploited; it is filled with beloved relatives that must be cared for and respected. ••• Perkins county, South Dakota ‘We’ve been on fire watch for almost nine months’ By Eliza Blue We wake to a dawn blazing red beneath the haze of smoke and the terrible smell of burning. “Near or far?” I wonder. It’s far – 500 miles to the west in Montana, but we’re still on edge because it’s autumn and we’ve been on fire watch for almost nine months. Early last spring a wildfire passed within a mile of our sheep and cattle ranch in South Dakota, and now the soot rises up every time the wind starts to blow. The year-long drought that’s cracked the earth and stopped the grasses from growing means the ash from all that the fire destroyed hasn’t had a chance to integrate with the soil and nourish new growth. Some days, when my husband comes in from fixing fences, he looks like he’s been working in a coalmine, his face tanned dark brown, the circles of his nostrils lined with black. Even with the soot, even with the haze, I go out walking most evenings – movement is the only thing that seems to keep my anxiety in check. It is easy to imagine what the view would have looked like 100 years ago, when my husband’s great-grandparents arrived here and started building their home. Probably exactly the same: hills, valleys, a few trees, a lot of dried-up grass. This region has been rehearsing climate change for generations. The boom and bust cycle of drought is scrawled on the DNA of the grasses whose roots reach deep and don’t mind being dormant for a few years. But this drought is different. It has lasted longer and it’s more widespread. We can’t put up hay to feed our animals through winter, and the cost of hay is at a record high because the land is just as dry or drier for hundreds of miles in every direction. For the past few thousand years, these hillsides have been classified as steppe, with an average annual rainfall of 13 inches. After most early homesteaders lost everything trying to farm this land, the majority of those who remained learned through trial and error to follow our ecosystem’s ancient rhythm, a rhythm that requires large ruminants to graze, nourishing the soil as they go. The rhythm that the Arikara, the Hidatsa and later the Lakota and Dakota followed when they used these lands as their summer hunting grounds, following herds of bison. Will we be able to learn this new rhythm? I walk all the way to the farthest draw and stand beneath a thick-trunked cottonwood. Her yellow leaves rustle loudly; it is impossible not to hear laughter in the sound. She already knows almost everything I am trying to figure out. Deep roots, branches that bend and don’t break. “As long as you have, that’s how long it will take,” she tells me. And I wish I could learn these things faster, because I feel like we’ve already run out of time. ••• Hamden, Connecticut Early in the decade, there were heavy, heavy winters with lasting snowfalls, and since about 2014 we haven’t had winters much like that. In their place are greater numbers of tropical storms with heavy rainfall and sustained high winds, causing flooding and tree damage fairly regularly during spring and summer months. In the three years that my wife and I have owned our home, we’ve seen two tornadoes and hurricanes and tropical storm events easily in the double digits. – Adam Matlock ••• Grass Valley, California ‘What is it to be well in sick times?’ By Mekdela Maskal I came back to the land that raised me in June of 2020 and the changes screamed of drought and fire threat. The crunch of the leaves under my feet were louder than I remember, and I could no longer fully submerge my body in the stream in the valley below. The season of smoke and flames started in August last year, with dry lightning that ignited 650 wildfires across northern California overnight. I didn’t have a full day of deep breaths outside until November. My thoughts were occupied by what home was before this. I was homesick while I was home. This year, I told myself that preparation would ease my nerves. I started my fire-ready list once Dixie ignited in July. Dixie is still not contained and is now the second largest fire in California history, with almost a million acres burnt. My nearest fire sparked the afternoon of 4 August. I was working at my desk upstairs. I stared away from my computer towards the floor and noticed a rectangle of orange sunlight coming in from the skylight above. I checked Twitter for updates as I ran outside to see for myself. It was a new flame, the River fire, eight miles from home and burning towards me. My legs walked me down the hill. I stood on a familiar rock, watching ash fall around me. I felt at home. I thought of teacher Dr Bayo Akomolafe’s words: “The times are urgent, let us slow down.” The intensity and proximity of the fires have only increased, so why do I feel lighter amid the grief? What is it to be well in sick times? The fire was contained within a week and my area never moved from evacuation warning to mandate, so I stayed home and unloaded my car just a few days after filling it up. I realized it wasn’t just the preparation that made this season feel different. I feel connected to the life here now, not only what was before. I understand that the “change” in climate change includes us as humans. There isn’t necessarily going to be an “end” to this crisis, but many ends, and many beginnings.On Monday, the US supreme court will hear arguments in a case which could determine whether the US government faces accountability for its mass surveillance of Muslim Americans after 9/11. The nine justices will be asked to decide on whether Muslim US citizens who were subjected to undercover surveillance by a paid informant at their southern California mosque can receive redress through the courts. Sheikh Yassir Fazaga, Ali Malik and Yasser Abdel Rahim, the three plaintiffs, argue that they and thousands of other Muslims were targeted because of their religion, and the federal authorities who subjected them to such unconstitutional treatment should answer for that. Lawyers for the government will counter that the case should be dismissed, as litigating it would reveal intelligence about federal anti-terrorism operations that would be harmful to national security. Information on who they were investigating and why, as well as details of the FBI’s sources and methods, should remain confidential on grounds that they are “state secrets”. Ahilan Arulanantham, a human rights lawyer at UCLA who will be arguing FBI v Fazaga for the plaintiffs on Monday, told reporters that the question for the court was simple: “Will the people we represent ever get their day in court? Are the courts open to protect this community’s religious freedoms, or can the government slam the doors shut whenever it claims to be acting in the name of national security?” At the heart of the case is Craig Monteilh, a fitness instructor convicted for fraud, who was taken on by the FBI as an informant five years after 9/11 in “Operation Flex” in which he surveilled mosques in Irvine, California. Ali Malik, one of the three plaintiffs in the Fazaga case, vividly remembers when Monteilh first visited the Islamic Center of Irvine in July 2006. The informant presented himself as a person of French and Syrian descent wanting to convert to Islam. “He was not someone you’d forget,” Malik told the Guardian. “Physically, he’s very dominant– a big guy, a body builder. He’s massive, shaved head, tattoos – so he didn’t look like the majority of constituents at the center.” Malik, a US citizen from birth, was 22 and a student when Monteilh appeared. Malik said that he and his fellow worshippers were excited to welcome into their community the new convert, who took on the name Farouk al-Aziz. “We had never experienced an undercover provocateur,” Malik said. “We had no reason to believe that the FBI was involved in that activity. In fact, the FBI had come to our mosque, looked into our eyes, and assured us that they were not spying on us.” Malik became Monteilh’s mentor, teaching him how to pray. For more than a year, they met regularly, sharing personal details of their lives and working out at the gym together. Malik recalls becoming uneasy about Monteilh when he began asking questions about violent jihad, becoming increasingly incessant on the subject. “He would say, ‘What about jihad? What about this?’ I had only one response: ‘Vigilante violence is not okay in Islam. You need to focus on how to pray and how to establish a connection with God.’” Malik picked up the same concerns from others in the mosque – Monteilh was inciting violence among them. “He was so assertive, and he spoke with such urgency that he was really intimidating.” The last conversation they had was so disturbing that Malik went to the imam of the mosque and told him Monteilh was potentially violent and a danger to the community. Eventually, a restraining order was taken out preventing Monteilh from visiting the mosque. Ironically, the mosque also informed the FBI about their concerns. The FBI said it would deal with the situation. In 2009 it became public that Monteilh was working for the FBI and had been trying to entrap law-abiding American Muslims with his talk of violent jihad. It emerged that he had gathered hundreds of phone numbers, thousands of email addresses, and hours of video and audio recordings inside mosques, homes and businesses associated with Muslims. Monteilh later admitted his role, telling the Guardian in 2012 that his FBI handlers had authorized him to have sex with Muslim women and record their pillow talk. “They said, if it would enhance the intelligence, to go ahead and have sex. So I did,” he said. That same year, Monteilh told NPR that he told two congregants: “we should bomb something”. Malik joined his co-plaintiffs, Sheikh Yassir Fazaga and Yasser Abdel Rahim, in filing a lawsuit against the FBI. In 2011, with the help of the American Civil Liberties Union of Southern California and the Council on American-Islamic Relations of Greater Los Angeles, they filed a federal class-action lawsuit accusing the government of surveilling Muslim Americans in violation of their constitutional rights. The invocation of “state secrets” in the Fazaga case was the first time in recent American history that the privilege was invoked to dismiss a lawsuit brought by an American citizen concerning domestic law enforcement. Monday’s hearing is the second time the supreme court will consider the application of “state secrets” this term. Last month, the justices considered whether the Guantánamo detainee Abu Zubaydah should be able to question two former CIA contractors about the brutal torture he was subjected to at a “black site” in Poland. In the Fazaga case, the nation’s highest court will adjudicate on whether the lawsuit against FBI’s surveillance can proceed under the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act. This would allow the case to be heard in a federal district court with part of the proceedings conducted in private to safeguard sensitive intelligence. Malik and his fellow plaintiffs will be in Washington on Monday to listen to the arguments, although they will not be allowed into the courtroom under Covid restrictions. He told the Guardian that the hearing was “probably the most important thing, other than getting married and having children, in my entire life”. He said the lawsuit boiled down to a simple premise: “Can I practice my religion without having to feel I’m doing anything wrong?” As for the government’s claim of “state secrets”, Malik said: “It’s terrifying to know that the government can conduct illegal activity against me and that I, as a citizen, can’t hold them to account. All I’m asking for is the establishment of the rule of law – for the constitution of the United States to be upheld.”Is Liz Truss ever going to be prime minister? It’s no, right? That’s pretty definite. I know she’s foreign secretary and statistically speaking that shortens the odds considerably compared with a general member of the public but, looked at another way, it’s binary: you’re either someone who is going to be prime minister one day or you’re not. The overwhelming majority of people aren’t and she’s one of them. There’s no Tory leadership election I can imagine that wouldn’t be won by someone else. I mean, I suppose some terrorists might fire a rocket at the cabinet room when Liz is in the loo. Even then, she’d only be acting prime minister for a few weeks of being asked “When are you calling a leadership election?” and “Why didn’t you go before the meeting?” plus maybe a lone photo op with Justin Trudeau on his way to Brussels, and then she’d lose to Robert Jenrick or Theresa May or the ghost of Michael Gove. So I really think we, and she, can rule it out. She must realise that. I really hope she does because otherwise she’s delusional. She is literally more likely to win Strictly. She’s foreign secretary, and that is a very important job, but it is the most important job she will ever have. It is not a springboard or staging post, it is the destination of her political journey. So she might as well set the politics aside and try to do the job as well as she can. Sadly, that doesn’t seem to be her approach. A key sign of this is her handling of the case of Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe, a British citizen who is being held hostage in Iran on trumped-up charges. She’s been there since 2016 and her husband, Richard Ratcliffe, is currently camped outside the Foreign Office on hunger strike in his desperation for the British government to bring her home to him and their seven-year-old daughter. Ratcliffe had a meeting with Truss last week at which she expressed her sympathies but didn’t resolve to do much else. A few hours later, she tweeted merrily, amid a flurry of emoticons, on the subject of international travel opening up, that “family and friends can reunite”, which, as well as being staggeringly insensitive, doesn’t suggest that the Ratcliffes’ horrendous situation had particularly touched her. Her next tweet was something sabre-rattly about summoning the French ambassador over that fatuous fishing row with which the governments in London and Paris are courting the votes of their respective countries’ xenophobes. “But what can she do?” you might ask. One thing she can do is get Britain to pay Iran back the £400m the government acknowledges it owes, that the international court in The Hague has ruled that it owes and that has, according to the Ratcliffes’ lawyers, been explicitly linked by the Iranian judiciary to Zaghari-Ratcliffe’s fate. Still, it’s not a ransom, it’s a debt. There’s no shame in paying it, regardless of Zaghari-Ratcliffe’s situation. The shame is in not paying it. I understand Truss can’t just issue the cheque herself. She’d need to persuade the MoD (which owes it) and the Treasury, but as foreign secretary sums of that magnitude are within her power. I believe she could do it if she wanted to. But it’s not what a politician would do. Whether or not the money gets paid, the astute political move is to avoid being the one who agrees to pay it. The Ratcliffes present an awkward problem. Basic political strategy, the techniques that have resulted in Truss landing her current exalted post, dictates that she should manoeuvre herself away from such problems and towards more popular issues such as foreign holidays and shouting at the French. No pictures were published of her encounter with Ratcliffe, though she certainly doesn’t mind a photo and was hailed last month as “a style influencer” by the Times. But she’d rather be snapped on the deck of an aircraft carrier or jogging across Brooklyn Bridge than telling a heartbroken and starving man that she’s got another meeting in five minutes. Every politician whose desk the Ratcliffes’ file has crossed has done the same thing. They’ve made the right noises and shunted the issue away, somehow managing to close their minds to the protracted torment that they’re causing an innocent family. They’ve all prioritised the protection of their careers over the childhood of a little girl whom many of them have met. I suppose that’s the kind of unsentimental mettle it takes to prosper in Britain’s political system. Matt Hancock’s wife knows what I’m talking about. But if Truss could stop and think for a moment, she’d realise that, for her, there’s no point in doing that any more. She has reached her zenith. So she can stop playing the game and do what she thinks is right. But can she remember what that is? Have all such thoughts been swept away by the exigencies of her career? Do the skills required to get the job preclude those required to do it well? Is Britain like a company that appoints its chief electrician based on who is best at plumbing? They spend their lives climbing the greasy pipe and end up at the top perplexedly contemplating an enormous fuse board while holding a spanner. Our system uses the Ratcliffes. Their plight is quite handy. Politicians can show their support and look good doing it. Jeremy Hunt did that last week, despite being one of the foreign secretaries who previously failed to solve the problem. That’s quite a clever trick to pull off – I don’t fancy Truss’s chances in a leadership election against him. So why not try to get a few things done as foreign secretary and give up on the repositioning, the image projection, the static affectation of dynamism? The Ratcliffes’ problem can be resolved. Iran would let her go, but the right conversations need to be had in the right way and a debt needs to be paid and it has to actually happen, not merely be “moved towards”. This will be a culture shock for Truss. It will feel risky. But the real risk, if she doesn’t do it, is that she’ll have somehow become foreign secretary for no reason at all.Imagine a medicine that could help people process disturbing memories, sparking behavioural changes rather than merely burying and suppressing symptoms and trauma. For the millions suffering with post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and depression, such remedies for their daily struggles could be on the horizon. Psychiatry is rapidly heading towards a new frontier – and it’s all thanks to psychedelics. In an advanced phase trial published in Nature in May, patients in the US, Israel and Canada who received doses of the psychedelic stimulant MDMA, alongside care from a therapist, were more than twice as likely than the placebo group to no longer have PTSD, for which there is currently no effective medicinal treatment, months later. The researchers concluded that the findings, which reflected those of six earlier-stage trials, cemented the treatment as a startlingly successful potential breakthrough therapy. There are now hopes that MDMA therapy could receive approval for certain treatments from US regulators by 2023, or perhaps even earlier – with psilocybin, the active ingredient of magic mushrooms, not far behind in the process. (A small study at Johns Hopkins University, published last year, suggested it could be four times more effective than traditional antidepressants.) You could say interest in psychedelics is mushrooming. Last month, in a first for psychedelics since the war on drugs was launched in the 1970s, US federal funding was granted for a psilocybin study, to treat tobacco addiction, following pressure by lawmakers, including Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez. This marks a jaw-dropping turnaround for hallucinogenic drugs. Even 10 years ago, they were effectively taboo in many academic fields and halls of power. But as the intellectual rationale behind the war on drugs has become increasingly untenable, hundreds of millions of dollars have been pumped into psychedelic pharmaceutical research. “Psychedelics are the most extraordinary tools for studying the mind and brain,” says Dr David Luke, co-founding director of the psychedelic consciousness conference, Breaking Convention. “It’s a hot-button topic with around a dozen dedicated research centres at top-level universities around the world.” Academic and scientific enthusiasm around psychedelics has been increasing amid exasperation over the lack of advancement in psychiatry. “It has not progressed as a field of medicine relative to others for decades, and many psychiatrists have been deeply frustrated,” Luke claims. Yet there appears to be a set of long-ignored tools to treat causes rather than simply addressing symptoms, and psychedelics could do for psychiatry what the microscope did for biology, he says. “They work to treat the underlying commonalities of a range of mental illnesses and potentially prevent their occurrence, too.” Unfounded claims that psychedelic drugs have no medical uses, as the US Congress once declared, and are fundamentally dangerous, kept research endeavours in a straitjacket. Possibly more accurately, there were concerns that the drugs prod people into becoming more rebellious. “It’s not that psychedelics are dangerous, it’s that they give you dangerous ideas,” says Dennis McKenna, ethnopharmacologist and author. “That was the basic reason why there was such an overreaction and clampdown, because it was such a turbulent time with the Vietnam war.” Politicians rather than scientists or clinicians were in the driving seat behind systematically suppressing research, and usage. This was all part of psychedelics’ mind-bending ride. Their use has increased under the radar, spurred on by cultural shifts in the west. Over the past decade, the recreational and spiritual use of hallucinogens has shed its taboos, following thousands of years of continued use in the Amazon, Mexico, Siberia and elsewhere. “I realise for the first time this is the only genuine, religious experience I’ve ever had,” pop icon Sting recently said. “For me, the meaning of the universe cracked open.” He was followed more recently by Miley Cyrus and Lindsay Lohan, who have both told of their experiences attending plant medicine ceremonies. Not long ago, UK fitness icon Joe Wicks outlined his plans to visit the Amazon to drink the hallucinogenic healing medicine ayahuasca, after his lockdown workout sessions went viral. Coldplay frontman Chris Martin has told of his “really wonderful” experience with magic mushrooms, which provided “the confirmation I needed about how I feel about the universe”. It increasingly seems that public declarations of psychedelic use are in vogue. Former Texas governor Rick Perry, a self-described “historically very anti-drug person”, is convinced psychedelics can transform the lives of war veterans suffering from severe PTSD, who are always on guard for danger, unable to sleep and behave self-destructively. “All of that properly done in the right type of clinical setting will save a multitude of lives,” he told local media earlier this year, referring to people he knows who have been abroad from the US for psychedelic treatment. With his public support, a state bill to expedite the study of psychedelics was passed in May. “Psychedelic medicine has the potential to completely change society’s approach to mental health treatment, and research is the first step to realising that transformation,” said representative Alex Dominguez, a Democrat who sponsored the bill, in a statement at the time. “It’s said that ‘As goes Texas, so goes the nation.’ While states across the country consider how best to address the mental health crisis facing our nation, I hope they once again look to Texas for leadership.” How did the mood music change so quickly for hallucinogens? Researchers were steadily unshackled – after groundbreaking research into the so-called “God molecule” DMT forced the door open – and promising data emerged as paradigm shifts solidified. Ceremonies with ayahuasca are known to increasingly take place from London to Sydney. In the US, the União de Vegetal church and some Santo Daime congregations have in the past 15 years gained the legal right to use the DMT-containing brew for religious purposes because it is central to their beliefs. The Native American Church, which has some 250,000 members, gained the right to use mescaline-containing cactus peyote as a sacrament in the US – where it grows naturally in the southwestern desert – back in 1994. Meanwhile, Decriminalize Nature, which argues humans have an unalienable right to develop their own relationship with natural plants, persuaded US authorities in half a dozen municipalities, including Washington DC, to decriminalise all plant medicines, also in May. Earlier this year, the Californian senate passed a bill to legalise the possession and social sharing of psychedelics. Oregon has already voted to decriminalise the possession of personal amounts of all drugs, while psilocybin therapy has been licensed and the state’s health department has been tasked with licensing magic-mushroom growers and training people to administer them.Denver is even training emergency first responders in psychedelic harm reduction, a US first. Increasing numbers of trials have reported steady doses of dazzlingly promising results for people with a risk of psychological issues. A study in the Lancet last year found that a high dose of psilocybin significantly reduces depressive syndromes and markedly improves anxiety for sustained periods. This appears to be due to the fostering of stronger communication between usually disconnected parts of the brain, engendering a higher state of consciousness as people are less constrained and more able to process emotions. “The fact that a drug given once can have such an effect for so long is an unprecedented finding,” New York University psychiatrist Stephen Ross told the New Yorker of a 2016 study that laid the groundwork for further research. “We have never had anything like it in the psychiatric field.” One of the key mooted advantages of psychedelics over existing drugs is that they work holistically to make the neuroplastic brain more malleable, therefore freeing people from long-held beliefs and memories – opening them evermore to new concepts and states of mind. Thus, they allow the brain to reset and rewire itself, rather than simply dampening down symptoms and even causing serious side-effects. This positions psychedelic therapies as revolutionary for addiction and OCD treatment, and a host of other treatment-resistant conditions, too. A large trial by scientists at the University of São Paulo also shows ayahuasca – a mixture of Amazonian shrubs – significantly reduces the severity of patients’ depression. Extinction Rebellion co-founder Gail Bradbrook credited her use of ayahuasca and iboga, the psychedelic African shrub used in coming-of-age ceremonies and to combat addiction, with inspiring her campaign strategy, which has helped force environmental issues to the forefront of the debate in the UK. “There’s a growing body of research indicating that psychedelics tend to greatly increase our connection to nature, even if you take them in a sterile research environment,” says Luke. Attitudes and ecological behaviours also change positively. In one survey, he found that the majority of people who used psychedelics stated that taking them had made them more concerned for the natural environment, had changed their diet and increased the amount of gardening they did. Users were also found to become more involved in environmental activism as feelings of compassion deepened. “Given that we are in the grip of an extremely fast, manmade, mass extinction event, the largest in millions of years, then we need every tool at our disposal, including psychedelics, or we might not even make it as a species ourselves,” he says. As with renewable energies, markets are responding to the gargantuan potential profits to be made amid the new consciousness and the wheels of capitalism are now in full motion. The multi-billion-pound alcohol, pharmaceutical and wellness markets are facing serious disruption thanks to the ascendance of psychedelics. Magic mushrooms are even being legally imported into the US for the first time, for research, after a maiden delivery earlier this year. On the recreational side, high-street psychedelic dispensaries have been popping up in Canada despite their sale remaining illegal. Brazen vendors say there is already enough research to prove the drugs are safe.Naturally, there is a clamour among the disrupters to consolidate their companies’ positions at the forefront of the pharmaceutical psychedelics market. Mental health company Compass was the first to be granted a patent for synthetic psilocybin in early 2020. It was subsequently granted another two in March for an oral psilocybin depression treatment, but faces criticism for an alleged intellectual property land grab that may hinder scientific research by limiting competition. Another 37 patents are being considered by US authorities, with 66 already granted, according to a patent tracker. One company even patented LSD for eating disorders before they had begun investigating whether it was effective. Françoise Bourzat, a trainer of psychedelic guides in the Mazatec tradition and co-author of Consciousness Medicine, takes a dim view of how big capital is attempting to monopolise treatments rooted in thousands of years of wisdom traditions and discovered by indigenous people. “Money talks. We can’t stop this tsunami. But we need to emphasise the importance of reciprocity, social justice, accessibility and the sacredness of the work,” she implores. Companies should support education and healthcare provision in indigenous communities, given the profit they stand to make, she argues, since the medicines more belong to them – “they just didn’t patent”. She also has concerns over the manner in which treatment with psilocybin, and other psychedelics, could be delivered. “This work is rooted not in medical treatment but in the sacred practice of connecting with traditions that are both indigenous in nature and spiritual in practice,” says Bourzat, who is advising in Oregon on the state’s development of facilitator training. “The Mazatec community in Mexico use the mushroom for connection with the divine and curing tensions and physical ailments that for them are connected to a spiritual blockage or absence of energy circulating in the body and the heart. They connect sickness with unprocessed emotion, which is probably a sound conclusion.” Many of the medicines (though not magic mushrooms, which are simple to grow and relatively ubiquitous) are finite resources, and already face serious pressure. The manner of patenting and overharvesting carries a dark paradox given that psychedelics are supposed to engender more enlightened and selfless states. “The purpose of medicine is to create a bigger, deeper, more thorough experience of our inner functioning, our physical functioning, our emotional functioning, our energetic functioning, our spiritual functioning, our relational functioning, how we are with the land,” Bourzat told podcast Berkeley Talks. “Mushrooms bring it to your face, like, ‘This is your illness.’ By knowing your illness, you resolve your illness, you deal with it, you treat it from within yourself. The mushroom helps you see the truth.” The fear among psychedelic advocates is that a potential deprioritisation of the human aspect of care – whether through sterile environments or through prescriptions where patients chart their development through apps without human contact – could be detrimental to the benefits of the treatment. “The mainstream medicalised approach that is emerging is minimising the value of human support. This work is supposed to be done within relationships,” Bourzat says. McKenna agrees that it would be foolish for the pharmaceutical industry to ignore the culture and historical context of psychedelic usage, particularly if only those who are ill are allowed access. He believes everyone should have access to them, and not just in private clinical settings as appears the case with recently approved ketamine. The icon among psychonauts declares: “Any future regulatory frameworks should not set up situations where you have to be sick in order to take a psychedelic legally.” • This article was amended on 8 November 2021 to clarify that there is currently no effective medicinal treatment for PTSD.The travel company Expedia has stopped selling holidays that include performances by captive dolphins and whales. There have been growing calls in recent years, including from the prime minister’s wife, Carrie Johnson, to ban attractions and experiences that involve captive sea creatures. Announcing the move on Twitter, the company said: “We recently adjusted our animal welfare policy. As a result, attractions and activities that involve performances by or interactions with dolphins and other cetaceans will no longer be available on our sites.” It further clarifies on the Expedia website that “seaside sanctuaries that provide captive animals with a permanent seaside living environment are allowed if they are accredited and do not feature interactions or performances”. Campaigners are hopeful other companies will follow suit. Virgin Holidays announced in 2019 it would no longer sell tickets to such attractions and experiences. Katheryn Wise, from the wildlife charity World Animal Protection, said: “This is amazing news and something that we have been campaigning for since 2019. We are so pleased that they have listened. “Travel companies play a huge role in driving captive dolphin entertainment and as one of the largest travel companies in the world we are delighted that Expedia Group are making a stand. It’s time for other travel giants … to do the right thing and follow suit.” The PA Media news agency reported that the company intended to implement the policy by early 2022. “We give our providers 30 days to comply with the updated policy or face removal from the site,” Expedia said. The last captive dolphin attraction in the UK closed in 2003 but people can still travel abroad for the activities. There are more than 3,000 dolphins held in captive conditions at tourist entertainment venues around the world. The company has also stated it does not “allow intentional physical contact with wild and exotic animals, which include but are not limited to dolphins, whales, cetaceans, elephants, big cats, bears, reptiles and primates”, and also does not sell activities involving exotic pet cafes, restaurants and travelling zoos. Travel companies are increasingly moving to distance themselves from unethical animal attractions. Intrepid Travel set off a domino effect among other companies when it ceased all elephant ride activities in 2014. The travel association Abta updated its animal welfare guidelines in January 2020 to class activities with captive elephants and tourist contact or feeding of great apes, bears, crocodiles or alligators, orcas, sloths and wildcats as unacceptable.Social media can be a force for good when it becomes a place for honest discussion about illness, author Joanne Harris is to argue in a candid radio interview. Harris, known for her bestselling 1999 book Chocolat, suffered panic attacks when she became famous and would pass out in public. She will tell host Lauren Laverne this morning[Sunday]today she is glad she overcame her nerves and shared the news she had been diagnosed with breast cancer last year. Speaking on BBC Radio 4’s Desert Island Discs, the writer said that she felt “so connected to the world” because she had “shared so much online”. Harris said she initially posted on social media about her illness so she would not have to tell people individually about her recovery was progressing: “But then I realised that, actually, as I was getting feedback, there were a whole lot of people who were also going through the same experience and who felt empowered by the fact I’d come out and talked about it. People are very afraid to say, ‘I have been diagnosed with cancer’.” She added that the illness had not “been an entirely negative experience” because it was caught early, thanks to a routine mammogram. Harris uses the platform to repeat her social media message to attend mammogram appointments. “It could save your life. It could have saved mine.” Making light of her treatment on social media also helped her deal with her recovery. “It’s one of the coping mechanisms the human mind has, to poke fun at something terrifying,” she said. “I brought out the funny side of some of the things that were happening.” Harris gave her cancer the name Mr C and created the hashtag GoodbyeMrC. “I would basically tell jokes about losing my hair, losing my eyebrows, losing my eyelashes, looking like a potato.” When Juliette Binoche was cast to star in the Oscar-nominated film of Chocolat released in 2000, the actor stayed at Harris’s home in Barnsley, the author tells Laverne, sleeping in her daughter’s bedroom because there was no spare room. The panic attacks began in America. “I would just pass out, suddenly and without any warning, at a premiere or a glitzy event. It was strange because I didn’t feel I wasn’t coping, but obviously I wasn’t.”I confess that I’m not an avid reader of the Court Circular section of the papers, so I’m glad that my attention was drawn to the following. The Prince of Wales attended a “Sustainable Markets Initiative Fashion Taskforce Digital ID Commitment Presentation”. Delving further into this murky event, I discover that “the members of the task force have committed to begin to digitally identify the products within their brands and to adopt a circular data protocol with immediate effect”. Not being at fashion’s cutting edge, this left me further bewildered. I think it means that clobber manufacturers are striving to make their products more environmentally friendly, but I admit that I’m stumped by a circular data protocol. Altogether more explicable is that “vax” has been enshrined as word of the year by the Oxford English Dictionary. The word was used 72 times more in September than in the previous year. New to me, though, were vaxxie, vax-a-thon and vaxanista, someone, according to the Urban Dictionary, who gets the vaccine and flaunts it with high-end shopping, trips and parties. What we used to call a swank pants in my day. We’ll leave the pressing issue of whether antivaxxers is spelt with one X or two. Too vexatious, or should that be vexxatious? I was pleased to get a letter from reader Andrew Bunbury, who wrote: “We recently visited the British Museum’s Becket exhibition and found it to be very well presented. However, I was shocked to read one of the historical notes that referred to ‘three decapitated heads’. One would expect the country’s senior museum to demonstrate a sounder use of our national language. The offence is so severe that I feel heads must roll – but please ensure that you sever them this time!” A very good point well made. • Jonathan Bouquet is an Observer columnistPledges In terms of national carbon pledges, India provided the best news last week, with prime minister Narendra Modi announcing that the country – currently a major polluter – intends to generate half its electricity from renewables by 2030 and achieve net zero emission status by 2070. Most experts rate the latter target as extremely ambitious and, according to the journal Nature, many suspect it is more likely that India’s plan is to reach net zero only for carbon dioxide by 2070, with other greenhouse gases coming later. Nevertheless, the move is significant and contrasts sharply with the poor emission commitments made to date by Saudi Arabia, the planet’s second-biggest oil producer, and by Russia, its second-biggest gas provider. Much, in short, remains to be done. Forests Felling trees contributes to climate change because it depletes forest cover, which is vital for absorbing carbon dioxide. Forests are, it’s said, being cleared at a rate of 30 football pitches’ worth a minute. An agreement to call a halt to this staggering level of deforestation – reached on Tuesday – was one of the high points of Cop26’s first week. As part of the deal, more than 100 world leaders agreed to reverse deforestation by 2030. Crucially, Brazil –which has cut down huge stretches of the Amazon rainforest in recent years – was among the signatories. However, observers have pointed out that a previous international agreement, in 2014, failed to slow deforestation in any way. On the other hand, the latest pledge is being backed with some serious money: almost £14bn ($19.2bn) of public and private funds. Some of this money will go to developing countries, to restore damaged land and help tackle wildfires. Methane Carbon dioxide may be the principal driver of global warming, but methane is also a potent greenhouse gas, and atmospheric levels have surged over the past decade. The commitment – by an alliance of more than 90 nations, representing two-thirds of the global economy – to reduce methane emissions by at least 30% from current levels by 2030 is therefore considered an important, albeit belated, step forward. “Cutting back on methane emissions is one of the most effective things we can do to reduce near-term global warming and keep it to 1.5°C,” said European Commission president Ursula von der Leyen. Methane is emitted from gas and oil wells, pipelines, livestock, and municipal landfill sites, and much of the effort – to be led by the US – will involve companies being obliged to plug leaks in more than 3 million miles of pipelines. Significantly however, China, India and Russia have not pledged to cut their methane emissions. Coal Greenhouse gases produced by burning coal are the single biggest contributor to climate change. Weaning the world off coal is considered critical in limiting temperature rises across the planet. “I think we can say the end of coal is in sight,” said Alok Sharma, British president of the two-week summit, detailing an agreement to phase out existing coal-fuelled power plants and stop building new ones. Signatories of the non-binding pledge include major banks and, he said “46 countries … 23 of which are making commitments on ending coal for the first time”. However, the absence of Australia, India, the US and China from the pledge to drop coal has drawn criticism. “The key point in this underwhelming announcement is that coal is basically allowed to continue as normal for years yet,” said Jamie Peters, director of campaigns at Friends of the Earth. Future warming The International Energy Agency (IEA), the world’s energy watchdog, reacted fairly enthusiastically to the pledges made so far. “New @IEA analysis shows that fully achieving all net zero pledges to date &amp; the Global Methane Pledge by those who signed it would limit global warming to 1.8C,” the agency’s director, Fatih Birol, wrote on Twitter last Friday. But Selwin Hart, the special adviser to the UN secretary-general on climate action, challenged the assertion. “Fatih, I heard your numbers,” he said in Glasgow. “But based on the nationally determined contributions that have been submitted, the world is on a 2.7 degree pathway – a catastrophic pathway.”The peculiar thing about the RSC’s amiable family show The Magician’s Elephant is how short it is of childishness. It is not so much that Sarah Tipple’s production has hardly any actual kids, more that it never freewheels; it stands up for magic but does not embrace the absurd. Though often attractive, it is mostly sedate. Nancy Harris and Marc Teitler’s musical adaptation of Kate DiCamillo’s 2009 novel shows the inhabitants of a small European city, diminished by recent war, finding new life when a magician conjures up an elephant at the Opera House. Suddenly, it seems there is hope for long-separated siblings and for a couple who (woeful phrase) “keep trying” to have a baby. All the sentiments are sympathetic – and rather too flagged-up: the show sticks up for dreaming and kindness rather than commerce and military harshness; the story is also eco-tinted, as the elephant pines away from her family and her natural environment. It is hard for a puppet pachyderm to measure up to the mighty Sultan’s Elephant made by Royal de Luxe that sashayed through London in 2006, but the creature (greeted as “Madame”) designed by Tracy Waller and Mervyn Millar – and manipulated by Zoe Halliday, Wela Mbusi and Suzanne Nixon – brings a thrill to the stage, with her ears wrinkled like old parchment and her heavy but graceful sway. Oliver Fenwick’s lighting design, mostly sepulchral, provides a particular kind of stage magic, summoning up the creature and eventually making her vanish while in full sight as the audience are dazzled by lights. Madame is the high point, but it takes far too long for her to arrive. The narrative is flabby, with more set-up than action and with music that trundles and scurries, often with a train rhythm, rarely exploring or lingering in the ear. The stage is adult-heavy, with comic, rather than funny, policemen, a Cruella villainess and a soldier with PTSD. Jack Wolfe – sweet-voiced, pixie-like but resolute – gets the hero just right, with Miriam Nyarko beautifully forthright as his lost sister “Adele the Brave”. Sam Harrison is outstanding as a twirling fop, who in the best song of the show describes himself as “the count who doesn’t count, the title no one reads”. These are bright sparks, but not enough to make a blaze. In 2019, Morgan Lloyd Malcolm gave the West End a shaking with Emilia, commissioned by Michelle Terry for the Globe; a rallying cry to feminists and a sceptical account of accepted history, it brought audiences to their feet. Her new look at received views of women’s lives is inward, contemporary, an account of the terrors experienced by someone who has recently become a mother. As someone who is herself not a mother, but who did have one, Mum offered me one of the particular excitements of the theatre: that of leaping into someone else’s experience. I have read many descriptions of postnatal anguish; Sophie Melville’s performance gives the horrors an extra dimension of physicality. Arms stretched wide, face pulled taut, she wheels round the stage as if she were being punched by an invisible fist. Dismantled by tiredness, her eyes glitter narrowly. She turns on herself: “Who’d give a baby to you?” She turns on the women around her: friend, professional, her own mother, a mother-in-law who appears alternately hostile and helpful; these parts are ably divvied up between Cat Simmons and Denise Black. Nightmare and daily life become indistinguishable for protagonist and audience: what presents itself as a raw blurt is actually a carefully steered series of surprises. Marsha Norman’s maternally inflected play has a different explicitness. Staged to mark Hampstead’s commitment to European premieres of American plays, ’Night, Mother was first seen at the theatre in 1985, a year after the end of its Broadway run. Intent, plot and circumstance are throughout laid bare, sometimes boldly, sometimes absurdly: “You are my child,” a mother points out to her daughter. This daughter declares she is going to kill herself. She has had enough: her epilepsy has been regarded as a sign of derangement; her husband has left; her son has turned to drugs and crime; world politics are threatening. She is calm, methodical, meticulous; as eager to ensure her mother is well supplied with fudge as she is to check the bullets for her gun. Her mother will have to cope – with the knowledge and the event. So far, so cutting, and Roxana Silbert’s production has the allure of a contained and bewildered Stockard Channing and Rebecca Night, resolute and bleak as the daughter. Ti Green’s design – brown wheel-backed chairs, crocheted sunflower placemats – captures the terrifying naturalism of Norman’s dialogue. The price of this explicitness is a sluggish pace. Anger and distress descend out of the blue (Channing makes a lot of rigid jabbing gestures), without much sense of inner propulsion or of any countercurrent to what is stated. Here is an interesting kernel, but not an evening’s worth of drama. In 1983, ’Night, Mother won both the Pulitzer prize and the Susan Smith Blackburn award. The runner-up for the latter was Caryl Churchill’s prescient Top Girls. That placing now looks absurd. Star ratings (out of five) The Magician’s Elephant ★★★ Mum ★★★ ’Night Mother ★★★ The Magician’s Elephant is at the Royal Shakespeare theatre, Stratford-upon-Avon, until 1 January Mum is at the Soho theatre, London W1, until 20 November ’Night, Mother is at the Hampstead theatre, London NW3, until 4 DecemberFrom the classic little black dress to a for ever cool biker jacket, black has long been fashion’s last word in chic. “I love black because it affirms, designs and styles,” Yves Saint Laurent once said. “A woman in a black dress is a pencil stroke.” But, in a post-restriction world, even this stamp of approval has been undermined. Because, in 2021, colour is the new black. Harper’s Bazaar ran a feature titled How Gen Z killed basic black in which writer Isabel Slone argued that “utilitarianism has been replaced with a spirit of experimentation” in fashion. Black, such a useful and versatile staple in wardrobes, is the fall guy. “An all-black wardrobe is no longer shorthand for a mysterious and brooding individual,” wrote Slone. “More and more, it telegraphs that a person is, well, old-fashioned.” The take-up of colour is widespread. Scroll through any fashionable Instagram feed and you will find influencers dressed in brights ranging from pumpkin orange to primrose yellow, aqua blue, neon pink and grass green, sometimes all in the same outfit. The trend can also be seen in street style and on celebrities –like Rihanna in bright green on a dinner date in New York, and Kim Kardashian in head-to-toe highlighter pink when hosting Saturday Night Live recently. In the 48 hours following Kardashian’s appearance, searches for pink rose 82% on the fashion search platform, Lyst. Colour is on the catwalk, too. Tagwalk, a fashion search engine which documents catwalk trends, reports that colourblocking at the spring/summer 2022 shows was up 273% compared with the previous year. Gucci’s Love Parade show in LA was a veritable rainbow of pinks, yellows and reds, while Kelly green – a shade similar to Rihanna’s coat and also found in collections of brands ranging from Rejina Pyo to Bottega Veneta – has been declared “the colour of now” by Elle magazine. This shift away from black is partly down to easing of restrictions in most countries. Colour expresses joy and allows its wearer to look dressed up – an appealing concept after 18 months at home in grey marl sweatpants. Fashion psychologist Dr Dawnn Karen said that “people are dressing for their best life” and this comes with a certain abandon. “We’re going to layer that clash. ‘I’m going to put this on, don’t care if it matches’,” she said. “They are receiving that internal validation. We no longer are looking towards others, we’re looking towards ourselves.” The rise of colour in fashion also reflects the celebration of personal style that dominates fashion now, particularly online. Rosanna Falconer, a brand consultant and co-founder of FashMash, is known to her followers on Instagram for brightly coloured outfits. She says fashion’s embrace of colour “started with the digital revolution. A pink dress photographed much better for e-commerce than a black one.” But, while screen pixilation means this has been rectified, colour still stands out. “A colourful design conveys so much more in a 10-second TikTok video and might just stop the scrolling and result in a like,” she said. Wearing colour isn’t just about gaining attention, though. It can be a way to boost your own mood, at a time when uncertainty remains. “People are trying to dress themselves happy,” said Karen, “because of that uncertainty, that anxiety, that melancholy.” Falconer also believes in the power of colour to make its wearer feel better. She says she wears it “as much for the effect it has on those around me as the effect it has on me… on dull grey autumn days it’s tempting to cocoon away in neutral colours. But I promise, even 10 minutes in a bright colour tricks the mind into a better day.” Influencer Nicole Ocran describes herself as “a pink person” and her Instagram account features yellow, orange and green and lilac. She says black, for her, recalls an older idea of fashion based around rules. “In the era of fashion that I grew up in, it was definitely associated with like, ‘this is the only way you can be chic’, and , minimal wardrobes.” Now, she steers away from black: “It feels a little bit too safe. I’m in this this kind of stage of my life where I want to be more playful.”We’ve talked about sick pay before in this column, unsurprisingly, given that a pandemic means lots of ill workers. But while we’ve needed those with Covid to stay at home, it’s been hard, thanks to the lowest statutory sick pay in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, which protects only a quarter of our earnings on average. It’s worth asking why overall sick pay levels are so bad. Firms and workers have the option of negotiating employer-provided sick pay beyond the legal minimum. Many do, but two-fifths of workers in caring, leisure and service jobs rely on the statutory minimum. New research helps us understand why we have a problem. Surveying more than 12,000 UK residents, it found that workers who come into more contact with others are least likely to have sick pay and most likely to work when ill. We know some firms are reluctant to offer sick pay because of the challenge of verifying whether workers are really ill. But workers also don’t prioritise sick pay, with almost half unwilling to sacrifice 2% of pay for it. That makes some sense for individuals prepared to work while sick but it’s rubbish for society: everyone else bears the cost if I turn up to work with the flu. Our sick sick pay system isn’t going to resolve itself because it’s one big market failure. The blindingly obvious answer? The state has to step in. • Torsten Bell is chief executive of the Resolution Foundation. Read more at resolutionfoundation.orgA 1,200-year-old, 15-foot (4.5-metre) dugout canoe has been taken from Lake Mendota in Madison, Wisconsin, after two divers stumbled upon it while riding underwater scooters. The vessel was recovered from roughly 27ft of water and brought to shore this week. “This is the first time this thing has been out of the water in 1,200 years,” said state archaeologist Jim Skibo. Christian Overland, director and chief executive of the Wisconsin Historical Society, called the canoe a remarkable artefact, while archaeologist Amy Rosebrough told Kenosha News it was “extraordinarily rare”. “We really don’t have anything like this from Wisconsin,” Rosebrough said. Tamara Thomsen, a maritime archaeologist, and her friend Mallory Dragt went for an underwater joyride on their scooters in June. In doing so, they noticed what looked like a “log sticking out of the bottom of the lake”, CNN reported. When Thomsen investigated further, she realized it was a canoe. Weeks later, carbon dating revealed the vessel to be more than 1,000 years old. Ancestors of the Ho-Chunk Nation of Native Americans, known as People of the Big Water, built dugout canoes in the area by burning the inside of logs and scraping them out with stone tools. “Consider cutting down a tree that’s two-and-a-half feet wide with a stone tool and then hollowing it out and making it float,” Skibo said. “It must have taken hundreds of hours and a great deal of skill. You get a new appreciation for people that lived in a time when there were no modern-day tools to do this thing where they could do it quicker.” Skibo said the canoe was still intact partly because it had not been exposed to the light. “That’s one of the reasons we have to start preserving it,” he said. “There’s living organisms on it that are chewing away on it as we speak.” The vessel will undergo several years of preservation treatment and may end up in a proposed Wisconsin Historical Society museum in Madison. “I’m an archaeologist who tells stories from artefacts,” Skibo said. “And this is a great one.”The Los Angeles police department targeted the late rapper Nipsey Hussle’s street corner and his The Marathon Clothing store before his death in 2019, labeling the intersection a “hot spot” for crime and sending special patrols that stopped and questioned people in the area, according to records reviewed by the Guardian. Hussle, whose name became synonymous with the corner of Crenshaw Boulevard and Slauson Avenue, spent years investing in projects in the area until he was fatally shot at the intersection in March 2019. City leaders publicly mourned the artist and entrepreneur, but it was revealed soon after his death that LA law enforcement leaders had been quietly targeting his businesses with a criminal investigation, alleging it was a site of gang activity. Internal records obtained by the Stop LAPD Spying Coalition and shared with the Guardian shed new light on how LAPD invested resources into policing at Crenshaw and Slauson, suggesting that for years the department focused enforcement efforts around the community gathering spot where Hussle had bought commercial space and was working to redevelop a corner strip mall. The files, which were acquired through public records requests, are part of the coalition’s new report on “data-driven” LAPD initiatives that will be released on Monday. The report scrutinizes a controversial and now-shuttered LAPD program called Operation Laser (an acronym for Los Angeles Strategic Extraction and Restoration), which aimed to prevent crime and “restore peace”. Launched in 2011, the program purported to use data to identify “chronic offenders” and specific locations linked to gun violence and gangs, in an effort to “extract” criminal activity from communities. But critics said the initiative was ineffective and biased, and that it enabled surveillance, racial profiling and harassment of Black and Latino residents, with little oversight. In the face of backlash, LAPD discontinued Laser in 2019, acknowledged its results had been “inconsistent”. Samiel Asghedom, Hussle’s brother and business partner, told the Guardian he did not know of Operation Laser, but was not surprised to learn that the initiative focused on their store and the surrounding plaza: “It was a target point … It was like everybody walking out of the shop would get harassed or arrested.” Mass stops at Crenshaw and Slauson The full extent of the operation targeting Hussle and his businesses is unclear. Hussle had raised questions about the department’s activities in his community long before the start of the program – in a 2013 interview, he said officers would regularly stop and question people, and collect their information for no reason. But it appears that LAPD first brought the Laser program to Crenshaw and surrounding neighborhoods in 2015, identifying six “zones” of interest (corridors that allegedly had high crime rates). Within those zones, LAPD selected specific locations to target, known as “anchor points”. The Crenshaw and Slauson location was marked as an anchor point in 2016, one of about five locations targeted in the district. (By 2019, before the program was shuttered, the city had roughly 70 anchor points across LA, which included businesses, homeless encampments, parks, sidewalks and train stations.) Hussle, who was 33 when he died, had deep ties to the plaza. “Age 14 on up – my whole life took place on these four corners,” he said of the intersection in an interview in 2010. The artist and entrepreneur spoke openly about gang culture in the neighborhood and being a part of the Rollin’ 60s, a local Crips gang, at a young age. He also said he wanted to invest in economic opportunities for his community, with projects led by locals, instead of allowing outside groups to gentrify his neighborhood. Throughout the years, Hussle and his brother ran several stores on the corner, including an apparel store called Slauson Tees, which opened in 2006. Hussle opened The Marathon Clothing store in 2017, with a launch event on 17 June. In the days after the grand opening, LAPD intensified its presence on the block, the internal records suggest. A “patrol mission report” from 21-27 June suggests that officers were deployed to the “anchor point” at Hussle’s intersection in a crime “suppression” effort. During that week at the location and surrounding blocks, LAPD recorded 58 stops, but made only seven arrests, suggesting that for the vast majority of people stopped or detained, there was no probable cause to arrest them. In a mission the following week, LAPD stopped 103 people, and made only three arrests; the records say LAPD was looking for a robbery suspect described only as a Black male between 16 and 18 years old. The stops could carry serious consequences, even without arrest. As part of the Laser program, officers would routinely fill out “field interview cards” for civilians they questioned, even if they weren’t taken to jail, and would put their information into LAPD databases, which could later be used against them. Police across the city have allegedly used the cards to falsely label people as gang members and to collect their social media information. “LAPD was speculatively criminalizing the location,” said Shakeer Rahman, a Stop LAPD Spying organizer and lawyer. The data that the officers collected could then be used to justify further targeting, he added: “Police are deployed to these locations, armed with what they’re told are these ‘data-driven trends’ … but those trends are just the racial profiling that police have always done.” In one 2016 paper, the architect of the Laser program explicitly argued that LA crime data showed how certain violent crimes were “more likely to be located in areas where there is a higher percentage of African-American residents”. Asghedom said LAPD had frequently harassed his family and passersby at the plaza in the years leading up to the 2017 launch, at one point arresting him while he was working at one of his shops on his birthday for a probation violation. But the police activity escalated dramatically after The Marathon Clothing launch, he said. “It was like every ten minutes a [police] car is coming through the lot, and officers are hopping out. It was nonstop,” he said. In one instance, LAPD even stopped and questioned shoppers who appeared to be tourists, he said. The shoppers turned out to be off-duty police officers from out of state. “It became, ‘Don’t come here if you don’t want police contact.’ If you did have a warrant, you ain’t coming to buy nothing from us. It was like, ‘Shit, I’m gonna get pulled over. I’m gonna get targeted,’” he said. Asghedom said it felt as if the LAPD officers were angry about the success of the store, which was a source of pride for the local community and drew fans and supporters from across the US: “We’re here every day selling clothes, so there is less crime. This is something that y’all should be happy about. But instead, their whole goal was just to shut it down.” The push to evict Nipsey Hussle Operation Laser’s focus on Crenshaw and Slauson appeared to continue for years, with one October 2018 map included in the records specifying the Marathon store among a group of addresses as an ongoing anchor point. The Stop LAPD Spying report also raises fresh questions about Los Angeles’ efforts to evict Hussle and his brother from the plaza. After Hussle’s death, the New York Times uncovered that the city had been targeting his store as a “nuisance” property and the site of alleged gang activity, pressuring the landlord to evict the rapper and his business partners. LA’s “nuisance abatement” program allows the city to file evictions based on alleged criminal activity at a property, and records show that the city considered evictions a key “strategy” to address issues with Laser anchor points. Emails reviewed by the group also suggest that some city law enforcement officials had communications with developers in South Central and other parts of the city about eviction and enforcement efforts. The emails, the report’s authors argue, show that data-driven policing programs target areas with growing interest from real estate developers and have accelerated gentrification and displacement there. Asghedom said that he and his brother had worked hard to make the corner of Crenshaw and Slauson a positive force in the neighborhood, and he argued that their shops had helped reduce crime in the neighborhood, not perpetuate it. Their landlord supported them, he said: “He was making money. We were making improvements to the lot. He tried to voice that to the police, and they didn’t give a fuck about none of it. They said, ‘We’re trying to label this as a city ‘nuisance’, and if you don’t sever their lease, we’re going to seize the lot from you.’” Instead of evicting them, the landlord sold the property to Hussle and his business partners, which they considered a huge accomplishment, Asghedom said. But even after Hussle’s death, the city continued to target the shop with a “nuisance” case, Asghedom said. “It felt like a cat and mouse game. Their agenda was, ‘Whatever they are doing over there, crush it, stop it,’” said Asghedom. It’s unclear to what extent that data collected through Laser may have been used to target The Marathon store for eviction in the final year of his life. The city attorney’s office, which was pursuing the eviction, declined to comment. Over the years, they had serious discussions about whether to move the shop elsewhere, where they might face less police harassment. But ultimately, Asghedom said, his brother refused to leave Crenshaw and Slauson. Asghedom said he and the other business partners eventually decided to temporarily close down the plaza, so that the city could no longer claim it was a “nuisance”. In the future, he hopes to reopen the Steve’s Barber Shop at the location, to give free haircuts to youth, and to launch a youth center there, along with some kind of museum or gathering spot where fans can pay tribute to his brother. “Nip wanted to stay in the area and inspire the youth, and we want people to know this is something that Nip bought, knowing where Nip started and where Nip took it to.” LAPD declined to respond to repeated requests for comment about the Laser program and the Marathon store. LAPD’s deadly record in South LA Laser zones Operation Laser’s reach in South Central went far beyond The Marathon Clothing. The Stop LAPD Spying report documents incidents of police violence that occurred in Laser “zones”, arguing that these surveillance and “extraction” tactics can be deadly. Keith Bursey Jr, 31, was killed by an LAPD officer on Slauson Avenue, a block away from Crenshaw, on 10 June 2016. Officials said LAPD was in the area because 10 June was “Hood Day” when “gang members celebrate their gang”. Bursey was a passenger in a car that LAPD approached in a parking lot to investigate the “odor of marijuana”. Officers ordered the passengers to exit, and shot Bursey, hitting him in the back when he tried to flee, officials said. “It seems like they were stopping anybody for any infraction that day,” said Cliff Dorsey, Bursey’s cousin, to the Guardian. Dorsey, a South Central native, who now works as a public defender, said he wasn’t familiar with Operation Laser, but that it aligned with the experiences of people in his neighborhood where LAPD gang operations rely on “guilt by association”. LAPD frequently labeled South Central natives as criminal gang members based on their families and upbringing, Dorsey said. Bursey was not ashamed of his ties to the Rollin’ 60s, which family members had been a part of, but the gang did not define him and did not mean he was a criminal, Dorsey said: “It can be like family. These are young men that grew up in the same circumstances, surrounded by the same poverty, the same drugs. And they’re trying to survive as best they can.” Mary Williams, Bursey’s grandmother who raised him, said her grandson was a talented tap dancer and football player and lamented that police stopped him that day “for no reason”. “They can’t just go around, harassing people and putting their names in databases. It was such an unnecessary murder.” She said that two weeks after the killing, one of Keith’s cousins was also stopped at the same intersection, without justification, and eventually released. LAPD’s “data-driven” missions also targeted the Crenshaw mall, just north of Hussle’s store, which was labeled a Laser zone in 2015. “This is a mall frequented by Black and brown people,” said Quintus Moore, whose son, Grechario Mack, was killed by police inside the mall in 2018 while suffering a mental health crisis. His son was holding a knife, but witnesses said he wasn’t threatening, and the police commission later ruled that officers violated policy when they shot him. Moore said it seemed that the LAPD was often bringing new tactics and programs to his community and the area around the Crenshaw mall “because they want to try out their new gadgets and weapons in the Black neighborhood”. While LAPD has launched efforts over the last decade aimed at improving community relations in South Central, Moore said it felt as if little had changed. He said he had been unjustly pulled over twice while driving in the area in recent years – once when an officer peered into his car, and another time when an officer asked him if he had tattoos. Both times, after short interactions, he was released. Johana Bhuiyan contributed reportingOn Monday, the Cop26 summit will focus on the need for countries around the world to adapt to the effects of the climate crisis. Adaptation has long been an overlooked issue at the annual Cop meetings, with the focus more on reducing greenhouse gas emissions. For many years, there were fears that talking about adaptation would distract from the urgent need to cut emissions, or even that it would be a “cop-out” – by suggesting that countries could adapt their way out of trouble as a cheaper alternative to shifting away from fossil fuels. Those fears have fallen away as the climate emergency has become ever more apparent in the form of extreme weather events, which scientific advances have allowed us to link clearly to global heating. Last week in Glasgow, UN secretary general António Guterres said that nearly 4 billion people suffered climate-related disasters in the past decade. Adaptation can take the form of seawalls, flood barriers, storm drains in cities and shelters for displaced people, but there is also scope for “nature-based solutions” such as tree planting to help prevent landslips, restoring wetlands to act as sponges for heavy rainfall and planting crop varieties that are more resilient to higher temperatures and water shortages. All require investment, however, and most poor countries cannot raise the necessary finance by themselves. But little of the cash needed has so far been forthcoming, and donor efforts through “climate finance” have tended to focus on projects, such as renewable energy plants, that reduce greenhouse gas emissions but also turn a profit. Sonam Wangdi, chair of the Least Developed Countries group, which represents more than a billion people, said: “Adaptation is extremely important. We need to adapt now, and for that we need money. But that money is not coming, currently. How it’s going to come, I don’t know, but we need the money.” He pointed to increasing evidence of the effects of climate breakdown around the world: in Madagascar, where people are suffering what is being called the first climate-related famine; and in Bangladesh, where rising sea levels combined with storm surges are threatening low-lying areas, and cyclones are becoming more frequent and intense. In his own country, Bhutan, glaciers are retreating, which is causing both floods and water shortages. Poor countries were given about $80bn (£60bn) in climate finance in 2019, the latest year for which full data is available, according to the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. But only about a quarter of that was for projects that help countries adapt to the impact of the climate crisis; the bulk of the funding went to reducing greenhouse gas emissions. Guterres has called for half of climate finance to be devoted to adaptation efforts. “Public and multilateral development banks [such as the World Bank] should start as soon as possible,” he added. And Wangdi warned that without swift action to protect countries’ vital infrastructure, the effects of climate breakdown will cause potentially irrevocable damage and could reverse decades of progress on lifting people out of poverty. Poor countries emphasise that they are taking measures for themselves, even without donor assistance. “It is not that we are sitting around waiting for money,” said one negotiator. “We know we have to do this. We are putting our own budgets towards this, but we do not have enough and could do so much more if we had some help.” Patrick Verkooijen, chief executive of the Global Centre on Adaptation, pointed to the Africa Adaptation Acceleration programme, which aims to attract $2.5bn annually from the developed world to add to $6bn a year already coming from hard-pressed African nations. The money is “a drop in the bucket” of what developed countries are capable of providing, he said, but would make a vast difference, as people in Africa were already suffering the effects of extreme weather. He said projects that help communities adapt to the changing climate could also create new jobs and safeguard existing ones, and help fragile economies recover from the Covid-19 pandemic. Teddy Mugabo, chief executive of the Rwanda Green Fund, pointed to Green Gicumbi, a project involving 250,000 Rwandans in a region prone to flooding and landslides. “That they face these risks is no fault of their own,” she said. “They are among the millions whose lives have already been fundamentally altered by global warming.” The project involves forest management, watershed protection, sustainable energy and using “climate-smart” techniques to manage water and soil resources and plant the right crops in ways that make the most of the soil and climate. Developed countries are also facing the need to adapt to the changing climate. US agriculture secretary Thomas Vilsack said the his government was working on climate-smart agriculture that would help American farmers cope with changing weather, water scarcity, higher temperatures and longer dry spells.When Terence Conran died in September 2020 his former employee and friend Stephen Bayley wrote an obituary for the Guardian that was waspish but also fond and funny, properly acknowledging his erstwhile boss as a revolutionary in taste and design. To postwar British homes that were 50 shades of sad and brown, Conran brought a verve and colour, and persuaded people to think about objects – a wine glass, a sofa, a rug, a salad bowl – as something beautiful as well as useful. Britain was a better-looking place because of him. Later, he opened a series of restaurants that transformed London dining in the 1990s and became almost emblematic of fin-de-siècle prosperity. That obituary expresses in about 3,000 words what Terence incontinently splurges over 300 pages. Bayley has a co-author in ad man Roger Mavity to supply a featherbed of reminiscences of his time as Conran’s CEO – he seems grateful merely to have breathed the same air as “Terence” – but it’s essentially Bayley’s project, with his initials hovering beneath most of the chapter headings. Bayley confesses his debt to Conran, who catapulted him from obscurity at “a provincial university” into a glamorous life of expense-account lunches, fine wine, fresh flowers, Cuban cigars – the 1980s, in short. And, like so many given a leg-up, the protege has never really forgiven his mentor. His book makes for a strange mixture of sentimental regard and cold-eyed score-settling. On page one he calls Conran “a mean-spirited, selfish bastard”; on page three he admits that few have made such a difference to “British material life in the past 60 years”. It is rather like watching a man angrily shaking his fist while unable to get up off his knees. It certainly tells us as much about Bayley’s personality as it does his subject’s. When he points out, for instance, that Conran could only see out of one eye, following a workshop accident, he adds “but that single eye was a very, very good one”. Fair enough. So why does he feel driven to keep making ironic jibes about his “monocular” vision and his “single eye for a bargain” (where presumably he meant “singular”)? Does he fancy himself as Odysseus, righteously slaying the Cyclops whose brooding prisoner he has been for so long? The shame of it is that Conran’s story is interesting, and would carry some authority here if Bayley could resist his retrospective one-upmanship. I was absorbed by the fledgling years, by the suburban boy (born Esher, 1931) who came to London as a furniture-maker and set up a budget restaurant near Charing Cross he called The Soup Kitchen (out went Brown Windsor, in came vichyssoise, split-pea and minestrone). I knew nothing of his life-changing “grand tour” of France in Michael Wickham’s Lagonda in the early 50s, nor that by the age of 32 he had married for the third time. And bliss must have been that dawn on Fulham Road in 1964 when he opened Habitat, a shop aimed at “young moderns with lively tastes”. I only felt the reverberations myself 10 years later, on first clapping eyes on a duvet, or “continental quilt” as we called it – who would bother with bedding ever again? Conran’s grandiose claim to have imported it and thereby changed the sex life of Britain was never verified, as Bayley remarks in an amusing aside, “though the role of the contraceptive pill and women’s liberation may have been underestimated”. When Conran hires Bayley to oversee the Boilerhouse Project at the V&amp;A – an exhibition space devoted to design – their court of two is established. You wonder if the king suspected what troubles his diminutive dauphin might cause him down the line. Their association thrived initially, however, and in due course the Boilerhouse gave way to the grander ambition of the Design Museum, founded in what was then the near-derelict Shad Thames. Whose idea was it? Bayley, no paragon of humility, claims it was his, and that Conran only paid for it. Sharing an office allows him to get up close – too close – to the boss, whose flaws emerge in large size and small, like his complaining at the extravagance of Earl Grey teabags, or fretting that each time the office lift was used it cost 54p. The contradictions of his character toll with maddening repetition through the book: he was a generous host and a penny-pincher; a voluptuary and a puritan; a tyrant and a democrat; a promoter of talent who skimped on crediting his colleagues. Conran’s restlessness for the next big thing, at the cost of looking after what he already had, was generally thought to be his downfall. His takeover of British Home Stores in the mid-1980s was a hopeless mismatch; BHS’s middle-of-the-road product didn’t chime with Conran’s gospel of good taste. His golden touch deserted him, and he lost Habitat. After another business partnership failed, he lost the restaurants, too. His differences with Bayley had to be resolved by a lawyer’s letter, and the pair didn’t speak again for years. The repetitious narrative becomes quite a grind. A good editor could have made this book half the length and twice as entertaining. Bayley begins to wind up matters around page 263, then fills another 50 with a conclusion, two “epilogues” and the reprinted obituary. It seems he just can’t bear to let the old devil go. • Terence: The Man Who Invented Design by Stephen Bayley and Roger Mavity is published by Constable (£25). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyIf a publisher declares a book to be a classic, as Penguin has been doing for the past 75 years with its Classics series, and since 1961 with the Modern Classics offshoot, it raises a number of potentially knotty questions. What makes a book a classic? Who gets to decide? And will today’s classic still be a classic in 10 years’ time, let alone 50 or 100? “It’s a really slippery term,” admits Henry Eliot, who has written a book on the former series and is about to put out a volume on the latter, entitled The Penguin Modern Classics Book. “There are various ways that people have made sense of it,” he says. “The definition I find the most helpful is from Ezra Pound. He said that a classic is classic not because of any structural rules or criteria that it meets, but because of a certain internal and irrepressible freshness. And that rings true to me.” As for who decides, Eliot believes that rather than fencing off the landscape of literature by creating a stable of classics, Penguin editors are in fact opening it up and encouraging readers to broaden their horizons. There are serious imbalances in both series – four-fifths of the authors in the Modern Classics stable are men, and nine in 10 are white – but Eliot insists that things are changing. “The task of a classics publisher is to identify these imbalances and redress them,” he writes. Another question that appears less vexed, but which has likely caused sleepless nights for many Penguin designers over the years, has to do with external rather than internal freshness: how do you create a cover fit for a classic? The answer, according to Eliot, is: not easily. “From the beginning, built into the DNA of Penguin, has been this idea that the books need to be beautifully designed,” he says. “If anything has characterised the Penguin design ethos, it’s a kind of elegant simplicity – there’s something deceptively simple about a Penguin cover. It takes a huge amount of work to put them together.” Eliot’s new book opens with a section on how the cover design has evolved, and you can see the carefully considered but striking changes that were introduced by successive art directors over the decades (the Modern Classics series turned 60 this year). Dominant colours (orange, dove grey, eau-de-nil) drop out, only to creep back into later iterations. Typefaces get axed, after much agonising, to be replaced by more modern-looking counterparts. Grid layouts are imposed – many 1960s covers were designed according to the so-called Marber grid, which sectioned off the publisher’s logo, the title, the author’s name and the image – only to drift after a few years or get overhauled completely. Some of Eliot’s favourite covers date back to the early 1960s, when the Modern Classics series was still finding its feet. From the outset, Penguin had relied on mostly typographical designs, but by the late 50s illustrations were becoming more common. As younger designers and illustrators were brought in, and given much greater graphic freedom, Penguin covers became increasingly bold and strange, to match the writing they advertised. The colours of these covers were relatively restrained, says Eliot, “but within that quite muted, subtle framework, the art directors were commissioning these sometimes really shocking and startling original images from the illustrators of the day”. These included David Gentleman, Michael Ayrton and a young Quentin Blake, who was tasked with illustrating the novels of Evelyn Waugh. Blake, whose irreverent, scratchy style was already in place, captures Waugh’s mordant wit and keen sense of life’s absurdities. More unsettling is the work of Hungarian-born French cartoonist André Francois. Eliot singles out his cover of William Faulkner’s The Sound and the Fury, “where each eye of the face is made up of a mouth with another set of eyes. It’s just such a scary, striking image. It reminds me of Escher or one of Borges’s short stories – there’s something queasy and vertiginous about it.” The artists were toying with the form in various ways. Eliot points out the male figure in the foreground of the cover for Carson McCullers’s The Heart Is a Lonely Hunter – one of the first books published in the series – who appears to be leaning against the side of the book, as if propped up by the designer’s precisely formulated margins. This championing of original illustration lasted only a couple of years, though it gave rise to more than 100 covers. After 1963, says Eliot, the designers “began to increasingly use existing artworks – the idea being that the cover artwork was roughly contemporaneous with the text, so you get an instant visual link to what you’re reading”. Thus a cover of Virginia Woolf’s To The Lighthouse features a work by fellow Bloomsbury Group member Duncan Grant. The covers continued to be eye-catching and beautifully executed, right up to the present, but for this brief period in the early 1960s Penguin let its hair down and showed its wilder, weirder side. “The best covers find a way to make new titles intriguing and familiar authors appear fresh and irresistible,” says Eliot. By that measure, these early Modern Classic covers succeeded with madcap exuberance. • The Penguin Modern Classics Book by Henry Eliot is published by Particular Books, Penguin Press on 18 November (£30). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyWith its troubled loner protagonist prowling a sleazy nocturnal underworld, this grimy tale of an ex-con turned professional gambler is archetypal Paul Schrader material. And in Oscar Isaac’s enigmatic blackjack player “William Tell”, with his wary hooded eyes and closed book countenance, the film has a broodingly commanding central performance. It’s a pity, then, that much of its promise is squandered by sloppiness, both in the writing and elsewhere. Isaac’s character – he calls himself “Bill”, but the anonymous name, like everything else about him, is designed not to leave a trace – is a man of habit. Constantly on the move, he operates at the low-stakes end of the gambling circuit. But despite his under the radar approach, two people notice him. La Linda (Tiffany Haddish, miscast and ill at ease in the role) sees his potential and attempts to recruit him to her stable of gamblers. And Cirk (Tye Sheridan), a rootless kid with a half-formed plan, hopes to persuade him to seek revenge on a mutual enemy. Instead, Bill invites Cirk to join him on the casino circuit. That the film leaves us with questions is not, in itself, a bad thing. But scenes that go nowhere – an abortive visit to a character in prison, for example – together with devices that are clearly included for their visual impact rather than the credibility of Bill’s character ultimately undermine the integrity of the storytelling.“Jesus didn’t go to Tesco,” says Russell Dryden, fishmonger and manager of the Blue Bermondsey business improvement district. “He went to the marketplace.” Markets, in other words, aren’t just places for buying and selling things, but also for meeting people, exchanging ideas, sometimes for starting world religions. But their survival can’t always be taken for granted, for which reason he and his allies in the local community have been fighting for years to revive the one where they work and shop. He is standing by his stall in the Blue Market, a south-east London institution that at its 19th-century peak had 200 stalls. Behind him is a new clock tower, a perky fusion of pyramidal roof and horseshoe arches that hints at the architecture of other places – Moorish? Japanese? – without quite stating which. The silvery scales that clad its oak-framed structure catch the shifting autumnal light. Around are thoughtful and playful but budget-conscious interventions by a collaboration between Hayatsu Architects, a practice with a predilection for working in timber, and the Turner prize-winning collective Assemble. The market, like the area around it, has had its ups and downs. Bermondsey is an ancient place, formed around pilgrimage routes to a medieval abbey, then transformed beyond recognition by railways and shipping. It was once the “larder of London”, a hub of food production and trading, location of the world’s first commercial cannery and of a huge biscuit factory, a place from where custard and malt vinegar and other delights were dispatched to kitchen tables across the country. Most of this industry, along with nearby docks, has disappeared. By 2018, the number of stalls in the market had dropped to four. A 2005 Metropolitan police report called the area a hotspot for “race crime and youth disorder”. The Blue Market owes its name to a pub called the Blue Anchor, which may be something to do with the anchorites who gave spiritual counsel to pilgrims, for whom blue would have been a sacred colour. Its stalls used to line what is in effect the area’s high street, before being relocated in the 1970s to a triangular plaza in a new development. That it was a somewhat sterile place, ill connected to the pattern of surrounding streets, did nothing to help the market’s fortunes. Dryden, who has been selling fish here for 40 years, teamed up with other traders and local citizens to do something about it. They went through the long, slow grind common to projects to improve public spaces, of much chat and consultation, of thwarted plans, of insufficient funding. “You get £50,000 and you think ‘yippee’,” says Dryden. “But what’s £50,000? Nothing. You need a real chunk.” Eventually, they were offered £2m from the Good Growth Fund, a regeneration programme run by the mayor of London. It was enough to pay for the makeover designed by Hayatsu and Assemble. The clock tower is the most visible of a series of interventions in and around the market. Artful signs around the neighbourhood draw attention to it. Routes to nearby places are being opened up or improved; for example, to a big housing development that is coming to the former Peek Frean biscuit factory. It is also hoped to attract some of the energy of Maltby Street, a thriving food market about a mile along the railway line towards the centre of London. The roller shutters on traders’ lock-ups have been beautified with hand-painted accounts of Bermondsey’s history. Recycled building materials have been made into a mottled and marbled drinking fountain. Oak-framed canopies give shelter to the traders. There’s an emphasis on the way things are made, wherever possible by local businesses, on the jointing of the timber and the shining discs of the tower’s cladding, which, it turns out, are the bases of paint cans made in a nearby factory. A stall was set up in the market where passers-by could engrave images of local history on to them. There’s also thrift, as it turns out that £2m isn’t all that much, especially once a large part of it has gone on making local roads more pedestrian-friendly. Old concrete bollards are stained red and made into seating and existing trees are made to look less straggly and more verdant by the careful addition of planting around them. Much relies on paint and graphics, by the Bermondsey-based Stinsensqueeze. The result is a hybrid space in which the artful interventions co-exist with the municipal modernism of the 1970s development and the Millwall and England flags of a neighbouring bar. A wiry statue of a lion, installed a few years ago, has after some debate been retained. The place is charming and relaxed and not quite like anywhere else. The care and thought of its creation are palpable. It looks fragile – you feel trepidatious for its fate at the hands of graffitists and careless vehicles – but in Dryden’s view: “If something’s nice, people leave it alone.” In which case its delicacy will be a welcome alternative to the tough war-zone materials preferred by local authorities for places such as this. This country has plenty of futile and undernourished attempts to upgrade public spaces, not least because – for all that there’s widespread agreement as to their importance – the budgets for their improvement are skimpy. The Blue Market seems more thought and felt. What it needs now is for new stallholders to come, whom Dryden and his fellow campaigners are actively encouraging. He is confident that people will still want to buy and sell in the outdoors. “I think the human spirit is too strong. You go back to ancient Sumeria. You always have markets.”Warm water rushed up the sand and fizzed over our feet like soda. Screaming with a combination of joy and nerves, my two-year-old scrambled on to my back as the next wave washed around my waist, draping ribbons of seaweed over us both. Just nine months old when the first lockdown struck, she had never seen the sea and didn’t quite know what to do. Soaked, she threw herself on to the hot, camel-coloured sand and was soon camouflaged. Amid snorkelling teenagers bobbing on the water like buoys, my four-year-old rode an inflatable pink flamingo, watching older swimmers cut through the Mediterranean’s green swirl and head towards its navy depths. Measuring barely nine miles by five, the island of Gozo is Malta’s little sister, the quiet one with secret coves, ancient churches and family-run restaurants serving rabbit stew. Most visitors come on the ferry from Malta for a day trip, but we were here for a week, enjoying the calm and slowness as we drove around vineyards and pumpkin patches, the smell of citrus trees strong on the evening air. Ramla Bay, where we were swimming, is a conservation area, backed by sand dunes and subject to sand-sifting and clean-ups, as evidenced by the lack of plastic and cigarette butts. The seabed is strewn with boulders and best tackled in a pair of swim shoes; your swimwear will fill with red sand. But none of this dissuades beach-goers, who rev up on quad bikes, push grandmas in wheelchairs, and share fresh pizza to Nelly Furtado beats before dozing as their limbs turn bronze. By noon, taunted by the aroma of fried fish on the breeze, we gathered up toys, shook out towels and children, and called a Bolt to take us for lunch. Although bus services run around the island, we were advised to download the ride-hailing app, which offers a choice of green-energy taxis, minivans and cars with booster seats, along with the opportunity to chat to Gozitans young and old. In 15 minutes we arrived at Ta’ Philip, just above the harbour in the village of Ghajnsielem. Pushing through curtains made from threaded wine corks, we stepped into a modernised winery and were met by a teenager named Benjamin, who smiled through braces and showed us to a table by the open kitchen, from where we could hear the whomph of fire in pans. With a farm-to-fork ethos, owner Philip Spiteri opened Ta’ Philip (Philip’s Place) in 2016 to focus on local specialities. Adamant about traditional methods, the 56-year-old restaurateur installed a wood-burning oven where suckling pigs are slow-roasted from midnight to 10am, along with local lamb and kid. While we waited, garlic baguettes arrived in brown paper bags. Lightly charred, they were so fresh the butter burned my fingertips. Philip swooped in with three ramekins of butterbean and garlic puree, tomato relish and kunserva helwa, an intense, sticky tomato conserve that’s “stirred and stirred with sea salt and sugar”, then spread into dishes to dry on the roof in the sun. He brought over a bottle labelled “Ta’ Mena Estate”, and explains that Mena was his late mother, who began the fruit and vegetable farm much of his produce comes from. All his fish is caught locally. My lobster spaghetti was spun like a chignon and clipped with a flaming orange shell filled with meat. It was steeped in garlic, basil, white wine and stock, and so rich, firm and filling that I struggled to make it through my main course of qarabaghli mimli – a trio of round courgettes plumped with minced beef and pork, and capped with a crust of parmesan. But it was the homemade tiramisu that ensured we were the last customers to leave. On the walk into the capital, Victoria, known locally as Rabat, we passed houses named Ave Maria, Saint Leo and Saint Anthony, many of which had cubby holes scooped out to fit a statuette of Mary or the local saint. But one thing was ever-present: a yellow aura created by the gebla tal-Franka, the soft, golden limestone that lights up the island against a crisp blue sky. And as the sun reddens around 7pm, Gozo’s balconies, ramparts and farmhouses take on a rose-gold hue, appearing to shimmer at the edges. In the market, heavy ladies sat with their knees apart selling lace and earrings, grumbling as mopeds revved down the stone passages. My four-year-old and I sat together on the steps of the 18th-century Banca Giuratale, eating watermelon ice-cream and watching a filfola lizard shimmy up the bench, its feet shaped like pods of star anise. The square is the hub of the action and I got chatting to a local surgeon. During the pandemic Gozo didn’t fare as badly as some had feared, owing to its “double isolation – as an island off an island”. Maltese tourists, unable to travel anywhere else, flocked to its beaches and restaurants in what was perhaps a redemptive moment for a people who have often felt let down by their Maltese siblings. “Dating back to the time of the Knights of St John,” the doctor said, “when Malta failed to defend Gozo, we have not felt as though we were properly looked after by the sister island, so there is a certain lack of trust there.” The next morning, we spiralled down to the depths of the Ramla Valley, surrounded by an abundance of prickly pear cacti, their pads spread out like rabbit ears and rimmed with ripening fruit. It wasn’t even 10am but the heat had risen, and like a million maracas, the sound of cicadas shook out from the trees. We’d come to Dreams of Horses Farm, an equine therapy centre where rescue horses are brought to recuperate and, in turn, help people recovering from trauma. The owner, Victor Muscat, crunched across the drive tailed by two ducks and a turkey. Deeply tanned under his worn suede hat, he asked the children if they’d ever been around horses. “The first thing people do is touch them on the nose. Imagine if I did the same thing to you: I don’t know you, but I walk over and touch your face? Horses are not able to see you from the front; you need to be standing to the side.” Victor led us into the stables to meet a young stallion rescued from an owner who could no longer look after it. He stood by its shoulder and began to rub with his fist. “Two warnings,” he said. “If his ears are flat, move back. And if he turns his head and opens his mouth a bit, that’s the second warning.” The horse nuzzled into his shoulder and Victor whispered, his face breaking into a fatherly smile. Open for a couple of hours every day in the cooler evenings, the farm welcomes children and adults with disabilities or troubled backgrounds to come and groom the horses and donkeys. Victor brought out eight-year-old Shooting Star, a hip-height falabella horse with a thick fringe. He stood patiently while the girls plaited his blond mane, before walking him around the paddock in delight. On the drive back across the island, we twisted round coastal roads, watching the sea drift in and out of view. Single crosses appeared on hilltops and small trucks passed by, piled high with watermelons. Winding through a village, we peeked into fisheries, antique shops and ice-cream parlours. Church bells pealed sweetly, neighbours chatted on steps and that local limestone illuminated the scene. Perhaps this little sister once felt obscured, but there’s little doubt that she is now out of her sibling’s shadow and bathed in her own, beautiful golden light. For more information see visitmalta.comEdinburgh’s Lyceum has reopened to live audiences after its long, Covid-forced closure. Its familiar, 19th-century, picture-frame theatre has been transformed. The wooden stage now thrusts out, into and over the stalls; the audience is seated behind as well as before the main proscenium arch. Physical boundaries between performers and spectators, between real and imaginary, are blurred. This new set-up works brilliantly for director Wils Wilson’s production, which immerses us in the world of Pedro Calderón de la Barca’s certainty-destabilising, 1635 verse play, themed around the existential question: how can we know whether or not life is a dream? Segismundo, isolated and imprisoned since birth, knows nothing of his background (Lorn Macdonald enacts him crouching, snarling, animal-like, as well as angry, articulate and passionate). His mother, the Queen of Poland (majestic Alison Peebles), foresaw in the stars that he would grow up a vicious monster. Now, wishing to discover if the stars were correct, she has Segismundo drugged, brought to court and there treated as the prince he is. He behaves monstrously, is returned to his prison tower and told that all that happened was a dream. Offered a new possibility to lead an insurrection, he must choose his course between dream v reality, good v bad, love v hate. In Jo Clifford’s 1998 translation, the jailer offers a fulcrum around which these opposing elements find a possible balance when he tells Segismundo: “Even when you’re dreaming/ The good you do is never lost.” Overall, Wilson’s concept is impressive. The only (major) flaw is that the direction of the actors places too much emphasis on heightened levels of intensity and energy: shouted lines become indistinct; expressions of emotions become blunt. Nonetheless, design by Georgia McGuinness and Alex Berry, allied with Calum Paterson’s sound, Nerea Bello’s music, Kai Fischer’s lighting and the performances together achieve a celebration of the dream of life that is theatre. • Life Is a Dream is at Royal Lyceum theatre, Edinburgh; until 20 NovemberFootball is a game that only occasionally follows the script. Before every big game everybody prognosticates, looks at the form and the history, considers the tactical match-ups and tries to read the way the historical wind is blowing. Even when the predictions are largely right in terms of the pattern of the game, the score doesn’t always follow. Which was what made Saturday’s one-sided Manchester derby so remarkable: it was utterly, dully predictable. You didn’t have to be Paul Scholes, the toe-sucking seer of Salford, to see what was going to happen. Ole Gunnar Solskjær had United sit deep in the 3-5-2 shape that last week looked as though it might serve as a short-term fix, to keep crisis at bay for another couple of months. City, as they had against a far better-drilled Chelsea side attempting a similar approach, would pick their way between the bollards, dominate the game and win. The level of comfort would not quite be matched by the scoreline because of the visitors’ weird inability to take their chances in certain games. And, lo, it came to pass. It’s not about the formation, per se. This has worked for United against City before. Prior to last week’s win at Spurs, the last time they started with a back three in a league game was in March 2020, when they beat City 2-0 with a team strikingly similar to Saturday’s line-up. On that occasion, Brandon Williams started at left wing-back with Luke Shaw replacing Eric Bailly in central defence, Nemanja Matic played instead of Scott McTominay and the front two were Dan James and Anthony Martial (although both Bailly and McTominay came on). The system can work. But what is different now is context. The back three then felt like a specific plan – United had used it a couple of months earlier in losing at Anfield – rather than a desperate spin of the kaleidoscope, hoping for something to take shape. Nobody can believe this is the way United want to play long-term, because to do so would mean only one of Marcus Rashford, Mason Greenwood and Edinson Cavani is ever going to start. It would also mean there is no place at all for poor Jadon Sancho, whom United pursued for 18 months before finally signing amid understandable excitement for £73m. An alternative for certain big games? Perhaps. But any confidence that it is a specific plan for specific circumstances is undermined by the fact that United, having not used it in 18 months, have suddenly turned to the shape three times in a week against very different opponents, also employing a back three in the 2-2 draw with Atalanta in midweek. There is a sense of chaos and drift and that infects players. In that 2-0 derby win 18 months ago, Aaron Wan-Bissaka was magnificent, making eight tackles and being named man of the match. On Saturday he made poor decisions again and again as he had in the defeat to Liverpool, his ability to judge when he should go to the man on the ball apparently shot. Harry Maguire and Luke Shaw are way off the levels they showed last season or for England in the summer. Then there’s Eric Bailly. Perhaps his own goal was the result of an inherent rashness but, if that is the case, why was he given a new three-year contract in the summer? Solskjær’s opinion was apparently exposed by the way he rushed Maguire back from injury for the defeat at Leicester, when his inability to push off his damaged calf was surely a contributory factor in Youri Tielemans’s equaliser. Bailly was very good against Atalanta on Tuesday, Duván Zapata’s goal far more the result of the lack of pressure on José Luis Palomino that allowed him to measure a ball behind the centre-back than his own positioning. Now he joins Sancho and Donny van de Beek as a personnel question resulting from an absence of coherent planning. What happened to the talk, after José Mourinho was sacked, of appointing a director of football to offer a coherent philosophy? Did that just melt away when the decision to give Solskjær the job permanently was made? Was it assumed that nostalgia, which had largely neutralised the Mourinho toxicity, would be enough going forward? What happens next? Is there a plan? Antonio Conte has slipped through United’s fingers, just as Thomas Tuchel and Mauricio Pochettino did. Indecision reigns, not helped by the instinctive veneration of the past, and the terror of sidelining a club icon. Yet Solskjær used to be adept at setting up teams to defend. Last season, United kept five clean sheets in the six league games against City, Chelsea and Liverpool. He’s won four of his nine games against Pep Guardiola. That wasn’t the aspect of his management that used to be doubted. So what has changed? Why have United let in seven goals in two home games in a fortnight against Liverpool and City while being embarrassingly outclassed? The answer is obvious: Cristiano Ronaldo, a player signed at the urging of Alex Ferguson and various former players with seemingly about 12 hours thought. Yes, he scores goals. Yes, he rescues results against the 13th-best team in Spain and the fifth-best team in Italy and punishes the likes of Newcastle and Tottenham. Ronaldo has no doubt been a major boost to the burgeoning United heritage industry, even to the point of scoring dramatic late goals to offer a reminder of how things used to be. But are the glory days even remotely close to returning? Not with these players, not with this manager, not with this board.The Cabinet Office has been accused of a “grotesque abuse” of public funds in a freedom of information battle over the personal diaries of Lord and Lady Mountbatten in which costs are now expected to exceed £600,000. Andrew Lownie, the author and historian, has fought a four-year legal battle over the papers that are in an archive saved for the nation after a fundraising campaign. They are now held at Southampton University. The university initially blocked the release of the diaries and correspondence between the Mountbattens covering historical events from the abdication of Edward VIII to the independence of India, after seeking advice from the Cabinet Office. Lownie, author of a 2019 biography of the Mountbattens, has successfully forced the release of the vast bulk of papers. The Cabinet Office and the university are still fighting Lownie in an information tribunal over the material not yet released. Lownie’s legal costs for the case and an appeal hearing due to be heard next week are now at about £350,000. His legal team says a “conservative estimate” for the total legal costs for the Cabinet Office, university and the Information Commissioner’s Office is £300,000. Lord David Owen, the former foreign secretary who has left his own archive of papers to Liverpool University, said: “This has been a grotesque abuse of public money. It’s an absolutely disgraceful interference by the government and Mr Lownie should be paid back his costs.” Mountbatten, who was born to the German Battenberg family, became one of the most trusted advisers to the royal family and was a mentor to Prince Charles. He and his wife, Edwina, were influential figures in London society in the 1920s, mixing with the royal family and Hollywood stars such as Charlie Chaplin and Fred Astaire. They both had affairs during their marriage and their personal lives were described as “messy and complex”. Mountbatten served as the last viceroy in India. Edwina struck up a close friendship with Jawaharlal Nehru, the first prime minister of independent India, and there was speculation they had an affair. Mountbatten was chief of the defence staff, head of the armed forces in Britain, from 1959 to 1965. He was assassinated in August 1979 by a bomb planted on his fishing boat in County Sligo, Ireland. Lownie, who is raising funds for the case on the legal funding website CrowdJustice, said: “These diaries and the correspondence contain fantastic detail and are a unique and invaluable insight into some of the most significant historical events of the last century. “The government and the university have gone from a position where nothing could be released to where almost everything can be released. We want to try and recover our costs, but they still haven’t admitted the game is up.” The diaries covering the period from 1920 to 1968 are part of a larger collection of 4,500 boxes of documents and photographs, known as the Broadlands Archives, which were kept for years at the Mountbattens’ Hampshire estate. They include the papers of the 19th-century prime minister Lord Henry Palmerston and 1,200 letters from Queen Victoria. The documents were moved on loan to Southampton University in 1989 through an agreement with Trustees of the Broadlands Archive, a Mountbatten family trust. The trustees subsequently decided to sell the archive and they were saved for the nation in 2011 with a £2m grant from the National Heritage Memorial Fund. Lownie requested access to the Mountbattens’ diaries and correspondence in 2017, but was told the papers were sealed on advice from the Cabinet Office. The Information Commissioner’s Office ruled in December 2019 that the documents should be released, but the university, supported by the government, appealed. Rupert Earle, a partner at legal firm Bates Wells who is acting for Lownie, said: “The documents were transferred to the university on the basis they would be open to the public, but the Cabinet Office has a default setting of secrecy. It has been an outrageous waste of public money.” The Cabinet Office has recently faced criticism over its response to freedom of information requests. The Information Commissioner’s Office says it is the most complained about public authority in relation to the legislation. The Cabinet Office said it is not appropriate to comment during legal proceedings, but has said in parliamentary response that Mountbatten accepted his diaries should not be disclosed without first being vetted. Officials are still deciding whether to release details of the government’s legal costs. A Southampton University spokesperson said: “99.8% of the Broadlands Archives, which consist of 4,500 boxes, is publicly available and accessed regularly by researchers globally as an invaluable historic resource. “ We were directed [in 2011] to keep a small number of the papers closed until otherwise advised.” • This article was amended on 8 November 2021. The main photo of the Mountbattens had been flipped when supplied by the agency. It is now the right way around.Next year marks the 30th anniversary of Black Wednesday, a momentous day in history. 16 September 1992 will be forever remembered as the day Britain was blown out of Europe’s exchange rate mechanism by foreign currency speculators led by George Soros. John Major’s government sought to fend off the attacks by using Britain’s reserves to buy pounds and by raising interest rates. The day started with official borrowing costs at 10% but during the morning of Black Wednesday they were raised to 12% and later it was announced that they would be further increased, to 15%, the next day. In the event, that move never happened because the battle to keep the pound in the ERM had been lost by then. But seen through the prism of Thursday’s decision by the Bank of England to leave interest rates on hold, the contrast with today’s monetary policy could hardly be more stark. In the late 1980s and early 90s, policy was considered loose when interest rates were cut to 7.5% and tight when they stood at 15% – as they did for an entire year in 1989-90. When rates changed they did so in one percentage point jumps (Black Wednesday being an exception). There was no messing about with quarter-point increases and there were periods when borrowing costs were changed monthly. Last week, the Bank was deliberating about whether – in the face of inflation expected to hit 5% by the spring – it should raise rates by 0.15 points, from 0.1% to 0.25%. In the end it decided to leave things as they were, while making it clear that action was very likely in the coming months. Rates are expected to rise next year but not by all that much. Interest rates have not been as high as 1% since early 2009, when aggressive cuts were enacted in the aftermath of the global financial crisis. There have been times in the past when interest rates have remained low for a long time. Between 1932 and 1951, the only time borrowing costs went above 2% was in the period immediately after the outbreak of the second world war, and even then the move was quickly reversed. It wasn’t hard to find some positive benefits of this cheap-money policy. Low interest rates stimulated a private sector housing boom in the 1930s, made it less onerous to finance the cost of the war and enabled the postwar Labour government to fund the welfare state. So the question is this? If, as seems highly likely, low interest rates will continue until the middle of the decade and beyond, what benefits have there been? Not a higher growth rate, that’s for sure. The Bank believes the economy will grow by 7% this year and 5% next but that’s merely catchup after the 10% drop in output in 2020. Once this process is over, the economy settles back to grow at 1.5% in 2023 and 1% in 2024. The Office for Budget Responsibility is expecting something similar, with growth averaging about 1.5% a year between 2024 and 2026. It is not only that these are weak by UK standards, they are weak by international standards as well. As Labour has noted, on the basis of the Bank’s estimates, in 2023-24, Britain is on course to have the lowest growth rate of any nation in the rich-country Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development club apart from Japan. Bridget Phillipson, the shadow chief secretary to the Treasury, says after more than a decade of Conservative rule, Britain is a high-tax, low-growth economy. Free market thinktanks make the same point. Of course, there are those who would say slower growth is something to be welcomed rather than bemoaned because making a fetish of gross domestic product is the reason the eyes of the world are on Glasgow for a climate change deal. The fact is, though, that the government is not pursuing a no-growth or de-growth agenda. The prime minister and the chancellor talk of a dynamic, sustainable, high-growth economy but the reality is Britain has the highest taxes since Clement Attlee was prime minister coupled with even lower interest rates than in the 1930s and 40s, and not a lot to show for it. Maybe this is over-gloomy. The current low interest regime is not only a British phenomenon because everywhere in the developed world the level of borrowing costs consistent with low inflation has come down markedly, notwithstanding the cost of living increases caused mainly by higher energy prices. Britain is doing pretty well in some of the industries of the future – green tech startup, genomics, artificial intelligence, for example – and will be better placed than rival countries to exploit the opportunities provided by the fourth industrial revolution. It has to be said, though, that it is taking a long time for the UK’s scientific excellence to bear fruit. If, after 15 years of ultra-low interest rates and almost a trillion pounds of quantitative easing the economy is only growing by 1% a year, it suggests that the small high-tech startups of a decade ago are failing to realise their full potential. It is a depressing thought that the stimulus provided by the Bank of England since late 2008 has done far more to boost house prices than it has to boost productive investment. When asked whether the stimulus of the past decade or so has been worth it, policymakers normally take refuge in the “what if” argument. Look at the counterfactual, they say. Growth would have been weaker and the dole queues longer had we not kept our foot to the floor. This is no doubt true but it is not saying all that much.Large government bureaucracies are often slow to adapt to changing realities, such as the catastrophic threats we face in a warming world. The US Department of Homeland Security (DHS) is no exception. New research from Brown University’s Costs of War Project shows that the DHS has been overly focused on foreign and foreign-inspired terrorism, while violent attacks in the US have more often come from domestic sources. A combination of willful ignorance and institutional inertia caused the agency to miss the rise in white supremacy and domestic terrorism that led to the January 6, 2021, insurrection at the US Capitol. The new data from Dr Erik Dahl, Associate Professor of National Security Affairs at the Naval Postgraduate School, show that just one of the 46 failed terror plots in the US from 2018 through 2020 was directed by a foreign organization. In contrast, 29 plots were planned or carried out by domestic groups. In 2019, DHS finally acknowledged the growing threat of targeted violence and domestic terrorism borne mainly of far-right ideology and white supremacy and issued its first strategy document identifying these threats. While we know now that the threat of violent attacks from domestic sources outnumber those from foreign sources, a bigger source of insecurity still is that of climate change. On October 21, the DHS released its first-ever “Strategic Framework for Addressing Climate Change,” acknowledging the importance of climate as a source of disruption and threat to security. As the COP26 UN climate meetings start this week, it’s time for a recognition that climate change is in fact a more expensive, more deadly, and more real threat to lives and to the US economy than the threat of what we call terrorism. The “War on Terror” – a phrase born in the George W Bush administration – needs to be retired both as an action and a concept. The word “terrorism” instills a sense of fear and gives carte blanche for the US government to intervene around the globe. As a response to the 9/11 attacks, the US military has waged wars that have directly caused nearly 1 million deaths and indirectly caused many times that. The footprint of DHS itself has grown globally, as it is now the third largest US civilian agency overseas. Dahl’s data show that foreign interventions by the US keep the fear of Americans focused abroad, without any statistical evidence that groups in other countries pose a significant source of threat to American safety. The concept of “counterterrorism” has led the US into over 85 countries, including in the Middle East and Africa, with the US spending trillions of dollars fighting unwinnable wars. The US Department of Homeland Security has spent over $1tn since its creation in 2003, and the Department of Defense has spent trillions more fighting wars in Afghanistan, Iraq, and elsewhere – wars that have made the globe no safer. Instead of wasting trillions of dollars and millions of lives fighting a war on terror, the US should be mobilizing to combat climate change. Federal spending should be channeled toward clean energy projects, other decarbonization efforts, and adaptation for a changing climate. The increase in extreme weather events has already cost the US hundreds of billions of dollars in weather-related damages and the frequency and severity of these types of events will only increase unless swift and sweeping actions are taken. Climate-related disasters have killed more Americans from flooding and wildfires than the 2,996 people who died in the 9/11 attacks. Wildfires have resulted in over 3,200 deaths in the U.S. since 2000, according to recent research in The Lancet. Hurricane Katrina alone killed over 1,800 people in 2005. The Atlas of Mortality from the World Meteorological Organization finds that the US accounts for 38% of global economic losses from caused by weather, climate, and water hazards. It’s time for the US to shift toward the biggest threat to our security, and to direct federal resources accordingly. Let’s retire the “War on Terror” and fight the battles that will more significantly save lives and livelihoods. Heidi Peltier is a senior researcher at the Watson Institute for International and Public Affairs at Brown University and director of programs for the Costs of War ProjectAt his bruising best – and Bull is his finest cinema work since his debut, London to Brighton – writer-director Paul Andrew Williams is a furiously visceral force behind the camera. His knuckleduster direction goes beyond mere muscularity and takes on the daunting persuasive power of a mob enforcer; his storytelling is both thrilling and utterly terrifying. Bull, which earns every last moment of its 18 certificate, is no ordinary revenge movie. A redemption story populated by wholly irredeemable characters, it’s the kind of savage storytelling that nails you to your seat and leaves you – and most of the supporting cast – thoroughly roughed up. It won’t be for everyone – the squeamish should give it a wide berth and a left-field final act twist might not connect with all viewers – but fans of mean, low-budget British crime pictures in the vein of Kill List will find much to admire. The film’s propulsive power is, in part, due to the skin-flaying fury that drives the non-linear screenplay – there’s a venomous, stripped-back economy to the writing that ensures that it is impossible to look away even if you want to (and trust me, you’ll want to). But perhaps even more crucial is Neil Maskell’s searing central performance as Bull, a man who returns after 10 years to wreak havoc on those who betrayed him. Maskell is phenomenal, managing to be both completely repulsive but at the same time horribly magnetic. Equally chilling is David Hayman as Norm, Bull’s former employer and ex-father-in-law, a man with a razor-blade smile and not a hint of kindness in his soul.Nancy Pelosi has done it again. The most successful Speaker of the House in modern history has notched up another win by sending a bipartisan infrastructure package to Joe Biden for his signature. The bill is the biggest investment in America’s infrastructure since President Eisenhower created the interstate highway system in the 1950s, and has been a long-standing goal of both parties. Donald Trump’s promise to bring home similar legislation during what his White House dubbed “infrastructure week” became a running joke as his presidency imploded. Pelosi, given the space she needed to operate by a very different type of president, actually did it. There is a great deal to celebrate in the package, which independent economists say may create over half a million jobs. As well as investing in America’s physical infrastructure like road, rail and broadband networks, it also makes the country’s first major investment in helping communities prepare for extreme weather events caused by climate change. There’s also chunks of money to upgrade the electrical grid and protect it from extreme weather, to expand the nation’s network of electric vehicle charging stations, and to invest in experimental forms of clean energy. No-one should mistake this for anything other than a major victory for the Biden administration, which even managed to persuade a sizeable number of Republicans in the Senate and the House to vote in favor. It’s exactly the type of major bipartisan win which Joe Biden promised during his campaign, and which naysayers said he would never achieve. But getting this sort of win meant making a lot of compromises, and some of the most important policies put forward by the administration didn’t make it into the final bill. Republicans and moderate Democratic senators like Joe Manchin were happy to vote for legislation which boosts the construction industry and brings federal dollars home to their states. But at the same time, they stripped out provisions which would have made the legislation truly transformational, including a so-called Clean Energy Standard which would force power companies to increase their production of clean energy and set the country on the path to producing 80% renewable energy 2030. Legislative sausage-making is rarely pretty, and the infrastructure bill makes for an impressive first year for Democrats, especially combined with the American Rescue Plan Biden signed in March, which saved the economy from a Covid-induced slump. But the party can’t rest on its laurels. Biden promised a presidency which would be not only impressive but transformational, rising to the challenge both of climate change and of beating back the anti-democratic forces which have seized control of the Republican Party. And in order to do that, there is still much work to be done. The first step is to make sure that the party’s next major piece of legislation, the Build Back Better Act, doesn’t suffer the same fate as the infrastructure package. A grab-bag of social care and climate provisions, the bill would – among other things – provide universal access to preschool, reduce childcare costs, and spend over half a trillion dollars on tackling climate change. Although Democrats don’t need Republican votes to pass it, moderate senators like Manchin and Krysten Sinema have already insisted that popular proposals – such as universal paid family leave and free community college – be removed from the plan. If Democrats water it down any further, they’ll have missed a once-in-a-generation opportunity to show how the party can improve people’s lives. Passing an expansive social care and climate bill is also necessary to maintain faith between moderates and progressives, something that is key if the party is to sustain the high levels of turnout which it will need to win future elections. Pelosi managed to convince many progressive lawmakers to vote for the infrastructure package because they have been assured that Build Back Better will be passed too. But moderate Democrats are still playing games, delaying a vote on progressive priorities until they receive an estimate of how much they will cost from the Congressional Budget Office. There is also a broader problem that Democrats must face, which is that even a transformational year of legislating might still not be enough to protect the party from the sort of bludgeoning which recent election results suggest it may face in the midterms and the presidential election of 2024. Public opinion souring against an incumbent party and president is a predictable feature of American politics, but it carries particularly sinister implications given the Republican party’s transformation into an anti-democratic, authoritarian force. Saving the economy, supporting parents, rebuilding the nation’s infrastructure, and taking the biggest-ever steps to tackle climate change ought to be enough. But what if it isn’t? Indeed, although progressive energy is currently focused on spending bills, next year a new challenge awaits – what to do to protect American democracy from the return to power of a party which seems hellbent on destroying it. So far, Democrats have made the bet that providing material gains to voters is the best way to ensure that the party keeps winning elections even in the face of gerrymandering, voter suppression, and unbalanced institutions like the Senate and Electoral College. But even if that is a sound strategy for now, eventually the party’s luck will run out. As Pelosi and Biden end the year on a high note, they also need to remember that without democratic reform, everything they have accomplished – and much more besides – might eventually be lost. Andrew Gawthorpe is a historian of the United States at Leiden University, and host of the podcast America ExplainedBrazilian director Alexandre Moratto’s follow-up to his award-winning debut Socrates, 7 Prisoners delves into the subject of modern slavery through the eyes of 18-year-old Mateus (Christian Malheiros, excellent). In order to support his family, Mateus takes a job in the city, but finds himself imprisoned and working off a seemingly endless debt to his employer (Rodrigo Santoro). His initial reaction is desperation and anger, but Mateus is smart and negotiates with his captor on behalf of his fellow workers. The rather on-the-nose storytelling grows increasingly complex and interesting the further that the protagonist ventures into morally ambiguous territory. In cinemas and on Netflix from 11 NovemberReverend Paul Thomas BEM, South Wales Fire and Rescue Service I joined the Liverpool Fire Brigade in 1968 at the age of 16. I transferred to North Wales, before eventually joining South Wales Fire and Rescue Service nearly three decades later. I was brought up in a Christian home; my father was a minister right here in the valleys. For a long time, I never wanted to be involved, formally. Eventually, I trained for the ministry, jointly leading a church, and missions in Uganda. On one such trip, I found my calling. By 2002, I was ready to retire from the day job. I handed in my notice, then had a call from the chief’s office. I was invited in for tea and biscuits and he asked if I’d consider staying on as the service chaplain. I left operational duty, but never the fire service. We have a motto: “For all without exception.” It means we’re not bothered by who you are or what you believe, everyone will be cared for. The service has occupational health and HR, of course, but we’re here to support people personally in the strictest of confidence. You can be uniformed or not; a retiree or family member. Regardless, I never bring faith up, unless specifically asked. We don’t shove it down your throat: that’s the number one rule of the chaplaincy. Some people I meet are going through marital or relationship struggles; others financial difficulties or workplace problems. And, of course, there are specific challenges our personnel face as a result of our jobs: post-traumatic stress disorder, grief and injury. Our men and women are prepared to put their own lives at risk for people they’ve never even met. That takes a remarkably pure love for humanity. It’s a privilege to be at their service. I know the system inside out – the horrors and trauma, the joyfulness, too – because I’ve spent a professional lifetime inside it. I myself have had colleagues who’ve died on duty; friends who’ve lost their lives in fires, too. Each impacted and shaped me hugely; it’s how I relate to colleagues. My phone is on 24 hours a day. From time to time, I’ll get that 3am call. In fact, crews have their own inbuilt coping strategy in the immediate aftermath of an incident – I’m not regularly asked down to the station. Often, I find it’s days or weeks later that people really need my support. Once the adrenaline has worn off and the team isn’t together. It’s not all about the serious stuff. I make sure to be a constant presence. That way, relationships are built up over time – you can’t expect people to trust a total stranger. I find support, when I need it, from my wife, chaplain networks and church community, but I can also turn to my fire service brothers and sisters. It’s a reciprocal relationship, and that’s special. I’ll never forget going into HQ one day when someone stopped me on the stairs and said, “Paul, you look like you’re having a rough time, let’s sit down for a chat and a coffee,” just as I would. Adam Kelwick, International conflict zones I came to Islam in my late teens and was very quickly accepted. Naturally, I found myself building bridges between the Muslim community and wider British society, convincing each that the other wasn’t out to get them. Chaplaincy felt like the obvious next step, and nearly 20 years ago I attended my first training course. Being a chaplain is similar to being an Imam, it’s just I can go to where the people are without being tied down to a mosque or specific location. In my time I’ve been the chaplain for hospitals and both Merseyside’s police and its High Sheriff. More recently, I’ve turned to international humanitarian work, working with people in some of the world’s most challenging environments. Three weeks ago I was in Yemen; I’ll be heading to Syria this month, again. In the past, I’ve worked in Iraq and Somalia. Right after Isis was expelled from the eastern side of Mosul, I was part of the first international NGO team to enter the city. In situations like this, emergency projects are the focus: food and support; responding to health needs, both mental and physical. We never operate in an active conflict area and I’m lucky to work with organisations who look out for my safety and security. I constantly remind myself I’m not a saviour arriving from the west – my faith and outlook makes it clear: I’m their servant. As a humanitarian I support anyone. Someone’s faith is immaterial. I may often be in Muslim-majority countries – that’s where many crises are – but we’ve worked with people of all faiths and backgrounds. I spent long periods in the Calais Jungle, and a lot if time with Ethiopian Christians. We don’t discriminate between the vulnerable: it’s a universal truth that the only victors in conflicts are the rich and powerful. Of course, people recognise I’m a Muslim and some I meet want religious counsel. Usually, this simply means sitting down to listen. Islamic tradition teaches us that smiling in the face of your brother is a form of charity. Often, the most important thing I can give is my time and attention. I spend so much time with people living through the most difficult circumstances you can imagine, and yet I return to England knowing they’ve given me far more than I could ever give them. In the face of violence and starvation, displacement and death, I observe perseverance and patience; resilience and compassion. When I come home, I can’t help but feel a sense of contentment. That’s something, I think, we’re missing in our society. You might expect there to be a crisis of faith in the places I go, but honestly? I see the opposite. Over here, when something goes wrong, people ask God: why me? I don’t hear this question when I’m in these places. Faith over there is of a different substance: God tests the ones he loves; his existence isn’t dependent only on good things happening to individuals. Even in the most tragic and trying of moments, when I ask someone how they are coping, they’ll say, ‘Alhamdulillah’, which means ‘Thank God’ in Arabic. I find that incredibly humbling. Parminder Kondral MBE, Sikh Chaplaincy, UK After 35 years in the civil service I retired in 2012. Before then I’d done a bit of volunteering in my local hospitals. With more spare time, I began spending time working with people going through mental health hearings. At the time when they’re at their lowest, they need someone near them. My father was a religious man and faith had always been important to me. I’m the National Coordinator for Sikh Chaplaincy, UK, and a lot of my work involves coordination across the country ensuring my colleagues have the support they need. I spend time working with local gurdwaras, and reassuring people that, despite the word “chaplain” having Christian connotations, I’m very much Sikh, thank you. With patients, I certainly make sure their religious needs are met, but more often than not, the people who I visit don’t want to talk about faith or practice. Sikh or not, I’ll offer up my presence. Conversations can take any path, it’s part of what I enjoy. One day I might find myself discussing TV shows, the next I’m exploring the meaning of life with a very observant Muslim. They often want reassurance that things will be OK, and if they won’t be, there’s nothing to be afraid of. Sikhism teaches us there are five virtues which take us closer to God: truth, compassion, contentment, humility and love. I take these with me on every visit, as I hold your hand and ask what you need. If I’m caring for a Sikh person, we’ll recite prayers and read scripture. Some days are difficult and, of course, the patient is my priority. But at times, I do need to take a moment to compose myself. When I was a primary school pupil, my teacher – not a Sikh – taught me a prayer. It’s one I say regularly, and have taught to my children: “Thank you, God, for all you give; life and love and strength to live.” I still turn to that regularly. Through Covid we spent a lot of time on Zoom; not being a physical presence for patients was far from ideal. I did what I could, but I missed being face to face. You need that contact when serving those in need: the old and the isolated, the afraid and vulnerable. I’m certainly no doctor, but what us chaplains do in hospitals is also healing. Pippa Swan, HM Prison Maghaberry, Co Antrim Prisons are inevitably challenging environments to live and work in. There’s an added layer of complication for me, being a humanist in a highly religious and sectarian Northern Ireland. I’m English originally, but have lived here for 15 years. I find at times being an outsider works to my advantage. I’ve been a practising vet for 30 years and happened to stumble across an advert from Humanists UK when they were looking for people to provide support to people from a non-religious perspective. After some training, I got to work in Maghaberry Prison, a high-security men’s facility near Lisburn. The prison wasn’t set up for non-religious volunteers like me; unlike in England, we’re not part of the official chaplaincy service. That means no access to existing infrastructure or state-funded resources. Instead, we’ve had to work it all out ourselves, from the IT systems to directions. We’ve also got our work cut out educating people with what it is I can offer: “non-religious pastoral carer” is quite the mouthful. I’ve met people guilty of murder, drug and sexual offences; those with a long list of past crimes, others locked up for their first conviction. Some pastoral carers choose not to know what it is the people they visit are guilty of. It’s a way, so they say, of creating an environment free from judgment. But I prefer to know someone’s history; it’s for my own protection. If I’m going to sustain a relationship with someone, I want to do so on open ground from the offset. It’s not counselling that I do – I don’t grapple with people’s pasts; coaching, meanwhile, feels more about the future. Instead, my role is about the present: walking alongside someone, briefly, and helping them stay upright and balanced. Without the rigidity of a religious rule book to guide you, rationalising right and wrong – and understanding what my role might be – takes serious consideration. I’ve started studying for an MA in “existential and humanist pastoral care” to spend time questioning this properly. In the end, there are no set steps; no doctrine to obey. I may not believe in God, but I believe in humanity and redemption. I find meaning in life by connecting with others – in prisons that can prove hard for inmates. Many have few relationships and some have no contact with the outside world. So I try to be there instead. Person to person, I build connections. I have conversations with people I’d never otherwise meet, about all sorts of unexpected topics. I wanted to challenge myself and my ideas. At first I was surprised at how quickly I could relate to the men I met. Stepping out of my middle-class bubble, I began to understand how and why people do what they do. The inequalities and circumstances beyond an individual’s control – the inevitability. There’s a reason why people do bad things, anyone can fall on hard times. Someone should always be there to support you. If prisons can serve any function, they have to be places of rehabilitation. Why not see, I’ve said to myself, if I can in some small way be part of that process. Rabbi Menachem Junik, Jewish Care, London As the pastoral and spiritual lead for Jewish Care (a health and social care charity) I support people from the moment they step foot in our homes: both residents and their families. I arrived in England via the United States and Johannesburg, before settling in London. Not far from where I moved was a Jewish Care home. I decided to visit with my kids at the first opportunity. Kindness, after all, is the greatest mitzvah [good deed] you can do in our religion. I made connections, and started going back week on week, voluntarily. A year or so later, I was asked to support the 800 residents across their homes permanently. I advise on the bigger picture, but the majority of my work is one on one: for all involved, coming to a home can be a huge adjustment. Seeing a parent move to a residential setting can be tough; residents need to find a way to feel settled and independent. We have individuals from all affiliations and none in our homes; orthodox to entirely non-observant. In what I do, everyone is made to feel welcome. A lot of my time is spent supporting people at the end of life – an incredibly important period. I try to offer emotional and spiritual support, providing guidance, where I can, from Jewish teaching. Judaism tells us that when a child is born, it arrives in the world pure and holy. At the time of someone passing, they transition back to the spiritual realm; in the world to come there’s reward for those who lived lives of generosity. Often, I turn to song, and not just prayer but music. There’s a spirituality to sound; it helps people to reconnect with lost loved ones and their often distant childhoods. This can especially be true, I find, for people living with dementia. Yesterday, I was about to leave a home but was stopped. “Rabbi,” a woman said, “my mum is dying.” We’d never met, but this daughter was struggling. I went upstairs and joined their family. We spoke for a while, about the purpose of life and how to face these moments calmly. They weren’t hugely religious, so I asked what might help. At their request, I sang a prayer from the festival of Yom Kippur as we stood by their mother’s bedside in her final moments. It brought them comfort. From time to time, I have to go straight from a heartbreaking death to an event or meeting. That can be testing; the support of my colleagues and family is vital. But showing mercy, being charitable and showing up for people sits at the heart of what my Judaism means. You get through it. My work is also about enriching life, injecting purpose and meaning when – , for many, worlds are changing rapidly. To welcome in the Sabbath we have a service across all our homes; I organise activities around Jewish festivals and give educational talks when wanted. My greatest joy comes from celebrating Simchas: we have second Bar and Bat Mitzvahs, and renewals of vows; there are celebrations for centenarians and blessings for newborn great-grandchildren. Judaism is a way of life, far more than a religion. Some join us because they follow our customs and rituals strictly; others are mostly interested in the chicken soup. Wherever you stand, I’ll be there next to you.What kinds of times are these? The question is the title of a poem by Adrienne Rich, and in Will Tuckett’s new chamber ballet Then or Now for Ballet Black, it finds a quiet but spellbinding response. Rich’s own poems, voiced by various actors, form one strand of the piece, their sparse lines ranging freely between sweeping generality – war, individualism, love – and concrete immediacy: coffee at breakfast, a paper plane, a cheek pressed to a window. Rather than illustrate or interpret the words, Tuckett’s staging becomes itself a kind of poetry, an anthology of scenes for eight dancers, voiceover and violin that works through suggestion rather than statement, and lets form give shape to feeling. Some scenes are clearly based on Rich’s words. A poem on “sending love” is transposed into sweet, swift action as a nugget of imaginary energy – love – ricochets among the dancers, variously slow, high, straight or curved. More often, the choreography ties itself more loosely or more fleetingly to the words, the dancers passing in ragged flight as “dark birds of history”, for example. Or it makes its own poetics, letting its images dissolve into measured phrases of motion, shaped by limbs, weight and placement, and framed by the slow, wide steps of its violin score. For all its beauties, its intimacy of scale, its sublimation of drama into composition, the work feels founded on big, urgent themes of war and love – that is, conflict and connection. Tuckett has placed an unexpectedly gentle finger on the unsteady pulse of our times. Mthuthuzeli November’s The Waiting Game follows a more familiar dance-drama approach. Its three scenes hinge, somewhat precariously, on the image of a movable door. November starts crouched and cowed, tormented by voices in his head reciting his wake-work-eat-sleep routine while otherworldly pierrot-like figures emerge through the doorway, like sinister unseen forces. In the second scene, Sayaka Ichikawa comes through, coaxing him out of his ennui with impish games of pluck and peck. Finally, he makes it through the door, and finds himself in a land of showtime, glitter-coated with backing dancers, boogieing to Etta James. As dance, it’s a fun finish; as drama, quite a long shot. Ballet Black is at Festival theatre, Edinburgh, on 18 November. A film adaptation of this double bill will be streamed online, 22-28 November.Welcome to the era of immortalists: scientists, dreamers and – crucially – billionaires, who want us to think of age as a curable disease, and our final end as something that could be indefinitely postponed. According to one estimate, the revenues of the global anti-ageing industry will increase from about $200bn today to $420bn by 2030. One sure sign of its rosy prospects is the involvement of high-profile people in the US who have made vast fortunes from the internet. If many of them can avoid taxes, why not death? “Death is sort of an affront to American life,” wrote Zadie Smith in 2003. “It’s so anti-aspirational.” In tech circles, this kind of distaste for mortality often blurs into the culture of “biohacking” (fasting, closely tracking your vital signs, gobbling supplements and “smart drugs”) which is one manifestation of transhumanism: to quote the definition in the Oxford English Dictionary, “a belief that the human race can evolve beyond its current limitations, especially by the use of science and technology”. The sums invested in anti-ageing research by such tech players as the Google founders, Larry Page and Sergey Brin, and the Trump-supporting venture capitalist, Peter Thiel, show what happens when such ideas meet big money. The same goes, somewhat predictably, for the activities of the Amazon founder and aspiring astronaut, Jeff Bezos, who has previously funded an anti-ageing setup called Unity Biotechnology, and, via his personal investment vehicle Bezos Expeditions, is now reportedly a donor to a newly founded California venture called Altos Labs. The latter company is apparently going to set up “institutes” in the US, the UK and Japan, and is recruiting scientists with the offer of big salaries. One insider says its initial aim is to “understand rejuvenation”; its focus is the kind of “biological reprogramming technology” focused on the manipulation of cells. Plenty of other companies – they have such names as BioViva, Youthereum Genetics, the Longevity Fund and AgeX Therapeutics – are also trying to somehow arrest ageing. Piercing through the research and journalism that surrounds what they are doing, you occasionally get the vague feeling that some of the people involved may eventually come across some or other revelation about age-related diseases, but there is usually a sense of fuzzy, hubristic ideas, and money that would be better spent elsewhere. Anti-ageing research now has a long history, but as far as I can tell, no company working in the field has yet managed to push any therapy to the stage of conclusive clinical trials. In 2012, the Japanese scientist, Shinya Yamanaka, won a Nobel prize for his discovery that bathing single cells in four proteins could rejuvenate them, but using the technique on mice resulted in some developing cancerous tumours. Besides, even if anti-ageing techniques eventually proved successful, what would be the social and cultural consequences of literally pathologising old age? If we lived much longer, would we also be expected to work indefinitely? How would the planet cope with a hugely increased population, and who would be first in the queue? I think I know some of the answers to the last two questions. They resonate with the negotiations currently going on in Glasgow, and the lifestyles of some of the people gathered there. As my colleague George Monbiot recently pointed out, keeping the average rise in global temperatures to 1.5C demands that each of us is responsible for no more than two tonnes of CO2 a year, whereas the richest 1% of the world’s population are on track to produce an average of more than 70 tonnes a head. Imagine such people jetting around until they were 140, or 200, or even existing forever. There is something about all this that feels analogous to the space travel efforts of Bezos and Elon Musk, and what those projects seem to say about a relative lack of attention to some urgent issues playing out on the planet that the two men apparently want to escape. In the same way, sizeable investments in attempts to eventually cheat death risk neglecting aspects of ageing that we all face right now. Some of these are about specific illnesses and conditions often linked to getting older. (Bezos, in fairness, has also contributed to dedicated work on cancer and dementia, though I dare say even more help would be welcome.) But there are equally urgent questions centred on people’s everyday lives – and potential answers that could certainly do with more help from self-styled philanthropists. Notwithstanding the effects of the pandemic, the age-frontier of the planet’s population is already increasing fast. The World Health Organization says that by 2030, 1.4 billion – or one in six – people in the world will be aged 60 or over, and the number of people aged 80 or older is expected to triple between 2020 and 2050, to 426 million. The UK reflects these trends. But as evidenced by this country’s ongoing contortions about social care, we tend to live in a collective state of denial. Consider also the kind of sad facts for which there are so far no biohacks. Half of all people in the UK aged 75 or over live alone – and, according to the charity Age UK, half a million people over the age of 60 usually spend each day in solitude. Thinking about eternal youth may be a diverting intellectual exercise. But as a matter of scientific fact, we know that strong and stable relationships and immersion in communities result in people living longer and healthier lives, and the loneliness that too often grips people’s later years has the reverse effect. The idea of co-housing, whereby people – often of all ages – are resident in communities built on mutual help and everyday socialising, embodies exactly that realisation. So, at their best, do the kind of modern retirement villages where people live in their own spaces, and have access not just to company, but an array of services and life-enhancing leisure options. But how do we recreate those innovations for millions of people? And if we did, what would it mean for our health and care systems, leisure services and transport networks? As against the cliche of retirement to the country or coast, would it be good for older people to live nearer the centre of cities and, if so, how would that work? Most importantly, if there currently is a chronic mismatch between our housing stocks and what an ageing population needs, what do we intend to do about it? Leaving aside huge questions about their personal and corporate tax arrangements, imagine if the most trailblazing, publicity-attracting projects of 21st-century billionaires involved not leaving the planet or living indefinitely, but the kind of earthbound things that could transform lives in the here and now. Just as the Scottish-American businessman Andrew Carnegie used the money he made in the steel industry to fund the building of 2,500 libraries around the world, they could plough their money into co-housing projects, retirement communities, adult education centres and more. Such things wouldn’t be quite as head-turning as the unlikely promise of a world populated by deathless super-humans, but they would be a lot more useful. Four years ago, scientists at Harvard University published the latest findings of a study of the lives of 268 alumni; it had started in 1938, and was eventually expanded to include people in inner-city Boston. What it said about longevity was striking: not just that “close relationships, more than money or fame, are what keep people happy”, but that those ties “are better predictors of long and happy lives than social class, IQ, or even genes”. Here is what the immortalism of famous capitalists rather neglects: that the most immediate route to living better and longer lies not in hacking our cells, but helping people to be more human. John Harris is a Guardian columnistAs communities expand, so do eminent domain cases – and the trend is causing big problems for small businesses. Simply put, eminent domain is the right of a government to require the compulsory sale, or in extreme cases expropriation, of land by a property owner so public officials can put that private property to public use. It’s supposed to be for the common good. It’s used so governments can build roads or expand its services to a community. But in many cases, individual property owners – and business owners – are forced out of their locations, which can cause irreparable harm. In Pennsylvania, for example, the owner of a diner for more than 35 years is now facing extinction, as the state plans to build a highway through his property. “I told them I’m begging to let me keep what I have,” the owner, Bill Katsifis, told Penn Live. In neighboring New Jersey, a borough plans to use eminent domain to punt a popular local pizzeria in order to make room for a future supermarket chain. The pizza owner, as you can imagine, is not happy. “I’m confused how they would make the corner eminent domain; that’s what we are trying to understand,” he told NJ Advance Media. “We’re part of the community. They can’t just throw us out in the street.” Sometimes it’s not even being forced to move that’s the problem. A third-generation Mexican restaurant in San Antonio, Texas, is facing months of sewage smells and potential spills right outside their eatery as a local water utility plans to put a sewage pump station in front of it. “It will just drive people away just from the stench of it,” the owner, who is contesting the project, told the San Antonio Report. “How come he [the sewage company’s chief executive] didn’t choose McDonald’s? It’s too strong of a company. I’m a small man.” According to an investigation by the Texas Tribune and ProPublica, it seems that Texas, because of its growth, has been ground zero for eminent domain cases – and abuses over the past decade. The investigation found that “homeland security cut unfair real estate deals, secretly waived legal safeguards for property owners, and ultimately abused the government’s extraordinary power to take land from private citizens”. These abuses included circumventing laws, giving priority to wealthier property owners and haphazardly condemning land that caused aggravation and costly lawsuits by smaller property owners. In some cases, big businesses have used eminent domain to further their interests. In Belfast, Maine, for example, opponents are battling a recent town-council vote to use eminent domain to allow Nordic Aquafarms, a Norwegian-owned salmon farm, to take over a disputed mudflat. The US supreme court is allowing an energy company to use eminent domain to take land away from the state of New Jersey in order to build a pipeline. Trust me when I say that you’re not going to see small businesses win these kinds of battles. In most cases, business owners that are forced to leave a property under a typical eminent domain scenario are offered “fair value” for their property. That amount is supposed to be determined by an independent appraiser. I’m sure that in some cases the appraised value exceeds the value that a business owner would receive. But there is always an intangible. For many, their businesses are not just their livelihoods. It’s their history, their family, their life’s work. Imagine how you would feel if you were forced to sell or even move your business against your will. It can’t be easy. But then again, that’s the price some have to pay so that others can progress. So what to do? The answer is to be proactive, not reactive. I’ve found that eminent domain claims by a government usually don’t come completely out of the blue. There is oftentimes some advance warning and time allowed to make alternative plans. Many of the clients I have who have faced this situation have also known about the risk for quite some time. You can fight if you’ve got the resources, but in the majority of cases the government will win, so at best putting up a fight can buy more time. But in the end, if you believe your business is at risk of this you’ve got to be ready. You must have a plan, you have to give yourself time to adapt. You must be prepared to make a change.Jemima Khan, a close friend of Princess Diana, pulled out of helping to script Netflix’s The Crown because the story was not being handled “as respectfully or compassionately” as she had hoped, she has said. Khan said she was brought in to help the show’s creator, Peter Morgan, write the script of the fifth series, which includes the years leading up to Diana's death in a Paris car crash in 1997. Khan, a well-connected film and television producer, was part of Diana’s social circle at the time. She has never spoken publicly about their friendship but, she told the Sunday Times: “It was really important to me that the final years of my friend’s life be portrayed accurately and with compassion, as has not always happened in the past.” Those years include Diana’s romances with the heart surgeon Hasnat Khan and Dodi Fayed, the son of the billionaire owner of Harrods, Mohamed Al Fayed. There was also the Panorama interview with Martin Bashir when, referencing Camilla Parker Bowles, Diana said: “Well, there were three of us in this marriage, so it was a bit crowded.” Khan said once she had realised that the stories were going in a direction she did not agree with she requested that all her contributions be removed and asked not to have a writing credit. “In 2019, Peter Morgan asked me to co-write on the fifth series of The Crown, particularly those episodes which concerned Princess Diana’s last years before she died,” she said. “After a great deal of thought, having never spoken publicly about any of this before, I decided to contribute. “We worked together on the outline and scripts from September 2020 until February 2021. When our co-writing agreement was not honoured, and when I realised that particular storyline would not necessarily be told as respectfully or compassionately as I had hoped, I requested that all my contributions be removed from the series and I declined a credit.” The next series is expected in November 2022. The Australian actor Elizabeth Debicki, who came to prominence after her portrayal of Jordan Baker in Baz Luhrmann’s film The Great Gatsby and later The Night Manager and Tenet, will play Diana, taking over from Emma Corrin. Filming for the series began in July, with Dominic West taking over from Josh O’Connor as Prince Charles. Imelda Staunton succeeded Olivia Colman as the Queen, Jonathan Pryce replaced Tobias Menzies as Prince Philip and Lesley Manville took over from Helena Bonham Carter as Princess Margaret. Also in the cast are Jonny Lee Miller as John Major and Bertie Carvel as Tony Blair. Khan is the daughter of the late Eurosceptic financier Sir James Goldsmith, the sister of the former minister Zac Goldsmith and ex-wife of Pakistan’s prime minister, Imran Khan. In a statement to the Sunday Times, a spokesperson for The Crown said: “Jemima Khan has been a friend, fan and a vocal public supporter of The Crown since season one. She has been part of a wide network of well-informed and varied sources who have provided extensive background information to our writers and research tea, providing context for the drama that is The Crown. She has never been contracted as a writer on the series.”Hospitals in England are already at peak winter levels for bed occupancy, according to NHS bosses, who fear the health service will come under severe pressure in the months ahead. The chief executive of NHS Providers, which represents England’s 240 NHS trusts, said the situation was unprecedented and “very worrying” as exhausted hospital staff prepare for higher levels of Covid and other respiratory infections such as influenza while dealing with a backlog of care for patients. “What’s very, very striking in talking to our trust chief executives is how worried some of the very long-term leaders, who’ve been around a long time, are at this point. What they are saying to us is they’ve never been so worried,” Chris Hopson told Times Radio on Sunday. “The accident and emergency pathway is very, very busy. So at a point when our staff are really exhausted, it is very worrying. The bit that’s particularly worrying is … if you look at acute hospitals, where effectively you look at bed occupancy, which is a very good measure of how busy a hospital is, we’re seeing bed occupancy levels, it’s sort of 94, 95, 96% at this point, before we’re into peak winter. We’ve not seen that before. That’s unprecedented. So, there’s a real sense that the NHS is going to be under real pressure.” The NHS faces a surge in admissions every winter as the colder weather drives up respiratory infections, exacerbates heart problems and in severe conditions causes a steep rise in accidents. But pressure on the health service tends to rise through December and reach a peak early the following year. While coronavirus cases are falling in the UK, it is unclear whether the epidemic has peaked for the year or whether infections will surge again now that schools have returned after half-term and people start to mix more indoors. Covid rates may have peaked in secondary school children but have been rising in older, more vulnerable age groups, driving an increase in deaths through October. Beyond concerns about bed capacity, Hopson said he was “very worried” about the move to make Covid jabs compulsory for NHS staff from April. He said there was an obvious risk of infected staff passing the virus on to colleagues, patients and visitors and recognised the logic behind mandatory Covid shots, but said there were risks with the approach. “The bit that’s absolutely vital, and we have seen this in social care, is that if we get this wrong then what will happen is we risk a significant loss of a significant number of staff, just at the point when we cannot afford to lose those staff,” he said. Matt Hancock, however, has called on ministers to bring in legislation requiring all NHS workers to receive a coronavirus vaccination before winter. Writing in the Daily Telegraph on Monday, the former health secretary said: “Having looked at all the evidence, I am convinced we must require vaccination for everyone who works not just in social care, but the NHS – and get it in place as fast as possible.” Speaking on BBC One’s Andrew Marr Show, the UK Health Security Agency’s Dr Susan Hopkins said that while new cases peaked on 18 October, infections could remain at a “very, very high level”, meaning there would be more deaths that could have been prevented with vaccination. “The people who are dying are the same people who have died all the way through,” she said. “It is particularly the older age groups, so the over-70s in particular, but also those who are clinically vulnerable, extremely vulnerable, and have underlying medical conditions. “As we’ve mentioned, the immune effects wane and what we see is, especially in the older or the vulnerable groups, those are the people whose immunity will wane the most. So, if you’re a healthy 30-year-old, then two doses will protect you for a longer period. That’s why those people need to come forward for their third dose as soon as possible.”Nazi-plundered artefacts, globe-hopping glitz and numerous nail-biting escapes from seemingly impossible situations: on paper, Red Notice could pass as an adequate Raiders of the Lost Ark-inspired romp. But the film, which stars a grumpy and unusually charmless Dwayne Johnson as an FBI profiler on the trail of Ryan Reynolds’s insufferably smug art thief and Gal Gadot’s slinky criminal mastermind, is so concerned with knitting together a mess of double-crosses and false endings that it loses the propulsive drive and excitement of the films it imitates. Reportedly the most expensive Netflix original production to date, Red Notice would have benefited if some of its $200m budget had been spent on untangling the screenplay. • In cinemas 5 November, on Netflix 12 NovemberAcross 1 suppliers SUP/PLIERS 6 tool LOOT (rev) 8 dribbler double def 9 gimlet double def 10 twirly too early (hom) 11 chainsaw sane chore (Spoonerism) 12 spayed spade (hom) 15 emulsion EMU + L  ION 16 fetching F(emale)/ETCHING 19 effort thiEF FOR Thievery (hidden) 21 paroxysm P 
<a>ROXY + S(wi)M 24 puppet cryptic def [software tool] 25 republic PURE (anag) + B(a)LI/C(ourse) 26 dear double def 27 represent RE/PRESENT Down 1,22across screwdriver double def 2 puberty BY P(rovocation) TRUE (anag) 3 lolly double def [sweet &amp; money] 4 earache EA(ch)/RAC  E 5 signature AIR GUN SET (anag) 6 timings T(our) + I  S 7 operagoer O(ld)/PE&lt;(d)RAGO(n)&gt;ER 13 premature P  URE 14 Daily Star 1 ART LADY’S (anag) 17 chopper C  OPPER 18 gumdrop GUM + DROP 20 frisbee FRI(day)’S (busy)BEE 22 duple DUP  E 23 Eliot TOILE (rev)     </a>Sir James Lester, the former Tory MP for the Nottinghamshire constituencies of Beeston and then Broxtowe, who has died aged 89, was so out of step with many of his colleagues in the Thatcherite 1980s that at times he seemed to be “almost one of us”, in the words of a Labour backbencher. A close friend of his neighbouring Nottinghamshire MP Ken Clarke, he belonged to the One Nation Conservative breed that has all but been extinguished on the current Tory Commons benches: he was pro-European, pro-foreign aid, against cuts in benefits or privatising the Post Office and against extending the Official Secrets Act. He was not afraid, either, to be an early opponent of the Thatcher government’s attempt to introduce the poll tax. Unsurprisingly, therefore, he only briefly held junior ministerial office at the Department of Employment under Jim Prior before being culled in Margaret Thatcher’s first reshuffle in January 1981 as being insufficiently ardent in pursuing trade union reform. A genial and convivial figure, always known at Westminster as Jim, he subsequently devoted his energies to his membership of the Commons foreign affairs select committee and the all party group on overseas development. Jim was the son of Marjorie (nee Phillips) and Arthur Lester. His father, who ran a leather and shoe import business, was a Labour alderman on Nottinghamshire county council and in his spare time a speedway motorcyclist. In due course both father and son would serve on the county council, Jim as chair of the finance committee and Arthur as his vice-chairman. When Jim was first elected as a Conservative MP his father said it was the proudest day of his life. Perhaps that family background was where Lester’s distinctly non-factional approach to politics came from. At home the politically obsessed family had taken both the Daily Mail and the Daily Worker. Lester was educated at Nottingham high school – Clarke would follow to the same school eight years later and Ed Balls much later still – but instead of going on to university left at 16 to join the family business. After he had completed national service with the Army, his political career began in local politics, on Bingham town council in 1964, followed by his election to the county council in 1967. He contested and very nearly won a parliamentary byelection for the then staunchly Labour coal-mining Bassetlaw constituency the following year, losing by only 740 votes, then fighting it again and losing more heavily at the general election in 1970. He was then selected for the more suburban marginal seat of Beeston, winning it at the February 1974 election and clinging on by 120 votes at the following election that October. When the constituency was absorbed into the safer Broxtowe seat in 1983 he was elected there and held it until defeated in the Labour landslide of 1997. Early in his Commons career Lester, together with his father, campaigned in favour of British membership of the Common Market in the 1975 referendum. At Westminster he was made a Tory whip, helping to organise a campaign to undermine the Labour government. After James Callaghan’s defeat by one vote in a confidence motion in March 1979, Lester and Clarke celebrated with a night out at Ronnie Scott’s jazz club in Soho. The reward following the Tory victory that May was the junior ministerial job at employment. The idea was to introduce legislation curbing the powers of trade unions, but the prime minister was rapidly disillusioned by Prior and Lester’s approach as too conciliatory and gradualist: “wet” in her famous phrase. They were soon replaced by more robust figures, in Lester’s case Norman Tebbit. With little chance of further promotion, Lester became a member of the Commons foreign affairs select committee, a position he would hold for the next 15 years, and he also became vice chairman of the all-party overseas development group. His was occasionally prepared to defy three-line whips, on the poll tax and on freedom of information legislation. Following the arrival of John Major’s more congenial, generally pro-European administration he became an enthusiastic supporter of the Maastricht treaty. When Tory Eurosceptics launched an early assault on the European court of justice over limiting working hours, he said: “I certainly would not like to try and convince my electorate that it was not a good thing that they had three weeks’ paid holiday a year. You can’t have a court of law which you pick and choose whether you accept its results.” Having held Broxtowe comfortably at elections for 14 years, Lester – who received a knighthood in 1996 – was swept away in Tony Blair’s landslide. He launched a parliamentary consultancy instead. Lester was married twice, firstly to Iris Whitby in 1953. The couple had two children before the marriage was dissolved in 1989. He subsequently married Merrylyn Denis the same year. He is survived by Merrylyn, his children, Simon and Tina, and two stepchildren, Richard and Caroline. • James Theodore Lester, politician, born 23 May 1932; died 30 October 2021Rory Burns has declared Ben Stokes’ return to the England squad as “a massive boost” to their chances of success in the Ashes, but says the sudden announcement that the all-rounder would be on the flight to Australia came as no surprise to him. After taking time away from the game to recover from finger surgery and prioritise his mental health, Stokes was not initially named in the squad but was added a fortnight later after declaring himself fit and “ready for Australia”. England’s Test specialists arrived on Saturday and are currently quarantining on Queensland’s Gold Coast. “To get Stokesy back in the side, back in the squad and back around things is obviously a massive boost for us – we know what a good player he is,” said Burns, speaking while isolating in his hotel room. “But I wasn’t actually that surprised. I kind of felt like something was bubbling away.” “It was nice when I saw it announced and it’s obviously exciting because we want to get out here and have the best side possible, and obviously Ben adds to that in a massive way,” Burns added. England’s top order has regularly disappointed of late, and across the last three years Burns had played 26 innings with Dom Sibley, seven each with Keaton Jennings and Jason Roy, six with Joe Denly and even two with Jack Leach, none of them averaging more than 28.5. But towards the end of their series against India in late summer, Burns was partnered with Haseeb Hameed, resulting in two century standsfrom three attempts. “I think me and Has, in weird ways we probably do it slightly differently but as a partnership it was working quite nicely,” Burns said. “We don’t really say too much to each other at various times, but what we did say seemed to go at the right time. It was a nice little partnership developing there, and if we can pick back up where we left off last summer it’ll be a good thing.” “In recent times we’ve probably not scored as many runs as we’d like, but the challenges that lie ahead in Australia we can almost [anticipate] so preparation is key and we’ll be looking to get that right,” the 31-year-old concluded. Jason Roy, who hobbled off the field during England’s unsuccessful run chase against South Africa at the T20 World Cup on Saturday, has undergone scans on the injury in Dubai. Results are expected on Monday, when a decision will be taken on whether he will remain in the squad or be replaced. James Vince and Liam Dawson are with the squad as travelling reserves, with the former the obvious choice to step up should Roy be ruled out of the remainder of the tournament as is widely expected. In Roy’s absence the most likely reorganisation would see Jonny Bairstow, who opens in ODIs and has done so in 15 T20 internationals, move up the order. Bairstow has recently settled at No 4, having batted there in 13 of his last 18 T20 innings, and though he is the obvious choice to start alongside Jos Buttler, doing so effectively destabilises two positions. The choice then would be between bringing Vince or Sam Billings into the middle order as a specialist batsman, or abandoning the batting-heavy approach England have preferred in their previous games in the tournament and select an extra bowling option. David Willey would be the obvious choice given his potential contribution with the bat – his average in 203 T20 career matches is 23.73, slightly superior to Billings’ 23.64 in 201 games – but Tom Curran and Reece Topley, who replaced the injured Tymal Mills in the squad last week, are alternatives.Ten years ago, the psychologist Steven Pinker published The Better Angels of Our Nature, in which he argued that violence in almost all its forms – including war – was declining. The book was ecstatically received in many quarters, but then came the backlash, which shows no signs of abating. In September, 17 historians published a riposte to Pinker, suitably entitled The Darker Angels of Our Nature, in which they attacked his “fake history” to “debunk the myth of non-violent modernity”. Some may see this as a storm in an intellectual teacup, but the central question – can we learn anything about the future of warfare from the ancient past? – remains an important one. Pinker thought we could and he supported his claim of a long decline with data stretching thousands of years back into prehistory. But among his critics are those who say that warfare between modern nation states, which are only a few hundred years old, has nothing in common with conflict before that time, and therefore it’s too soon to say if the supposed “long peace” we’ve been enjoying since the end of the second world war is a blip or a sustained trend. In 2018, for example, computer scientist Aaron Clauset of the University of Colorado Boulder crunched data on wars fought between 1823 and 2003 and concluded that we’d have to wait at least another century to find out. Clauset doesn’t think it would help to add older data into the mix; indeed, he thinks it would muddy the picture. “It’s up to researchers who study sub-state-level violence to substantiate their claims that the dynamics of such violence are relevant to the dynamics of war and, in my view, they haven’t done a great job there,” he says. Most researchers accept that there is a difference between war and interpersonal violence – and that these two things are governed by different forces – but there is disagreement over where to draw the line between them. Historian and archaeologist Ian Morris of Stanford University, author of War! What Is it Good For? (2014), is among those who say that the nature of collective violence hasn’t changed much in millennia, it’s just that human groups were smaller in the past. For him, therefore, a massacre of a couple of dozen of hunter-gatherers in Sudan around about 13,000 years ago, the earliest known example of collective violence, is relevant to a discussion of modern warfare. Archaeologist Detlef Gronenborn of the Römisch-Germanisches Zentralmuseum in Mainz, Germany, agrees. In 2015, he and others described a massacre among Europe’s earliest farmers at a place called Schöneck-Kilianstädten in Germany, about 7,000 years ago. More than two dozen individuals were killed by blunt force instruments or arrows and dumped in a mass grave, their lower legs having been systematically broken either just before or just after death. The absence of young women from the group suggested that the attackers may have kidnapped them. Gronenborn says that massacres of entire communities were frequent occurrences in Europe at that time and that one of their hallmarks, judging by the human remains, was the desire to erase the victims’ identity. “The only difference between then and now is that of scale,” he says. But while some researchers may agree with Pinker that prehistoric and modern warfare are essentially the same phenomenon, they don’t necessarily agree with him that the evidence points to a long-term decline. Pinker based his claim that prehistory was extremely violent on around 20 archaeological sites spanning 14,000 years. Those sites unequivocally attest to ancient violence, says historian Dag Lindström of Uppsala University in Sweden, “but they cannot be used for quantitative comparative conclusions”. We simply have no way of knowing how representative they were. “The further you go back in time, the more difficult it becomes to have an accurate assessment of how many people died in battle,” says historian Philip Dwyer of the University of Newcastle in Australia, who co-edited The Darker Angels of Our Nature. Civilian death counts are even less reliable, he says, and have likely been significantly underestimated throughout history. In Dwyer’s view, all war-related statistics are suspect, undermining attempts to identify long-term trends. Others think the statistics can be informative. Gronenborn’s work is feeding into larger scale efforts to identify and explain patterns in collective violence. One such effort is the Historical Peace Index (HPI), a collaboration between Oxford University and the group behind Seshat: Global History Databank – a scientific research project of the nonprofit Evolution Institute – to map warfare globally over the past 5,000 years. Their goal, as the name suggests, is to try to understand the causes and consequences of war, with a view to building more peaceful and stable societies. The argument of those taking this kind of approach is that the more data you gather, the more you can identify meaningful patterns. Gronenborn, for example, says that it is beginning to look as if collective violence was cyclical in neolithic Europe. One hypothesis he and others are testing is that mounting internal social tensions fuelled explosions of violence, with external shocks such as climate fluctuations acting as triggers. The awkward truth is that collective violence has been one way in which societies have reorganised themselves to become more humane and prosperous. But as societies changed, so did the reasons they went to war. “People always want to know: what was the earliest war?” says bioarchaeologist Linda Fibiger of Edinburgh University. “But it would be more interesting to ask: how did neolithic people define violence? What was their concept of war?” Any debate over the decline – or not – of war must take into account its changing nature, Dwyer says, adding that it didn’t stop changing 200 years ago. In the decades since the second world war, for example, major international conflicts have become less frequent, but small wars have proliferated. This has happened, argues Yale University historian Samuel Moyn in his new book, Humane, in part because over the 20th century the justification for war shifted to peacekeeping and the defence of human rights, ensuring that war shrank in scale but became “for ever”. The trouble with small-scale wars, as Clauset and others have found, is that they have a strong tendency to escalate, especially if they go on for a long time. In 2019, political scientist Bear Braumoeller of Ohio State University published Only the Dead, in which he argued that the risk of escalation today was as high as it had been when European leaders sent their troops to war in the summer of 1914, believing they would be home by Christmas. “When it comes to the propensity of war to spiral out of control and produce mind-boggling death tolls, we live in the same world that they lived in,” he wrote. Why war escalates so easily is not well understood, but Braumoeller says it’s a “good bet” that technology is a factor. Scientist Peter Turchin of the Complexity Science Hub in Vienna, one of Seshat’s co-founders, agrees. He says that stepwise advances in military technology – he calls them “military revolutions” – may have been major drivers of collective violence. The military revolution, singular, is the term historians use to describe the period of rapid technological and social change that began in the 16th century with the advent of portable firearms. But Turchin says there were others. One of the most important got under way about 3,000 years ago, across a swath of Eurasia south of the steppes, when archers armed with iron-tipped arrows first mounted horses. Each time, the technology handed an advantage to those who had it, stimulating a technological and eventually social arms race. And that technology wasn’t even necessarily devised for military ends. The farming revolution, which ushered in the neolithic period, was also a military revolution, because the advances that gave farmers new tools also gave them new weapons. And some have argued that war became more lethal in the early 1800s in part because of the newfound ease of moving troops and supplies by rail. “The upshot was that, with more soldiers on a given battlefield, it took more deaths on both sides to win a battle and therefore more deaths to win a war,” Braumoeller says. Many people perceive technological change to be accelerating. The 20th century saw at least one military revolution, as a result of which we have nuclear weapons and the capacity to wage war in space. The early nuclear weapons were so destructive and so bad at hitting targets that they acted as effective deterrents and helped usher in this current period of stability, Morris says, but counterintuitively, we may have more grounds to worry now that they are generally smaller and more precise. Morris sees parallels between the period we’re living through now and the late 19th century, when international conflicts were few, but small-scale insurgencies and civil wars proliferated, and some of them, such as the Boer war, spiralled out of control. That long peace was finally shattered in 1914 and this one will be eventually too, he thinks. What the cause and who the belligerent parties will be in the war that breaks the peace is not yet possible to say of course, though there has been much speculation – for example that it may involve Chinese military action against Taiwan. Nevertheless, for those who believe that the past can be instructive about the present, just not in the way Pinker does, Better Angels recalls a slew of books published on the eve of the first world war that proclaimed that war between the great powers was a thing of the past.At the Tate’s Hogarth and Europe, I stood on tiptoe for rather longer than was comfortable, and dedicated myself to searching for landmarks on A Plan of the Cities of London and Westminster, and Borough of Southwark; with the Contiguous Buildings (1746) by Jean Rocque and John Pine. In this rendering, the capital was, I thought, things gradually coming into focus, strikingly familiar: here was High Holborn, Old Street and Goswell Road; if Mile End was edged by fields, Whitechapel looked satisfyingly inky. But I thrilled, too, at its unexpected sprawl, the map in question, assembled from multiple sheets, being as wide as Gin Lane itself. Stare at this mammoth engraving for long enough and in your head, a din will soon strike up: harried hooves on cobbles; a sallow-faced girl hawking oysters; a drunken guardsman shouting the odds. By 1760, London was home to 740,000 people and the most populous city in Europe. We picture it as dangerous and dirty, but as the Tate’s show reminds us, it was also cosmopolitan and cultured: think of Canaletto’s The Grand Walk, Vauxhall Gardens (c 1751), in which smartly dressed types promenade, talking (perhaps) of literature or music (in 1749, about 12,000 people attended a performance of Handel’s Music for the Royal Fireworks in Vauxhall); or of Zoffany’s David Garrick (1762-3), a portrait of the actor in which, by being wig-less, he appears all the more the aesthete. (Canaletto came to London from Venice in 1746 and Zoffany from Rome in 1760.) For artists in particular, there was a new freedom; liberated, just a little, from the need for rich, aristocratic patrons by the development of print, men such as William Hogarth could address the public more directly and be entrepreneurial about it to boot (Hogarth produced his own prints after his paintings, cutting out the publishers who normally profited from engravers’ work). Portraits were no longer the painter’s mainstay. Now, artists told moral stories. They sent people up. They were more interested in honesty than in blandishments and tended towards cruelty as much as kindness. Alice Insley and Martin Myrone, the curators of Hogarth and Europe, have set themselves a huge task, the aim of which, unfortunately, is not apparent in its title. Ultimately, their exhibition isn’t only about the way one celebrated British artist related to Europe at a time when society was rapidly changing and xenophobia occasionally ran riot. Rather, this is a group show of work both by Hogarth and by those of his contemporaries who made their living in other great European cities: Jean-Baptiste-Siméon Chardin in Paris, Pietro Longhi in Venice, Cornelis Troost in Amsterdam and several others. It reveals the way such men influenced each other and the preoccupations they shared – except, alas, for when it doesn’t, and a piece appears for no discernible reason (the appearance of, in essence, two versions of Giuseppe Maria Crespi’s luscious A Woman Looking for Fleas is, for instance, never explained). Though 60 of Hogarth’s works are included, among them the very famous Marriage A-la-Mode (1743), The Gate of Calais (1748) (often known as O the Roast Beef of Old England) and, yes, Gin Lane (1751), be warned: sometimes he disappears from view altogether, pushed out by the likes of – sacré bleu! – Philippe Mercier and Jean-Antoine Watteau. Such abundance then – and there are wonderful things gathered here, among them loans from private collections you may be seeing for the first (and last) time. In Sir Francis Dashwood at his Devotions (c 1733-9), Hogarth plays on the libertine reputation of his subject, dressing him blasphemously as a woman-worshipping monk, to strange effect. In Francis Matthew Schultz in His Bed (c 1755-60), said to have been commissioned by its subject’s wife in an effort to curb his drinking, he depicts a man vomiting blood into a chamber pot, a brutally candid image that is disturbingly at odds with his grand bedroom, all velvet and brocade. I enjoyed looking at work by Nicolas Lancret and (especially) Troost: such paintings reward close examination. But by involving so many artists from so many places, something is lost. Hogarth and Europe is exhaustingly diffuse. Nor was I keen on its curators’ painfully extreme anxiety towards social attitudes in this period; to the connections of some of its subjects to colonialism and slavery; to sexism and antisemitism. They treat the work like bombs that are about to detonate. Desperate to defuse them before anyone is upset, they have appointed no fewer than 18 “commentators” (mostly academics), whose often clod-hopping analyses appear next to the work: a committee that has been designed to spot offence before it’s taken and even, on occasion, to invite the visitor to see insults that may not actually exist. This results, I think, in some quite drastic misreadings. The curators are determined that Hogarth’s Before and After (1730-31) depict a rape and its aftermath (in the first picture, a woman shies away from the man who would seduce her; in the second, she clings to him as he buttons his breeches), an interpretation that wilfully ignores both their tone, which is warm and slightly comical, and the fact that in the second painting, the dog is no longer protectively barking (it appears to be asleep). Equally, I’m unconvinced that in The Lady’s Last Stake (1759), Hogarth gives his female subject “agency” – what would such a word even have meant in his time? – by suggesting that she is contemplating an affair with an officer who holds a jewellery-filled tricorn hat. Surely the painting is about gaming debts, or even blackmail, not her “sexual appetites”. When I first arrived at Hogarth and Europe, I was dazzled and delighted. I stood in front Southwark Fair (1733), a vision of urban chaos over which a union jack flutters desperately in the breeze, and considered first the artist’s satiric genius with a crowd (in Hogarth’s hands, the multitudes stroll blindly towards the metaphorical precipice, and you can almost smell their armpits as they do so) and then, of course, its parallels with our own time (so long as the flag is flying, no one need think too hard about the consequences of malice and misrule). But the longer I stayed, the more the feeling grew in me that I was not really allowed to enjoy what I was seeing, and that if I did, I was a bad or insensitive person. Reaching the gorgeously tender Heads of Six of Hogarth’s Servants (c 1750-5), the curators were at last more positive, noting these faces’ individualism, the expansion of what they call “the range of subjectivities” to encompass the working class. But by then, it was too late. In something of a massive own goal for the gallery, I’d been made anxious and weary. I no longer fully trusted myself to smile at these muslin collars and rosy cheeks, these crisp bonnets and soft jowls. Hogarth and Europe is at Tate Britain, London, until 20 March 2022The Oulipo movement, a group of mostly French writers in the second half of the 20th century, believed that imposing constraints on the writing process was a spur to creativity. Georges Perec famously wrote a novel without the letter “e”, while Jean Lescure’s N+7 approach produced new work by replacing every noun in an existing text with the noun seven places after it in the dictionary. It feels as if there will be a number of inadvertently Oulipean works that emerge from the chaos of the past few years, books that, were it not for Covid, might have been something very different. Peter Fiennes’s sun-drenched hymn to Greece, A Thing of Beauty: Travels in Mythical and Modern Greece, feels like just this sort of book. A project that started out as a fairly straightforward travelogue has become something stranger and more interesting under the heightened pressure applied by the constraints of the pandemic. When Fiennes, a celebrated nature writer and former publisher at Time Out, begins his quest to get to the heart of Greece, international travel is impossible. He finds himself sitting by a lake at Byron’s home, Newstead Abbey in Nottinghamshire, dreaming of Missolonghi, Apollo and nereids. Then, in the second chapter, when the travel ban (briefly) lifts and Fiennes is able to hightail it to Athens, his voyage is given added zest by the enforced delay, a sense of the miraculous imbuing everything. Fiennes’s book has two central concerns. The first is to understand why Greece and Greek myths in particular have such an enduring hold on the contemporary psyche. Fiennes, though, wants to strip away the “closed-room fug of elitism” that surrounds the idea of “the classics” and instead seeks to establish a connection between the ancient past and the present through visiting the places from which these myths emerged. The second organising interest of the book is environmental. Partly this comes out of Fiennes’s background as a nature writer, but there’s something more than this. It seems he wants to establish whether there’s any way the wisdom of ancient Greece can be applied to the climate crisis: “If these people had possessed our technologies, was there any code, or anything about their beliefs, that would have restrained them from taking and using whatever they wanted?” This environmental concern, through the image of the hope that is left when Pandora’s box (actually, he tells us, a jar) is opened, expands into the idea that what we need most now is a means of harnessing the joy and optimism with which the Greeks addressed the world. Grecian light at a time of darkness. Fiennes is a brilliant and generous guide through Greece. He weaves the ancient world and the modern together with intelligence and elegance, taking us from Athens to Corinth, along the Sacred Way to Eleusis, to Epidavros, Olympia, Delphi and Epirus. There’s a wry Sebaldian humour at work here – he recognises that modern Greece doesn’t always live up to the majesty of the past. Stopping at the Temple of Dionysus in Thorikos, he stands beside a “deserted beige Portakabin” and recognises that “the God is long gone”. But these disappointments merely heighten the joy we feel when Fiennes lights upon connections to the past that spark and fizzle, when we discover that precious hope amid the ruins. A Thing of Beauty is a must-read for anyone visiting Greece but, at this time when travel is tricky for any number of reasons, perhaps even more essential for those of us who don’t know when next we’ll get there. • A Thing of Beauty: Travels in Mythical and Modern Greece by Peter Fiennes is published by Oneworld (£18.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Lush, Lindsey Jordan’s first Snail Mail album, was written while she was still a teenager and rapturously received for its yearning, darkly intense songs about queer love. Three years on, Jordan has broadened her indie folk-rock with loops and synths. While her pure, clear voice is as expressive and engaging as ever, Valentine is more accessible and less interesting. A few of her acutely painful aperçus survive – “Sometimes I hate her just for not being you,” observes the title track – but it feels like Jordan is more aware of the weight of her words and measures them too carefully. These new songs hint at how fame and acclaim may have warped Jordan’s relationship with herself and others, with references to supermodels, suicide, surveillance and rehab, muddied by a frustrating opacity. What’s missing is Lush’s piercing intimacy of relatable experience. I kept thinking of Billie Eilish’s NDA, a song about the disorientating strangeness of superstardom – not anything most of us can identify with, yet Eilish reveals fame’s compromises and humiliations until it feels both shocking and true. Jordan gestures at those depths but never fully explores them.Three state and territory governments have reached a self-described “historic” cross-party agreement to help each other work towards reaching net zero greenhouse gas emissions. The Coalition and Liberal Party governments in New South Wales and South Australia and the ACT’s Labor-Greens administration said the collaboration – known as the net zero emissions policy forum - would help sub-national jurisdictions address the practical challenges of achieving net zero. The step is the latest taken by lower levels of government in the absence of stronger action by the federal government, and comes ahead of a cities and regions day at the Cop26 climate conference in Glasgow. The announcement follows widespread criticism of the Morrison government for releasing a net zero plan that contained no new policies to rapidly cut greenhouse gas emissions, as scientists say is necessary. It instead relies on unspecified technology breakthroughs, global trends, and carbon offsets for more than a third of the abatement task. The states and territories involved hope other sub-national governments around the world will join the group, which will share policies and resources and work together to speed up the transition. “Taking action on climate change is an economic and environmental imperative, and this is about ensuring states and territories are working together to address it,” said the NSW treasurer and energy minister, Matt Kean. “Greenhouse gas emissions do not recognise borders, and to tackle climate change we need a globally collaborative approach and that is what this forum is about.” The ACT’s chief minister and minister for climate action, Andrew Barr, said the forum members were calling on their colleagues in other state and regional governments to take decisive action to address the climate crisis. “Sub-national governments have a vital role to play in getting to net zero emissions because we have some of the most important levers such as transport, buildings and energy,” he said. South Australia’s minister for environment and water, David Speirs, said they were encouraging other sub-national governments to join “and help create the low carbon jobs and industries of the future while making sure we leave a better planet to our children and grandchildren”. The forum is an initiative of the Under2 Coalition, which aims to bring together sub-national governments that aims to cut greenhouse gas emissions. It will be directed by a ministerial group, which NSW will chair for the first 12 months. The announcement comes as the energy and emissions reduction minister Angus Taylor wrapped up his time at the Glasgow conference. Australia’s ambassador for the environment, Jamie Isbister, is now leading the delegation in the second week of the fortnight-long summit. On Sunday, the opposition’s climate spokesperson, Chris Bowen, was asked if a federal Labor government would collaborate with the states and territories to speed up the transition to net zero. The federal Labor party has been cautious about its climate policy ahead of the Glasgow summit, including the level of emission reduction that it would commit to for 2030 if it won the federal election due in the next six months. But Bowen said targets adopted by the states and territories would be a factor as the federal Labor party developed its position. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Of course we’ll consider and factor in not only the targets of state governments, and all of them across the board have varying degrees of targets, but also the policies they have to achieve those,” he told the ABC’s Insiders program. “I would assume under the government’s modelling it’s factored in as well, in their 30% to 35% projection (of a cut by 2030 below 2005 levels), but we don’t know because we haven’t seen the modelling.” Bowen also hinted the opposition was looking at changes to the existing safeguards mechanism, which the Coalition legislated as a tool to stop industrial emissions going up. The Morrison government still has the same 2030 emissions target – a 26-28% cut – set under Tony Abbott six years ago. Scientists say global emissions need to be cut roughly in half by then to keep alive the possibility of limiting global heating to 1.5C.Australia risks losing jobs to other countries if it fails to lift its below-average spending on research and development, a peak science body has warned, amid Scott Morrison’s vow to promote “technology not taxes” on climate policy. Australia invests just 1.8% of its economic output in research and development, well behind the OECD average of 2.5%. “We need to do better – clearly,” said Misha Schubert, chief executive of Science &amp; Technology Australia, which represents more than 80,000 scientists and technologists. Morrison told the climate summit in Glasgow last week: “It will be our scientists, our technologists, our engineers, our entrepreneurs, our industrialists and our financiers that will actually chart the path to net zero, and it is up to us as leaders of governments to back them in.” Schubert said the prime minister was “absolutely right” about the role of those sectors in seizing opportunities for Australia, but this applied “not just with our urgent clean energy transition but with all of the big technological opportunities that sit before us across the next decade”. “We need to back them in at scale, with deeper investment across the board,” Schubert said. Australia is currently ranked 21st in the OECD for research and development, with Israel, South Korea, Japan and Taiwan at the top of those rankings. With an election due in Australia by May, the group is urging all political parties to pledge to make Australia a global superpower in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (Stem) by lifting Australia into the top-10 in the OECD. Schubert said Australia should be “taking notes” from the UK, whose research and development investment is similar to Australia’s as a share of GDP but with the prime minister, Boris Johnson, pledging to ramp it up to 2.4% of GDP. She said the group’s 10-point pre-election wishlist, released on Monday, was not about “investment for the sake of investment, but rather a clear-eyed economic strategy that is about seizing jobs, wealth and income for Australia’s next generations”. In the coming decade, Schubert said, a range of frontier technologies would develop at scale, including artificial intelligence and machine learning, quantum computing, clean energy technologies, biotech and agricultural technologies. “Australia needs to stay at the forefront of tech advances in all those fields, or we will lose jobs and opportunities to our competitors across the advanced economies of the world, in the OECD, and in our region,” she said. The election proposals also include $2.4bn fund to “drive income-generating commercialisation of Australian research and create thousands of new jobs”. They also include a call for “a comprehensive plan to transition to a net zero emissions economy and safeguard Australia’s unique biodiversity”. In a separate statement released on Monday, an alliance of business representatives, unions, investors, and farming, welfare and environment groups have described the Morrison government’s commitment to net zero by 2050 as “a first step”. The Australian Climate Roundtable said it was also necessary to raise Australia’s medium-term emissions reduction goals – despite the government’s decision not to increase its formal 2030 target of a 26% cut to 28% on 2005 levels. The roundtable said stronger medium-term action would “provide a clear and credible basis for action and investment” and “maintain our competitiveness amidst a growing global transition”. “Innovation remains critical to identify low, zero and negative emissions options, improve their capability and reduce their costs,” said the roundtable, whose members include the Business Council of Australia, the Australian Industry Group and the Nationals Farmers’ Federation. “Support for basic and applied research, demonstration and commercialisation is important.” The roundtable said government policy should seek to prevent the unnecessary loss of competitiveness by Australia’s trade exposed industries – but delaying changes “will not resolve these fears and may worsen trade risks, given the impacts of other nations’ climate transition choices on Australia’s export industries”. Labor has said it will release more details about its climate policy at some point after the Cop26 conference in Glasgow wraps up. Labor’s climate spokesperson, Chris Bowen, hinted on Sunday the opposition was looking at changes to the existing safeguards mechanism, which the Coalition legislated as a tool to stop industrial emissions going up. Bowen told the ABC’s Insiders program the Business Council had “made a useful contribution” by suggesting changes to the safeguards mechanism. He said Labor would consider the emission reduction pledges of the states and territories as it worked on a national 2030 target, but said it was yet to see the federal government’s modelling of the plan to net zero. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “You don’t release a budget reply until you see the budget. We’ve now seen the government’s alleged plan [but] we’re still waiting on more detail about the modelling,” Bowen said. The leader of the Greens, Adam Bandt, accused the Morrison government of “holding back the rest of the world’s efforts to keep people safe” from the climate crisis. In a speech to the Green Institute on Monday, Bandt will say that if Australia had kept the carbon price legislated during the Gillard minority government, “we would have met the Coalition’s weak 2030 targets in 2020”. “We would not face, as a country, the humiliation and shame on the international stage Scott Morrison inflicted on us these past weeks,” Bandt will say, according to his speech notes. “We would be able to stand with our allies, the USA and the UK, to increase our 2030 commitments.”Ronnie Wilson, who has died aged 73 following a stroke, was the oldest of the three brothers who formed the Gap Band in Tulsa, Oklahoma in 1967. A singer and multi-instrumentalist who played keyboards, trumpet and flugelhorn, Wilson was integral to the ensemble, which enjoyed a string of indelible funk-soul hits in the late 1970s and early 80s. Among the best loved of these were Oops Up Side Your Head, Burn Rubber On Me (Why You Wanna Hurt Me), Early in the Morning, You Dropped a Bomb on Me, Outstanding and Party Train. Their songs were distinguished by their frequent use of powerful synthesiser basslines. Wilson was also co-writer on songs including Party Lights, Yearning for Your Love and Oops Up Side Your Head. The last of these reached No 6 in the UK and 4 on the US R&amp;B charts in 1979, and later earned Wilson and his brothers co-writing credits on Mark Ronson and Bruno Mars’s massive international hit Uptown Funk (2014), owing to the resemblance between the two tracks. By 1982 the Gap Band was one of the biggest-selling R&amp;B acts in the US, with the albums Gap Band III (1980) and Gap Band IV (1982) both achieving platinum status. Their commercial profile dwindled as the 80s wore on, though, and All of my Love (1989), partly written by Ronnie, was the band’s last No 1 on the US R&amp;B chart. Ronnie was born in Tulsa, the eldest son of the Rev Oscar Wilson, a Pentecostal minister, and his wife, Irma. Oscar preached at the Church of God and Christ in Tulsa, and the three boys – Ronnie, Charlie and Robert – sang there regularly as their father’s warm-up act. Ronnie recalled: “Dad would give us one of those famous looks, warning us that if we didn’t tear up the church house and have everybody shouting by the time he got up to speak, we were in for a whoppin’.” While their parents would only permit religious music to be played in the family home, the brothers would smuggle in records by James Brown or Stevie Wonder and listen to them secretly. While in high school, Ronnie and Charlie each started their own band, but then merged the two together and brought in Robert on bass. They originally called themselves the Greenwood, Archer and Pine Street Band, deriving the name from streets in the Greenwood district. This had been the site of the Tulsa race massacre in 1921, which left at least 100 residents dead, both black and white. They shortened the name to the Gap Band when it proved too long to fit on a concert poster, and played local venues such as the Gallery and the International Club. They took their first step towards wider recognition when an associate of the local musician Leon Russell saw them at the International Club and invited them to Russell’s recording studio. Russell, a successful solo artist who had collaborated with Eric Clapton and George Harrison, recruited the Gap Band to play on his album Stop All That Jazz (1974), and in the same year they recorded their own album, Magicians Holiday, on Russell’s label, Shelter. This failed to set the charts alight, as did the follow-up The Gap Band (1977), but the tide turned when they signed with the Los Angeles-based producer Lonnie Simmons’s Total Experience Productions. A deal with Mercury Records ensued, and their 1979 album, also called The Gap Band, reached No 10 on the Billboard R&amp;B chart, with Shake reaching 4 on the R&amp;B singles chart. Before 1979 was out they had released The Gap Band II, which gave them another hit with Oops Up Side Your Head (on the album, the track was titled I Don’t Believe You Want to Get Up and Dance (Oops!)). The Gap Band III delivered a cluster of hits including Yearning For Your Love, Humpin’ and Burn Rubber on Me. The album was an R&amp;B chart-topper, and reached 16 on the mainstream album chart. Even when the peak of their success was over, the Gap Band’s music enjoyed a healthy afterlife by being sampled by innumerable artists including Janet Jackson, Snoop Dogg, Public Enemy, Ice Cube and Mary J Blige. The band dissolved after Robert died of a heart attack in 2010. Charlie, who had beaten drug and alcohol addictions, established a successful solo career. Ronnie, who endured his own “$1,200-a-day cocaine habit”, recalled how he sought help from a higher power by serving in the music ministry of a church in San Antonio: “If you be God, I want you to take this drug habit away from me – save me, and I’ll serve you.” He is survived by his wife, Linda, and by Charlie. • Ronnie Wilson, musician and songwriter, born 7 April 1948; died 2 November 2021 • This article was amended on 8 November 2021 to correctly refer to Oops Up Side Your Head rather than Oops Upside Your Head.India’s elimination from the T20 World Cup was confirmed on Sunday when New Zealand’s victory against Afghanistan took the Black Caps out of their reach and turned their final match of the Super 12s, against Namibia on Monday, into a dead rubber. Their elimination is a massive blow to tournament organisers, with India its largest and most lucrative broadcast market, and as well as the team’s weaknesses it has exposed issues with the World Cup’s format and scheduling. India’s first two matches were scheduled a week apart, both played on a Sunday evening to maximise those all-important viewing figures: the first, a hotly anticipated encounter with Pakistan, was watched by around a billion people. But when both were lost in similar style – subdued batting performances and unconvincing bowling displays (they took just two wickets in their first two matches combined) following a lost toss – India stood on the brink of elimination with their tournament only just begun. A full week between games stretched the patience of players who, having gone into the World Cup straight from the Indian Premier League, had by then been living in biosecure bubbles for months. “It’s been a long break for us,” Virat Kohli said before their second match, against New Zealand. “It’s been a lot of time waiting and just doing nothing, really, for us as a team.” By the second Sunday of the Super 12s the group’s three strongest teams had all played each other, Pakistan winning twice, New Zealand once and India not at all. Though Afghanistan had the potential, ultimately unfulfilled, to upset any of them, the remainder of the matches became a procession. In particular the two teams who qualified from the first group stage, Scotland and Namibia, had realised their ambitions simply by getting that far and, once there, proved hopelessly uncompetitive. India would of course have been more comfortable if they had hosted the tournament as planned but conditions in the United Arab Emirates are very familiar to players who had all been involved in the IPL, which has been held in the same venues in one and a half of the past two seasons. But India’s internationals are banned from competing in foreign T20 competitions and, despite hosting the most popular domestic tournament of all, internationally it seemed the game had moved on without them noticing. Though cricket is the second most popular sport in New Zealand, a country of 5 million people, and the most popular in India, a country of 1.4 billion, the Kiwis have beaten India in the semi-finals of the 2019 50-over World Cup, in the World Test Championship final this year, and have now now eliminated them from the T20 World Cup. Needing to win their last group game to secure qualification, they limited Afghanistan to 124 for eight, Trent Boult and Adam Milne outstanding with the ball, before comfortably reaching their target with 11 balls and eight wickets to spare. They will now face an injury-depleted England in the first semi-final in Abu Dhabi on Wednesday, with Pakistan playing Australia in Dubai a day later.Two performances of Bluebeard’s Castle on the same day have left me somewhat jittery. Bartók’s only opera, examining a marriage pulled apart by the exposure of secrets, memories and past emotional pain, admits of multiple approaches, and this contrasting pair of interpretations could not be further apart in stance and intention. At Stone Nest on London’s Shaftesbury Avenue – once a chapel, then, in the 1980s and 90s, the Limelight club – the newly formed Theatre of Sound are staging a chamber version by director Daisy Evans and conductor-arranger Stephen Higgins that reimagines the opera as study of a happily married couple facing the devastating reality of the wife’s dementia. At the Royal Festival Hall, meanwhile, Edward Gardner and the London Philharmonic gave a terrifying yet astonishingly beautiful account of Bartók’s original score – a more traditional treatment, inevitably, but no less disquieting by any means. Purists might object to the Theatre of Sound version as straying too far from Bartók’s intentions, though it’s an unforgettable production in its own right. The opera’s symbolist paraphernalia is replaced by domestic naturalism both in terms of design and direction. In place of Bartók’s seven locked doors, a single trunk contains the relics of the couple’s past that Gerald Finley’s Bluebeard remembers with joy and anguish, as Susan Bullock’s Judith emotionally slips away from him. His previous three wives have become reflections of Judith’s former self, as lover, bride and mother, but the final image of solitude is hers, not his, a retreat into silence as she gazes at her reflection in a mirror. There are multiple casts during the run, but Finley and Bullock are utterly remarkable here, singing and acting with astonishing emotional nakedness and detailed veracity. Neither has done anything finer. This really is a devastating piece of theatre. Higgins, meanwhile, conducts players from the London Sinfonietta in his own small-scale arrangement, skilfully done and carefully reflecting the deep sadness and eventual despair that characterises the production. You miss, though, the glamour, danger and incipient violence of Bartók’s full orchestration, where Gardner, as one might expect, is in his element. Preceded by Haydn’s Symphony No 90 in C Major – the same key as the climactic opening of Bartók’s fifth door – he dug deep into the score’s tensions and colours in a sensationally paced and played account. Ildikó Komlósi was his formidable Judith, hell-bent on breaking down the emotional remoteness of John Relyea’s Bluebeard, and catastrophically unaware that in so doing she will destroy them both. Powerhouse stuff, and similarly unforgettable. Theatre of Sound’s Bluebeard’s Castle is at Stone Nest, London, until 14 November.I think it started in 2017, or 2016, the year identity stuck to our ambitions. In a litany of newly profitable labels, I had a full deck: Latina, woman, poor, trans. I was part of the think-piece boom, and everyone had a story to sell. Plucked from Tumblr by a new crop of feminist media, I was assigned the futile task of representation. People called me “brave”. I wrote personal essays, bravely. I modeled for magazines, bravely. At first I was happy to share, even proud of my participation in this anti-Trumpian effort of branding. It felt urgent, because it was. We learn about ourselves through images, and the inclusion of marginalized people was a beginning. I played along. The personal was political, and monetizable. “Doors” had been “opened” – we had no clue what we’d let out. I didn’t intend to step before a camera, but it happens if you’re at enough parties. These were the decadent years, when everything required a “launch”. Every look, tweet and interaction was an audition. Casting directors circled dance floors searching for their next It girl. When you’ve ripped through all your magazines and stuck them to the wall, at some point you (I) want to try being the girl in the picture. If you’ve come to know yourself through fashion, in an Eddie-Redmayne-in-The-Danish-Girl kind of way, it is understandable to want to right some of its wrongs. Clothing can be a disguise, or lead to new guises. Millennials of a certain age are still recovering from the brain rot of the fashion era in which we came to be. We grew to call ourselves models, photographers and stylists, all in opposition to a skinny white reality that didn’t fit. We posted online, and cultivated followings until we saw our ambitions through. Yes, we were seeing more trans people, but what else? I want to do more than just be seen. And that will demand a departure from certain narrative appetites and representations of the moment. When we first meet Jules, the teenage trans character in the hit HBO show Euphoria, her assault is our point of entry. It isn’t a false representation, but it isn’t a good one either. Her tragedy is the audience’s opportunity; an educational moment at her expense. This would be less tiresome if the public portrayal of trans girlhood was more varied – or if the growing number of real-life assaults didn’t loom all too large. Of course, violent attacks are a reality for many trans people, but are we ever allowed fantasy? Trauma hasn’t made me brave. Instead I am angry, vengeful. For now, the culture industry has won, and it’s turned a community into a contest. I’ve begun to think of its gaze as something I am stealing. In my mind, it’s better to be a criminal than a victim. The flattery of participation has worn off, and now I am stuck. Do I finally decide to opt out? That would make me feel less crazy, but I’d still scramble to make rent. I’m here to work. I keep taking the diversity jobs, either because I’m hopeful, foolish, or broke. Glamour is hard to resist. I receive a DM offering a spot in a photoshoot featuring an “LGBTQ+ cast” and $100 for a day’s work. I don’t turn it down right away. I feel uneasy: what if this is who I am? I don’t want to exploit my image, but I could use the money. It might be worthwhile if the ask to bring my identity to set was in service of something that excited me. It hardly ever is. The pay isn’t the problem. I know $100 is a weekly MetroCard, pizza and manicure. It’s the “LGBTQ+ casting” for me. Like, it’s always on these sets, where I’m “celebrated”, where I’ll be asked my pronouns repeatedly. That’s fine, I know it’s the right protocol – just not while my tits are out. Sure, I’ll tell you why I haven’t spoken to my dad in 10 years – but do you promise to pay the invoice within 30 days? But it’s fun to be put in drag, even when it sucks. That’s how they seduce you. The whir of blow-dryers, the hushed communication between photographer and stylist, the feeling of being part of it all. So I responded to the message. I sent in my measurements and waited for three days. I never heard back. Somehow rejection feels worse when you didn’t want it to begin with. I laugh, I write and I wonder if they’ll read this. I’m optimistic. I’m also bored. I’ve been sold authentically trans stories, but I still don’t see them on TV or in the movies or magazines. They’re out there, just not on our social media feeds. They’re uptown, and down south. In huddled bathroom stalls, where ideas are traded between snatches of gossip. Group chats where people say the things they dare not tweet. I want to see trans women experience pleasure. Something that is unafraid to frame us boldly, even harshly. Give me liars, cheaters and thieves. They deserve our attention, too. I want something sexy, rather than didactic. Glamour without a sense of mourning. If I must be trans – and it seems I must – then let it be dangerous! Or joyous, with better dialogue and beautiful lighting. I don’t care what it means to be trans, or a woman. I want to be told stories. • The picture caption of this article was amended on 14 November 2021 to indicate that it shows Hunter Schafer as Jules in the HBO show Euphoria. Devan Diaz is a writer from Jackson Heights, New York An earlier version of this essay originally appeared in CR Fashion Book“Just here would have been the great hall,” says Chris Ferguson to a Guardian reporter and a dozen indifferent sheep chewing grass in a stunning Northumberland valley. “Over there would have been the royal residence and behind that, a grandstand. We are on top of one of the most important sites of Anglo-Saxon history anywhere in this country.” Ferguson is standing in a field telling the story of one of the last century’s most remarkable archaeological finds. It is here, and in the nearby market town of Wooler, that he and his family are spearheading the development of a £10.4m tourist attraction, one that aims to be the Sutton Hoo of the north. Ad Gefrin – “near the hill of goats” – was discovered in the 1950s by a team led by archaeologist Brian Hope-Taylor. It is a site that includes a complex of timber halls, including the vast Great Hall and a unique wooden grandstand which formed the royal summer palace of seventh-century Northumbrian kings and queens. While arguably as important as the Sutton Hoo finds of the 1930s, it did not have the glamour. There was no buried ship or fabulous helmet, so it has not resonated in the public consciousness in the same way, says Ferguson. But it should. “Now it feels like a very idyllic rural backwater, but in the seventh century it was one of the most important sites in Britain.” Ad Gefrin was the summer home of the kings Æthelfrith and Edwin and his queen consort, Æthelburga, as well as the saintly Oswald. It was a stage for some of the most momentous events in early northern English history, including the first conversions to Christianity. Bede, writing in his Ecclesiastical History of the English People in AD731, tells how the Italian missionary Paulinus, sent by Pope Gregory I, spent 36 days, “morning to night”, baptising people in the River Glen. It was a place of hospitality, feasting and cultural exchange and would have had visitors from all the other Anglo-Saxon kingdoms as well as Rome and Ireland. It was also a place of battles and feuding, burned down twice – by Penda of Mercia and Cadwallon, King of the Britons. The plan is to open a visitor centre and museum in Wooler that tells the vivid story of Ad Gefrin and Northumbria’s Anglo-Saxon golden age. It will include an imagined recreation of the Great Hall with thrones and weapons and objects, showing that the so-called dark ages were far from gloomy. “They were the most blingy people you could possibly imagine,” says Ferguson. “So this place will look really blingy, with bright, vibrant colours and gold.” If Game of Thrones-type Anglo-Saxon histories bore you, then Ad Gefrin is also creating Northumberland’s first legal single malt whisky distillery offering tours and tasting. The hope is that profits from the distillery will underwrite the more perilous cultural side of the operation. “You don’t have to do both, but great if you do,” says Ferguson. After Wooler, Ferguson hopes people will travel to Yeavering, about four miles away, the picturesque location of the Ad Gefrin archaeological site. Some may even climb Yeavering Bell and discover the iron age hill fort, the largest in northern England. Ferguson, head of operations and lead curator on the project, said the plan was to open in autumn 2022. Does he see it as a Sutton Hoo of the north? “Effectively, yes. If you want to learn about the early medieval period in the north, I want this to be the place you would naturally come. Northumbria’s golden age is not a period which has had the same attention as Sutton Hoo, and it deserves to.” Ferguson believes Anglo-Saxon history generally does not always get the attention it deserves. “This period just gets missed in general education. People might get taught at school the Romans and the Tudors and then the Victorians. You quite often get asked, ‘So when are the Anglo-Saxons? Which ones do they come between?’ “This project is about people and excitement and bringing history to life.”Northern Ireland’s health minister is suing Van Morrison after the singer accused him of being “very dangerous” over his handling of Covid restrictions. Robin Swann’s legal action relates to a well-publicised appearance by the musician at the Europa hotel in Belfast in June. Morrison criticised the Ulster Unionist party minister after the last-minute cancellation of his show. Video of the incident went viral after Morrison called the Democratic Unionist MP Ian Paisley on to the stage to join him in chants. Paisley has since described it as “parody” and said he did not believe Swann was dangerous. Four gigs scheduled by Morrison, including one at the Europa hotel, were cancelled at the 11th hour as live music was still not permitted under Covid restrictions. The management of the hotel blamed confusion by Stormont ministers for the late notice, believing they had been given the green light to proceed. A few weeks later, Morrison said he would challenge the Northern Irish government in court over its “blanket ban” on live music in licensed venues. According to reports, Swann began defamation proceedings earlier this year that also cite two subsequent incidents when the singer elaborated on his views on Swann. In the first, he was asked by a Sunday Life newspaper reporter about his initial comments on Swann. Morrison was reported to have described the minister as a “fraud”. The second relates to content Morrison uploaded to YouTube in which he addressed the Europa hotel controversy. In that video, he again criticises the minister and calls him “dangerous”, albeit referring to him incorrectly as “Robert Swann”. Swann has hired the libel lawyer Paul Tweed, who has represented well-known figures including Harrison Ford, Justin Timberlake, Jennifer Lopez and Arlene Foster. He recently won a settlement for the former Sinn Féin president Gerry Adams over a libel action against the Sunday World newspaper in Ireland. Proceedings were “at an advanced stage with a hearing expected to be listed in early 2022”, Tweed said. Swann’s action emerged after it was disclosed in the Sunday Life on Sunday. It is understood Swann’s legal team sent a writ to the singer in June and followed that up with a detailed statement of claim in September. Morrison’s lawyers are understood to have responded to the claim last month. The Europa hotel incident unfolded when Morrison complained Swann had “all the power” over the entertainer’s ability to perform gigs. He pulled up Paisley to join him in chants about the health minister. Swann said Paisley subsequently apologised for the incident and it is understood the minister is not taking legal action against the North Antrim MP. The Belfast-born singer has been an ardent critic of coronavirus restrictions, particularly those that prevented live music performances. He recorded a number of anti-lockdown songs last year that he said were aimed at the UK government. The lyrics included claims that scientists were “making up crooked facts” to justify restrictions that “enslave” the population. Swann subsequently responded to those songs in a piece written for Rolling Stone magazine. In that op-ed, the health minister described the singer’s claims as “bizarre and irresponsible”. He said some of what he was claiming was “actually dangerous” and would provide “great comfort to the conspiracy theorists”. Morrison’s lawyers have been approached for comment.Dean Smith has been sacked as the head coach of Aston Villa 11 games into the Premier League season. Villa have endured an underwhelming start to the campaign, with Friday’s loss to Southampton – the club’s fifth league defeat in succession – apparently the final straw. “This year we have not seen the continuous improvement in results, performances and league position which we have all been looking for,” said the club’s CEO, Christian Purslow. “For this reason we have decided to make a change now to allow time for a new head coach to make an impact. The board would like to sincerely thank Dean for his many excellent achievements, on and off the pitch, during this time.” The club have also tweeted a lengthy video tribute to Smith on social media. Smith, who grew up in the West Midlands and was a boyhood Villa fan, was appointed as head coach in October 2018 with the club 14th in the Championship. He oversaw promotion in his first season in charge and then an impressive first year back in the top flight, as well as a run to the final of last season’s League Cup. The side have struggled this term, however, after selling Jack Grealish to Manchester City in the summer. “No1 will ever compare – the real goat,” the erstwhile Villa captain tweeted alongside claret and blue hearts after Smith’s departure was announced. Purslow’s comments concluded: “Everyone knows how much Aston Villa means to Dean and his family. He has represented the Club with distinction and dignity – universally liked and respected by everybody associated with Aston Villa – our staff, players and supporters alike. We wish him the very best.” His dismissal comes less than a day after that of Daniel Farke by Norwich. Five Premier League managers have now been sacked this season, one more than in the whole of the 2020-21 campaign. Villa were immediately linked with Southampton’s Ralph Hasenhüttl, the Rangers manager Steven Gerrard and Paulo Fonseca. The Denmark coach Kasper Hjulmand is highly thought of by the club’s ownership group which includes the Danish sporting director Johan Lange. He is also an admirer of Brentford’s Thomas Frank. Smith’s former No 2 John Terry, who left the club in the summer, was among the bookmakers’ favourites to make a return but Villa have poured cold water on that notion.Along with a lot of other people, over the summer I had responded to news about Covid vaccine trials in young children mainly by sitting on the fence. When the time came, I thought, I’d probably get my two six-year-olds vaccinated, but possibly not in the first wave. It seemed unnecessary to run for the door, given the low impact of the disease on young children and the high number of teens and adults (nearly 80% in our zip code) in New York who have had at least one dose of vaccine. A big surprise, therefore, has been not only how keen I am to get my kids vaxxed, after Tuesday’s announcement that 28 million five- to 11-year-olds in the US are now eligible, but how emotional this moment feels. It has been a feature of Covid that every projected end-point has been pushed back beyond the horizon. To remember March 2020 is to invite bitter laughter at the naivety of those early days of lockdown, when we thought this thing might be over by summer, or by autumn, or by the first Christmas – definitely by the time the vaccine programme rolled out, in early 2021. And it did get much better. Viewed from the US, people in the UK look deranged, sending their unvaccinated kids to school unmasked, behaving as if Covid is over while the numbers surge. But even here in New York, where precautions are still stringent – the kids are under mask mandates at school and no one I know is having indoor playdates or birthday parties – it is, of course, a vast improvement on where we were last year. If this is the new normal, we had, I thought, done a good job of adjusting. With this in mind, it seemed that vaccinating one’s kids when the trial period was so “shallow” (these are the things one has found oneself saying, with great authority, in the last weeks and months) wasn’t a priority. At the end of October, the New York Times reported an Axios-Ipsos poll showing that 42% of parents in the US said they were unlikely to get their under-12s vaccinated. Another survey, by the Kaiser Family Foundation, found that two-thirds of all parents were either reluctant or firmly opposed to vaccinating their kids. People mumbled about myocarditis, a heart condition most often triggered in very small numbers of boys and young men in the wake of receiving the vaccine. This seemed eminently reasonable in October – as has been the case throughout Covid, time concertinas in weird ways so that even the most recent history can feel like ancient times. Wait and see; why wouldn’t we? That was the week before last. I hadn’t been paying close attention to the data; these conversations were all driven by emotion. Looking now, however, this position seems ludicrous. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 172 children between the ages of five and 11 have died from Covid-19 in the US, and more than 8,300 have been hospitalised. The CDC figures indicate that of the 877 recorded cases of myocarditis in under 30-year-olds after the Pfizer or Moderna vaccine, none resulted in death. All these risks are vanishingly small, and the risk to kids from catching Covid – this is before you get to the public health implications and the risks posed to vulnerable adults from unvaccinated kids – would still seem to be higher. On Tuesday, a week after the Federal Drug Agency approved the vaccine for five to 12-year-olds, at a third of the adult dose, the CDC officially recommended it. Within a day, we received two emails, one from our doctor’s office, another from my children’s school, offering the Covid vaccine for all who wanted it, in the school auditorium next Tuesday. Suddenly, a pathway to getting the kids out of masks opened up. (Although if large numbers of parents hold out on vaccinating their kids, it’s unclear exactly how this will happen; as with every other aspect of Covid, the greatest opportunity provided by this latest development is the one to loathe other people.) In the 1980s, we lined up outside the nurse’s office in school to receive our BCG (tuberculosis) jabs, and it’s a smart move to deliver Covid vaccines in school. By the middle of last week, friends were jumping on even earlier appointments in midtown clinics and before long, photos started to come in of their eight-year-olds getting jabbed. All dissembling evaporated. We look with hope and relief to this Tuesday. It doesn’t proof us against every Covid-related eventuality, but after all the mindless dithering and unscientific speculation, the feeling is one of pure joy. Another step closer. Emma Brockes is a Guardian columnistWhy don’t opera singers deafen each other? They’re singing loud enough to be heard in the back row, yet they are right in each other’s ears. Brian Dermody, Blessington, Co Wicklow Send new questions to nq@theguardian.com. Readers reply Bold of you to think we don’t. Corinne DeJong As an opera singer we take some care, generally, to not sing directly into the ears of our cast mates. I make certain to adjust my position onstage to take care of my colleague’s ears no matter the situation. There are times when the sheer volume is deafening, but it is infrequent. More often than not it is hard to actually hear onstage. In America, where I mostly perform, stages and houses are built for large audiences and big travelling productions, not just opera. The sound of a pitted orchestra can go straight out and away from the stage, making it necessary for companies to amplify the orchestra and send the feed to speakers backstage, so singers can hear the accompaniment to their singing. This can be more deafening than the singers singing together. It’s a delicate balance no matter what. John Moore Most of the time singers’ proximity on stage isn’t close enough to warrant concern. Opera singers are more likely to get hearing problems, such as tinnitus, as a result of years of solo practice in confined spaces. Richard Burkhard, operatic baritone One evening at a performance of the Vancouver Symphony Orchestra, the principal cellist inserted his hearing aids on stage. At the intermission, the opportunity occurred to talk to the second cellist about this, asking if the player was losing his hearing. The surprising response was that he was not inserting aids but earplugs, to protect against the thundering proximity of the piano in the concerto that was on the programme schedule. Perhaps opera singers take similar precautions, or the loud singing indicates that they are already somewhat deaf. Anthony Walter, British Columbia The reason an operatic voice can be heard in the last row is not volume, but projection and overtones. The human ear is more susceptible to certain sounds, especially higher frequencies, and opera singers take advantage of that. That being said, they will rarely sing directly into someone else’s ear. Even when singing love duets at close quarters, they will face forward to make sure their voice carries into the theatre (and to look at the conductor). In addition to that, theatres are usually huge spaces where sound disperses quickly and isn’t reflected in an uncomfortable way as would be the case in a small room. We do accidentally deafen each other sometimes though, and the same can be said for orchestra musicians! Clara Schneider, aspiring opera singer I did once have the experience of a Mephistopheles singing his line directly into my ear during the Kermesse scene in Gounod’s Faust and just before I sang a line of my own. I was deaf for a few moments, but fortunately it cleared fairly quickly for the rest of the scene, although I could still feel a buzzing sensation most of the evening. However, singers in general “play angles” and direct the tone out and into the theatre. Even if they seem to be facing and singing at each other from the audience perspective they “angle” to let the voice be heard. It becomes instinctive, even if asked to sing from a tricky physical position, to find body alignment and a way of angling to let the voice resonate and carry. There is little point in singing directly into the stage wings, an exception being one Verdi Lady Macbeth I knew who wanted to create an eerie echo type effect and soften her high note at the end of the sleepwalking scene. AndyPandy21 Trust me. After a day of singing teaching your ears hurt. ladivina69 Opera singers are trained to project their voices out, to the point that they actually can’t hear themselves very well on stage (which also must help the other singers). Projection is just not a matter of the singer screaming their loudest on stage and then ever diminished volume reaching the audience, as would happen in a stage play. Opera singers project through gaps in the orchestra using their training in pitch and resonance, which also means that a note that can be heard clearly over an entire orchestra is not necessarily going to shatter the eardrums of the people she’s sharing the stage with – she’s not trying to scream over an orchestra using sheer volume, she’s projecting a pitch at a resolution that carries to the human ear in the back of the auditorium. Thomas1178 The part about not being able to hear yourself so loudly when singing well is true (generally if it sounds good in your head it sounds muffled to the audience and vice versa). It does equate to an increase in volume for the audience, including fellow singers. Generally speaking the staging is arranged so that for the most part singers are singing out and not directly into each other’s ears. As you learn stagecraft you also learn not to position yourself in such a way as to deafen someone else. It does happen occasionally though. Sheeples The acoustics of the auditorium – which, if well designed, can carry sound extremely efficiently – and the extreme directionality of the human voice – especially a trained one – can lead a voice on stage to appear to defy the square root law of power loss over distance that physics ordinarily defines: appearing relatively quiet to someone next to you (but off axis to your side) and almost full volume to someone 50 yards away at a resonant sweet spot of the room. HaveYouFedTheFish That reminds me of the anecdote about the aspiring operatic singer doing his best to emulate Franco Corelli in Tosca “… L’ora è fuggita, e muoio disperato” (the hour has passed, and I am dying in despair). His neighbour across the street, at the end of his tether, shouted back: “No, you are going to be choked to death if you continue.” Hesperian It’s a rare event, but it has happened. Back in the 1920s at rehearsals in an unsuitably small Milan rehearsal room for the premiere of Puccini’s Turandot, tenor Arturo Sfumato, in the star role of Calàf, performed an impassioned aria in too close proximity to the left ear of eminent lyric soprano Norma Tivoli, resulting in instant and permanent partial deafness that prevented her from taking the role of Liù and terminated her career. Naturally, the composer and the whole cast were devastated, and the inconsolable Sfumato begged Puccini to insert a song for him to perform in honour of the poor victim of the accident. As history relates, the composer did just that, in the form of what has come to be recognised as one of his greatest masterpieces – the celebrated aria Deafen Norma. ThereisnoOwlCley Marshes, Norfolk The first Wildlife Trust in the UK, Cley Marshes, on the north Norfolk coast, is one of the best places for birdwatching in Europe, and in the autumn months the skies and coastline teem with migrating wildfowl and waders. Even if you’re not a keen twitcher, the migrations are a spectacular sight and the nearby beach at Holkham is one of the most beautiful on the English coast. Stay at the Harper in nearby Langham, a chic boutique hotel set in a former glass-blowing factory. It also has a small spa and two restaurants serving delicious and warming fare. Double rooms from £210, B&amp;B; theharper.co.uk Petersham Meadows, London Richmond’s Petersham Meadows is a bucolic delight. In summer, a herd of Belted Galloway cattle grazes here and by November the meadow is a riot of autumn colour. Enjoy a well-deserved tea at Petersham Nurseries in their picture perfect glasshouse, surrounded by autumnal foliage. Gorge on polenta cake, meringue and buttermilk scones washed down with a glass of rose petal prosecco. If you have the energy, visit nearby Marble Hill House and take a leisurely stroll up Richmond Hill. Gaze across the open meadows below, a view so historic it’s protected by an Act of Parliament. Stay at the Petersham Hotel, a Victorian country house overlooking the Thames. Doubles from £126; petershamhotel.co.uk. Afternoon tea at Petersham Nurseries from £45pp; petershamnurseries.com Galloway Forest Park Deer-rutting is one of the most spectacular natural sights in the autumn months, when male deer repeatedly clash antlers in a visceral battle for superiority. With its huge deer population, Galloway Forest Park offers an excellent chance to see the stags fight, along with dark skies for stargazing, mountain bike trails and adventure play areas, all swathed in vibrant auburn foliage. The Kirroughtree Visitor Centre is a good place to pick up information on trails and activities, and the Galloway Cottages, a clutch of farm buildings converted into comfortable holiday homes, are an easy walk from the park. From £499 per week, hoseasons.co.uk Blaithwaite, Cumbria Autumn skies offer some of the best stargazing of the year, and two new Stargazer Lodges on the Blaithwaite Estate, just outside the Lake District National Park, offer the chance to spot constellations from the mezzanine bedroom, set beneath a panoramic skylight window, the outdoor hot tub or the deck. The 250-acre estate offers wonderful walking and bookable activities for families. Bassenthwaite Lake is within easy driving distance and at its most beautiful in autumn; Dodd Wood, which runs along the eastern side, has some spectacular foliage. Stargazer Lodges sleep up to four, from £450 per week; blaithwaite.co.uk Bakewell, Peak District Glide above the flame-hued hills of the Peak District in the cable car at the Heights of Abraham country park (heightsofabraham.com), which rises to a 60-acre hilltop estate, 550ft above sea level. There are seven viewpoints dotted across the grounds, which give extraordinary views of the surrounding area. Nearby, the Monsail Trail offers easy cycling through some of the Peak’s most beautiful limestone dales, with walking routes for all levels. The Peacock at Rowsley makes an ideal base; an upscale restaurant with luxurious rooms, perfect for indulgent evenings after active days. Doubles from £150, B&amp;B; thepeacockatrowsley.com The Wye Valley, Wales Though it stretches for around 150 miles, from the mountains of mid Wales down to the River Severn, the most beautiful part of the Wye Valley – perfect for an autumn walking weekend – is between Monmouth and Chepstow. Here, the river cuts through a steep-sided valley, with wooded hills on either side, blazing burnt orange and saffron yellow in the autumn months. Follow a stretch of the long-distance Wye Valley Walk, or some of the other trails that lattice the countryside. Stay at the Whitebrook, an upscale restaurant with rooms in a small hamlet above the valley. Doubles from £360, B&amp;B, including dinner; thewhitebrook.co.uk The Teign Gorge, Devon One of Dartmoor’s most famous walks, the Teign Gorge circuit takes in the spectacular Castle Drogo – the last castle to be built in England – lush meadows and the wooded banks of the River Teign. The area is currently the largest woodland restoration project in the UK, and on sunny autumn days Whitton Wood glows with rusty-hued foliage. Venture out at night to see some of the most spectacular skies in the country. Dartmoor has Dark Skies status and is a great spot for autumn stargazing. Stay at Gidleigh Park, a luxury country house hotel with an award-winning restaurant and world-class wine cellar. Doubles from £287, B&amp;B; gidleigh.co.uk Madehurst, West Sussex Splash out on a rural-chic weekend in the heart of glorious Sussex countryside at the Pig at Madehurst, with charming rooms dotted through the grounds in traditional brick and flint stable buildings. The picturesque town of Arundel, dominated by an impressive Norman castle, is just four miles away; Mill Road, beneath the castle, is famous for the rows of lime and alder trees that drop their leaves, carpeting the pavements. Follow it up with a stroll around Swanbourne Lake, or head along the river for a waterside beer at the Black Rabbit Pub. Doubles from £215; thepighotel.com The Ashridge Estate, Hertfordshire The whole of the Chilterns is famous for its beech woods that turn auburn, russet and saffron in autumn, and the Ashridge Estate – a 5,000 acre swathe of land crisscrossed with paths, bridleways and cycling paths – is one of the best places in England to see autumn colours. A guided trail is specifically designed to take in the best of the foliage, including some of the less-trodden areas of the estate. The Greyhound Inn lies just on the boundary of the estate, and combines cosy rooms with modern classics in the buzzy dining room. Doubles from £95, B&amp;B; greyhoundataldbury.co.uk Studland Bay, Dorset Free of the crowds that flock to Dorset’s most beautiful beaches in the summer months, Studland Bay is glorious in autumn, when the long arcs of sand on Knoll, Middle, South and Shell beaches are perfect for blustery, salt-tinged walks. Refuel with lunch at the 16th-century Bankes Arms Inn, before dipping into the countryside behind the beach, where swathes of ancient woodland carpet the walking trails with russet and auburn leaves. Stay at the Hotel du Vin, back on the mainland in Poole, an elegant Georgian mansion situated just off the Old Quay. Doubles from £107; hotelduvin.comWhy doesn’t my husband wake himself up with his snoring? It is so loud I can hear it downstairs through the ceiling (he does a lot of shift work so we often sleep at different times). Sometimes I record him to show him how loud it is. It baffles me that snorers don’t wake themselves up. I would love to know why. Lucy Matthews Post your answers (and new questions) below or send them to nq@theguardian.com. A selection will be published on Sunday.The UK may eventually need to implement a carbon dioxide border tax to stop consumers effectively exporting greenhouse gas emissions abroad, the environment secretary has said. On Sunday, George Eustice insisted he was not in favour of a domestic meat tax to help reduce global heating and that such a proposal had “never been on the cards”. But, in an interview with the BBC’s Andrew Marr, he said that in the long term a CO2 border tax – a levy on imports related to the amount of CO2 generated by meat production – might be necessary because otherwise emission trading schemes would not work. Eustice also said the Treasury and the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy were looking at models for how such a tax might operate. Downing Street has ruled out a CO2 tax that would impose higher costs on UK meat producers and Eustice said a claim that he favoured a meat tax, based on an interpretation of an interview he gave before the start of the Cop26 summit, was wrong. “What I actually said is that in seven years we have a big programme to repurpose the agriculture budget that we have, and so there is no case for any kind of carbon emissions trading or meat tax, or any such thing in the food sector,” Eustice said. But he said the logic of emission trading schemes – imposing caps on the emissions allowed by producers – made a CO2 border tax inevitable. “Were you to introduce some kind of emissions trading scheme to try to reduce carbon emissions further … then you would also need to have some kind of carbon border tax to take account of those countries that maybe weren’t pulling their weight,” Eustice said, stressing that ideally this should be done multilaterally. Eustice also said a CO2 border tax might be necessary to protect domestic producers. “If you don’t want to export pollution, then you do at some point have to consider something like a carbon border tax,” he said. Asked if this meant higher taxes on goods coming from countries like China and India, Eustice said he would phrase it differently. “We would be saying, as countries taking the action necessary to deal with this global challenge, that we’re not going to allow those producers in this country to be undercut by those who aren’t doing their share,” he said. In the past, No 10 has been wary about endorsing CO2 border taxes. Boris Johnson is known to dislike anything that suggests consumers may have to pay a price for the shift towards net zero. But at their summit in Cornwall in the summer, G7 leaders acknowledged the need to tackle the problem of “carbon leakage”, in language that acknowledged the case for border taxes. The EU has published its own plan for what is effectively a CO2 border tax, known as the carbon border adjustment mechanism.It’s not often you see the Barbican foyer full of people wearing football shirts and scarves, but then I’m pretty sure the BBC Symphony Orchestra has never been involved in a premiere quite like this one, either. Mark-Anthony Turnage has been an ardent Arsenal supporter for more than 30 years, and even lived for a while within a pitch’s length of the old Highbury stadium, but until now he had never composed a tribute to his favourite club. Up for Grabs, which was introduced by the BBCSO conducted by Ryan Bancroft in a thrilling premiere, celebrates one of the most famous moments in Arsenal’s history, the evening in 1989 when they won the First Division title on goal difference, beating their closest rivals Liverpool 2-0 with virtually the last kick of the game at Anfield. Turnage insists that his score can be a free-standing 25-minute orchestral piece in its own right. But Up for Grabs was designed to be played alongside a specially edited film of highlights of the Anfield game, which was how it was performed at the Barbican, with the capacity audience cheering and applauding every twist and turn in the game as if they were reliving what happened 32 years ago. The atmosphere was electric. In a platform discussion after the premiere, chaired by Amy Lawrence with three members of that winning Arsenal team, Lee Dixon, Alan Smith and Nigel Winterburn, as well as their manager George Graham, Turnage revealed that he had never enjoyed composing anything as much as Up for Grabs. That enjoyment certainly comes through in his deliriously unbuttoned score, with its jazz trio – guitarist John Parricelli, drummer Peter Erskine and bass guitarist Laurence Cottle – driving things along. Arsenal football chants and songs provide thematic material, and the breathless, raw-edged intensity of it all sometimes harks back to Turnage’s music of the late 1980s and 90s. There are comic moments – a touch of Tom and Jerry when the film cuts to the Liverpool manager Kenny Dalglish – but reflective lyricism, too: the whole work is dedicated to the memory of David Rocastle, a member of the winning team who died in 2001, and, when he appears in the film, an elegiac saxophone pays its tribute. But then the whole work encapsulates perfectly and unexpectedly just what great sporting occasions can be about. Up for Grabs is available on BBC Sounds until 5 December.For millions of young people around the world, climate breakdown is something they have known their entire lives. Many live in regions that are particularly at risk of being affected by tipping points - parts of the Earth’s system where small changes, such as increased temperatures, could lead to accelerated and irreversible impacts. A landmark IPCC report earlier this year warned that tipping points such as melting ice sheets or Amazon forest loss could soon be triggered, with the potential to bring catastrophic change to vulnerable areas. But rather than be paralysed by fear, these young activists are taking action. From protecting coral reefs to organising protests, they are doing what they can to try to stop the tipping points from being passed. “They’re doing it right,” says Prof Tim Lenton, a leading expert on climate tipping points from the University of Exeter. “[They are] alerting the rest of the world from its slumber to tackle climate change and to transform society.” Jon Bonifacio, 23, Metro Manila, Philippines Jon Bonifacio grew up hearing about the Philippines’ coral reefs. He pictured brightly coloured underwater worlds, where marine life could flourish. But when he finally got to visit a reef a few years ago, what he saw told a different story. “The coral reefs seemed completely lifeless,” he says. Rising sea temperatures are pushing the world’s tropical coral reefs past a tipping point where they now suffer bleaching events almost every year. While scientists say there is still a chance to prevent several tipping points, coral reefs face a bleak future: even if temperature rise is limited to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels, it has been projected that 70%-95% of coral reefs will be gone by the end of the century. When Bonifacio learned about this, he dropped out of medical school to pursue climate and environmental advocacy full-time. He joined local environmental groups, advocating for companies and governments to do better, tried to prevent reclamation projects that threaten to bury marine reserves, and even swam to reefs to remove crown-of-thorns starfish that eat corals – a small cause of reef die-off. “I like what they’re doing,” says Lenton. “Even if it’s hard to change the global climate, activists can reduce other pressures on the reef.” While there are days when Bonifacio is “paralysed by the anxiety of what the next few years and decades could bring,” he has not given up hope. Supporting local science and research institutions, he says, is a concrete way to help. “We still do have a chance at life worth fighting for.” Adri Mafoletti, 18, Porto Alegre, Brazil Over the course of Adri Mafoletti’s life, the Amazon rainforest she grew up in has lost more than one-third of its capacity to absorb carbon. Logging and the climate crisis has resulted in the loss of trees. Now, scientists estimate that 40% of the existing Amazon rainforest could become a savannah, pushing it past its tipping point and reducing the planet’s ability to absorb carbon. For indigenous communities living in the Amazon, crossing this tipping point would also mean an end to their way of life. “Indigenous peoples cannot live without forests and rivers – it’s all we have, it’s part of us,” says Mafoletti, who is part of the Guaraní community. “We are nature, without it we don’t exist.” Mafoletti is doing all she can to fight climate change. She makes sure indigenous groups on the frontlines have access to basic goods and raises awareness of how the climate crisis exacerbates gender inequality. Nanna Chemnitz Frederiksen, 18, Nuuk, Greenland Nanna Chemnitz Frederiksen grew up in Nuuk, Greenland, where every fraction of a degree of heating is made visible by the ever-shrinking Greenland ice sheet. “People from all around the world, politicians and scientists come to Greenland to see the inland ice,” she says. “We are at the centre of this.” A significant portion of the ice sheet is thought to be on the verge of a tipping point, where melting could soon become unavoidable even if emissions are cut. The ice sheet is hugely important to stabilising the global climate, as it provides a vast white regionthat reflects sunlight back into space. But as the ice melts, the reflective surface shrinks, leading to more warming and melting and in turn, sea level rise. Scientists say sea level rises of one to two metres is probably already inevitable. Frederiksen knows that the melting ice sheet will have negative impacts on communities across Greenland, especially in northern settlements such as Qaanaaq where permafrost melting is destabilising homes and roads and impacting how fishers and hunters operate. But her real concern lies on the impact it will have globally. “I am not so scared of what the effects of the melting of ice in Greenland will be,” Frederiksen says, “It scares me what effect it can have for the rest of the world.” After school, Frederiksen volunteers with Greenland4Nature, a collection of young Greenlandic people trying to make their voices heard about climate change. But she says it is hard to remain hopeful. “When this world shows me how people deal with CO2 emission, pollution of the ocean, pollution of the soil … I get scared.” Roseline Mansaray, 26, Freetown, Sierra Leone Roseline Mansaray has not slept in weeks. It is the rainy season in Freetown, Sierra Leone and she is scared. “I am in panic, praying for my country not to experience any more destructive flooding this year,” she says. West Africa is one of the few places in the world that experiences monsoons. But as the planet heats up, the monsoon patterns are changing, potentially leading to either significant increases or decreases in rainfall. “Some models say it will get wetter, others say it will get drier,” says Prof Lenton. “But either way would be problematic.” Already, Mansaray has watched increased rainfall during monsoon season devastate her community. She used to live in Kroo Bay, an informal housing settlement where floods destroyed homes in her community, injured her neighbours, contaminated drinking water and led to the spread of waterborne diseases including cholera, diarrhoea and typhoid. Then on 14 August 2017, Mansaray witnessed a hillside collapse after heavy rains that killed an estimated 1,000 people and displaced hundreds of families who were moved into temporary camps. Mansaray is doing her part to address the climate crisis: she is one of the main organisers for Friday for Futures in Sierra Leone, planning local street protests as well as helping organise some internationally. For her, activism is less a choice than a matter of survival. “I am no stranger to climate change,” she says. “I have tasted its bitterness.”The Texas senator Ted Cruz led conservatives in condemnation of a prominent public figure for advocating Covid-19 vaccinations for children. Big Bird. This week saw final US approval for five- to 11-year-olds to receive the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine. Sesame Street, which has offered Covid advice before, duly deployed its popular characters to encourage parents to protect their children. Big Bird, who despite his vast size and to some slightly overbearing mien is according to the beloved show perpetually six-and-a-half-years-old, announced on Saturday that he had been vaccinated. “I got the Covid-19 vaccine today!” the hulkingly benevolent yellow avian announced, using an appropriate communications platform, Twitter. “My wing is feeling a little sore, but it’ll give my body an extra protective boost that keeps me and others healthy. [CNN reporter] Erica Hill even said I’ve been getting vaccines since I was a little bird. I had no idea!” Cruz responded: “Government propaganda … for your 5 year old!” Other rightwingers piled in. Lisa Boothe, a Fox News contributor, said “brainwashing children who are not at risk from Covid” was “twisted”. Children are at risk from Covid, if less so than adults. In October, the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) said 66 children aged between five and 11 had died from Covid-19 in the US. Children can infect others and infections in the five-to-11 age group are rising, the CDC said, accounting for 10.6% of new Covid cases. Undeterred, Steve Cortes, a host on the conservative Newsmax network, said of Big Bird’s tweet: “This kind of propaganda is actually evil. Your children are not statistically at risk, and should not be pressured into a brand new treatment. Do Not Comply!” Resistance to vaccine mandates and other Covid public health measures persists among Republican voters, despite a US death toll of more than 753,000 from a caseload of almost 46.5m. On Saturday, a conservative judge in New Orleans issued a temporary stay on a federal rule which says businesses with more than 100 employees must demand vaccinations or weekly testing. The Biden administration said it was confident it would prevail. Cruz, who recently made headlines by defending the first amendment right to give Nazi salutes at school board meetings, seemed to enjoy his work on the day’s active front in the broiling culture war. He also tweeted: “Liberals are weird. They don’t care about open borders. Or rising inflation. Or schools covering up sexual assaults. Or the disaster of Afghanistan. Or tyrannical Dem[ocrat]s violating medical privacy and freedom. “But criticise Big Bird? And they lose their sh[it].” The bad news for Cruz was that Big Bird seems unlikely to stop his public health advocacy, which he has pursued for years. In 1972, for example, he helped tell children: “Don’t wait, vaccinate!” As the Twitter account Muppet Wiki – “fans and professionals working together to build the best resource about the Muppets, Sesame Street and Jim Henson” – put it: “Big Bird is so polite. Be like Big Bird.”Libya’s chronic political instability has been exposed, with the country’s foreign minister, Najla El-Mangoush, suspended from office and banned from leaving the country by the president, only for the disciplinary action to be rejected by the prime minister. The power struggle comes days before a major conference in Paris at which world powers hope to speed up the departure of foreign mercenaries and troops from Libya ahead of planned December presidential and parliamentary elections, which are hanging in the balance. Mangoush, one of the few women at the top of Libya’s male -dominated, and sometimes violent politics, was suspended by the country’s interim president, Mohamed al-Menfi, a former diplomat with a support base in the east, “as a precaution” to investigate “administrative violations”. She has been accused of carrying out foreign policy without coordination with the Presidential Council, including by suggesting in an interview with the BBC last week that a former Libyan intelligence officer implicated in the Lockerbie bombing might be extradited to the US. Mangoush gave a commitment only that the extradition would be examined, not carried out, but her remarks were enough for her political opponents to try to oust her, which they have been trying to do off and on since her surprise appointment in February. The investigation is due to last as long as 14 days so the ruling would in effect debar her from travelling to the Paris conference hosted by Emmanuel Macron and at which the US vice-president, Kamala Harris, is due to attend. Since Muammar Gaddafi was overthrown and killed by western-backed rebels in 2011, Libya has been unable to form a government that can unite over the division of resources between the west, east and south of the country. During a 2014-20 civil war, the country was divided east and west between rival governments and warlords. The suspension of Mangoush by Menfi was supported by 80 members of the House of Representatives, the eastern-based parliament. But the prime minister, Abdul Hamid Dbeibeh, said the power to appoint or suspend ministers in his government was his exclusive preserve. Libya is ruled by an interim government following the election of the Presidential Council in February by a UN-appointed dialogue forum. Menfi and Dbeibeh were elected by the 75-strong forum on a joint ticket, but always represented different political interests. Their election has been dogged by allegations of bribery. The sole purpose of the interim government, in theory, was to provide services and prepare for presidential and parliamentary elections on 24 December, but the populist-inclined prime minister has been behaving as if he would wish to remain in power for longer, something most western powers have been resisting as they try to maintain momentum to the vote in six weeks. Dbeibeh was on Sunday reported to be considering standing for president. The elections would, for the first time in Libya’s history, provide the country with a mandated legitimate unified government in which there was clear division of powers between a parliament and a directly elected president, a new post in Libyan politics and the parliament. But the path to elections has been obstructed by existing political institutions reluctant to relinquish power and patronage, as well as by genuine fears that elections in such a divided country, in which militia and mercenaries proliferate, will not heal the country’s divisions by concluding with a stable, universally recognised government. Mangoush, who has succeeded in presenting a different face internationally to Libya’s largely male-led politics and can claim credit for organising an earlier stability conference in Tripoli attended by foreign ministers from Europe, has called for at least 20% of mercenaries and foreign forces to leave the country by 24 December. Proposals for mercenaries to leave the country have made some progress, though Turkey is insisting it is not part of this process since its forces are there at the invitation of the government. In an attempt to give the impression that the momentum to elections is unstoppable, the head of the High National Elections Commission, Imad al-Sayeh, announced that nominations for the presidency would open on Monday and continue until 22 November, while parliamentary elections nominations would be available until 7 December. He also said Libyans could go to polling stations in schools to collect voting cards. Mangoush was reported as saying in her BBC interview that “positive outcomes are coming” in the case of Abu Agila Mohammad Masud, alleged to have been a top bomb-maker for Gaddafi. The US has been seeking his extradition for at least two years, and he is aleady in jail in Libya on unrelated charges. She added the process would need to respect Libyan laws, a caveat that left it unclear what Libyan would ultimately accept his extradition. It was also claimed by her office that she did not name any individual in the interview. Mangoush said the Libyan government “understands the pain and sadness” of the victims’ families but “needs to respect the laws”. The US and Libya were collaborating on the case, she said, and it was progressing. A $2.7bn compensation agreement signed by Gaddafi’s regime did not protect Libyan citizens from future prosecution, the US argues. It merely served to lift sanctions on the Libyan government and immunise the state from any other civil claims. The deadly attack in 1988 on Pan Am Flight 103 from London to New York killed 270 people, including 190 Americans, when it came down over Lockerbie in Scotland.That’s it for today’s blog, though we’ll have a match report from Suzanne Wrack any minute now. Thanks for your company, bye! The post-match thoughts of Rehanne Skinner “We worked incredibly hard. I think it’s a fair result on the balance of play. We didn’t create as many chances as we have in other games, but the thing I’m most proud of is that we never say die.” That was quite a finish. I’d like to see Percival’s goal again - it may have taken a slight touch off Aoife Mannion. Either way it was a wicked free-kick, which kicked off the turf to beat the diving Mary Earps. Once the ball was allowed to bounce, Earps was in trouble. Peep peep! 90+6 min: United almost steal the win! Moments after the goal, Korpela makes a vital save. Galton skinned Percival and lifted an excellent cross to the far post. Russo’s downward header kicked up off the pitch and was tipped away by Korpela. That’s a fine reaction save. The free-kick was on the left wing, just past the halfway line. Percival drove it into the area, where it cleared everyone and bounced extravagantly to beat Earps! Ria Percival scores from 50 yards! 90+4 min Spurs win a free-kick near the halfway line. The keeper Korpela is coming forward... 90+3 min At the other end, Russo’s cross-shot is comfortably saved by Korpela. 90+2 min Ubogagu drags a snapshot wide from 25 yards. 90 min Zelem and Hayley Ladd’s midfield dominance has been a key part of this United performance. They are five added minutes away from a big victory. 90 min The excellent Zelem lofts a good pass over the defence for Thomas, who cuts onto her left foot and hits a shot that is blocked by Bartrip. 89 min A dreadful pass from Clemaron goes straight to Thomas on the edge of the D. She gets the ball out of her feet and thrashes a left-footed drive just over the bar. That was beautifully struck. 87 min There’s a break in play after a clash of heads between Bartrip and Thomas. They’re both okay. 85 min United are keeping Spurs at arm’s length, as they have throughout the match really. It’s been an excellent away performance. 84 min Thomas flicks the ball square to Russo on the edge of the area. She tries to move away from the last defender Neville, who makes a vital, probably goal-saving tackle. 81 min Kyah Simon’s work is done for the day. She comes off, to be replaced by Angela Addison. 80 min Staniforth’s corner is looped towards goal by the head of Zelem. That leads to a bit of a scramble in the six-yard box until Williams blooters the ball to safety. 79 min Kyah Simon has also been booked, I’m not sure why. 77 min This is a good spell for Spurs, their best of the second half. United’s left-back Hannah Blundell has just been booked for something or other, possibly dissent. 76 min A floated free-kick is headed behind by Galton, a crucial touch that took the ball away from Ayane. Green’s corner is only cleared as far as Ayane, who heads instinctively towards goal from 10 yards. Earps makes a comfortable save. 76 min And now a double change for Spurs: Jess Naz and Kit Graham are replaced by Rosella Ayane and Josie Green. 73 min Thomas is playing up front now, with Russo moving to the right wing. 73 min A double change for United: Ella Toone and Kirsty Hanson are replaced by Lucy Staniforth and Martha Thomas. 71 min A mishit cross from Naz lands on the roof of the net. Earps was scrambling across her line, though ultimately she had it covered. 70 min The second half has been much more entertaining than the first, and although they have been the better team, United won’t feel safe at 1-0. 69 min Percival is booked for a cynical foul on Russo, who had skilfully rolled Bartrip and was breaking into space down the United left. 66 min: Fine save by Earps! A loose ball rolls towards Graham, 30 yards out. Out of nothing she hits a spectacular, booming shot across goal that is pushed over by the leaping Earps! 63 min The corner, swung under the crossbar by Percival, is claimed bravely and with authority by Earps. She really is a class act. 62 min That’s much better from Spurs. Graham plays a slick one-two with Simon and tries to clip a through ball towards Williams. It’s cut out by Thorisdottir, who stretches to concede a corner. 60 min Spurs have been neat and tidy in the middle third, but they have really struggled to create chances. The closest they have come to a goal was a mishit cross from Naz. 57 min Toone, increasingly influential, finds Russo on the left side of the area. Her shot is half blocked by Bartrip and runs through to Galton, whose close-range shot is superbly blocked by the stretching Zadorsky. Zelem swings the resulting corner onto the roof of the net. I think she was having a shot. 56 min Williams thinks United should give the ball back to Spurs from the corner. Zelem disagrees and swings in a cross that is headed away. 54 min United have been much better since half-time. Hanson wins a corner on the right, though Zadorsky thought she was fouled. Zelem takes a short corner with Batlle and swings in a deep cross that leads to a bit of chaos in the Spurs area. Williams’ attempted clearance hits Zadorsky in the face, and then she almost runs into the goalkeeper Korpela. Williams puts the ball behind for a corner, which allows Zadorksy to receive treatment. 50 min: Good save from Korpela! Toone drags a clever through pass to Hanson, whose curling shot from the edge of the area is pushed away by Korpela, falling to her right. 49 min At the other end, Kyah Simon shoots over from 30 yards. Spurs have changed their spine - Simon is playing as the No10, with Kit Graham moving back into midfield. Naz is now on the right wing and Ubogagu is on the left. 49 min Another long-range shot from Toone is comfortably held by Korpela. United have made a terrific start to the second half. 47 min It’s So-hyun Cho who has gone off for Spurs. 46 min Spurs begin the second half. United have a half chance after 26 seconds, with Galton heading wide of the far post. Moments later, Toone flips a shot from the edge of the D that is comfortably saved by Korpela. Spurs are making a half-time substitution. The lively Chioma Ubogagu is on for... I’ll get back to you on that. We’ve seen the goal a few times now. I guess you can argue that Tinja-Riikka Korpela shouldn’t have been beaten at the near post from such a tight angle, but it really was a ferocious hit. Peep peep! Manchester United lead through a barnstorming goal in injury-time from Alessia Russo. Not much else happened, in truth. Both teams worked hard but struggled to create chances until Russo took matters into her own hands. 45+4 min Williams’ downward header is hacked clear by Thorisdottir in the six-yard box. I think it was going wide but Thorisdottir took no chances. Russo received a short pass from Toone in the inside-right channel, 30 yards from goal. She nutmegged Zadorsky, ran straight through Neville’s challenge and then smashed a rising drive past Korpela from a tight angle. Pick that out! Alessia Russo puts United ahead with a spectacular goal! 45 min Five minutes of added time, mainly for all those concussion checks. 43 min Zelem’s free-kick hits the wall again. In fact it was blocked by one of her teammates. 42 min Zelem’s shot hits the wall - but the Spurs defender, Neville I think, is penalised for handball. It’s a pretty harsh decision, but it means Zelem can have another crack, this time from 20 yards. 41 min Free-kick to United 30 yards from goal. Zelem and Toone are over the ball... 38 min At the other end, Naz shoots over the bar from 25 yards. 37 min United appeal unsuccessfully for a penalty after an impromptu wrestling match between Thorisdottir and Williams. I think they both fouled each other, to be honest, and the referee scored it a draw. 36 min: Vital block by Percival! A throw-in from the right is collected superbly by Russo, who rolls Zadorsky and hammers a cross-shot that is pushed away by Korpela. Galton is first to the loose ball and hits a close-range shot that is deflected over by the bar by the stretching Percival. I’m pretty sure that was going in. 34 min Percival charges forward from right-back, onto a terrific pass by Clemaron. She knocks it past the last defender Thorisdottir but Earps comes from her line to claim. 31 min A decent cross from Simon is well claimed by Earps. 27 min Williams forces Thorisdottir into a mistake and then goes down on the edge of the United area. She wants a free-kick; the referee disagrees. 26 min Toone’s cross is backheaded over by Galton, who was offside anyway. Cho is okay to continue, since you asked. 23 min With Cho still being treated, Rehanne Skinner takes the opportunity to get the rest of the team in a huddle. 21 min So-hyun Cho is receiving treatment after wearing a shot from Russo in the face. 20 min This is a decent spell for United, with much of the game taking place in the Spurs half. Still no real chances for either side, mind. 15 min United can’t get Ella Toone on the ball. Spurs have had a bit of joy down the left through Jessica Naz, but that’s about it. 13 min Batlle’s overhit cross drifts behind for a goalkick. There’s been plenty of endeavour but not much quality, at least not yet. 11 min Graham is on her feet and looks okay to continue. 10 min Graham is down after a clash of heads with Ladd. She looks like she’s struggling - she tried to get her feet, then realised it wasn’t a good idea and sat back down. The physios are checking her for concussion. 8 min The tempo of the game is really good, both with and without the ball. Spurs, in particular, are giving United no time on the ball. 5 min The resulting corner, swung beyond the far post, is missed by Earps and cushioned back across the six-yard box on the volley by Williams. The ball hits a United defender and ricochets to safety. 4 min A neat dragback from Neville finds Naz, whose attempted cross almost swirls in at the near post. Earps moves smartly across her line to punch the ball behind. 3 min There’s a cracking atmosphere at the Hive, and both teams have made a fast start to the game. The weather isn’t quite as pleasant as I first thought - the sun is shining but it looks pretty darn blustery. 1 min Peep peep! Manchester United kick off from left to right. The players stroll into the winter sunshine. It’s a very pleasant day in north-west London, perfect for football. Probable formations Spurs (4-2-3-1) Korpela; Percival, Bartrip, Zadorsky, Neville; Clemaron, Cho; Simon, Graham, Naz; Williams. Substitutes: Heeps, Morgan, Green, Harrop, Tang, Ale, Addison, Ubogagu, Ayane. Manchester United (4-2-3-1) Earps; Batlle, Thorisdottir, Mannion, Blundell; Ladd, Zelem; Hanson, Toone, Galton; Russo. Substitutes: Baggaley, Harris, Boe Risa, Thomas, F Fuso, Smith, Jones, Staniforth. Spurs make four changes from their last league game, that 2-1 defeat at Brighton. Tinja-Riikka Korpela replaces the (presumably) injured Becky Spencer in goal. Jessica Naz, So-hyun Cho and Kyah Simon also come in for Chioma Ubogagu, Kerys Harrop and Rosella Ayane. One change for United from the 2-2 draw with City: Hayley Ladd replaces the injured Jackie Groenen. There might be a crack in the glass ceiling. Manchester City’s desperate start to the season means there is a realistic chance that the WSL’s seven-year triopoly will end this season. Arsenal and Chelsea will fight for the title, all things being equal, but third place is unexpectedbly up for grabs. Two of the main contenders, Tottenham Hotspur and Manchester United, meet today at the Hive Stadium. It’s a battle of the Skinners - Spurs’ head coach Rehanne against Manchester United’s Marc. We should have asked Mike Skinner to read this preamble. Spurs started the season with four straight wins, including a shock victory away to Manchester City, but were beaten at Brighton in their last league game four weeks ago. United have had a mixed start - three decent wins, a lively 2-2 draw against Manchester City and a hideous 6-1 defeat at home to Chelsea. A win for either team today would move them above Brighton and into third. That’s where they want to be in May - not just to break the glass ceiling, but to qualify for the Champions League. Kick off 12.15pm.Rehanne Skinner praised the “disciplined, organised, patient and committed” performance of her Tottenham team after a 55-yard free-kick in injury time from the New Zealand defender Ria Percival earned them a first point against Manchester United and moved them up to third in the Women’s Super League. Percival’s free-kick started off as a dangerous cross into the six-yard box but then bounced past the England keeper Mary Earps and cancelled out Alessia Russo’s goal on the stroke of half-time. “It was a good bit of skill to be fair, credit where credit is due,” said Skinner, the Spurs manager. “But the response following that was exceptional.” United, who are desperate to finish in the top three and earn Champions League football after narrowly missing out last season, had beaten Spurs each time the sides had met since the Red Devils launched a women’s team in 2018, scoring 20 goals and conceding only three in six games. It is a testament to the development of Tottenham under Skinner, the former England assistant manager who is approaching her first anniversary in north London, that the gap between these two sides is shrinking. At the end of last season there were 27 points separating fourth-placed United and Tottenham in eighth. Now, six games in, Spurs are two points ahead of United. “It’s huge progress. It shows what we’re trying to do here at the club,” Skinner said. The gap between the teams has not reduced solely as a result of improvement at Spurs but also in part due to a dip at United, as the club adapts to life without their former manager, Casey Stoney. United were unbeaten and top at Christmas last season, having dropped only two points, before they slid down the table after a growing injury list took its toll. Now, under Marc Skinner, who joined from Orlando Pride, they have dropped seven points – three in a bruising 6-1 home defeat by the champions, Chelsea, two in a 2-2 draw with Manchester City and now this. However, in a 12-team league each point dropped is more keenly felt. It took time for United to settle into the game at the Hive, where the sun shone but an icy wind swept through, but by the break they had the edge courtesy of Russo, who spent much of last season out with a hamstring injury that required surgery. Collecting a short pass from her fellow England international Ella Toone, Russo nutmegged the Canadian Olympic gold medallist Shelina Zadorsky, brushed off pressure from Ashleigh Neville and hammered a rising shot past the stand-in Spurs keeper, Tinja-Riikka Korpela, from a tight angle. “She’s just got this wonderful strike,” Marc Skinner said. “It’s almost like a scorpion’s pincer. She whips it so quickly that the goalkeeper doesn’t have time to move.” Despite a controlled performance from the visiting team, who were urged on by a vocal contingent of travelling fans who had braved the trip despite the 12.15pm kick-off, they were kept at bay by Spurs. Indeed, United were increasingly forced to rely on a set of fine saves from Earps, including tipping away a 30-yard effort from Kit Graham, to maintain their narrow lead. But in the fifth minute of added time Earps’s goal was finally breached by Percival’s bouncing free-kick to spark wild celebrations. “I didn’t really feel we were that threatened, barring a couple of shots from long distance with the wind –they used the elements well,” the United manager said. “They didn’t hurt us, barring that last moment. We’ve got to be better, when it’s controlled, at punishing the opponent and that’s what we’re going to continue to work on.”Saúl ‘Canelo’ Álvarez was so certain he would beat Caleb Plant and become the first undisputed world super-middleweight champion on Saturday night that he began the week wearing blue silk pyjamas as he stepped off his private jet when he landed in Las Vegas last Monday. The world’s best boxer then posted a photograph of himself in his fetching outfit and, on Twitter, he asked: “You ready Vegas?” By Saturday night a significant corner of this gaudy old gambling town had whipped itself into a frenzy and, in the process, proved it was more than ready for a particularly raucous Mexican party. Álvarez, as relaxed outside the ring all week as he was vicious between the ropes at the MGM Grand Arena, provided a fascinating study in contrast. He had spent most of Wednesday night playing poker with Eddie Hearn and Frank Smith, the head of boxing at Matchroom Sport, the Essex promotional company which had staged his previous fight, against Billy Joe Saunders, at the Dallas Cowboys Stadium in May. Apart from setting a new record attendance for an indoor boxing promotion in America, with 73,126 fans crammed into that arena, the fight had such a savage ending that Saunders was taken to hospital in an ambulance. His orbital bone had been shattered by an uppercut from Álvarez. A similar fate awaited the skilful and valiant Plant, who was knocked down heavily twice, and then counted out, before he was also taken to hospital in Las Vegas for a precautionary examination. In the 11th round a shuddering left hook from Álvarez made Plant buckle. He stumbled towards Álvarez who simply pushed him back so that he would have the space and leverage to land an uppercut almost as crushing as that which ruined Saunders. Plant was resilient enough to get up but he was hurt even more badly as Álvarez closed the show. It was the distressingly violent ending the Mexican had promised all week because the buildup between him and Plant had become embittered and personal. “Caleb is a good fighter,” Álvarez said in the ring afterwards. “I have a lot of respect for Caleb Plant. He was a difficult opponent with a lot of ability and I told him there’s no shame. We had a great fight tonight. He was making the fight pretty difficult, but Eddy Reynoso [Álvarez’s trainer] told me to just stick to the gameplan in the last two rounds. In the end, I got him. That’s the way it had to finish. He was already hurt and I went for the kill.” Yet the new undisputed champion spent a sizeable chunk of his post-fight press conference praising Plant’s performance and explaining why they had spent so long embracing and talking softly to each other in the centre of the ring after the bout. “I told him he was a great man and also that some day I hope he will have a great family as well. In the fight we have to hurt each other but at the end we’re all human and we want the best for each other.” There are shifting themes of brutality and vulnerability here – which are different to the sheer certainty of Álvarez before and during his every fight. Before he met Plant in the ring he had ordered two flamboyant jackets for him and Reynoso. Apart from the extravagant design and kitsch patterns, the jackets were most eye-catching because of the message stitched on their backs: Undisputed Super-Middleweight Champion 2021. They spoke of the conviction that Álvarez carries into the ring with him every time. After winning four world title bouts in the space of the last 11 months, Álvarez said that his body needs a break from the rigours of training and fighting with such intensity. He will only return to the ring next May and, while he stressed that he has yet to decide whether he will defend his super-middleweight titles or move up to the light-heavyweight division, the most compelling fight for Álvarez is obvious. Artur Beterbiev, the IBF and WBC light-heavyweight champion from Russia, is routinely described as a beast. But it is hard to believe that even Beterbiev could beat Álvarez who has already traded in such heavier terrain. Two years ago, in September 2019, Álvarez won the WBO light-heavyweight title when he beat Sergey Kovalev – another feared but now faded Russian who operates under the alias of Krusher. Álvarez was tested but he ended up stopping Kovalev before deciding to return to the super-middleweight bracket. “I love challenges and whatever comes my way I’ll be ready for it,” he stressed late on Saturday night. “I’m looking for the best fights but it’s always important to defend your titles. But I really don’t have a timescale for sitting down with my team and thinking about it. “Right now I’m just enjoying the moment. It was a truly historic night and I’m so proud to be part of it. At the moment I just want to enjoy this victory because it is really meaningful. We will then have time to think about the future.” It is part of the contradiction at the heart of Álvarez that, after the destructive way in which he ended the courageous challenge of Plant, he now will spend time pondering his next set of designer pyjamas. The harsh reality of the ring means that it cannot last forever but, at least for now, no one else in boxing is quite as relaxed, authoritative and distinctive as Saúl ‘Canelo’ Álvarez.It’s a gray afternoon, promising rain and with temperatures in the 50s, people have taken their jackets out of the closet. The streets of downtown Monroe, Georgia, a town of about 14,000 residents 45 miles due east of Atlanta, are quiet for a Saturday. It’s the county seat of Walton county and a monument honoring Confederate veterans stands tall outside the county courthouse. The soldier carved from granite looks across Broad Street to the town’s police station and is flanked to the south by the Walton Tribune’s office and a district office for representative Jody Hice. Hice, a Republican and former pastor and talkshow host, has announced his candidacy for Georgia’s next secretary of state and is one of three candidates for statewide offices in next year’s national elections who have received Donald Trump’s endorsement. Unsurprisingly, 74% of Walton county’s residents voted for Trump last November. And, although Monroe had the opportunity on 2 November to vote for Democrat Emilio Kelly as the town’s first Black mayor in its 200 years of history, residents three days before election day wanted to talk about what one man called the “disastrous” state of affairs they see in the US. (Kelly would go on to lose.) A year on from an election Trump lost, they believe they’re living in a country where Joe Biden was not legitimately elected, the government is paying people not to work and the state is contaminating children’s minds in public schools, while violating the rights of parents by insisting on teaching about racism that “happened a long time ago”. Some are pretty sure Covid was created in a lab, that “natural” immunity works fine and that vaccines could make you sicker. The situation is so dire that the current administration has “possibly damaged our country permanently”, said Patrick Graham, owner of the Tribune and author of a recent editorial titled, “Y’all Biden Folks Proud Yet?” None of the Trump supporters picking up pizza or visiting candle and antiques stores downtown believed the presidential vote tallies announced a year ago were accurate. They pointed to the allegations made prominent in Trump’s failed lawsuits across the country and in Georgia. “With everyone screaming, ‘Let’s Go Brandon’, there’s no way in the world he had 81m votes,” said Mark Kramer, a 68-year-old retiree who moved from nearby Lawrenceville a year ago. A couple of blocks south, Mike, a 53-year-old, self-described “good ol’ country boy” who didn’t want his last name known, had stopped at a gas station before heading home to watch the Atlanta Braves in the World Series. He believes the 2020 election was “fixed”. “I’m not a conspiracy person … but the more thought I put into it … not in the state of Georgia, I don’t believe it happened,” he said, referring to Biden winning the popular vote. “I don’t want to go so far as to say it was stolen, but ballots were trashed and a lot of things went wrong – including here in Georgia,” said Holland, a 54-year-old legal assistant at an Atlanta corporate law firm who was walking her dog Henry in the late afternoon drizzle. About half the people the Guardian spoke to in Monroe had been vaccinated, a figure in line with Georgia as a whole, consistently in the bottom of national rankings for vaccination rates. Graham, the Tribune editor, expressed concern over the “government forcing an experimental chemical into people’s bodies to keep them employed … If we keep going in this direction, it’s going to erode our freedoms.” “I don’t care for masks or vaccines,” said Jason Mealer, a 38-year-old McDonald’s employee. “We had Ebola here and that was deadly. Why do something about it now? I say, just live your life.” Retiree Mark Kramer said “there’s no ingredients you can read” in Covid vaccines, and that they are “poison – they’ll cause you more disease than anything else”. No one in his family had been vaccinated, he added, pointing to a restaurant nearby where they were waiting for him. Kramer didn’t want his picture taken; his son-in-law standing nearby explained their objections: “You have BLM, antifa – you have no idea what they might do” if a photograph were to appear online. The personal impacts of global or macroeconomic forces were also on people’s minds in downtown Monroe, without much interest in the global or macro sides of the equation. High gas prices, bottled supply chains, short staffing – consensus was, they are all due to the current administration. “I went to Ihop and their schedule had changed to 7am to 4pm due to staff shortages,” said Holland. “People in my own town are staying at home instead of working,” she said. “Biden is paying people to stay home.” The notion that radical changes have taken place in how students from kindergarten through grade 12 are taught about race and racism in US history – tagged as CRT or critical race theory – is not absent among Trump supporters in Monroe, where most Black and white residents live in separate parts of town to this day. CRT is an academic discipline that examines the ways in which racism operates in US laws and society. It is not taught in Georgia schools. “I don’t agree with what’s being taught in schools,” said Holland. “Parents should have a say, and teaching kids that white people are racist is the wrong thing. It’s almost like they want to recreate history,” she said. “Bringing in CRT is not what teaching is all about,” she said. “Preparing for college, for the real world, is what it’s about. Not about race, or anything else.” But race – and racism – is woven into Monroe’s history. A few miles from where Holland spoke, in 1946, a mob of several dozen white people shot and lynched two Black couples, by Moore’s Ford Bridge, which crosses the Appalachee River. The gruesome act of violence led a 17-year-old Martin Luther King Jr to write a letter to the Atlanta Journal-Constitution and President Harry Truman ordered the FBI to investigate. No one was found guilty. In an ongoing lawsuit, the 11th circuit US court of appeals ruled in March of last year that grand jury records from the case must remain sealed, keeping all of us from potentially learning what happened that day, and who was responsible. The Moore’s Ford lynching persists not just in the courts, and the memories of many; only two months ago, Monroe’s mayor, John Howard, presented a statement to the town’s city council publicly acknowledging it for the first time. One Black city council member refused to sign the statement, calling it a political stunt aimed at currying favor among the town’s Black voters in Howard’s bid for re-election. Should schools in Monroe teach children about the lynching at Moore’s Ford? If so, how? “That sort of history – though it was ghastly – should be taught,” said Jeff Blackstone, a 58-year-old who owns a company that installs hotel TV systems. “But – we have all learned from our mistakes. Although there are still some outliers who go back to the horrid ways of previous years, that should not be tolerated. And I … don’t agree with what the government is trying to do with our lives – like CRT – trying to teach us societal views.” “I think we need to move beyond Black, white and brown,” Blackstone said. “I hire and fire people and don’t judge by their color, but what they can do to help me.” James “Trae” Welborn III, associate professor of history at Georgia College &amp; State University, says racism and its expression have changed over time. “Racism now takes seemingly benign forms – talk of personal liberties, colorblindness … The idea is that racism is people running around in white hoods, burning white crosses. So you say, ‘I wouldn’t do that,’ and anything that falls short of that isn’t racism.” Welborn also pointed to the idea that racism happened a long time ago, the shared urgency among Trump supporters to “deny and marginalize the issue of race and racism, in favor of ‘the beacon of liberty and freedom’ narrative in American history”. A civil war historian, Welborn sees parallels between the views and rhetoric of Trump supporters and those of the Confederacy. “There’s even similar language – the threats of violence: ‘Come to the Capitol and give ’em what for,’” he said. Meanwhile, in the present, many Trump supporters in Georgia are following Garland Favorito and his organization, VoterGA, which has two lawsuits in state courts tied to last year’s elections. Favorito’s organization is 15 years old and works on election integrity – a term which was then used in public discourse in reference to issues such as how to employ audit methods that could truly verify elections results, and now is mostly used to underline any supposed evidence that Trump won. Until last year, VoterGA was primarily supported by progressive Democrats. Now, Favorito receives social media followers, and donations, from thousands of Trump supporters, in Georgia and elsewhere. As for last year’s election, he said, “the truth is, nobody knows who won. The secretary of state [in Georgia] can tell you he knows, but he has no idea.” This is because, he said, allegations of ballot stuffing have not been satisfactorily investigated by the state and a “forensic analysis” of election system servers in the state’s 159 counties has not been performed. The problem is that “nobody wants to get to the truth”. Asked about the process followed in Arizona, where a group called Cyber Ninjas took months to review election materials from the state’s largest county – and still concluded that Joe Biden won – Favorito said that the group’s work was never really completed, because the state didn’t supply them with everything they sought to examine. This means “we will never know who won in Arizona”, he said. Asked if it concerns him that many of the Trump supporters supporting his work in Georgia are the same people who hold positions such as the vaccine being “poison”, he said, “No, it doesn’t concern me to speak truth … Trump supporters have just as much a right to say Trump won as the secretary of state says Biden won, because we don’t know the truth.”Recorded together but released a year apart, Kid A (2000) and Amnesiac (2001) marked a huge departure from the increasingly baroque guitar-led anthems of Radiohead’s first three albums. The broadening of their palette to embrace Warp-influenced electronica, free jazz and krautrock abstractions initially baffled many (the Guardian awarded Kid A two stars, while Melody Maker’s reviewer was reduced to describing it as “post-bollocks”), but get past the glitchiness and the occasional moments of discord, and here were songs as affecting and powerful as those on OK Computer, just framed somewhat differently. The change in direction clearly coincided with a particularly fertile period for the band, because this 20th-anniversary box features a bonus disc of unreleased contemporaneous material together with the two original albums. Perhaps unsurprisingly, nothing here eclipses Pyramid Song or Optimistic. Instead there are intriguing alternate versions (including yet another iteration of Morning Bell, this time a lullaby-like instrumental take), half-finished sketches, the gorgeous string arrangement of How to Disappear Completely in isolation, foreshadowing Jonny Greenwood’s Oscar-nominated score for Phantom Thread – and two previously unreleased songs. The attractively loose-limbed If You Say the Word failed to make the cut at the time because its mellow aesthetic didn’t fit; the dread-filled Follow Me Around (a version of which appeared as far back as the 1998 documentary Meeting People Is Easy) is just Thom Yorke and acoustic guitar, and is decidedly uncomfortable listening. Together they comprise a fascinating companion piece for two classic albums.Standing on a Turkish beach ready to join a group of Syrian refugees on an inflatable boat bound for Greece, the photojournalist Güliz Vural’s biggest fear was that the people traffickers organising the illegal crossing would not let her onboard. If she had known that within a few hours of leaving Turkey she would be under arrest, accused of people trafficking herself, she would have thought twice about the journey. On that bright October morning the smugglers intimidated and humiliated the refugees who had gathered on the shore. “They were dangerous people, and rude,” Vural, 41, says through an interpreter. But they agreed that she could accompany the migrants and eventually they set off, nearly 50 people crammed on to a boat designed for 12, their fluorescent lifejackets a patchwork of colours against the clear sky. Soon they were in the cobalt blue water of the Aegean Sea, leaving Turkey’s Sivrice Bay behind, and heading for the Greek island of Lesbos. The families held on to each other tightly. Some rubbed and kissed prayer beads, before ritualistically tossing them overboard. They passed the 90-minute journey mostly in silence, except for occasionally throwing their hands into the air to pray. “Ya Allah!” they would cry out. “Oh God!” The migrants carry the inflatable boat they will travel in down to the beach. They had to leave all their possessions as they crammed themselves in. Nearly 50 Syrians made the crossing in a boat designed to carry 12 people, adding to the anxiety felt by the children in particular. Wearing a wetsuit and perched at the bow, not daring to move for fear of destabilising the boat, Vural spent the journey training her camera lens on the anxious faces of her fellow passengers. “I took photos non-stop. I wanted to document [their experience]. This was a moment in history.” After the outbreak of civil war in Syria in 2011, Vural spent three years documenting the lives of refugees who had fled the violence and destruction of their homeland. She met families living in temporary accommodation in Istanbul and travelled to the border town of Reyhanlı in the southern province of Hatay, near the Syrian border. The grief and pain she saw in the people she met resonated with her. “My Kurdish family were forced from south-east Turkey in 1977. Even though I was born in Istanbul and wasn’t a refugee, I felt a lack of belonging. We lost our culture; it felt like our Kurdish history had been deleted. When I saw how traumatic the Syrian refugees’ lives were, it reminded me of my own family’s trauma, and it really affected me.” Some of the refugees she encountered were happy to stay in Turkey, but others had dreams of making it to Europe. Stories of perilous sea crossings between Turkey and Greece began to emerge as waves of refugees risked their lives to start anew in the west. In total, more than a million migrants and refugees entered Europe in 2015, the vast majority via sea from Turkey. The tragic image of two-year-old Syrian Alan Kurdi lying face down on a Turkish beach after drowning on a sea crossing came to symbolise the desperate plight of people who dared to believe in a better future. Vural sat in the bow so she could take photographs of the migrants, hardly daring to move in case she upset the boat. More than 800 people died in just one year on the Turkey-Greece route that she documented. According to the International Organization for Migration, at least 3,700 migrants died trying to cross the Mediterranean in 2015 – more than 800 of them on the Turkey-Greece route that Vural documented. Since 2014, more than 22,000 migrants have been recorded as missing in the Mediterranean. It was the biggest migration crisis in memory and Vural felt she had to record it in some way. “I saw many journalists [reporting] events from the shore. I wanted to be on the boat with [the refugees].” In October 2015 she travelled to the Aegean coast, just south of Çanakkale, a known departure point for illegal crossings “My husband is a journalist and he understood why I had to go, but I didn’t tell my parents or my daughter. I didn’t want them to worry,” she says. The photojournalist Güliz Vural, centre left, crossed with the refugees from Sivrice Bay, Turkey, to the Greek island of Lesbos. Right, Vural being detained as a suspected people smuggler when the boat landed in Greece. The hazardous journey is expensive: the migrants Vural joined paid about £2,000 for each person. They were understandably anxious about the journey but Vural saw their courage too. They had to abandon their belongings when the smugglers ordered them to make space for everyone and squeeze in. They were also bidding farewell to their families and to the lives left behind. “They brought only the future with them,” says Vural. After arriving in Greece, the migrants were sent to a refugee camp for processing. But Vural was arrested by the Greek coastguard as a suspected people-smuggler. “For the first time in my life I was handcuffed, then I was taken to the judge, who said I would be tried for two serious crimes: human trafficking and entering the country illegally. They said I faced a jail term of 25 years.” She was shocked and scared but, she says, “I tried not to be regretful.” After calls to the Turkish embassy, letters from her newspaper and a €3,000 (£2,600) warranty, the authorities accepted that she was a journalist and released her five days later. But her confiscated phone was never returned to her so she was unable to contact the refugees whose number she had taken. But Vural had the photographs. She named the series Journey in the Death Boat but the Turkish media, which had splashed her photo on the front pages when she was arrested, showed no interest in the story of the refugees’ journey. Though she was never given a reason, Vural believes this is because the project criticises Turkey for allowing people smugglers to operate. ‘He spent the whole journey desperate and sad,’ Vural said of this nine-year-old boy. Relief and jubilation as the boat lands in Greece. Next week the project will go on display for the first time in the UK in an exhibition at Coventry Cathedral on the 10-12 November as part of the sixth Rising Global Peace Forum. The series is a tribute to her determination, and to the refugees who risked everything for a better life. Today, she thinks about the migrants often, wondering how many made it to their dream destination: Germany. Vural is now a migrant herself. In April she moved to the UK to set up her photography business, dismayed by the political climate in Turkey, where “opposition journalists no longer have a right to life,” she says, since the Turkish government cracked down on free speech after the 2016 failed coup attempt. She is acutely aware of the freedom she has to return to Turkey whenever she wishes. She plans to use that freedom to continue photographing those who have little chance of returning home. “I want to continue to work with refugees in the UK,” she says. The migrants passed the 90-minute journey mostly in silence, except for occasionally throwing their hands into the air to pray. “Ya Allah!” they would cry out. “Oh God!” • Journey in the Death Boat will be on show at Coventry Cathedral from 10-12 November. Güliz Vural will speak about her experiences on the opening day of the Rising Global Peace ForumA story about middle-aged male angst may not be especially original, but Pedro Mairal’s bittersweet meditation on love, sexual desire and ageing skewers the absurdity and the pain. His narrator is Lucas, a 44-year-old Argentinian writer, in debt and uninspired. He plays house-husband to his successful wife, Catalina, whom he suspectsof having an affair. The answer to all his troubles, Lucas believes, is the $15,000 advance from his Spanish publisher, which he plans to cash in a bank on a day trip to the Uruguayan capital Montevideo, and exchange for pesos on the black market back in Buenos Aires. Also in Montevideo on the day Lucas visits is Guerra, the seductive young woman he met at a literary festival. He arranges an afternoon tryst and behaves like a besotted teenager. Mairal is alert to the nuances of a midlife crisis – the loss of dignity, the abandonment of reason – and his descriptions of Lucas getting drunk, stoned and tattooed, while fixated on bedding Guerra, are pitch-perfect. Lucas admits his infatuation with Guerra was easy to sustain because he controlled the fantasy: “All those months I had you in my head and could rewind you, fast-forward you, pause you. I’d open and close the emails you’d send me.” Later, on the brink of having his desire fulfilled, he describes the thrill of escaping himself: “she ran her hand over the back of my neck, and it sent an electric charge all the way down my back. She reset me. I forgot everything, my name.” As we are frequently reminded, Mairal’s promiscuous protagonist is a writer (the narrative is confessional) and his thoughts never cease – he eavesdrops on others, questions his motives, ponders banalities. In a flash of self-awareness, Lucas observes: “I wanted to live. To see, to touch. To get inside reality. Get inside Guerra. Get into a war with my fucking imagination, my eternal invisible world.” By the end of this psychologically astute novella, translated sensitively by Jennifer Croft, Lucas recognises how quickly cracks in a relationship become chasms and that the key to happiness is acceptance. • The Woman from Uruguay by Pedro Mairal, translated by Jennifer Croft, is published by Bloomsbury (£12.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyA married lesbian couple are launching a landmark legal test case against a branch of the NHS fertility sector in England, claiming it discriminates against LGBT+ families. Influencers Megan Bacon-Evans, 34, and her wife Whitney, 33, from Windsor in Berkshire, have accused their clinical commissioning group (CCG), Frimley, of penalising them financially because of their sexuality. The couple, known to their 220,000 followers across YouTube, Instagram, Twitter, Facebook and TikTok as “Wegan”, shot to fame as bloggers and LGBT+ role models in 2009, featuring on the BBC’s Britain’s Relationship Secrets documentary and the reality bridal show Say Yes to the Dress. They started a petition for equal treatment in November last year after being “shocked and devastated” at the barriers to starting their family under the current rules, which are often dubbed a “gay tax”. Frimley states that same-sex female couples, and single women and people with wombs, must pay for 12 intrauterine insemination (IUI) or IVF treatments to “prove” medical infertility, costing an estimated £30,000 or more, before receiving NHS help. By contrast, the majority of cisgendered heterosexual couples, including Megan’s sister, are required only to try to conceive for two years. CCG Frimley, which covers 800,000 patients across Windsor and Maidenhead, Bracknell Forest, Slough, Surrey Heath, north-east Hampshire and Farnham, denies discrimination. On Monday, the campaigning legal firm Leigh Day, backed by Stonewall UK and the British Pregnancy Advisory Service (BPAS), will apply for a judicial review on behalf of the couple claiming discrimination under the Equality Act and articles eight and 14 of the European convention on human rights, in what could become a major test of the NHS’s treatment of LGBT+ families. If permission is granted, the case could be heard as soon as January in the high court’s administrative division. The couple, who have been married for four years, have so far spent £8,000 on donor sperm and mandatory pre-insemination tests. They have also launched a £10,000 fundraiser to cover potential legal fees, and called for support from the LGBT+ community. Megan Bacon-Evans said: “We’re doing this for every LGBT+ couple who had to give up on their hopes and dreams of creating a family. It’s time for discrimination to end and for there to be equal treatment with heterosexual couples in the healthcare system.” Anna Dews, of Leigh Day, told the Guardian that if the review was successful it could set a “powerful” precedent to challenge similar “unlawful” policies across the UK. “Fertility equality” campaigners claim healthcare policies penalise individuals from LGBT+ and low-income backgrounds, forcing many into debt or dangerous, unregulated online deals with men, risking sexual assault, disease and custody battles. The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (Nice), which sets guidelines for England, Northern Ireland and Wales, recommends three IVF cycles for patients under 40. Scotland operates separately. But a British Pregnancy Advisory Service (BPAS) report published in June found that England and Northern Ireland imposed “significant” financial barriers on LGBT+ families and single women. About 76% of England’s 106 CCGs are accused of a “postcode lottery”, requiring between three and 12 private treatments before offering the same help received by heterosexual couples. Northern Ireland requires four treatments, while Scotland and Wales impose no additional costs. “These restrictions amount to a tax on LGBT+ families, and the impact can be truly devastating,” said Marta Jansa Perez, the BPAS director of embryology. “The need for reform is urgent. We are proud to stand with Whitney and Megan in their fight for fertility equality, and we applaud their courage for publicly sharing such a personal struggle.” Eloise Stonborough, Stonewall’s associate director of policy and research, said it was also proud to support the couple, and added: “Current Nice fertility guidelines and variations in the services available through local clinical commissioning groups create unacceptable financial and practical barriers that disproportionately affect LGBTQ+ people, particularly lesbians and bi women.” While prices vary, a round of IUI, which is cheaper than IVF but with a lower success rate, can cost £3,000-£4,000 factoring in the procedure along with the purchase, shipping and storage of medically screened sperm from a bank, mandatory tests, drugs, travel and time off work, according to campaigners. In 2019, the then health secretary, Matt Hancock, promised a fertility sector review, claiming “sexual orientation should not be a factor in access to IVF”. CCG Frimley has been contacted for comment.Nicaragua’s authoritarian leaders, Daniel Ortega and Rosario Murillo, are poised to extend their rule over the crisis-hit Central America country with an election that opponents and much of the international community have denounced as a charade. Ortega, the Sandinista rebel who led Nicaragua during the 1980s and has governed continuously since 2007, will seek an unprecedented fourth consecutive term in Sunday’s contest, which follows a ruthless six-month political crackdown on rivals. Seven presidential contenders have been thrown in jail or placed under house arrest since May, while other leading critics have fled to Costa Rica, the US and Europe, and foreign journalists have been barred from the country. In recent weeks, reporters from CNN, Le Monde, New York Times, NPR, Washington Post and the Honduran newspaper El Heraldo have all been prevented from entering Nicaragua to witness proceedings. On Sunday night the US president Joe Biden denounced what he called “a pantomime election that was neither free nor fair, and most certainly not democratic”. “Long unpopular and now without a democratic mandate, the Ortega and Murillo family now rule Nicaragua as autocrats, no different from the Somoza family that Ortega and the Sandinistas fought four decades ago,” Biden added in a statement. Tiziano Breda, a Central America specialist at Crisis Group, said Ortega’s assault on Nicaragua’s beleaguered opposition meant there was little doubt over the election result, which is expected to be announced in the early hours of Monday. “[Ortega losing] would be quite a plot twist – but I don’t see it happening,” said Breda, predicting that the former leftwing guerrilla, who helped rescue Nicaragua from dictatorship in the 1970s, would secure between 60% and 70% of the vote. Breda believed the repression was driven largely by Ortega’s fear of losing power and being prosecuted for a deadly 2018 crackdown on student-led protests in which hundreds were killed. “He has shown that political survival outweighs any possible internal or external pressure. It was a matter of life or death for him to ensure re-election on Sunday,” Breda said. Jesús Tefel, an exiled political activist who fled to Costa Rica in July after a succession of allies were jailed, described the election as a “farce” and urged the international community to do more to help re-establish Nicaragua’s battered democracy. “What we have now in Nicaragua is a dictator and a dictatorial system, which is trampling over every single one of our rights. It’s like the perfect dictatorship,” he said of Ortega and Murillo, his powerful vice-president and wife. “This is an awful precedent for global democracy. The message it sends is that you can be a dictator and there are no consequences. This will encourage other dictators – it will encourage the enemies of democracy,” said Tefel, a leader from the opposition group Unidad Nacional Azul y Blanca (Unab). Zoilamérica Ortega Murillo, Ortega’s estranged stepdaughter, condemned the election as “an absurdity, a stitch-up and a form of virtual reality”. “A war on truth is under way,” Ortega Murillo, who cut ties with Nicaragua’s leaders in 1998 after accusing Ortega of sexual abuse, said during an interview in Costa Rica where she also lives in exile. Speaking to the Spanish magazine Alfa y Omega, Ortega’s former vice-president, the exiled writer and one-time Sandinista Sergio Ramírez, said: “Daniel Ortega will decide the number of votes he secures.” Ortega and Murillo have defended the wave of detentions, claiming the targets were criminals guilty of crimes “against the homeland” and seeking to topple their Sandinista administration with a foreign-backed coup. In a rambling televised address on Sunday afternoon, Ortega said Nicaraguan voters had a choice between the peace and economic stability he offered and the “terrorism, confrontation and war” promoted by his opponents. “This is a historic battle,” Ortega declared, claiming the overwhelming majority of Nicaraguans wanted the former. Despite such hardline rhetoric, Breda suspected Nicaragua’s leaders would change tack after the election. So far, Ortega has been focused on guaranteeing victory by bullying the opposition into submission. After securing a fourth term, Breda predicted he would try to calm the situation and placate the international community by proposing a “dialogue” with members of the opposition and business community. “I expect a shift in tactics, because they will serve a different goal after 7 November,” Breda said. “I think he’s aware that he will need to seek a governability settlement with some sectors which are crucial for the functioning of the state and for the overall economic stability of the country.” Thousands of exiled Nicaraguans were expected to march through the streets of Costa Rica’s capital, San José, on Sunday to protest against what many see as Nicaragua’s transformation into a police state. Ana Quirós, a feminist campaigner and former Sandinista who was among the organisers, said she was convinced that sooner rather than later Nicaragua would experience political change. “I have patience, I have hope and I have confidence,” said Quirós who was stripped of her Nicaraguan nationality and deported for backing the failed 2018 rebellion. Quirós admitted unity was a challenge given the ideological and personal differences between Ortega’s foes. “I have sat down with people who I spent so many years battling, people from the right, people who are anti-abortion,” she said. “But before we can discuss our differences we need to resolve this situation and that means first of all securing the release of the political prisoners.” Ortega and Murillo have shrugged off criticism of the election. Asked to comment claims of irregularities, Nicaragua’s vice-president reportedly sent a one-word email to the Washington Post: “Gracias!”British shoppers may face shortages of some of their favourite crisps until the end of the month after a botched computer upgrade disrupted the world’s biggest crisp factory. Walkers has been forced to prioritise its most popular varieties – including cheese and onion, ready salted and salt and vinegar, as well as Quavers and Wotsits – after the glitch forced it to slow production. A spokesperson said “more niche” varieties had been slowed. “A recent IT system upgrade has disrupted the supply of some of our products. Our sites are still making crisps and snacks but at a reduced scale,” a Walkers spokesperson said. “We’re doing everything we can to increase production and get people’s favourites back on shelves. We’re very sorry for the inconvenience caused.” The IT issue has added to the problems faced by the British food industry – along with most other manufacturers – during months of delays and disruption caused by the pandemic. Tesco has been using cardboard cutouts of fruit, vegetables and other groceries to fill gaps on shelves because of supply problems. Shoppers have spotted fake carrots in Fakenham, cardboard asparagus in London, pictures of oranges and grapes in Milton Keynes and 2D washing liquid bottles in Cambridge. Sainsbury’s has also used outline drawings of packaging to fill shelves. In August, McDonald’s blamed supply chain problems when it was forced to pull milkshakes from its menus in Great Britain. The chicken restaurant Nando’s had to close shops because of poultry shortages, and rival chain KFC had to cut some items from its menus. Some parts of the food industry have also said they have suffered from worker shortages caused by the coronavirus pandemic and Brexit, with European workers facing more hurdles to work in the UK. UK farms have in the last month been forced to slaughter thousands of healthy pigs themselves – meaning they are not suitable for sale for meat – because of a shortage of abattoir workers. Some meat processors have also resorted to shipping carcasses to the EU to be butchered, before bringing them back to sell in the UK. Beyond the food industry, companies have warned of possible future shortages of products ranging from fake tan to toys, with issues ranging from power cuts in China to shortages of container space and lorry drivers once products reach the UK. Supply shortages have reached their worst levels since the mid-1970s, according to surveys by the Confederation of British Industry, the UK’s biggest business lobby group. The supply chain problems have highlighted rich economies’ reliance on “just-in-time” deliveries and automated processes. Walkers’ main crisp factory in Leicester is usually able to churn out as many as 5m bags a day, and production normally only stops on Christmas Day, Boxing Day and New Year’s Day, according to the Leicester Mercury. Walkers, which is owned by the US food and drink conglomerate PepsiCo, is usually relatively profitable. Accounts from 2020 showed profits at Walkers of £38m from revenues of £265m despite higher health and safety costs because of the pandemic.Kathryn Stone, parliament’s sleaze watchdog, has had her protection ramped up amid a rise in abuse against the backdrop of the Owen Paterson lobbying scandal. MPs have previously sought to undermine the position of the parliamentary commissioner for standards after her inquiries into the finances of Boris Johnson. But messages of abuse targeted at her and her office reached a peak last week after the business secretary called on her to consider her position, it is understood. Kwasi Kwarteng’s comment came before a government U-turn after Tory MPs voted to overturn her investigation into lobbying breaches by Paterson, who resigned as a Conservative backbench MP last week. Steps have been taken to step up security for Stone after online abuse, the Guardian understands. On Sunday, a former chair of the committee for standards in public life said the government’s actions were putting Stone in harm’s way. Party leaders needed to do more to publicly back and support Stone, Sir Alistair Graham told Times Radio. “She is a public servant who has been there for a number of years who is now doing an excellent job in the House of Commons. The last thing she needs are threats which are seeking to place undue pressure on her,” he said. “Of course the worry has been that over the past 72 hours or so, the real story behind [the row surrounding] Owen Paterson is not [about his] safeguarding his position but trying to find a way to push Kathryn Stone out of her job and that is of course a shocking state of affairs.” Asked whether Graham blamed the government for doing things that seemingly put her in harms way, he said: “Yes, I do. “The fact that they have sought to whip their Conservative members of parliament to not allow the recommendation from the House of Commons standards committee to suspend Owen Paterson, and then an amendment which was really about abolishing the standards regime in the House of Commons, was a dreadful manoeuvre. “Many people suspect it was about getting Kathryn Stone out because she may well be carrying out further investigations regarding sleaze accusations relating to the prime minister.” The environment secretary, George Eustice, was asked on BBC One’s The Andrew Marr Show for his response to reports of Stone receiving hate mail for doing her job. Eustice did not comment on the abuse but reiterated that the government had been seeking to create an appeals process for MPs accused of breaches.Voters in Virginia and New Jersey this week sounded a serious warning to Democrats, key players in the Biden administration and Congress said on Sunday: the party needs to get things done or it faces disaster in midterm elections next year. The energy secretary, Jennifer Granholm, said “we thank God” something was done on Friday night: a $1tn infrastructure deal sent to Joe Biden’s desk by the House. Three days after Democrats lost a race for governor in one state Biden won comfortably and barely held the other, House centrists and progressives managed to come together, with some Republican support. Biden hailed a “monumental step forward” and a “blue-collar blueprint to rebuild America”. He also said “the one message that came across” in Virginia and New Jersey was: “Get something done.” Ron Klain, the White House chief of staff, echoed his boss, telling NBC’s Meet the Press the American people “wanted to see more action in Washington. They wanted to see things move more quickly, and three days later, Congress responded.” But Democrats punted again on the second half of the president’s domestic agenda, the 10-year, $1.75tn Build Back Better package to boost health and social care and to seek to mitigate the impact of the climate crisis. Granholm told CNN’s State of the Union: “I think that the Democrats in the House got the message very loud and clear. Pass the bill and pass the second part too, because these contain things that everyday people care about. “The governor of Michigan, Gretchen Whitmer, ran on the phrase ‘Fix the damn roads’. And that’s what this bill does. It fixes the damn roads. It fixes the bridges. It gets broadband to real people. It fixes your homes so that they’re not leaking energy.” Granholm also said the infrastructure bill did not help with childcare and other “costs of living for real people”. That, she said, is the job of Build Back Better, which now awaits analysis by the Congressional Budget Office, a measure demanded by centrists. The New Jersey centrist Josh Gottheimer told CNN he and his allies wanted to make sure the bill was “fiscally responsible and paid for”. He said he was confident it would pass but dodged when asked repeatedly if his group would vote no if CBO analysis differed from White House and congressional estimates. In New Jersey, the Democratic governor, Phil Murphy, won by an unexpectedly narrow margin. Taking a page from Donald Trump’s playbook, the Republican Jack Ciattarelli has refused to concede. In Virginia, Terry McAuliffe, a former governor, suffered a devastating defeat by Glenn Youngkin, a businessman who kept Trump at arm’s length while campaigning on culture war issues including the place of race in education. Asked if Youngkin could have been beaten had major legislation been passed in Washington before election day, Mark Warner, a Democratic senator from Virginia, told CNN: “I wish the House would have moved earlier.” Warner also said voters needed to be told what was in the Biden bills, rather than what they cost. The bills’ cost is regularly condemned by Republicans – and by Joe Manchin, the West Virginia Democrat who remains a key obstacle in the Senate. The White House adviser Cedric Richmond told Fox News Sunday that Manchin was “a lot more conservative and everybody sees that but he’s been a willing partner to come to the table with constructive dialogue. And we’re confident in where we will go with our Build Back Better framework. We’re optimistic we’re going to get it done. And the truth is we need to get it done.” Richmond also rejected Republican claims that increased spending will add to inflation. Granholm said the administration saw current inflation as “transitory”. Larry Hogan, the governor of Maryland and a Republican moderate with presidential ambitions, told CNN Biden had “nearly snatched defeat from the jaws of victory”. The infrastructure bill “should have been an overwhelming win back in August”, Hogan said. “And I think [Biden] should not have let it get sidetracked by the progressives in the House. I think that was bad for Joe Biden. I think that was reflected in the election results because I think they misread the mandate. “You know, Joe Biden won a very narrow election by winning swing voters and they’re not where the progressive caucus is, I can assure you, and the vast majority of Americans are not for the second bill.” Progressives contend otherwise. In tweets on Saturday, the Washington state congresswoman Pramila Jayapal highlighted news from the Cop26 climate summit in Glasgow and said: “This is EXACTLY why we need the Build Back Better Act. We will deliver climate action – for our communities, future generations, and our planet.” She also retweeted the Rev William Barber, the leader of the Poor People’s Campaign. He said: “My prayer is that Congress will keep its word and vote to pass Build Back Better, because if not, that political betrayal will be a political crime and integrity breach.” Such a failure, Barber said, “would abandon over 140 million poor and low-wealth people who make up 43% of the nation and 30% of the voting population”. That, he said, “could split the Democratic party in ways that may be irreparable”.Lily: A Tale of Revenge Rose Tremain Chatto and Windus, £18.99, pp288 The enthralling heroine of Tremain’s 16th novel is orphan Lily Mortimer, abandoned as a baby in 1850 at the gates of a park. Taken to the London Foundling hospital, she experiences abuse and cruelty, leading her to commit an avenging crime years later. Tremain evokes Victorian London with visceral intensity in a gripping and deeply humane novel exploring themes of rejection, poverty, guilt and redemption. On Getting Better Adam Phillips Penguin, £6.99, pp176 (paperback) Earlier this year, the Freudian psychoanalyst and literary critic published On Wanting to Change, an extended essay on how psychotherapy – and the conversations it facilitates – can create potential for genuine change. On Getting Better, a companion volume, questions what we really mean when we talk about improving our internal lives and how it always begins in an idealised version of ourselves. Philips is an erudite and highly engaging writer: how, he asks, can we manage change when it “precipitates us into an unpredictable future?” The Walker: On Finding and Losing Yourself in the Modern City Matthew Beaumont Verso, £9.99, pp336 In a series of intriguingly entitled essays, Beaumont investigates the literature and experience of city walking. We learn that Dickens wandered through the night in the aftermath of his father’s death to cure both his insomnia and grief, while the works of writers including HG Wells, GK Chesterton and Georges Bataille are analysed for their pedestrian adventures. There are scant few female writers featured – only Virginia Woolf is granted significant coverage – in an otherwise well-researched work of literary criticism. • To order Lily: A Tale of Revenge, On Getting Better or The Walker go to guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply“Two-hundred pelicans breeding, 20 whiskered terns, 100 grey teal, 30 black swans, one little pied cormorant …” Richard Kingsford, a veteran ecologist, is rattling off the waterbirds he’s spotting below. He clutches his voice recorder closely to overcome the engine noise as our Cessna banks steeply, tracking the shoreline of Lake Brewster, a large lake in central-west New South Wales. John Porter, a NSW government scientist and fellow veteran bird counter, does the same, dictating the numbers and bird species he glimpses on the starboard side – while giving directions to pilot James Barkell – as we fly at 185kmh and barely 30m above the water. We’re on a three-day trip that is part of the annual waterbird survey, now in its 39th year. One of the world’s longest continuous bird counts, it’s also among the largest, spanning 2.7m square km – 11 times the size of UK or six times California. After the second circuit of the water body to provide a routine counting check, Kingsford asks Barkell to fly over the main pelican breeding colony near the lake’s middle so he can film it. “I’m going to have to gun it” we hear Barkell say in our headphones. “There’s a storm cell sitting over it.” After weathering the buffeting, we navigate between low ranges of hills and over verdant fields on the way to our next destination, Lake Cargelligo. Porter declares Brewster a success story for birds: “There were absolutely boatloads”. Lake Cowal, another big lake that was only beginning to fill earlier this year, reveals other sizeable breeding colonies, including straw-necked and white ibises. “The only thing missing was glossies,” Kingsford says, referring to the glossy ibis variety. “I did see some but they weren’t breeding,” Porter responds. “That gives me a thrill, that kind of thing,” Kingsford adds, picking up his laptop to make notes and communicate with home base back in Sydney. The excitement is still there for Kingsford even on his 36th consecutive year on the eastern Australia waterbird survey. Porter has notched up almost 30 years. For Barkell, it’s just his second year out, steering the NSW parks service plane along the east-west flight bands that will take in as many as 2,000 wetlands in a wet year such as this. His usual job is piloting Airbus A330s to and from Asia and the US west coast that are 60 times heavier than our Cessna Caravan, but far more automated. “Pull up, pull up” are warnings we hear regularly as we zero in on our targets. Barkell says he started out mustering cattle at the 1m-hectare Helen Springs station in the Northern Territory. He flew so low to scare bulls from under trees that his plane “had to climb the fences” and he would have to pull grass from the wheel struts, the 39-year-old pilot says, somewhat apocryphally. “It’s hours of boredom broken up by minutes of sheer terror,” the pilot jokes about the jetliners as we walk to breakfast in Deniliquin, our Riverina base for a night. “Whereas this is hours of terror separated by minutes of boredom.” Our plane – and the four of us on board – gets a decent workout. Though ranking only “four on the vomitometer”, according to Porter, day one in the air involves many tight turns, and has your correspondent grateful for three “Sic-Sacs”. Day two (and two sick bags) involves spells of severe buffeting, along with steep turns, ad nauseum, but by day three, this hanger-on is hanging on. “It’s exhausting. We’re putting in eight-hour days [in the air], flying at low levels in conditions like this at times,” Barkell says as a rainstorm sweeps across Dubbo airport where we are preparing for the final leg back to Sydney. Piloting involves constant adjustments of rudders, with Barkell watching out for changing wind patterns over the water that might warn him of sudden shifts. Barkell reckons he can identify a range of birds, like pelicans, grey teals and other ducks. “I sort of liken it to going on a six-week geography field trip.” For Kingsford and Porter, it’s a tiring but vital task to keep tabs on the health of ecosystems stretching from the Lake Eyre basin (when there’s water) in the Red Centre to Queensland’s rainforests and the lakes at the end of the Murray River. As waterbird species feast on different food – from aquatic vegetation to invertebrates and fish – their numbers offer a guide to the health of the rivers and lakes. Bird tallying of more than 50 species can only be an approximation and requires skills that can be honed by computer simulations such as Wildlife Counts. The birds’ colour, shape and size are among identifying cues, as are their flight patterns when they are disturbed by the plane. “Small grebes dive and so you just see a splash often, although not aways,” Kingsford says, listing some of the tricky ones to spy. “Separating out the little black from the great cormorants, and the little pied from the large pied [cormorants] is a challenge,” he says. “Then there are the Australasian shoveler, which are rare and can look like a black duck.” The way the birds scatter, often at different heights and directions, in one reason why drones aren’t yet a suitable substitute. “The human is eye is so much better at changing its focal length,” Kingsford says. Typically, the startled birds react too slowly to fly near us with our 46m target cruising height, although our first day collected one unfortunate avian on the windscreen. It was unlikely to be a waterbird, Porter says after we land in dusty Broken Hill. The daily results are fed back to the University of NSW, where they are processed by a team and provided to the state and federal agencies such as the Murray Darling Basin Authority that finance the research. Covid-forced delays getting into Queensland and South Australia mean this year’s flights won’t be completed until mid-December, with the lingering possibility of last-minute cancellations disrupting plans. The past two wet years after a severe drought mean conditions are primed for a major breeding event, but so far the surveyors haven’t seen one. “It’s looking really encouraging,” Kingsford says after we land back at Bankstown, in Sydney’s west. “There’s water in the Paroo, there’s water in a bit of the Darling and the Macquarie and a little bit in the Gwydir [rivers], but there’s not a massive flood” that would spark mass breeding. Longer term, though the trend is clear, with about a 70% decline in numbers since the survey began as human-made dams and diversions have proliferated. “We’ve got places where at one point there were hardly any of these private storages, and they are sort of mushrooming along the river systems,” he says. “When you start taking that water out of the system, you’ve got the inevitable consequences of less habitat for these water birds to breed and build up in numbers.” Climate change, with its likely greater flux between extremes of dry and wet,“is like an extra veneer of impact on the top,” Kingsford says. Nearing 63, the professor – who runs UNSW’s Centre for Ecosystem Science among many other roles – isn’t about to give up his annual surveys just yet. It’s unclear if other capable bird counters able to withstand turbulence will take over when he does. “It’s something my wife has asked me every year for the past 36 years,” he laughs, adding “certainly [there’s] at least three or four, or maybe a few more than that.”A cabinet minister has triggered a backlash from Conservative MPs by dismissing the Owen Paterson lobbying and vote debacle as a “storm in a teacup”. The environment secretary, George Eustice, made the claim despite fury among his party’s MPs about being forced to vote for an ultimately doomed attempt to save Paterson from disciplinary action. An Opinium poll for the Observer shows ratings for Boris Johnson and his party down significantly since last weekend. Eustice spoke as Labour demanded the resignation of Jacob Rees-Mogg, the leader of the the Commons, over his handling of the matter, and Keir Starmer declared the prime minister incapable of cleaning up politics because he was “in the sewer with his troops”. In an interview with Sky’s Trevor Phillips on Sunday, Eustice sought to make light of what happened last week, saying: “I think what we’ve seen is a sort of Westminster storm in a teacup, if I may say so.” Eustice said the government made a “mistake” in ordering its MPs to vote for an amendment that combined shelving the proposed punishment for Paterson, a Tory former cabinet minister found to have broken the rules banning paid lobbying, with a plan to review the way the standards rules for MPs are enforced generally. But he claimed there was widespread support for introducing a new right of appeal into the system. Robert Largan, the Conservative MP for High Peak in Derbyshire, said the minister was mistaken to try to minimise the scandal. “I think a prime minister showing loyalty to people is a good individual quality but in my view, I think they got this wrong,” Largan told Times Radio. The backbencher, who missed the vote on Wednesday but said he would have voted to suspend Paterson if he had been there, added: “I don’t think it’s very helpful to say: ‘Oh, it’s just a storm in a teacup.’ In my view, this was something that they’ve got badly wrong and they need to fix it.” Largan also said that, having read the standards committee report, he thought it was “very clear” Paterson had broken the rules. Tobias Ellwood, a Conservative former minister and chair of the Commons defence committee, also dismissed claims that No 10’s error was a trivial one, telling the BBC’s World at One that it had been “a dark week for British democracy”. He said that, taking into account other factors such as the government’s willingness to disregard international law, there was a “pattern of behaviour” on display and Johnson needed to think about his legacy. Ellwood, who also abstained in the vote on Wednesday, continued: “I think we have lost our way and we need to find our moral compass and get back to what the British people want us to do – good policy, good governance, leadership, statecraft. That’s what is needed at the moment rather than manipulating the system for our own survival.” The Liberal Democrat leader, Ed Davey, was campaigning in Paterson’s former seat on Sunday. At a rally in Whitchurch, Davey said: “People in North Shropshire, including many lifelong Conservative voters, are sick of having their concerns ignored and being taken for granted.” The Tories held the seat with a majority of almost 23,000 in 2019, with Labour second and the Lib Dems third. Starmer claimed the episode was illustrative of Johnson’s approach to probity. The Labour leader told the BBC’s Andrew Marr: “Boris Johnson is the prime minister who is leading his troops through the sewer – he’s up to his neck in this. “I don’t think you or anybody else could with a straight face say this prime minister is the man to clean up politics and to have the highest standards in public life because he is in the sewer with his troops.” Starmer suggested Johnson wanted to weaken the Commons standards regime because he was worried his own conduct would be criticised again. He released a letter he sent on Saturday to the House of Lords appointments commission asking it to confirm that it would oppose any attempt by Johnson to offer Paterson a peerage – a move No 10 appeared to rule out the next day. Labour also singled out Rees-Mogg for particular criticism. The shadow leader of the Commons, Thangam Debbonaire, said his position had become untenable because of the role he played in getting Conservative MPs to vote for a motion that would spare Paterson the proposed 30-day suspension . In an interview with Sky’s Trevor Phillips on Sunday, Debbonaire said: “If I was him, I would be considering my position, and that’s what I think he should do today.” Asked whether she was saying Rees-Mogg should resign, Debbonaire replied: “I think his position is untenable, yes.” Debbonaire said that despite the government U-turn on Thursday, Rees-Mogg had left the Commons “in a state of chaos”. She said the motion passed on Wednesday declining to back the standards committee report into Paterson still applied, and that the government should let MPs vote to rescind it before the Commons begins a short recess on Wednesday. • This story was amended on 7 November 2021. A previous version mistakenly said that Robert Largan abstained in Wednesday’s vote.Thank you very much for joining me for this great occasion. Here is a match report from the lovely Nick Ames. Join the main man Rob Smyth for West Ham v Liverpool. Ranieri is having a good old fashioned moan at Arteta about the Arsenal goal, claiming the Gunners should have given them the ball back for some reason or other. The other results: Everton 0-0 Spurs Leeds 1-1 Leicester Arsenal were deserved winners but Watford certainly made it into a game, only to struggle creating any real chances. The gap in scoreline would have been bigger if it wasn’t for Foster, too, who comes out of this game with a great deal of credit. Foster was not as busy as Kevin Friend who spent most of the match whistling for fouls. 90+4 mins: Martinelli is on for the final few moments. Saka off. Watford bring on Fletcher for Cathcart. 90+2 mins: Saka whips in a corner, which is flicked on at the near post. Eventually the ball finds Elneny who lays it off to an onrushing Lokonga to thwack towards goal from 20 yards but it is straight at Foster who fists away. 90 mins: Six minutes added on! 89 mins: It’s a second yellow for the Watford man who kicks Tavares up in the air on the edge of Hornets’ box. 88 mins: Ramsdale comes to claim a Hernandez cross to end the danger. Watford have enjoyed some decent pressure without a goal. 86 mins: Ramsdale comes out of his net thinking he will collect a ball over the top inside the box, only the angle means it does not make it into the area, forcing the goalkeeper to go with his feet but the ball and King evade him, gifting the Norwegian a shot at an empty goal; the angle is too right and he can only find the sidenetting. 84 mins: Hernandez finds King in the box, he takes a touch and tries to turn but he cannot roll the defender, allowing Ramsdale to pounce on the ball. Elsewhere that Lookman goal was ruled out by VAR, so it is still 1-1. 82 mins: Watford a looking to get the ball into the channels for the likes of Sarr and Hernandez to use their pace. Alas, it is not working. “If Arsenal finish off this 1-nil lead over Watford,” says the wonderfully named Jeff Necessary, “they’ll be in fifth place (and thus Europe) in the table with a goal difference of 0. I’d be curious if there was ever a team qualify for Europe out of the Prem with a goal difference that poor.” One for The Knowledge. 80 mins: Gabriel takes a poor touch and then almost kicks Joao Pedro in the head, costing him a yellow card. 78 mins: Odegaard pings a perfect pass across the pitch to Tavares who takes a touch and then chips a cross into the box but Watford have the bodies there to clear. 76 mins: Mary Waltz reports on Everton v Spurs: “Neither team has come close to scoring but there has been lot’s of diving, shameless simulation, and petty squabbles with the officials.” 74 mins: NO GOAL! Saka slips a pass to Odegaard, who spins inside the box and sends a shot across goal but it is Aubameyang who slides the ball home, although the striker is a yard offside, so the flag goes up. Hernandez is on for Dennis. 72 mins: Rose whips in a free-kick from the right but his delivery is poor and a defender heads clear. The good news for Rose is that he has lasted 72 minutes on the pitch, which is a surprise to everyone. 70 mins: Odegaard replaces Lacazette who gets a standing ovation. Maybe he will get a new contract after all ... 68 mins: Saka whips in a ball from deep on the right for Aubameyang to attack but it is inches ahead of the striker who cannot get a toe on it, allowing Foster to claim. “Still 0-0 at Goodison,” Richard Harris points out. “If 5 successive defeats is a sackable offence Rafa is on 3 so lose this and he could be on his way to Villa. Thomas Frank is on 4 with Brentford and Ole has 4 in 5 ...” Everton’s problems are higher up, I feel. 66 mins: It is not vintage stuff from Arsenal but their defence does not look flustered by anything Watford throw at them, a sign of the improvements made in recent weeks by the Gunners backline. White goes down and moans about an arm from Joao Pedro. Plenty of needle here. 64 mins: Joao Pedro looks to have slotted in behind King which should give the Norwegian more support, as he has looked very isolated throughout the match. 62 mins: King is on the floor as the foul count for the match reaches 3,839,393. He is on the floor after running into Gabriel. It does not look like much contact was made, so I do not know why he is in so much agony. Joao Pedro is on for Tufan. 60 mins: It took three minutes for play to restart after the goal. Watford need to pick themselves up and get back into the game. Elsewhere ... “Over at Elland Road,” says JR, “Jack Harrison has attempted to score from one yard out but missed. You should check it out later. Miss of the season candidate for sure. Considering the way both teams are defending (especially Leeds) there’s no possible way that game is finishing 1-1.” 58 mins: While Arsenal were scoring, Sarr was on the deck after running into a Maitland-Niles. He receives plenty of treatment and has a little moan at the referee but it is not a foul. White picks up a loose ball and drives through the Watford midfield until he is tackled on the edge of the box by Sissoko but the ball ends up at the feet of Smith Rowe and he slots it into the corner from 18 yards. 55 mins: Tavares hits a dangerous cross from the left but it goes over everyone and ends up with Saka on the right, who lays it off to Tomiyasu to hit first time only to see his shot bounce off a Hornet head. Sissoko is booked for taking down Saka. Lots of bookings for everyone not called Danny Rose. 53 mins: Saka is the latest to try and pick out Smith Rowe but his pass has a little too much on and it bounces into Foster’s arms. Aubameyang is the latest man to be cautioned for a foul on Femenia. Sissoko picks out Dennis inside the box, he takes a half decent first touch but follows it up by kicking the ball into the ground, sending it dribbling wide. 51 mins: Lacazette spins away from Sissoko and makes his way into the box, before trying to play in Smith Rowe but Nkoulou reads the danger and clears. 49 mins: Once again, Arsenal have started brighter. Lokonga has tested Foster but an opener still eludes the hosts. 47 mins: Some Danny Rose chat ... “Did Rose’s attempted challenge for the penalty remind anyone else of that photo of Boris Johnson playing rugby with the school kid or just me?” asks Thomas Stratford. “Now also craving a peppermint tea… thanks for that btw, haha. Enjoy!” A fine tea it is. “Hey Will,” says David Singleton, “all I have to go on is your minute by minute, so can you explain how Rose is still on the pitch nevermind not even booked yet?” Poor refereeing, mainly. Here we go again! Got myself a peppermint tea, so I am pretty pumped for the second half. Other scores ... Everton 0-0 Spurs Leeds 1-1 Leicester Mary Waltz says: “Nothing to report on the Conte v Rafa battle, cautious, dull football by both. Every notice of a manager being axed and seeing the possible replacements makes me happy we got Rafa.” “There have been some controversial sackings in the Premier league so far this season, do you think that any of the recently sacked managers shouldn’t have been given p45?” asks Bogdan Kotarlic. The Dean Smith one seems a bit harsh but it is hard to survive losing five games on the trot. It looked early on like Arsenal would have their way with Watford but the visitors have recovered from a tough opening 15 minutes, even if they are a little lucky to be level after giving away the penalty. 45 mins: Three minutes added on. 43 mins: Rose fouls Lacazette once again, as the defender cynically trips the striker but the referee feels a free-kick is punishment enough. Smith Rowe sends a high ball into the box which is cleared. It comes back into the box for Tomiyasu to attack but Rose beats him to it. Saka swings in the corner to the back post where Gabriel is waiting to head goalwards, only to see Foster’s leg block the ball on the line. 41 mins: Kucka drives through Arsenal’s midfield and gets a shot off from the edge of the box but it takes a deflection and goes just wide. The subsequent corner is well worked, ending with Rose firing a shot off from 12 yards but it blocked just in front of Ramsdale. 39 mins: Arsenal are struggling to get into a rhythm following their promising start to the game. Their moves do not seem to be flowing as Arteta would wish, with the pace down compared to recent performances. 37 mins: Kucka is the latest man to need some treatment for some ailment or other. 35 mins: The Arsenal skipper pings it towards Foster’s right but the Watford goalkeeper sticks out and arms to save it, before grabbing hold. 34 mins: PENALTY! Saka swings in a free-kick from the right flank but a Watford head clears it. The ball lands on Tavares’ boot, allowing him to take one of the worst shots in history but conveniently for Arsenal it loops up in the air where Lacazette is waiting to the control the ball but he does not get the chance as Rose cleans him out. 32 mins: Kucka is carded for going through Lacazette. We’ve already had four yellow cards in this game. GOAL! Harvey Barnes equalises for Leicester at Leeds. 30 mins: Smith Rowe lifts the ball into the box from deep, which Aubameyang sees as a chance to perform an acrobatic overhwad kick but he kicks Cathcart in the chest rather than making contact with the ball. Down the other end, Tomiyasu goes into the book for fouling Sarr. 28 mins: Rose kicks Saka in the heel when challenging for a bouncing ball, leaving the Arsenal man in a heap but he gets up and limps away. Goal at Elland Road where Raphinha has given Leeds the lead over Leicester. 26 mins: Watford have also taken the sting out of Arsenal’s attacks after the hosts’ bright start. 24 mins: Watford have now strung a few passes together, which is good news for this match as a contest. Dennis drives at the Arsenal defence but Saka sees him off with some cunning and a little bit of physicality. 22 mins: Dennis needs treatment for something or other relating to his buttock/hamstring. Play restarts with a Watford free-kick but it is easily cleared by the Arsenal defence. Just in case you are wondering: Everton 0-0 Spurs, Leeds 0-0 Leicester 20 mins: Saka gets round the back of the Watford defence and pings a cross into the box but it is too powerful for anyone to get on the end of. The ball goes back into the area and Aubameyang goes down under pressure but nothing is doing for the Gabonese striker. Watford get the ball clear, with Kucka and Lokonga ending up grappling on the floor, resulting in a booking for the Arsenal man. 18 mins: Dennis and Lacazette both hit the turf after the Watford man performs a tackle. The Frenchman gets up first and Dennis follows soon after, following a spell holding his buttock. 16 mins: Lokonga tries a first time shot from 25 yards without any pace nor direction. Unsurprisingly, it trickles wide. 14 mins: Watford have not strung two passes together yet. I will estimate that Arsenal have enjoyed roughly 90% possession. A long ball is pinged over the top for Sarr to chase but it bounces into the arms of Ramsdale. It is not glorious stuff from Watford. 12 mins: Femenia is now moaning about the reward of a corner to Arsenal, as he does not think he touched the ball last. Smith Rowe sends it in but a Hornet head does the business. 10 mins: King goes into the book for backing into Gabriel. The Brazilian goes down like a sack of spuds, claiming he is elbowed but nothing of the sort has happened. 8 mins: NO GOAL! A neat ball from Maitland-Niles finds Lacazette in the box, he chips a shot towards goal, which Foster tips to the side onto Aubameyang’s foot, he miscontrols it into Saka’s path, who neatly finishes. Luckily for Watford, Foster is in front of Saka when he receives the ball, ruling the England man offside. 6 mins: Femenia overlaps down the right but his brushed aside by Tavares, as Arsenal win a goal kick, much to the Spaniard’s annoyance as he thinks the Portuguese got the final touch. 4 mins: Smith Rowe swings in a corner from the left but it is headed clear, allowing Watford to break out but things breakdown near the halfway line. Watford have nine outfield players sitting very deep, absorbing pressure when they defend. This could be a long day for them. 2 mins: Arsenal have had all of the ball in the opening stages. They look confident in possession, not feeling the need to rush things. Peep! Peep! Peep! Here we go! Arsenal and Watford are paying their respects as this is the Gunners’ closest home game to Armistice Day. Mikel Arteta and Claudio Ranieri have laid wreaths next to the pitch, followed by a reading from Bob Wilson and minute’s silence. I can imagine Lampard sending his cover note to Aston Villa and forgetting to change the top from ‘To Delia Smith’. Lampard, Big Sam, Hodgson. I am sure it will be an underwhelming appointment but all mid-table ones are. “Flutterings of fear in the Arsenal fan dovecots,” says Charles Antaki. “The loss of Partey has not gone down well, with confidence in Ainsley Maitland-Niles provisional at best; certainly his athleticism is valued, and he runs about pleasingly, but he’s not known for the creative pass, and he has a tendency to lose the ball in daft places. So, expectations down and anxieties up.” And what a seat it is. Aston Villa CEO Christian Purslow said: “When Dean joined us in October 2018 our team was really struggling in The Championship. He immediately transformed the atmosphere and performances and achieved the ultimate success of leading Villa back to the Premier League within the same season - a rare feat. “He then secured our place in the Premier League after a tough campaign and took us to a Cup Final at Wembley. “However, after a good start to last season, this year we have not seen the continuous improvement in results, performances and league position which we have all been looking for. For this reason we have decided to make a change now to allow time for a new head coach to make an impact. “The Board would like to sincerely thank Dean for his many excellent achievements, on and off the pitch, during this time. Everyone knows how much Aston Villa means to Dean and his family. He has represented the Club with distinction and dignity - universally liked and respected by everybody associated with Aston Villa – our staff, players and supporters alike. We wish him the very best.” Aston Villa have sacked Dean Smith. Who will they bring in? Ranieri is going 4-3-3. Everton also kick off at 2pm. Andy Hunter looks at their current issues. Thomas Partey has a groin strain, just in case you are wondering about his absence. The great man, Nick Ames, looks at another great man in the form of Aaron Ramsdale. Tavares keeps his place for Arsenal, with the returning Tierney having to settle for a place on a comfy chair next to the pitch. Maitland-Niles also gets a rare Premier League outing in the centre of midfield. Arsenal: Ramsdale, Tomiyasu, White, Gabriel, Tavares, Lokonga, Maitland-Niles, Smith Rowe, Saka, Aubameyang, Lacazette. Subs: Leno, Tierney, Odegaard, Holding, Soares, Pepe, Elneny, Nketiah, Martinelli. Watford: Foster, Femenia, Nkoulou, Cathcart, Rose, Sissoko, Tufan, Kucka, Sarr, Dennis, King Subs: Bachmann, Ngakia, Troost-Ekong, Cleverley, Joao Pedro, Masina, Fletcher, Hernandez, Sierralta Arsenal are back … well they’ve won a few games in impressive style, at least. Their defence looks unified and competent, something they have not been able to boast for quite a while. They are unbeaten since their 5-0 drubbing at Manchester City and could end the day in fifth spot as Mikel Arteta begins to earn some kudos for his role in transforming the Gunners. Aaron Ramsdale was brought into the side after the Etihad shellacking and his form has been a key reason behind the turnaround for Arsenal. Against Leicester he made a number of important saves as he continues to prove himself Bernd Leno’s superior, showing those who questioned his signing (like me) that he is a top quality goalkeeper. Watford have enjoyed an intriguing start under Claudio Ranieri, losing 5-0 to Liverpool at Vicarage Road, beating Everton 5-2 away and then being edged 1-0 by Southampton at home. It was an intriguing appointment at the time but early inconsistencies do not fill many with confidence that Ranieri is the the right man to turn around the fortunes at Watford in the short or long term. Let’s hope for a cracker! Kick-off: 2pmAny Manchester United fans who would rather like to see Brendan Rodgers replace Ole Gunnar Solskjær should be careful what they wish for. Leicester’s manager has many strong points but right now he does not necessarily seem the answer to Old Trafford’s defensive woes. For a 10th successive Premier League game Rodgers’ side failed to keep a clean sheet and this defensive untidiness explains why a team once again harbouring European ambitions are marooned in mid-table. It could easily have been worse for Leicester but, in Patrick Bamford’s continued absence with an ankle injury, Leeds struggle horribly to score from open play and Marcelo Bielsa’s side were duly again rueing the litany of missed chances which have left them too close to the bottom three for comfort. “We created double the amount of chances Leicester had,” Bielsa said. “We deserved to win but did not manage to obtain it.” Leeds hurtled out of the blocks, subjecting Leicester to a high-intensity attacking blizzard and forcing Kasper Schmeichel to show off razor sharp reflexes to tip Jack Harrison’s deflected, awkwardly looping, right-foot shot to safety. Leicester’s manager looked relieved when no penalty was awarded after Ricardo Pereira sent Raphinha tumbling in the box. Bielsa’s Brazilian right-winger looked as if he belonged in a more exalted stratosphere to almost everyone else and goodness knows where Leeds would be without his game changing talents. Accordingly it felt entirely appropriate that Raphinha opened the scoring courtesy of a deceptively curving, left-footed, free-kick awarded after one of his characteristic advances was rudely interrupted by Boubakary Soumaré. As Elland Road erupted in celebration it seemed Leeds were back to their thrilling, fluent best. Yet, although Pascal Struijk was impressing in an unfamiliar left‑back role in a revamped home back four and Leicester were being forced into far too many errors by this rather glorious, if temporary, reversion to high tempo Bielsaball, the visitors retained a certain counter-attacking menace. Sure enough Leicester equalised virtually straight from the restart when Jonny Evans lifted a long ball forward for Soumaré to flick on in Harvey Barnes’s direction. Capitalising on a concentration lapse as Bielsa’s players allowed themselves to be distracted by the crowd’s euphoria, Barnes delighted in dodging the otherwise wonderfully assured Diego Llorente – who barely permitted Jamie Vardy a kick – before curling a superlative angled shot beyond Illan Meslier. Annoyed at this latest example of their penchant for self destruction, Leeds responded with considerable ferocity but, by now, Leicester had remembered a few street-wise habits and, often thanks to a minor foul here and there, succeeded in slowing things down. Still dominant, Leeds created a stream of half chances but, without Bamford around to polish them off, Leicester always retained hope. Admittedly Daniel James’s change of pace sporadically unsettled Rodgers’s defence but Bielsa’s lone striker could not disguise the reality that he was a winger deployed out of position. It might have helped the home cause had Harrison not missed a sitter from point-blank range after Kalvin Phillips nodded on a corner. With Rodrigo combining intelligently with Raphinha – even if the deep lying Spain forward could do with scoring a goal or two – and the recalled Adam Forshaw more than holding his own in central midfield, it was easy to appreciate Bielsa’s mounting frustration. Possession, though, can sometimes be overrated and, when Ademola Lookman tapped the ball home following Vardy’s flick, Leicester looked to have burgled a win before seeing the goal disallowed for a marginal offside by a VAR check. “It’s tough to take,” Rodgers said. “But if you can’t win you make sure you don’t lose and we showed courage. The guys have given me everything; I’m proud of my team. It’s a valuable point.”Citizens are alarmed by the climate crisis, but most believe they are already doing more to preserve the planet than anyone else, including their government, and few are willing to make significant lifestyle changes, an international survey has found. “The widespread awareness of the importance of the climate crisis illustrated in this study has yet to be coupled with a proportionate willingness to act,” the survey of 10 countries including the US, UK, France and Germany, observed. Emmanuel Rivière, director of international polling at Kantar Public, said the survey, carried out in late September and published to coincide with the Cop26 climate conference in Glasgow, contained “a double lesson for governments”. They have, first, “to measure up to people’s expectations,” Rivière said. “But they also have to persuade people not of the reality of the climate crisis – that’s done – but of what the solutions are, and of how we can fairly share responsibility for them.” The survey found that 62% of people surveyed saw the climate crisis as the main environmental challenge the world was now facing, ahead of air pollution (39%), the impact of waste (38%) and new diseases (36%). But when asked to rate their individual action against others’ such as governments, business and the media, people generally saw themselves as much more committed to the environment than others in their local community, or any institution. About 36% rated themselves “highly committed” to preserving the planet, while only 21% felt the same was true of the media and 19% of local government. A mere 18% felt their local community was equally committed, with national governments (17%) and big corporations (13%) seen as even less engaged. Respondents were also lukewarm about doing more themselves, citing a wide range of reasons. Most (76%) of those surveyed across the 10 countries said they would accept stricter environmental rules and regulations, but almost half (46%) felt that there was no real need for them to change their personal habits. Only 51% said they would definitely act to protect the planet, with 14% saying they would definitely not and 35% torn. People in Poland and Singapore (56%) were the most willing to act, and in Germany (44%) and the Netherlands (37%) the least. The most common reasons given for not being willing to do more for the planet were “I feel proud of what I am currently doing” (74%), “There isn’t agreement among experts on the best solutions” (72%), and “I need more resources and equipment from public authorities” (69%). Other reasons for not wanting to do more included “I can’t afford to make those efforts” (60%), “I lack information and guidance on what to do” (55%), “I don’t think individual efforts can really have an impact” (39%), “I believe environmental threats are overestimated” (35%) and “I don’t have the headspace to think about it” (33%). Asked which actions to preserve the planet should be prioritised, moreover, people attributed more importance to measures that were already established habits, required less individual effort, or for which they bore little direct responsibility. About 57%, for example, said that reducing waste and increasing recycling was “very important”. Other measures seen as priorities were reversing deforestation (54%), protecting endangered animal species (52%), building energy-efficient buildings (47%), and replacing fossil fuels with renewable energy (45%). Respondents viewed measures likely to affect their own lifestyles, however, as significantly less important: reducing people’s energy consumption was seen as a priority by only 32%, while favouring public transport over cars (25%) and radically changing our agricultural model (24%) were similarly unpopular. Only 23% felt that reducing plane travel and charging more for products that did not respect environmental norms were important to preserve the planet, while banning fossil fuel vehicles (22%) and reducing meat consumption (18%) and international trade (17%) were seen as even lower priorities. “Citizens are undeniably concerned by the state of the planet, but these findings raise doubts regarding their level of commitment to preserving it,” the study said. “Rather than translating into a greater willingness to change their habits, citizens’ concerns are particularly focused on their negative assessment of governments’ efforts.” Representative samples of more than 1,000 people were questioned in the US, UK, Spain, France, the Netherlands, Germany, Sweden, Poland, Singapore and New Zealand. People gave themselves the highest score for commitment everywhere except Sweden, while only in Singapore and New Zealand were national governments seen as highly engaged. The gulf between citizens’ view of their own efforts (44%) and that of their government (16%) was highest in the UK. • This article was amended on 9 November 2021 to clarify that 51% of respondents said they would “definitely act to protect the planet”; an earlier version incorrectly said this figure referred to those who said they would “definitely take individual climate action”.In late October, invaluable pieces of rock’n’roll memorabilia began littering Parramatta Road in Sydney’s inner-west suburb of Annandale. Like unwanted detritus, pieces of history from the Annandale Hotel – an establishment famed for nurturing gritty live music over the decades – were being offered up for free, including many framed and hand-signed photographs featuring the likes of the Hoodoo Gurus and Midnight Oil. The freebies were also advertised on Facebook. Whatever lay unclaimed, a skip bin was waiting around the corner. The new lessee, Neil Thompson, had not predicted the incoming abuse. The tenor varied, but the through-line was the same: Thompson and his wife and business partner, Amy, were the latest symbol of gentrification that had hammered the city’s live music scene – and he didn’t even understand the significance of the pub he was doing up. “Yes, we got hammered,” he concedes to Guardian Australia. “Someone shared one of the pictures, saying that we were disrespecting the legacy of the hotel, and it just exploded, it just went completely out of control. It was a total social media pile-on.” Some 200 metres further up Parramatta Road, Phil Thomson sat glowering behind the counter of The Vintage Record, an equally renowned music industry establishment which he has owned and operated for almost two decades. “I sat there and I stewed and I stewed, and then on the Friday I finally decided I was going to go down there and tell this bloke what I thought of him,” the Thomson-without-a-P says. Thomson likes to think he has a warm relationship with his surrounding neighbours, who include the Church of God Bible Study Centre, to his immediate right, and the Fantasy brothel, to his immediate left. They’re an inclusive lot in the inner-west end of Parramatta Road. He recalls countless intense nights spent at the Annandale, where many of Australia’s top rock acts had cut their baby teeth in the live music scene. The place had been boarded up since Sydney went into its first lockdown in March 2020. So when Neil Thompson took over the abandoned venue a year later, Phil Thomson had high hopes – until the memorabilia started appearing on the street. “You could say I gave him a history lesson,” says Thomson. Armed with his muscular Scottish brogue, he let the rival Thompson know exactly what he thought of this bloke and his ignorant, Londoner, eastern suburb-living ways. “Starting with, ‘Do you know what you’ve done to the history of the Annandale, man?’” Somewhat unexpectedly, Thompson began to agree. “I admitted I did something I probably shouldn’t have done – it looked atrocious [on social media], my wife was really copping a lot of online abuse, and I should have been a bit more thoughtful in my approach,” he says. “But when I found this place, it was in such disrepair, I genuinely thought nobody cared about it … I think I’m doing my best to rectify it now.” The publican set about retrieving much of what in previous days he had given away. A local resident had taken possession of about 80% of the collection, planning to send it to a mate in Geelong who ran a guitar shop, but the consignment had not yet left Sydney. With the record retailer now finding himself in the honorary position of curator, the English Thompson set about overhauling the interior design of the hotel with advice and encouragement from the Scottish Thomson, recognising the building’s not inconsiderable contribution to Sydney’s live music scene over the decades. “It’s been a big learning curve for me,” says Thompson. “I’d like to think my wife and I, with Phil’s engagement, we’re building trust and engaging with the community.” ‘History sweats from the walls’ The Gordon Gekko spirit of the 1990s saw the musos pack out and the pokies move in at the Annandale. It wasn’t until the turn of the century, when it was taken over by Matt and Dan Rule – brothers known for their talent in turning struggling pubs around – that the Annandale hotel began coming back to life. In his From the Pit blog, the Sydney-based music photographer/videographer James O’Connor paid affectionate homage to the ’Dale in an August 2012 post. The venue’s alumni, he noted, read like a who’s who of the Australian live music scene: John Butler, Jet, the Vines, Gotye, Front End Loader, Regurgitator, Mark of Cain, the Butterfly Effect, Baby Animals, Rose Tattoo, Hoodoo Gurus, Spiderbait and Jimmy Barnes. “There is so much history, it sweats from the walls, you could roll in it,” he wrote. “We should make new bands do just that.” Some well-known musicians began their careers at the Annandale behind the bar, including Bluejuice’s Jake Stone and the Jezabels’ Hayley Mary. Dan Rule regaled O’Connor with some of the more memorable gigs. There was the time in 2004 when the Vines lead singer Craig Nicholls lashed out at a photographer, called the audience sheep and demanded they “baaa”. Or the time Dananananaykroyd drummer John Baillie Jnr decided to join the moshpit and snapped his arm. A favourite haunt for Big Day Out afterparties, the hotel has served its local bevies to members of Metallica, Kings of Leon and the Strokes. Some of Powderfinger’s first gigs were at the Annandale – and also some of their last. Back on the block Within six months of O’Connor’s 2012 tribute to his favourite live music venue, the Annandale went dark once more. Over the time the Rules had reinvigorated the ’Dale, the suburb of Annandale had undergone its own transformation. Trendy cafes, upmarket eateries and homeware stores had usurped the area’s earlier fish and chips shops, Vietnamese bakeries and laundromats. Just 6km from the CBD, the suburb now has some of the most expensive real estate in Sydney’s inner west. Facing mounting debts, the Rule brothers launched a “buy a brick” fundraiser, and plaques on the hotel’s exterior began appearing, noting the generosity of local musicians, music lovers and multinational record companies (“I bought a bloody brick,” says Phil Thomson). The $50,000 raised bought the Rule brothers time, but not enough. By mid-2013 the business had been placed in administration, with the brothers blaming in part the hundreds of thousands of dollars paid in council fines over the years for noise violations, following complaints from neighbours. The hotel chain Oscars bought the Annandale and attempted to revive the live music scene there. But the problem with noise-sensitive neighbours persisted. The Butterfly Effect vocalist Clint Boge claims he practically grew up at the Annandale – from the first time he threw up in the pub’s notorious toilets after playing one of his first gigs as an 18-year-old. “We never stayed upstairs, we partied on so late a few times we may as well have,” he told O’Connor. “Each time we had to leave quietly because of the fucked-up neighbours. What’s with that? If you buy near a pub what do you expect?” You Am I was the last band to play live at the Annandale under the Rule brothers’ reign, although they returned to play in 2013 and 2019, less than a year before all live music fell silent under Covid restrictions. According to the I Lost My Gig Australia survey, since 1 July this year, 32,000 gigs and music events have been cancelled, equating to nearly $94m in lost income. The new Annandale Hotel will open on Thursday 11 November. But Neil Thompson’s newfound respect for the area’s local history extends to the enduring stand-off with local residents: there will be no live music. Instead, the hotel will serve as living museum, living up at least in part to O’Connor’s claim that the ’Dale was always much more than just a pub. “It’s more than just a live music venue, more than just a place where music fans gather, more than some grotty toilets,” he wrote. “It is the memories, the ringing ears, the sticky floor, the young nervous band stepping on stage for the first time, the place where the guy you saw play last week is pouring a beer tonight. “It’s the sum of all parts that make it such integral piece in the social fabric of the inner west and Sydney live music.”Every now and then a troll calls me white. It’s a violent colonial tactic: call me white if I identify as blak, call me blak if I wanted to identify as white. My self-identity is not important to them, nor is that of any other Indigenous person, or any person of colour. Wadjelas demand the right to define others, just defining themselves is not enough. They demand to define whiteness and blakness. It was the wadjelas that created the ‘one drop’ rule, that defined anybody with a single bla(c)k ancestor as black. They did that to separate people, to create a caste system, to protect the notion of whiteness, to protect whiteness from the merest ‘impurity’, from the merest influx of colour. Rather than accept that bla(c)k and white people are more alike than different, rather than accept that ‘half-castes’ are just people, one drop was enough, one drop was too much. It was the racist, settler colonialism that created whiteness, that created blackness, half-caste, quarter-caste, octoroon, that saw mixed-race people as a third race. Now those same wadjelas, who defined us as black, now want to call us white if we are not black enough for their liking. I am not quite white, not quite blak enough. I wish I was blakker on the outside; as blak on the outside as I feel on the inside. I’m a Vegemite sandwich on brown bread. If I was blakker I would suffer hate for the colour of my skin; that alone, blakkness, darkness would be enough, I would suffer discrimination for being dark, even the word darkness has, in English, a negative connotation. The colour of my father’s skin, my grandmother’s, my great-grandmother’s is a metaphor, a code for evil. We are the darkness. And then. I suffer discrimination because some people think I am too white to be seen as blak; that I should not identify as Aboriginal, that I should not have the right. Some people would try to remove my access to Aboriginal culture, would try to say I am too white, too mixed-race, to be allowed access to my Country and culture, family and land. Those same people think I should not access Aboriginal resources, affirmative action, land rights. The people who want to restrict my access to culture are not my family, not other Aboriginal people, not the land councils or the elders. The people who think I am too white to be Aboriginal are all white. It’s the wadjelas who think I am not blak enough; the same people who discriminated against my dad by calling him black. We see it all the time in the media, oft repeated despite the fact that it’s racial vilification, and against the law. Aboriginal people aren’t Aboriginal, we are told, if we are mixed race, if we live in the city, if we are educated, if we do too well, if we are not ‘from the bush’. And ‘from the bush’ is coded language for stone-age, removed from modern society, unemployable and ‘traditional’. ‘Traditional’ is such loaded language, enshrining a belief that we are stuck in the past rather than being one of the most adaptable cultures in history, that some of us are using ‘classical’ instead when referring to any part of Aboriginal culture that appears similar to what it is imagined we produced before wadjela came. The right-wing media, and even some of the more centrist media, draws an artificial line between the bush and the city, the urban blaks and the people from the bush. The division is often coded to skin colour, urban is shorthand for ‘not black enough’ and bush is shorthand for ‘real Aboriginal’. And to the racists in the colony, who cannot still grasp the concept that races can mix, who are obsessed with 18th- century notions of race, mixed-race Aboriginal people are no longer Aboriginal. Modern people do not understand very well that in the 18th century it was a common belief that races cannot mix, that mixed-race children of any two ‘races’ would become a third race; neither white or black. If an Aboriginal woman had a child with a white father that child would not be white or black, they would be a third race and them having children with any other culture would dilute the race of both parents. This belief was one of the drivers of the ‘protection’ laws that led to the settler government’s theft of children. AO Neville, the Protector of Aborigines in Western Australia until the 1930s, railed against the risk of the creation of a ‘third race’ of half-castes. Protectors took the mixed-race children, ‘half-castes’, ‘quarter-castes’, ‘octoroons’, from their parents, from their culture, raised the light-skinned ones white, at an orphanage, and trained the darker-skinned ones to be domestic servants for the colonisers. It was believed that skin colour also coded for children’s ability to assimilate. I would have been perfect for assimilation. There was no way the protectors would have left me with my family. They knew, the protectors and the other colonisers, where those mixed-race babies were coming from. There were records from Neville from the many times he asked for local protectors to remove girls before they came of age and to the attention of the white man (the attention they were referring to was sexual, obviously). He did not want a ‘third race’ to be created or continued. Colonisers also believed that one drop of non-white blood was enough to be considered not white. Not all mixed-race Aboriginal people were the product of rape. My grandmother was married to my grandfather. My great-grandmother and great-great-grandmother were married to white men. However, rape was common and many mixed-race children were the product of rape, and thus of colonisation. Maybe all mixed-race children were, blak mothers marrying white men to gain their protection, blak men marrying white women in the hope their children would be lighter-skinned and less prone to racism. No matter what happens to Aboriginal children of mixed race, no matter whose ‘fault’ it is that their skin is lighter than they would like, it’s not their fault. Nobody gets to choose their race. I am mixed-race because my family is and I did not choose my family. Nor would I choose to be anything other than who I am. Once mixed-race children were born they were taken from their parents. Under the protection acts in Western Australia, mixed-race Aboriginal children were routinely taken from their parents; the parents, in fact, had no rights to their own children. The Department of the Protector controlled every aspect of the mixed-race child’s life, including if, when and to whom they could marry. This policy was to ensure that mixed-race Aboriginal people could only marry white people to breed the next generation whiter. There can be no doubt that all mixed-race Aboriginal people are a product of colonisation; and the attempt to define us as not Aboriginal enough is also part of colonisation. It was policy to commit genocide by breeding, by eugenics, to breed out the black to ‘fuck us white’. I am a mixed-race person not quite blak enough, and will never be white, I will never be white at all. It doesn’t really matter. I know who I am, so does my family, so does Noongar Boodjar, my country. Colonisers often ask me why I don’t identify with my Irish and English ancestry, why I prefer to identify with my Aboriginal family. There are many reasons – all of them, to my mind, compelling. The first is the simplest: if you could identify with the bully or the victim, with the murderers or the family of the murdered, with the genocidal colonisers or the colonised, who would you choose? Secondly, if you were part of the culture that belongs somewhere, the first people, the people with a unique connection to the place, wouldn’t you live in that pride? Finally, the colonisers were attempting genocide, they wanted us all dead. If I identified with my wadjela ancestry at the expense of my Aboriginality, the colonisers win. I am under no illusions about my mixed-race status; I know I am mixed-race, but with the Aboriginal population being only 3 per cent, with my family being survivors of genocide, I have made my decision. There’s a saying among blak mob, ‘It doesn’t matter how much milk you put in tea, it’s still tea.’ I am a descendant of genocide survivors, a child of the oldest living culture on Earth. Nothing, no amount of milk, can change that. This is an edited extract from Lies, Damned Lies – A personal exploration of the impact of colonisation, by Claire G Coleman (Ultimo Press), out now.At some point the line between work and life blurred, then dissolved entirely, which was probably inevitable when Nakkiah Lui and her partner, Gabriel Dowrick, decided to make a TV show together. The couple met in 2014 on ABC’s Black Comedy, Lui’s first television writing gig, which Dowrick edited. “I like to think he fell in love with me on the screen because of my sense of humour,” Lui says. A moment passes before a peal of laughter tumbles through the phone. “He’s just looking into the distance right now.” In the years since, Lui has emerged as one of Australia’s leading multi-hyphenates – lauded playwright, screenwriter, podcast host and the publisher of her own book imprint. Dowrick is an in-demand editor, working on The Family Law, Wakefield, The Other Guy and Lui’s 2017 series Kiki and Kitty. The desire to write something together was always there – and it’s about to be realised in the form of Preppers: a tightly plotted six-episode ABC comedy that premieres on 10 November. Preppers tells the story of Charlie (Lui), a breakfast television host. Coerced into wearing a giant Australian flag thong costume for the show’s January 26 broadcast – her pleas to acknowledge the impact of Invasion Day dismissed by the show’s executive producer (Grant Denyer as you’ve never seen him before) – Charlie is finally tipped over the edge, only to become caught up with a community of doomsday preppers. There are echoes of the finale of Get Krackin’, which Lui co-wrote, that featured a searing monologue from Miranda Tapsell against the racism stoked by breakfast TV. “I did not expect that final episode … to be as controversial as it was. I got a lot of hate mail over that, I got people sending stuff to my home,” says Lui. “For like two years, any time there was an op-ed about it … I would get a barrage of insults, calling me names. I think part of it for me was like, can I survive this?” Writing Charlie, she drew from this experience: “What is it like to survive that type of public shaming?” The interest in prepping, meanwhile, began with reality TV. “A couple of years ago, I got really into watching Doomsday Preppers, Doomsday Bunkers, just all of those kinds of shows,” Lui says. “And then I started spending a bit of time on forums. It was, like, a real descent.” On one level, it was pure fascination, but there was also a deeper pull. “Being a First Nations person … that idea of survival and prepping for the worst, and survival being part of your history and this value you hold. For me, that’s definitely something I’ve inherited,” says Lui. For Dowrick, prepping offered almost infinite possibilities for storytelling. “I always loved that within the subculture of doomsday prepping, you’ve got all of these different points of view, in terms of how someone might believe the world could end. Environmental catastrophe, economic shutdown, you know, even dopey stuff like zombies or whatever. Asteroids, Christian rapture ... ” This spectrum of destruction is embodied by the ensemble of preppers assembled for the series and played by Meyne Wyatt, Ursula Yovich, Chum Ehelepola, Aaron McGrath and Eryn Jean Norvill. The group is led by Monty, a part written for Jack Charles. “It amazes me that no one has put Jack Charles in a comedy before,” says Lui. “He’s just so funny.” Preppers is a skilful balancing act, a laugh-out-loud comedy that never shies away from the seriousness at its heart: First Nations people already faced a genocide, so why wouldn’t they be prepared for anything? Nailing the tone required a lot of rewriting. “We went back and forth on a lot of these things, right up until the edit,” Dowrick says. “Like, how hard can you hit an idea and not make someone feel too uncomfortable that they’re not going to laugh when you come back out of that?” “We would pull out the storyboard at like 9pm and yell at each other that the joke wasn’t funny and try and make a better joke,” says Lui. Or they would go out for a nice dinner and “next minute we’d just be talking about the script”. “But in a way we both are really lucky that we love what we do. There’s kind of nothing I’d rather be talking about sometimes than the story that I’m playing with in my brain,” says Lui, who directs her next comment to Dowrick: “I think it might be the same for you.” Lui says Dowrick was “a great white ally” during the process, bolstering her confidence that a mainstream comedy audience would stay with them through the moments of seriousness and follow them back to the funny. “Because you’re so emotionally invested in it, especially around the stolen generation content. Or, you know, finding the bones of the colonial murder. Sorry, those are just really odd sentences,” she says. “But he was really great at coming in and … being like, nah fuck it, it’s a good idea. They can understand it. People will listen, and it’s going to make it funny and good.” Preppers is on ABC TV and iView from 10 NovemberUsed correctly, a wok can be the saviour of weeknight dinners. I need to emphasise used correctly here, because the way so many of us have been taught to cook with a wok is the exact opposite of how they are best used. A wok isn’t a big pot. Its main purpose is to cook small quantities of food quickly. The giant woks over fire-breathing wok-burners in restaurants turn out a single plate at a time, but at home, we try to load enough ingredients to feed the whole family into a wok and wonder why it turns out soggy. If you have eight ingredients, make four smaller wok-fried dishes using two ingredients each, instead of one big one that uses all eight. You’ll have a greater variety of servings, and they’ll turn out like proper wok-fried dishes instead of one big stew. Prawn and corn fried rice (Pictured above) Many fried rice recipes take their cue from the classic Yangzhou fried rice (often seen on Australian menus as special fried rice), where small amounts of different ingredients give the rice a multi-coloured confetti appearance – but fried rice doesn’t need to be made up of a lot of things. This version simply uses prawns, corn and spring onions, and makes for an amazing meal. Using cold rice from the fridge will allow you to separate the grains with a squashing motion of your spatula, without turning it into mush. Make sure you use plenty of oil, as the oil should coat the grains. Not using enough oil is one of the most common mistakes people make with fried rice. Serves 4 Prep 10 min Cook 10 min ¼ cup (60ml) vegetable oil, plus extra if needed 12 large raw prawns (about 400g meat), peeled and butterflied 2 garlic cloves, finely chopped 2 corn cobs, kernels stripped 3 eggs 4 cups (740g) leftover cooked jasmine rice, refrigerator cold Salt and ground white pepper, to season 3 spring onions, finely sliced Heat a large frying pan over a medium heat and add the oil. Add the prawns and fry for about two minutes until not quite cooked through. Toss the garlic through the prawns. Add the corn kernels and cook for a further minute or two until they brighten. Remove the mixture from the pan. Add a little extra oil to the pan if needed. Add the eggs and mix vigorously until the egg is cooked and starts to break into small pieces. Return the prawn and corn mixture to the pan and add the rice. Fry, tossing, until well combined and the rice is heated through and lightly toasted. Season well with salt and pepper. Stir the spring onion through and serve. Scallops, asparagus and bacon This is a western stir-fry, and why not? A few ingredients tossed together in a frying pan and seasoned is exactly what a stir-fry is – you don’t even need to do it in a wok. You can call it a sauté if you prefer. We don’t talk about vinegars enough. Most chefs I know spend a lot of time finding good vinegars to finish dishes with, and are even more specific about the vinegars they use than they are about oils. Salad dressings aside, a quick splash of vinegar is an excellent way to finish sauces, stews or even stir-fries like this one. Serves 4 Prep 5 min Cook 10 min 25g butter 8 large scallops, roe off 80g bacon or speck, cut into lardons ½ brown onion, finely sliced 1 bunch asparagus, cut into 5cm lengths 1 tbsp apple cider vinegar Salt and black pepper, to season Soft bread rolls, to serve Heat a large frying pan or wok over a high heat and add a little of the butter. Sear the scallops for a minute or two on each side until just barely cooked through. Remove to a plate. Add the bacon to the pan and fry until lightly browned, then remove and add to the scallops. Add the onion and remaining butter. Toss the onion for a minute until softened, then add the asparagus and toss for about two minutes until the asparagus is just cooked. Add the vinegar and season generously with black pepper and a touch of salt, if needed. Return the bacon and scallops to the pan and toss to combine, then remove to a plate and serve with bread to mop up the buttery juices. Cashew nut chicken The origins of this dish go back to the Chinese classic, gong bao ji ding – often Anglicised as kung pao chicken. Sichuan peppercorns are left out, hot dried chillies are replaced with capsicum, spring onions with regular onions, peanuts with cashews, and black vinegar with white. I love both versions. Note: Adding a little cornflour slurry (cornflour mixed with cold water) at the end is a vital step in many stir-fried dishes. It thickens the pan juices and sauces and helps them coat the ingredients. It’s as important to wok cooking as turning a fond into a sauce is to French cuisine. Serves 4 Prep 10 min Cook 10 min 1 large boneless, skinless chicken breast (about 250g), cut into 2cm cubes 1 tbsp soy sauce 1 tbsp Shaoxing wine 2 tsp cornflour ¼ cup (60ml) vegetable oil 3 slices of fresh ginger, bruised 2 garlic cloves, roughly chopped 1 small brown onion, cut into 3cm chunks ½ red capsicum (bell pepper), cut into 3cm chunks ½ green capsicum (bell pepper), cut into 3cm chunks 1 cup (150g) unsalted roasted cashew nuts For the sauce 2 tbsp chicken stock or water 2 tbsp white vinegar 1 tbsp dark soy sauce 1 tbsp soy sauce 1 tbsp Shaoxing wine 1½ tsp sugar ½ tsp sesame oil Combine the sauce ingredients and set aside. Place the chicken, soy sauce, Shaoxing wine and one teaspoon of the cornflour in a bowl and mix well to coat the chicken. Blend the remaining teaspoon of cornflour with ½ cup (60 ml) cold water and set aside. Heat a wok over a high heat until very hot. Add two tablespoons of the oil around its edge, letting it run down into the centre of the wok. Add the chicken and fry for about three minutes until browned and separated. Remove the chicken from the wok. Add the remaining oil to the wok, then add the ginger, then the garlic, and toss for about 30 seconds until the garlic is browned. Add the onion and capsicum and toss for a minute or two until just starting to soften. Add the stir-fry sauce and bring the sauce to a simmer. Return the chicken to the wok and toss through the sauce. Drizzle in some of the cornflour mixture, shaking the wok and using only as much as is needed to thicken the contents to a silky consistency. Toss the cashews through and serve. This is an edited extract from Tonight’s Dinner by Adam Liaw, published by Hardie Grant Books and SBS, RRP $45. Available in stores nationally. Photography: Steve Brown; Set photography: Bruce WaltersIn nearly two years of lockdown interruptions, I’ve often been asked for my professional opinion about the impact of Covid-19 measures on children. A great many views have been expressed on this, and I’ve hesitated to add to the fray. But the questions keep coming, so from my experience as a child psychiatrist seeing children in cancer wards, after accidents, falls, fractures, and now seeing children and adolescents in emergency departments, mainly for depression, self-harm, anxiety or suicidal thoughts, here are the things I’ve observed of children in distress over the pandemic. Kids need connection This is first and centre with family and caregivers, then of course, with friendship groups, and in adolescence with a wider circle, along with their growing independence. Children do a lot of implicit learning, from being with children and being at school. But it’s not the same for each child, as parents know. Some children are sad without their friends, some miss group work and social learning. Some parents see their child less stressed, more secure, happier learning at home. Some kids like face-to-face interactions, some are as comfortable connecting through gaming or social media. Parents notice that some are constantly connecting online and others spend more time alone and this can be their preference or due to factors outside their control. I find even children who spend a lot of time alone, including shy children and children with autism, usually still need to feel acceptance and belonging. Exclusion and rejection hurt. Children with disabilities need connection and respect for their social, intellectual, emotional, health and safety needs. Children also feel responsible for bad things that happen. So, for example, if they bring Covid-19 into the family, even if they didn’t do anything wrong, they can feel guilt, and blame themselves for what happens. I’ve seen many adolescents with dark thoughts and many who have self-harmed over the last year. Some can describe their feelings but some find this very difficult. Nearly all, however, leave open the chance, even if small, to make a connection. It’s through that connection we can work on a way forward. Kids are observant, curious and intuitive I find they usually take in more of the world than we adults give them credit for. I’m struck by how much they notice, from current affairs to classroom, peer and household interactions. For many their understanding is greater – sometimes vastly greater – than their ability to put thought into words. When we talk about feelings like depression, hopelessness, low self-worth, I ask if this is because of lockdowns. They shake their heads. “Is it part of it?” “No.” “A bit.” “Maybe.” “It’s mainly other stuff.” Some have given me thoughtful, sophisticated appraisals of ways the pandemic has made life (school, relationships, sport) more uncertain. They’ve weighed negatives against benefits (family time, online learning content and assessments). They’ve observe changing capabilities in themselves and others. Asked about teachers: “they’re trying”, “don’t think they like zoom”. About hanging out with friends online instead of in person: “It’s both good and bad.” Others say, “We’re allowed online more because we can’t see them.” Many have an astute awareness of what adults think. Some have misgivings about adding more worry to important adults in their lives. They also see the “meta” overview of the worrying-about-worrying loop. On the question of mental health and Covid, the short answer is: it’s not that simple. Kids are open to new ideas and new ways They understand complex concepts discussed at an age-appropriate level (think fairness and equity, climate science, marriage equality, privacy, even sun safety). I’m surprised how they’re across concepts such as viral contagion, airborne disease, how lungs work, almost as soon as adults are. They remember being younger and have ideas about how to make pandemic measures fun: “play outside”, “dress-ups with masks”. Most can discuss measures to keep themselves and others safe. They’re quick and open to adapt. For example, on the question of masks, I’ve discussed with colleagues the effect of mask-wearing in appointments, on kids and on us, how this affects rapport. Most kids can talk about it. Many don’t mind. Since the pandemic I’ve yet to see an adolescent in hospital not wear a mask properly when asked. Adults are less consistent. Kids are not one entity This is important. Different kids have different needs, different responses, different family situations, risks, priorities. But each child and adolescent notices when we’re genuinely interested, when they’re heard and seen for who they are. Some discussions refer to kids as if a homogenous morass. Kids can be keenly aware when they’re being co-opted for a wider adult agenda and they don’t buy it. I think kids usually have something to say and need us to hear it. And we need to hear it. As we know, our kids are our future. • In Australia, support is available at Beyond Blue on 1300 22 4636, Lifeline on 13 11 14, and at MensLine on 1300 789 978. In the UK, the charity Mind is available on 0300 123 3393 and ChildLine on 0800 1111. In the US, Mental Health America is available on 800-273-8255. • Dr Saretta Lee is a Sydney psychiatristAustralia is likely to be releasing more emissions from deforestation than reported to the United Nations, new analysis indicates, stoking calls for an independent review of the sector that has delivered the bulk of the country’s claimed reductions in greenhouse gas pollution in recent decades. An assessment of satellite imagery of more than 50 properties in Queensland by Martin Taylor, an adjunct senior lecturer at the University of Queensland, has identified significant discrepancies between what is treated as cleared land by Australia’s National Carbon Accounting System (NCAS) and the Statewide Landcover and Trees Study (Slats) used by the state government. “It flummoxes me – what’s going on in their models when they are missing such obvious land clearing,” Taylor said. “How can you possibly say that’s still forest … it’s so glaringly obvious something is wrong.” How countries have treated emissions from the land sector – clumsily known as Land Use, Land Use Change and Forestry (LuluCF) – has been contentious for decades, partly because of the challenges of accurately measuring and monitoring what can be subtle changes in vegetation even between seasons and periods of drought and wet spells. The Australian government has relied on its reporting of falls in land-clearing rates for almost all the reductions that allow it to claim the country’s emissions have fallen by about one-fifth since 2005, and that Australia has “over-achieved” on its pledged cuts under the Kyoto protocol. An accurate estimate of changing vegetation cover also underpins the veracity of carbon offsets, with the majority of claimed cuts paid for through the federal government’s emissions reduction fund going to the land sector. Its new long-term emission reduction plan to reach net zero by 2050 also relies heavily on it. “Emissions from [LuluCF] have fallen by 114m tonnes of carbon dioxide-equivalent since 2005, and in 2019 the sector represented a 25 Mt CO₂-e sink for Australia,” the government’s net zero plan report states. Australia reports annual emissions of about 500m tonnes. Deforestation has featured at Cop26 the climate summit in Glasgow, with Australia among the 105 nations to sign a pledge to reduce forest loss by 2030. Accounting rules agreed to under the UN framework convention on climate change help countries minimise loss of their forests. Under those rules, tree crown cover needs to amount for only 10% to 30% of an area of less than one hectare for it to be treated as a forest. Australia takes the mid-point of the range at 20%. Taylor said the 20% estimate was “a fundamental issue” that meant NCAS “just completely misses” land clearing. “Where forest tree cover gets reduced down from 100% to 30% or 20%, to them it’s still a forest and nothing’s changed,” he said. “That’s huge.” Taylor and other researchers said even 20% coverage could be understating actual clearing because the models used are less accurate than the Slats detection used by Queensland and other states, including NSW. It isn’t clear what land-clearing is Questions over the reliability of Australia’s land sector emissions accounting are not new. As far back as 2007, Andrew Macintosh of the Australian National University law school called for an independent review of NCAS, without which the “federal government’s claims about Australia’s performance against its Kyoto target should be treated with scepticism”. Glenn Walker, then with the Wilderness Society, also compiled a report highlighting how Queensland’s land clearing rates rocketed after the LNP under Campbell Newman came to power in 2012, yet Australia’s emissions continued to fall during that period. Excluding land use, national emissions had risen by more than 5% since 2005 – the base year picked by the Abbott government for Australia’s Paris climate goal – before Covid-19 lockdowns began. Carbon pollution in other rich economies fell in that timeframe. Researchers say there are “millions of anecdotes” to illustrate areas where land-clearing has been picked up by Slats, but not by NCAS. One case involved NCAS identifying a dam as a forest because of its dark colour. Don Butler, an ecologist formerly at the Queensland Herbarium and now a professor at ANU, worked with the Slats program for years. He said NCAS used Landsat imagery at 25m to detect vegetation and alterations, while Slats used 10m pixels. “Just that change alone will change the estimate of the area cleared,” he said. Stuart Phinn, a professor at the University of Queensland specialising in the use of remote sensing to measure environmental changes, said Newman’s policies “did have a large impact on clearing” that were picked up by Slats. Reports at the time estimated Queensland landholders were clearing 10 sq km a day in 2015-16. The environment minister, Steven Miles, estimated carbon emissions at 45m tonnes over that year. Slats doesn’t itself calculate emissions. As with NCAS, the emissions are inferred by the vegetation change identified in satellite images that is assessed using complex algorithms. The next Slats report for 2018-19 will be released by the end of 2021. Butler said: “The reason Slats is more accurate is that a human looks at every bit of clearing that’s reported and decides that it is clearing, and that’s not something that NCAS is resourced to do.” Phinn, Butler and other researchers do not suggest there is any intent by NCAS to mislead on emissions, but stress the need for more transparency. “It would be good to go more public with their modelling validation,” Phinn said. “I don’t think it’s open enough.” The emissions reduction minister, Angus Taylor, passed a request for comment to the energy department, which said any suggestion that the Australian government had underestimated land clearing was “misplaced”. “The Australian government prepares the national greenhouse accounts in accordance with Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change guidelines,” a department spokesperson said, citing the approach detailed in the national inventory report. “The methods and data are reviewed every year by teams of international experts assembled by the UNFCCC secretariat in Bonn. The international architecture that governs the National Greenhouse Accounts is designed to give confidence that the data are accurate, comparable and time-series consistent.” ‘It’s hard to understand and it’s hard to explain’ Martine Maron, professor of environmental management at the University of Queensland, said the complexity of the processes was one reason emissions from land clearing had not drawn as much public scrutiny. “It’s a huge issue in Australia,” Maron said. “It’s been a problem for a long time. It’s really, really hard to understand and it’s hard to explain.” “Essentially [NCAS and Slats] are using the same input data but they’re classifying change in different way,” she added. “I’ve spent years trying to get my head around it.” Butler said there were reasons to question the accounting even after recent revisions, including the increasing area assessed to be regrowth on previously cleared land. “It’s now worth about 10-12m tonnes [of CO2] of sequestration a year,” he said. “That’s the bit … I have the least faith in I suppose, and it is a significant part of the story.” Head of consulting at Ndevr Environmental, Matt Drum, and also formerly with the federal department of climate change, said land use changes were not reliably calculated, so his firm focused on tracking carbon emissions by the rest of the economy. “It’s not a bit of a black box, it’s a massive black box,” Drum says. “It’s at the point where you report without LuluCF – it’s much more reliable.” The Greens leader, Adam Bandt, said Scott Morrison “boasts of meeting and beating terrible targets, but his claimed 20% emissions cuts [since 2005] rely on accounting changes that the experts now question”. “Take out the land sector and it’s unstable greenhouse accounting and the Liberals haven’t reduced emissions since 2005 at all,” Bandt said. Phinn and Butler said space-based remote sensing was rapidly advancing and systems would soon be available that more precisely detected height and density of vegetation, so that regrowth of grass, for instance, was not treated as if it were more woody plants. Whether governments use the technology to adjust and even reinterpret past data is another matter. With the land sector also accounting for more than 60% of Australian carbon credits and more than three-quarters of contracted abatement under the ERF, potentially billions of dollars of offsets and sequestration claims are riding on good data. Will Steffen, a researcher at ANU, helped advise the Labor government under Julia Gillard on how to nudge companies to reduce their emissions rather than rely on offsets to do their work. “[We wanted] to make sure that there wasn’t a get out of jail free card by using land offsets in place of actually reducing fossil fuel emissions,” Steffen said. “The land sector screamed up and down that that wasn’t fair because then as now there are companies in those industries who make money off offsets.” Steffen said: “I think we need a really thorough review of the entire land clearing process. That’s not just accounting, but how we use land carbon vis-a-vis fossil fuel emissions.”The anticipation of Antonio Conte’s first Premier League game in charge of Spurs proved more captivating than the reality, though an education for the new manager all the same. It is 227 minutes and counting without a shot on target in the Premier League for a team containing Harry Kane, Son Heung-min and Lucas Moura. The heart on display appeased their new manager; the creativity remains an obvious work in progress. Everton had the edge in a feisty draw high on incident but low on quality. Rafael Benítez’s team had a strong penalty awarded and then overturned after a review and Mason Holgate sent off for serious foul play eight minutes after his introduction, also after a pitchside review by the referee, Christopher Kavanagh. Their performance was a marked improvement on recent efforts and, despite surviving a scare when Giovani Lo Celso struck a post in the 88th minute, they comfortably contained a Spurs team that has failed to register a shot on target in two consecutive Premier League games. That is the first time they have drawn such an extended blank since the data was introduced in 2003-04. “I have to be happy for different reasons,” Conte said. “The first is that Goodison Park is not an easy place to come to play, especially after a very intensive week for the players and club. emotionally. Then we played on Thursday and today I have to be happy because I started to see some tactical situations [develop]. For sure we can improve and we have a lot of space for improvement – tactically, physically and mentally. But today I have seen the heart of my players, the passion, the will to fight and to sacrifice.” Conte stuck with the same personnel and 3-4-3 formation that opened his reign with a chaotic win against Vitesse. There was certainly greater energy from Spurs than in Nuno’s final game against Manchester United and an urgency to find Kane as quickly as possible. In case of any doubt over the new manager’s instructions, he spent most of the first half with his left arm raised in the air and his index finger pointing towards the upper Gwladys Street end. More intensity, however, did not produce more of a threat. The more concerted pressure came from Everton, although they too failed to test the opposition goalkeeper in the first half bar a Ben Godfrey drive drilled straight at Hugo Lloris. Their reaction to three successive Premier League defeats and alarming displays against Watford and Wolves was, however, what Benítez and Goodison had demanded. Fabian Delph was rewarded for stemming the Wolves tide as a second-half substitute on Monday with his first start since December. The 31-year-old, who has endured an injury-plagued career at Everton, made another positive impact. His composure on the ball and aggression without it underpinned a much improved performance from Benítez’s side. There was some consternation in the crowd when he was replaced by Tom Davies in the 60th minute but three months out with a shoulder injury prior to Molineux – and a yellow card – explained that decision. Delph created one of Everton’s few first-half opportunities with a floated cross that Michael Keane headed wide. The defender’s header, Godfrey’s shot and a Demarai Gray effort that wascharged down by the Spurs defence constituted the home side’s chances before the break. Everton were in the ascendancy for much of the second half, however, and a flat game erupted into life moments after Delph’s departure. Kavanagh awarded a penalty when Richarlison, racing on to Anthony Gordon’s header into the area, appeared to be clipped by Lloris as he attempted to round the Spurs’ keeper. VAR advised Kavanagh to take another look on the pitchside monitor, where he adjudged Lloris to have played the ball before the man and overturned his decision. “If that happened in the middle of the pitch it would be a foul and so it should be the same in the penalty area,” argued Benítez. Conte countered: “It is impossible to make a mistake after looking at the VAR. The referee made the right decision.” Richarlison claimed a second penalty for a nonexistent handball by Pierre-Emile Højbjerg, leading to an argument with three irate Spurs players and a booking for both the Brazilian and Cristian Romero. Davies scuffed a shot straight at Lloris and Gray steered a first-time effort wide followingafter a neat exchange between the substitute and Lucas Digne. Conte’s team were on the back foot yet almost won the game on the counterattack when Holgate, introduced for Allan, who has flu, was dispossessed by Oliver Skipp. Spurs’ subThe Spurs substitute Lo Celso took over, cut inside the Everton defence and curled a powerful shot beyond Jordan Pickford from 25 yards. Lo Celso was into his celebratory run when the ball cannoned off a post to safety. A pitchside review cost Everton again when Kavanagh was advised to reassess the yellow card he had shown to Holgate for a foul on Højbjerg. It was upgraded to a straight red when the match official had a clear view of the defender’s horrible lunge on the midfielder’s knee. The often reckless Holgate could have no complaints. In the dying moments against 10 men there was no sign of a breakthrough from Spurs. Their wait for a shot, and Everton’s for a win, continues.Boris Johnson has no intention of placing Owen Paterson in the House of Lords, government sources have indicated. Speculation that the former Conservative cabinet minister might get a peerage, despite the Commons standards committee ruling that he committed an “egregious case of paid advocacy” in defiance of Commons rules, was triggered by a lobby briefing on Friday at which the PM’s spokesperson pointedly refused to rule out the prospect. The briefing prompted Keir Starmer, the Labour leader, to write to the House of Lords appointments commission asking it to issue a public statement saying Paterson was unsuitable for a peerage. But on Sunday, government sources went further, apparently ruling out a peerage for Paterson, at least in the short or medium term. One source familiar with the thinking in No 10 on the matter said there was “no intention of a peerage at all”. The source also strongly rejected suggestions that Paterson, who announced his resignation as an MP on Thursday, had already been offered a seat in the Lords, or that Johnson had discussed the prospect with his fellow Brexiter. Downing Street has yet to quash Paterson’s hopes of a peerage with an on-the-record statement, but ministers and officials are likely to be asked about this again in the coming days. Last year, Johnson gave a peerage to Peter Cruddas, a former Conservative party co-treasurer, even though the appointments commission said it could not approve him getting a peerage because of his past involvement in a cash for access controversy.In the end Murrayfield was rocking. This might not have been a classic – too many mistakes for that, too little continuity – but it had plenty of high points, plenty of tension and drama. And then it had the result. No one should get carried away, however much the sell-out crowd had cause to roar, but here is another important win for Scotland – and this against the No 3 side in the world, who lately recorded consecutive victories over the world champions. Murrayfield has been re-established as a formidable fortress for a while now, but there remains the hint of a fault line in Scotland’s confidence in general, which this win should help them work on. And next the world champions, South Africa, come calling. What might a win next weekend do for that confidence. “I loved it,” said Stuart Hogg, Scotland’s captain. “We’re chuffed to bits with that. Australia are a very, very good side. The exciting thing for us is we can get better as well. We’ve taken another step forward. There’s still a lot to work on. And the world champions are coming next Saturday. So exciting times.” Scotland’s two tries, the second midway through the second half a flamboyant dive by the debutant hooker Ewan Ashman, trumped Australia’s one, but the tourists might point to the two they had disallowed in the first half for clear-out infringements. The Wallabies’ first-half performance did not particularly feel of a two-try quality, but Scotland will know the Wallabies denied themselves in both incidents, rather than Scotland stopping them. Australia might cite, as well, the disruption they have suffered, particularly in their back line with the withdrawal from the tour of Quade Cooper and Samu Kerevi. Their back play did lack a certain fluency. If any side were purring in that department, it was Scotland, now brimming with Lions. Perhaps best of all, though, from Scotland’s point of view, was that this was a tight game, of the type the Scotland of a not-so-distant vintage might well have blown. Here they showed enough class and nerve to claim a well-deserved win. They turned around 7-3 ahead, but the first half never quite hit the heights. The referee Romain Poite, in his final Test, was moved to blow his whistle for a penalty 17 times. The high point of the early exchanges was a fabulous Hogg break down the left, from which Australia were lucky to escape with just a penalty, but we had to wait until the second quarter for the game’s first score. The majority of penalties were in Scotland’s favour, but they turned down all early shots at goal. The policy paid off at the third attempt, when a smoothly executed shift drive at a lineout was finished by Hamish Watson. Australia then grew into the game, even if their handling was loose at times. They thought they had equalised, when Michael Hooper scrambled over between the posts, but the preceding clear-out by Allan Alaalatoa fell foul of that dilemma of the modern player – what to do with the arms. Alaalatoa’s clipped the chin of Matt Fagerson, the Scotland tackler, and Alaalatoa was sent to the sin bin. Try rescinded. A let-off, without doubt. James O’Connor, called up for duty at fly-half, had missed an early penalty horribly, but he was afforded another chance just before the break, which he landed from much the same position. On the board at last, Australia followed up with a try four minutes into the second half, Rob Leota picking a fine line after an attacking scrum to put the Wallabies in the lead. The match came alive then, but Scotland in particular. Sam Johnson was worked clear on the loop but turned the ball inside to Ali Price, with a Lions winger unmarked outside him. No matter, a 50/22 by Finn Russell set up a platform from which Duhan van der Merwe, the Lions winger, was worked clear. A superb tackle by Nic White felled him, but Scotland were on the front foot now. And Australia were running out of front row. After a couple of HIAs for their tightheads, James Slipper was forced to switch across, and the Scots sensed a weakness. They scrummed two penalties. From the second, Ashman, an early replacement at hooker, finished spectacularly in the corner, the scoring pass supplied by his mate in the front row, Pierre Schoeman. Thus Scotland had a two-point lead entering the final quarter. The game became edgy again. Australia did manage to work through the game’s first passage of any significant number of phases, earning a penalty at the end of it, which O’Connor landed to regain the lead with quarter of an hour remaining. So Scotland turned to the scrum again, earning another penalty, which Russell converted a few minutes later. Australia pressed in the final 10 minutes, but a brilliant turnover and counter saw them back deep into their own territory, where Scotland were able to play out the final minutes. The crowd were ecstatic, not only with the win, but with the sense that their team continues to grow.Nearly 100 teachers have been arrested in Sudan as two days of civil disobedience and strikes in protest at last month’s military coup began. A teachers’ union said security forces had used teargas against its members outside the education ministry building for Khartoum state, where 87 were arrested and many were beaten. One of the teachers at the protest, Khalfalla Mohamed, said lawyers had told him his colleagues had been taken to the military headquarters after prosecutors refused to release them on bail. “We just protested and suddenly the whole place filled with all sorts of security forces, firing teargas and all,” he said. At least one, a headteacher, had her leg broken. Unknown men in plain clothes arrested another five teachers in Neyala, the capital of South Darfur, according to an officer at the education ministry in the city who spoke anonymously. “They arrested Gamal Margan, who is in charge of the education of the shepherds. They kidnapped him when he finished his prayers. The rest of them were arrested from their houses,” he said. “We are currently at our offices but nobody here is working because of the civil disobedience and also in protest of our colleagues who have been arrested and we don’t know why.” Last month’s coup halted a power-sharing arrangement between the military and civilians that had been agreed after Omar al-Bashir’s overthrow in 2019 and was meant to lead to democratic elections by late 2023. Top civilians including several ministers were detained, and the prime minister, Abdalla Hamdok, was placed under house arrest. Since the coup, led by Sudan’s top general, Abdel Fattah al-Burhan, mediation efforts involving the UN have sought the release of detainees and a return to power sharing, but sources from the ousted government say those efforts have stalled. Activists demanding the military exit politics have announced a schedule of protests leading up to mass rallies on 13 November under the slogan: “No negotiation, no partnership, no compromise.” Safia Amen, a teacher in Omdurman on a two-day strike, said: “We are not working because they kicked out many teachers from their positions … Burhan, for example, kicked out the head of the education in the state for no reason.” Amen, who would not give her her real name for safety reasons, added: “We are unhappy on what has happened in this country – after all these steps we took, the military wants us to go back. We are also on strike against the weak wages of the teachers with this harsh economic situation.” Local “resistance committees” and the Sudanese Professionals Association (SPA), which led demonstrations in the uprising that toppled Bashir, are organising a campaign of protests to try to reverse the military takeover. Some main roads have been closed by makeshift barricades in Omdurman, residents said. Others were closed in Khartoum el-Shajara and Jabra neighbourhoods, in the south of the capital. Security forces were also seen moving around in northern Khartoum, some of them carrying sticks. Bankers have joined the civil disobedience movement. One said as many as 80% hadtaken part in the strike despite many losing their jobs after protests last week. Five managers at five different banks were sacked and replaced by a decree from Burhan on Saturday. Western powers have paused economic assistance to Sudan and say relief on tens of billions of dollars of foreign debt is at risk unless there is a return to the democratic transition.Quibbles over refereeing aside, that was a heartening win for Scotland and a deserved one too. Congratulations to the boys in blue. Thanks for reading and emailing today and see you soon for more Autumn International Series action ... Bye for now. Michael Aylwin’s take on that yellow card for Alaalatoa: “Australia thought they had equalised, when Michael Hooper scrambled over between the posts, but the preceding clear-out by Allan Alaalatoa fell foul of that dilemma of the modern player - what to do with the arms. Alaalatoa’s brushed the cheek of Matt Fagerson, the Scotland tackler, and Alaalatoa was sent to the sin bin. Try rescinded.” Michael Aylwin is on the scene for us at Murrayfield, and here is his match report: Norman Perry sends an email entitled ‘Hooper’s disallowed try’: “Outrageous to give a yellow card. Not even a penalty for me. If no penalty, then perfectly valid try. “What game is being played these days? Not Rugby Union as I knew it. Might as well play touch rugby. I know that we have to look after players’ welfare, but this is supposed to be a contact sport.” I have a lot of sympathy with this view, I must say. The contact with Fagerson’s head was negligible. And I’m not sure it was a ‘swinging arm’ so much as a genuine attempt to clear out the ruck. I think Australia can count themselves unlucky with the decision, which of course was a double whammy in a tight game, with the yellow card and the disallowed try. Celebrate good times, come on! Romain Poite is awarded the match ball following the conclusion of his last Test match as a referee. He’s had a good innings. Did he get every call right? Maybe not, but it’s not the easiest game to referee, is it. Well played. The Scotland captain Hogg speaks: “It’s brilliant ... we’ve worked incredibly hard over the last little while to put ourselves in the position to win Test matches .. we’ve been waiting over 600 days for this [a crowd at Murrayfield] and it was worth it. “For me there’s no better feeling than winning here. It’s the best feeling you can get ... but the job’s only half done [in the Autumn Series] - we are two games in, and two wins ... it’s going to be a massive challenge for us next week [against South Africa]. “We back the boys up front. Look, we back the boys, they gave us another great platform [to attack and to win].” As they replay Ashman’s try, it’s notable that a massive, muscular carry by a winger – Duhan van der Merwe – created the necessary space and the momentum for a hooker, Ashman, to nip over in the corner. It’s hard to describe what a good finish that was, he leapt for the line and somehow managed to dot down, under massive pressure, while being forced into touch. Gregor Townsend, who has never been beaten by Australia as Scotland head coach, has a chat: “I can’t hear a lot, but that’s because of the amazing atmosphere ... in the coaching box, we were getting a bit emotional at the end, it’s been a while since we had the supporters here ... it wasn’t the best of games, but the resolve, and the impact the bench made, was tremendous. We’ve not had this atmosphere for a year and a half ... and we respect those opposition hugely, and it was such a tight game ... it means so much to us as a group. “I think we knew at half-time we weren’t as accurate as we know we can be ... but there was a fire about us in the second half which was great to see ... we grew more as we spent more time on the field together ... we’ll be better for this experience, it’s the first time this team has played together since March: It’s a huge challenge [against South Africa next week], they were very good yesterday, we’ll have to be very strong up front, but we believe there is more to come from this team.” The player of the match Hamish Watson, who looks absolutely thrilled and cannot stop smiling, has a chat with Amazon Prime: “To have 67,000 back at Murrayfield, it’s absolutely amazing, we’ve been waiting a long time for this ... what a really special day, thank you to everyone in the stadium, it was amazing, thank you. “We had to dig really deep for that one, Australia are a class team, they’ve won five on the bounce I think, and they’ve beaten some top teams ... the boys dug in and showed a lot of character ... it’s something special we are building here. “We’ve got a tough game again next week [against South Africa], with a fast turnaround... it was a very nervy last 10 minutes sitting on the bench ... it was amazing, thanks again.” They’ve done it! A nervous wait for the whistle, and a frenetic, error-strewn match overall, but Scotland got over the line. You must say that the right team won, but at the same time, Australia showed enough that you would not have begrudged them a narrow victory of their own. It was a stunning finish by Ashman, the debutant hooker, that proved so important for Townsend’s men. Australia were under-strength but they displayed all the spirit and ability that Dave Rennie has instilled in them in recent months. 80 min: Scotland have the ball, and have the lead, and they choose to kick for the corner. They duly win their lineout ball, and form a maul to eat up a few seconds. 77 min: Australia fluff their possession – first with a horrible pass from a forward that McDermott does well to tidy up and keep the attack going. Then the ball is turned over and Scotland roar down to the other end with a scintillating counterattack. Hogg, in particular, produces a lovely piece of skill and then it’s with Horne, who chooses to keep the ball when it looks like the right option was to offload to the inside with a couple of teammates waiting. Russell then tries a crossfield kick but it’s too long ... and moments later Beale misses touch at a key moment with his own kick. This is breathless stuff. Scotland lead by two. 75 min: Stuart Hogg has never been involved in a win against Australia. He’ll be gutted, particularly, if this one slips away, but Scotland are holding steady for now. And as I say that, their scrum is destroyed by Australia, and the Wallabies win a penalty. Australia have more than five minutes to play with. They kick the penalty for touch, and will have a bash at winning this ... 74 min: Don E isn’t happy: “How many times can a Wallabies supporter say ‘Fuck’ during a game?” he asks on email. 73 min: Beale tries to smash through the Australian line, but is gang-tackled and coughs up a turnover. 72 min: Jamie Hodgson, Jamie Bhatti, Oli Kebble, Josh Bayliss and George Horne are all on for Scotland now and Townsend empties his bench and tries to find some freshness to make the difference in the final few minutes. 71 min: Squeaky bum time now. One mistake - or one piece of brilliance - wins this match. Scotland win a scrum penalty in their opponents’ half. Hooper looks flabbergasted with the decision. Scotland celebrate. Russell has a chance to kick them back into the lead ... and he nails it. Great kick – Scotland edge ahead again. A tense final 10 minutes or so awaits. Worrying times for Scotland as they are punished by the boot of O’Connor. If Australia can grind out a win here it will be a seriously impressive achievement against a very confident Scottish side. Andrew Cotter sounds rather depressed as he commentates on that ball floating through the posts. Kurtley Beale is a replacement for the Wallabies, along with Tate McDermott, while Tom Wright and Nic White go off. 63 min: Australia win a penalty and attack with purpose into the Scottish half. These players have mostly had a long season already, but they look like there is plenty left in the tank and Scotland are going to have to give it everything to close this out ... And Poite penalises Scotland at the breakdown, and Australia have a penalty right in front of the posts, albeit from a fair way outside the 22. James O’Connor will kick it. 61 min: Into the final 20 minutes, and Scotland have their noses in front after that stunning finish by Ashman. Sam Skinner has gone down with an injury and needs some treatment. WHAT a finish by the hooker Ashman on debut. He dives for the corner, as Perese tried to force him into touch, and manages to twist his body and place the ball with assurance over the try-line. The celebrations are wild from players and fans as Scotland get back in front ... Russell misses a tricky conversion, however, so a penalty would take Australia back into the lead. 59 min: Another scrum for Scotland five metres out, trusting their set-piece. And is Ashman over in the corner?? The TMO will take a look. 56 min: Scotland have a scrum five metres out. With a little over 20 minutes to play, there are just three points in it. As expected it’s turning into a closely-fought Test match, although perhaps the quality of rugby has been a little lower overall than we had hoped for. Hogg now bursts down the right, but loses it forward. 54 min: Russell slams a brilliant 50:22 spiral kick to the right corner and Scotland have the lineout. They win the set-piece ball, are initially driven back, but then spin the ball left and Van der Merwe is sent haring for the corner. He can’t get there – Scotland have the penalty advantage and work through the phases. A Hogg pass is intercepted, but Poite brings it back for the offside penalty advantage. 52 min: Scotland come again, into the Australia 22, but Paisami pulls off a wonderful tackle-and-jackal, wins the penalty and the Wallabies can relieve the pressure. That was world-class. 47 min: Scotland scorch down their left wing, with Johnson getting his hands on the ball after Russell sets up Hogg, and Hogg pops a nice little pass to Johnson. They are nearly over in the corner. But some desperate and impressive scramble defence by Australia keeps the hosts out. Then there’s an odd moment off the pitch when Russell slightly man-handles a Wallaby water carrier as both wait for a clearing Wallaby kick to drop out of the sky. That probably sums up the frustration Scotland are feeling ... now the TMO Jonker asks Poite to tell Nic White to calm down (he just indulged in a bit of afters with a Scottish forward after a kick was nearly charged down). The Wallaby No 6 crashes over from fairly short range after a fine carry by Perese, and Australia lead! You sense that had been coming – even if Australia are a man down at the moment - Scotland are failing to impose themselves on their opponents at the moment. The sin-bin is over and Ala’alatoa is back on the field. 44 min: Taniela Tupou goes off for an HIA after a thunderous collision with Sam Johnson and I fancy he won’t be coming back, he looks totally dazed. 43 min: It remains a bit of a scratchy, imprecise game. Both teams are showing ambition, but I fancy Gregor Townsend will be hoping for much better execution from his side in the second half. 41 min: With Australia under a bit of early pressure, Zander Fagerson gives away an early penalty for going off his feet at a ruck. Here we go. Breaking news: Owen Farrell didn’t have Covid-19 after all, and will be available to face Australia at Twickenham next weekend: Plenty to unpack from that 40 minutes of rugby ... Izaia Perese came on for Jordan Petaia just before the half-time whistle. The Wallabies are down to 14 for the moment, but they are finally on the board. Fainga’a rumbles towards the Scottish line and is tackled. Ala’alatoa clears out the ruck, potentially dangerously, after which Hooper nabs the ball and does superbly to smash through a challenge and reach over the try-line under the posts. The TMO is taking a look, and decides there is contact with a Scottish head from Ala’alatoa with a swinging arm. It’s a yellow card for Ala’alatoa and of course the try will not stand. I think that’s a phenomenally harsh decision, there was no malice in the challenge by Ala’alatoa and any contact was negligible, but as always if you slow something down and replay it 10 times, it is possible to imagine there has been an infringement. It was slightly careless at very worst. That’s such a massive call in the context of the game too. What do you think? It’ll be interesting to hear the half-time analysis of that one but I think it’s a nonsensical decision. On top of that, the video replays suggest Zander Fagerson had his fingers in the eye area of Hooper in the bust-up that followed the try. 34 min: Len Ikitau directs a fine kick deep for the corner, which looks like it might be a brilliant 50:22 effort, but it’s adjudged to be Scotland’s throw into the lineout as perhaps he’d snuck over halfway before kicking it. Scotland throw it long and manage to clear the danger as we approach half-time. Scotland lead 7-0. 30 min: A searching low kick to the right corner, as Australia look at it, is tidied up impressively by Darcy Graham, who was under plenty of pressure from willing Australian runners. The Wallabies win an attacking lineout and Leota crunches into contact but is then penalised for holding on to the ball too long. 28 min: After a nip-and-tuck first 20, that try for Scotland feels very significant. Russell is warming to his task, looking to unleash this very capable Scots backline at every opportunity. Now, though, Australia win a penalty with Scotland on the front foot thanks to a tremendous bit of work by Hooper at the breakdown, ripping the ball away from the tackled Zander Fagerson. It would seem that our very own Gerard Meagher isn’t a fan of Jonker’s intervention in trying to rule out that try: That’s top work from Scotland. Ritchie wins a nice clean lineout, and a crunching drive from the Scottish forwards takes Hamish Watson crashing over the line. The TMO has a look. Poite says it’s a try. But it looks like the TMO, Marius Jonker, thinks there may have been an obstruction, with three Scottish forwards coming together to start the drive for the line ... It was Gilchrist who nabbed the ball after the lineout, then Watson took it and flopped over. Anyway, the try stands, and Russell clips a confident conversion straight through the posts. Good work from Townsend’s men. 20 min: Hogg fields another high kick and smashes up the middle. Russell gets the ball in hand and pulls off an absolutely lovely one-handed offload to Schoeman, despite being double-tackled by two opponents, one of whom is the powerful Hooper. In the next phase of play, as Scotland near the Australia line, the visitors and penalised for offside. Russell kicks for touch ... 18 min: The Wallabies are on the front foot now and punch their way up to nearly under the Scottish posts, but Poite spots an infringement by Leota (I think) and the hosts can clear. 15 min: Scotland win another scrum penalty but then run the ball off the advantage. Russell fizzes one pass right, then comes back to the left, and Hogg shows brilliant strength and elusiveness to burst down the left wing and into the Australian half. He passes inside as the Australia defence tries to scramble, and then it’s with Van der Merwe on the left touchline. The wing is tackled, and at the breakdown an Australian hand dips in and scoops the ball away, but Poite says the ball wasn’t out, and it’s a Scottish penalty ... they choose not to kick, smelling blood near the Australia line, but the Wallabies survive and soon mount a quick counter of their own with O’Connor kicking downfield. Exciting stuff, but with nearly 20 minutes played, it’s still 0-0. 12 min: George Turner, the Scottish hooker, goes off injured and looks distraught. Canadian-born Ewan Ashman of Sale comes on for his first cap, at the age of 21. 10 min: Still no score. Australia work through a few phases in midfield, then put up a garryowen, but the assistant referee has spotted an infringement and Scotland get a penalty and take it quickly, punching a hole in the Wallaby defence down the middle. Both sides are trying to run the ball, but there is a distinct lack of structure at the moment, and while there is ambition there is little precision. 8 min: At the first scrum of the match, which takes place on the Scottish 22 in a central area, the Wallaby prop James Slipper is penalised by Poite, and Scotland can clear their lines. 5 min: Australia win an early penalty and it’s a not a gimme for James O’Connor, but it’s not an especially difficult kick either, from around the 22 about a quarter of the way in from the touchline. It’s a horrible strike, though, and flies way right of the target, and we are still scoreless. 2 min: An interesting start. Stuart Hogg’s first contribution is tidy, fielding James O’Connor’s high kick and smartly offloading to Chris Harris, who crashes into contact on the Scotland right. The ball is worked back infield, where Finn Russell puts boot to ball, but his kick is charged down, and a flashy no-look offload from an Australia player is then swallowed up by an opponent. There is an attempted touch-finder by Russell which Kellaway does well to keep from going out of play. A frenetic start, with the kind of carefree offloading that would make Eddie Jones wince. Romain Poite blasts his whistle – his 72nd and final Test match. And we are off as the Wallabies kick off. Bagpipes! Flower of Scotland! Passionate fans, passionate players. Will the Wallabies be sent home to think again? Kick off is moments away. The teams are lined up. There is a moment to express rugby’s opposition to racism and discrimination, in the sport, and in the wider world ... and now it’s time for a rendition of ‘Advance, Australia Fair’. Five minutes until showtime. The players are coming out on to the pitch at a sold-out Murrayfield. I’m looking forward to this. “The schedulers have saved the weekend’s most intriguing contest for Sunday. All too often in recent years Scotland and Australia have presented as rugby’s equivalent of bridesmaids, but the Wallabies turn up to Murrayfield on a five-match winning streak, including a swaggering double over South Africa, the world champions. And Scotland will field seven British &amp; Irish Lions, which, by the standards of the rest of this century, must feel more than they know what to do with.” Gregor Townsend, the Scotland coach, speaks to Amazon Prime of his team selection – with six British &amp; Irish Lions coming into the lineup: “A lot of these players were here before Tonga, so they’ve been training for two weeks, and they’ve been training well ... it’s a big challenge, Australia have won five games in a row, they beat the world champions twice ... and they play a brand of rugby which is not too dissimilar to ours ... the pack have also shown, particularly against the Springboks, that they are a formidable outfit.” The Australia coach Dave Rennie – who used to coach Glasgow – has a chat: “We’ve improved ... we know there’s a lot more in us, and we know the challenges facing us while we’re in Europe ... Scotland will be really well prepared, they had a great Six Nations and we’ll be mindful of that. “The three guys from France [coming into the Australia squad] have brought a different dimension ... We’re in a good place ... Scotland are very patient, they can go multi-phase ... I’ve coached a number of those boys, and we are aware of their threats ... We think they might kick a bit more than they did against Tonga ... they’re a good side, very well balanced.” Weather update: It’s sunny and cold in Edinburgh and looks pretty ideal for a good game of rugby. Stephen Larkham, who is a pundit for Amazon Prime today, is getting some stick off his colleagues, including the presenter Jill Douglas, for turning up without a coat. Brave. Wayne Barnes took to Twitter this morning to wish today’s referee, Romain Poite, a happy retirement from officiating: this will be his final match, and he will apparently carry on as a police detective, his day job. He’s been one of the very best rugby union referees for a long time, in my opinion, and will be missed. Disagree? Tell me why via email or tweet @lukemclaughlin There is one change for Scotland from the team that defeated France at the end of the last Six Nations, with Pierre Schoeman coming into the front row for the injured Rory Sutherland. Compared to last week’s win over Tonga, Gregor Townsend has six Lions available to select, and all start today: Scotland Hogg (capt); Graham, Harris, Johnson, Van der Merwe; Russell, Price; Schoeman, Turner, Z Fagerson, Skinner, Gilchrist, Ritchie, Watson, M Fagerson Replacements Ashman, Bhatti, Kebble, Hodgson, Bayliss, G Horne, Hastings, Steyn As we know, there is no Cooper, Kerevi or Sean McMahon for the Wallabies, but it’s still a very handy looking team, with the lock Rory Arnold starting for the first time since the 2019 World Cup. Will Skelton and Kurtley Beale are named among the replacements, James O’Connor plays at No 10 in the absence of Cooper, and Michael Hooper is captain. Australia Kellaway; Wright, Ikitau, Paisami, Petaia; O’Connor, White; Slipper, Fainga’a, Alaalatoa, R Arnold, Rodda, Leota, Hooper (capt), Valetini Replacements McInerney, Bell, Tupous, Skelton, Samu, McDermott, Beale, Perese Referee Romain Poite (France) Missing the influential Samu Kerevi and Quade Cooper, Australia may have to come up with something new at Murrayfield, writes Bret Harris: Yesterday’s games produced a few predictable mismatches to go along with a couple of stirring arm-wrestles – namely Wales v South Africa in Cardiff and France v Argentina in Paris. It feels unlikely that this afternoon’s eagerly awaited encounter at Murrayfield, between two accomplished teams, will be settled by more than a score or two either way. The expectation is that a busy weekend of autumn Tests will be concluded in considerable style. The Wallabies arrive on a five-match winning streak, including two wins against the world champion Springboks, but are also missing key players such as Quade Cooper and Samu Kerevi, who have stayed with their clubs in Japan rather than join this tour of Europe. Scotland are looking and sounding very confident and back into the fold come the likes of Stuart Hogg, Duhan van der Merwe, Finn Russell, Chris Harris and Sam Skinner. With Russell pulling the strings from No 10, the home fans will expect plenty of heads-up, ball-in-hand rugby and Dave Rennie’s Australia will be aiming to reply in kind, so it should be an excellent match. Pre-match reading, teams and more coming up.Olympic champion Peres Jepchirchir won the 50th running of the New York City Marathon on Sunday in 2:22:39, surviving a thrilling three-way battle before sprinting for the finish line, and fellow Kenyan Albert Korir won the men’s race in 2:08:22. Jepchirchir is the first athlete to pick up Olympic gold and win the famed race in the same year, with compatriot Viola Cheptoo and Ethiopian Ababel Yeshaneh finishing second and third respectively on Sunday. American Molly Seidel, who took home the bronze from the Tokyo Games, finished fourth. Cheptoo was making her marathon debut and quickly found her brother, Bernard Lagat, who was broadcasting the race on ESPN, after she finished. Korir, who finished second in 2019, had established a 17-second lead through the 35km mark and leapt into the air as he broke the tape in Central Park, with Moroccan Mohamed El Aaraby finishing 44 seconds behind and Italian Eyob Faniel finishing third. Marcel Hug of Switzerland won the men’s wheelchair race for the fourth time, finishing more than six minutes ahead of the next racer for his first title since 2017. The 35-year-added yet another prize to a remarkable year that included four gold medals at the Tokyo Paralympics, including in the marathon. He also won the Boston Marathon last month, despite losing out on $50,000 for setting a course record after taking a wrong turn. Australia’s Madison de Rozario won the women’s wheelchair race, holding off past champions Tatyana McFadden and Manuela Schar for her first Big Apple victory. The 27-year-old also took gold at this year’s Tokyo Paralympic Marathon. The temperature hovered around 40F (4C) on Staten Island as the elite runners started at 8am, after the race when on hiatus for a year due to the Covid-19 pandemic. The field was cut by about 40% to around 30,000 runners, with efforts made to maintain distance between competitors near the start and finish lines.A watchdog had to prevent ministers breaching a strict code on political neutrality and independence during the search for new chairs for the BBC and the British Film Institute (BFI), the Guardian can reveal. A Freedom of Information Act response by the Office of the Commissioner for Public Appointments (Ocpa) showed that ministers were asked to replace interview panellists for the high-profile jobs because they were “not sufficiently independent”. The regulator has described such breaches as “threatening to undermine the independent status” of a role intended to bring “challenge and rigour” to finding appointable candidates for selection by cabinet ministers, including the prime minister. The regulator also stepped in twice to demand changes to the panel selecting potential candidates to chair the Office for Students, which regulates universities. It comes amid growing concern that the government is seeking to “rebalance” the boards of public bodies – particularly in the arts, heritage and broadcasting sectors – by appointing allies and blocking critics, in part to help it fight “culture wars”. The Tory party co-chair Oliver Dowden last month caused anger when he pledged to pick a new chair for the Charity Commission who would “reset the balance” after Dowden said some charities had been “hijacked by a vocal minority seeking to burnish their woke credentials”. This year, the regulator cleared the National Trust of breaching its charitable objectives in examining links between its properties and histories of colonialism and slavery, including Winston Churchill’s house at Chartwell. Charity bosses hit back, saying: “The commission must be above party politics.” Ministers have also been embroiled this week in a scandal over sleaze and attempts to undermine the independent parliamentary standards watchdog. On Thursday, Jonathan Evans, the chair of the committee on standards in public life, cited concerns about ministers “seeking to pack assessment panels with majorities of political affiliates” and called for the commissioner for public appointments to be consulted on all panellist choices. Lord Evans also called for the role to be strengthened in primary legislation so ministers could not abolish the watchdog or limit its powers if they objected to its actions. Peter Riddell, who until last month was the commissioner for public appointments, took the action on interview panellists before the appointments were made in January and February this year. In all cases, the ministers followed his advice and appointed different panellists whom the watchdog judged sufficiently independent. The appointments to lead the BBC and the Office for Students prompted public controversy because of their links to the Conservative party. Richard Sharp, a former adviser to the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, who has donated more than £400,000 to the Tory party, was picked as BBC chair, while the Conservative peer and donor James Wharton was selected to oversee the Office for Students. Also in February, Tim Richards, the founder of Vue cinemas, was selected to lead the BFI. Richards has not declared any political activity, which is defined as standing for elected office, donating to a party, or working or speaking publicly for one. Vacancies on the boards of public bodies include a new chair for Ofwat, which regulates the water and sewage companies that have been accused of polluting seas and rivers while making substantial profits. There are no rules preventing ministers from appointing political allies to roles leading public bodies. However, the panels selecting appointable candidates for the highest-profile positions must include a non-political senior independent panel member (SIPM). Riddell disagreed with ministers’ choices of SIPMs, who “were not sufficiently independent as set out in the [public appointments] code”, which requires them to not be politically active, to be independent of the department and of the body concerned, and to be familiar with senior recruitment and the public appointments principles. The individuals removed from the panels have not been named, with Ocpa citing Freedom of Information Act exemptions and suggesting this could “inhibit the free and frank provision of advice and exchange of views” and “prejudice the effective conduct of public affairs”. In a tweet last October, Riddell said he had challenged panellist choices and stressed “they need to be independent of the party”. Riddell told the Guardian the five-strong panel assembled by the Department for Education for the Office for Students role included three people “clearly with Tory party links and arguably a fourth had some ... Also there was no one with recent higher education student experience.” The final panel included Theresa May’s former chief of staff Nick Timothy, the former Tory MP Eric Ollerenshaw and the Tory peer Laura Wyld. There is no rule against ministers appointing politically active panel members unless they are the designated SIPM. The Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport and the Department for Education, which oversaw the appointments, declined to comment. A government spokesperson said: “The commissioner found no breaches of the code in the cases highlighted; he was properly consulted by ministers as required.” Officials stressed that the number of people declaring significant political links to the Conservatives remained low, at 2% of the the 1,500 public appointments in the last year. Riddell said the problems with the Office for Students process made it “an outlier”, but he added: “The balance of some panels has led one to lift eyebrows … The row over that has had beneficial side-effects. The balance of panels of other big competitions have on the whole been pretty good.” The panellists recommending the BBC chair included Catherine Baxendale, who was shortlisted to be a Tory parliamentary candidate in 2017 and gave £50,000 to the party when David Cameron was prime minister. “The tempo has stepped up,” Riddell said of the government’s “rebalancing” of the leadership of public bodies. “Under the [Theresa] May government, May was, as you would expect, rather correct and she was concerned with getting good people to do things. She was quite robust on that. Clearly things changed two years ago and there was more of a desire to shift the balance.” He said he had seen potential candidates with anti-Brexit views rooted out but declined to give examples, citing confidentiality. “There is a bit of a political litmus test being applied negatively as much as positively … People focus on X and Y [appointing] allies, but actually just as significant is blocking people.” He said the practice applied particularly to national museums and galleries “where the arguments have been most intense”. Riddell has previously warned that “some at the centre of government want not only to have the final say but to tilt the competition system in their favour to appoint their allies”. In his final report, published last month, he said ministerial restraint was “clearly under threat in more politically polarised times”. He said “this argues for reaffirming, and in some cases, strengthening the independent element in the appointments process”.Trustee by trustee, chair by chair, the government is changing the political tone at the top of Britain’s national bodies, from museums to regulators. In the last year, Conservative donors and Tory former politicians have been picked to lead organisations including the Health and Safety Executive, the BBC and the Office for Students, which regulates universities. The latest crop of appointments are whiter and more male than before, but another growing concern is about ministers pushing the boundaries of acceptable norms by using political appointments to cement their party’s positions on issues ranging from the reappraisal of Britain’s colonial past to freedom of speech on university campuses. At the National Maritime Museum, the trusteeship of a British-Bangladeshi academic who challenged the board to “retell” Britain’s history in the wake of the Black Lives Matter movement was not renewed this spring. A Science Museum Group trustee who refused to sign up to the government’s controversial “retain and explain” policy felt she had no choice but to stand down. Rishi Sunak’s former adviser Richard Sharp, who has donated £400,000 to the Conservative party, is the latest chair of the BBC. At the exam regulator Ofqual, the new chair is Jo Saxton, a one-time policy adviser to the former education secretary Gavin Williamson. The Office for Students chair went from Blair-era adviser Michael Barber to James Wharton, a Tory peer and donor who ran Boris Johnson’s 2019 party leadership campaign. The appointees’ aptitude for the roles might not be in question, but their links to the government are visible. Ministers have always had a final say on who leads major public bodies, but their activism has increased, the former commissioner for public appointments Peter Riddell told the Guardian. “Things changed two years ago [when Boris Johnson became prime minister] and there was more of a desire to shift the balance,” he said. Critics fear the process is “chilling” the independence of national bodies and deterring good candidates, but ministers argue it is time for a rebalancing. In March, the Conservative party co-chairman, Oliver Dowden, told a webinar that the government wanted “proper governance of organisations to ensure … they don’t get pushed around by some noisy campaign group” and warned that the “new nihilist left is an emerging danger”. Last month, he sparked an angry reaction from charities with plans to install a new chairman of the Charity Commission to “rebalance” the regulator’s approach to charities “that appear to have been hijacked by a vocal minority seeking to burnish their woke credentials”. The scrutiny of what candidates think – as seen through their social media and blogs – has become disproportionate, at least according to Riddell. Candidates to become a commissioner for Historic England, which advises on the preservation of monuments and runs hundreds of historical sites, are being warned that social media feeds and blogs will be searched and information shared with ministers. Anyone interested in becoming the fundraising trustee for the National Portrait Gallery, home to pictures of the Bristol slave trader Edward Colston as well as musicians such as Ed Sheeran, must show a commitment “to the need to contextualise or reinterpret, but never to erase” – a reference to the government’s controversial “retain and explain” policy on exhibits, not least those that relate to Britain’s colonial past. Government sources play down the phenomenon. They stress that political activity is no bar to public appointment and that last year only 6% of all appointees to public bodies declared “significant political activity” – that is, standing for or holding office, donating or public speaking in the last five years. However, Jonathan Evans, the former director general of MI5 who chairs the committee on standards in public life, said this week he was concerned the system of regulating public appointments was too dependent on ministers acting with restraint and that the governance code still allows ministers to appoint people whom assessment panels have deemed not appointable. He also said independent members of assessment panels should start reporting on the conduct of their competitions and called for panels to be made up of a majority of independent members when the chairs of regulators are being picked. Riddell, who stood down last month as the regulator of public appointments, is balanced on the issue. He said in his final annual report that in most cases ministers and those running public bodies had shown “mutual restraint”, but that in the last year he had had to intervene more to stop bad practice. For example, “the wholesale rejection of reappointments”, which allows ministers to rapidly change the makeup of boards, is “infuriating chairs”. Asked by the Guardian about the appointment of political figures, he said: “We are now seeing a more intensive effort and it is reflective of politics being more polarised. But it is not unique that the chairman of the BBC would have political links. It happened under Blair with Gavyn Davies. It’s the intensity [that has increased].” A separate Guardian analysis of 30 “significant appointments” by ministers to leadership roles at public bodies in the last year found that most appointees did not have obvious Conservative links. The latest chair of the Equalities and Human Rights Commission, Kishwer Falkner, is a crossbench peer previously affiliated with the Liberal Democrats. Simon Thurley, the recently selected head of the National Heritage Memorial Fund is a well-regarded former chief executive of English Heritage. In nine cases, however, successful candidates had links to the current administration, including some former MPs and current peers. Changes are under way at trustee level, too. Aminul Hoque, a British-Bangladeshi academic, served on the board of the National Maritime Museum, the collections of which are entwined with Britain’s colonial ventures, until his reappointment was vetoed by ministers this spring. Hoque describes himself as an “east London boy, son of an immigrant” and said that after the Black Lives Matter protests of 2020 he had argued “this is … a moment in history where we as a responsible national and international museum … have an opportunity to retell a critical story of Britain’s past, present and future”. “These were the kinds of discussions I was having at boardroom level and then the news of my dis-appointment came,” he said. “What I was doing within the boardroom was no different to what I do in my lecture halls: I ask critical questions. My instincts are around humanity, equality, inclusivity, a multicultural, equal world … Just maybe I asked one too many critical questions.” He said that since his removal “many other museum trustees contacted us and said it’s happened to us”. Last year, it was reported that the historian Mary Beard was rejected by the government for a trusteeship at the British Museum amid suggestions it was because of her pro-EU views. She was later appointed to one of the trustee positions that are at the behest of the museum’s board rather than the government. Natural allies of the government are winning trusteeships too. Inaya Folarin Iman, a presenter at GB News, the right-leaning cable channel, was picked for the National Portrait Gallery board last month, joining the former Tory minister Chris Grayling, who was appointed last year. Sarah Dry, a science historian, was a trustee at the Science Museum until earlier this year when she withdrew her application for a second term. She had been asked to sign up to the government’s retain and explain policy that states “the government does not support the removal of statues or other similar objects” and “you should not be taking actions motivated by activism or politics”. She said signing would have meant accepting self-censorship, with the result that certain types of exhibition might not go ahead. “Today it could be contested heritage, tomorrow it could be any other number of issues on which trustees are required to explicitly support current government policy,” she told a panel event this month. “We can imagine Brexit, issues like immigration, human rights violations in China, decarbonisation … If I had signed up to such a policy, I would have forfeited the independent judgment and advice that is the trustee’s main function.” Dry told the Guardian that the tactic of asking trustees to sign up to government policy was having a “chilling effect’’. She said she knew of another person who had scrapped a plan to apply for a trusteeship at the Science Museum as a result. “The effect is to lose access to expertise in the boards, held by people who aren’t willing to sign what is effectively a loyalty oath,” she said. “It transcends the question of contested heritage. It is about independence of expertise on boards of trustees. It might limit the appeal of these positions to serious applicants.” She questioned the real intent of the retain and explain policy given “there isn’t an epidemic of objects being taken off display”. “The government is waging a phoney war against a fake opponent,” she said. “Policies such as retain and explain are being used to undermine independent advice. It is not that we must care for our objects – that is already written into trustees’ obligations – it’s that we must share a particular story about Britishness.” A spokesperson for the government said it rejected the claims of Riddell, Hoque and Dry and added: “Public appointments are made in line with the governance code for public appointments. There is no automatic presumption of reappointment and ministers may decide to make a reappointment, or launch a campaign to attract fresh talent. As the new commissioner for public appointments, William Shawcross, outlined, it’s right that we redouble our efforts to attract a range of talented people from across the UK to apply for public appointments.”The writer Bob Baker, who has died aged 82, had creative input into the screen careers of two very different, but hugely popular, canine creations: Doctor Who’s robot dog K9 and the largely silent but comically expressive Gromit in the Oscar-winning Aardman Animation films. Baker was first paired with the animator Nick Park to co-write The Wrong Trousers (1993), the second short film featuring the clumsy, cheese-loving inventor Wallace (winningly voiced by Peter Sallis) and his more intelligent dog Gromit. Packed with comic set pieces including a wave of chaotic destruction caused by a pair of wayward robotic trousers and a hair-raising sequence on a model train commandeered by a duplicitous penguin, it won the 1994 Oscar for best animated short film and the Bafta for best animation. Baker and Park collaborated again on A Close Shave (1995), which introduced a new character, Shaun the Sheep, and found Wallace falling for a shopkeeper, Wendolene (voiced by Anne Reid), who was secretly sheep rustling with her robot dog, Preston. Baker also co-scripted the Wallace and Gromit feature film The Curse of the Were-Rabbit (2005) and, back to short form again, the bakery based A Matter of Loaf and Death (2008). All three won Oscars, Baftas and much else besides. Years earlier, in 1977, when firmly established with the long-running BBC science-fiction series Doctor Who, Baker and his writing partner Dave Martin conceived – as a one-off character – the mobile computer K9, a repository of knowledge with a supercilious attitude. Voiced by John Leeson (and for a short time by David Brierley), the character ultimately stayed with the series until 1981 before being given his own spin-off pilot, K9 and Company (1981), which paired him with the Doctor’s former companion Sarah Jane Smith (Elisabeth Sladen). In 2006, K9 returned with Sarah Jane for an episode of Russell T Davies’ successful resurrection of Doctor Who – which led to his sporadic appearances in a second, more successful spin-off, The Sarah Jane Adventures (2007-11). Baker and the producer Paul Tams, after years of trying, got the character his own show and 26 episodes of K9 (2009-10) were made and broadcast in Australia, and distributed internationally by Disney XD, the Cartoon Network, BBC Kids and SYFY USA, among others. Baker was born in St George, Bristol, the younger son of Roma (nee Coleman) and Stanley Baker. His father was a signwriter who spent Bob’s early wartime childhood posted abroad repairing damaged aeroplanes. Bob was educated at Air Balloon Hill secondary modern school but left at 15 without passing any O-levels. He became an apprentice monumental mason at the Co-op in Bristol, carving inscriptions on gravestones (“so I was always a writer,” he quipped). He played in a jazz band with John Fortune, made a couple of short 16mm films, and in 1959 enrolled at the West of England College of Art in Bristol studying painting, with animation and film as a subsidiary. After helping Clive Donner to scout Bristol locations for the film Some People (1962) and a collaboration with the film-maker John Boorman, which ultimately came to nothing, he did various jobs including restoring old houses, one of which he turned into a small shop. Manning the till, he got to know Martin, a regular late-night customer who was an advertising copywriter, and they decided to try writing together. “Dave said it’s a bit like a marriage without the sex,” recalled Baker of their fruitful relationship, which involved keen, if contrasting, senses of humour and an instinctive anticipation of what the other was thinking. A productive collaboration with the producer Patrick Dromgoole at HTV generated a number of projects including their first television play and two dramas, Thick as Thieves (1971) and Machinegunner (1976), both with Leonard Rossiter. Dromgoole also produced their children’s drama serials Sky (1975), about a group of kids trying to help a time travelling youth with special powers, and King of the Castle (1977), the story of a troubled boy who uses fantasy to escape from his difficult home and school life. This dark, disturbing and surreal series remained one of their favourite engagements and was nominated for a Bafta. Meanwhile, they had sent a script to the BBC based on the antics, during military service, of Bob’s good friend Keith Floyd (the future TV chef), and this resulted in their first commission for Doctor Who, The Claws of Axos (1971), which found Jon Pertwee’s Time Lord up against an alien race trying to take advantage of mankind’s greed. It was the first of seven adventures that they wrote for the series including The Mutants (1972), a clever satire on colonialism in which an alien planet’s natural evolution is hampered by the interference of a futuristic representation of the British empire, and The Three Doctors (1972-73) which united Pertwee with his predecessors Patrick Troughton and William Hartnell (whose failing health necessitated a hasty rewrite). The Invisible Enemy (1977) debuted K9 and featured a miniaturised Doctor (by now Tom Baker) injected into his own body in order to fight an alien virus. Baker also contributed a solo effort – Nightmare of Eden (1979) – an ambitious story in which two spaceships fuse together after a hyperspace jump and get caught up in intergalactic drug smuggling. Other collaborations with Martin included Z-Cars (1974), Hunter’s Walk (1974-76) and the tough police series Target (1977-78) and although they parted ways professionally they remained firm friends until Martin’s death in 2007. Baker script-edited and wrote episodes for Shoestring (1979) and Call Me Mister (1986), conceived and script-edited Into the Labyrinth (1982, another fantastical show with time travel elements) and wrote the 1992 TV film The Jazz Detective. An autobiography – K9 Stole My Trousers – came out in 2013 and when he died he was developing a number of projects, some K9 related. Two marriages ended in divorce. Baker is survived by his third wife, Marie (nee Hum), whom he married in 1991, and her children, Jo, Clare, Rachael and Sarah Jane; a daughter, Cathy, and a son, Martin, from his first marriage, to Vicki Hollis; a son, Andy, and a stepdaughter, Laura, from his second marriage, to Angela Wynne; and seven grandchildren. A son, Paul, from his first marriage, died in 2020. • Robert John Baker, writer, born 26 July 1939; died 3 November 2021 • This article was amended on 8 November 2021. A photo caption referred to a model of K9; it is actually the original.The prospect of a trade war between the UK and the EU has edged closer, with Ireland giving the clearest hint yet that Brussels plans to suspend the entire trade deal struck last December if the British government suspends the Northern Ireland Brexit protocol. The Irish foreign minister, Simon Coveney, accused the UK of “deliberately forcing a breakdown” in negotiations over Northern Ireland, adding that there was still time to step back from the brink. “The trade and cooperation agreement that was agreed between the British government and the EU was contingent on the implementation of the withdrawal agreement, which includes the protocol. “One is contingent on the other, and so if one has been set aside, there is a danger that the other will also be set aside by the EU,” he told RTE on Sunday. His comments confirm speculation that the EU will not dwell on its options if the UK triggers article 16 of the Northern Ireland protocol, but will instead deploy measures in the wider Brexit withdrawal agreement that allow cross-retaliation. The EU would have to serve the UK with 12 months’ notice, but it would have a devastating impact on British business, industry leaders warned. Shane Brennan, head of the Cold Chain Federation, said businesses would be “sacrificed” with “a near prohibition on UK food exports”. Coveney’s comments come amid heightened expectation that article 16 will be triggered by the UK after the Cop26 climate crisis summit in Glasgow ends on Friday. The Sunday Telegraph reported that the UK has begun work on a post-article-16 scenario, with plans to pull funds from the Horizon Europe research programme and go it alone with alternatives. Coveney said there was still time for the UK to pull back from the brink, but that the EU felt that every time it offered an olive branch to the UK, the response of the British was to harden its position and “constantly raise new problems”. “You have to ask yourself the question, ‘Why are they doing that if they’re acting in good faith?’” Ireland’s European commissioner, Mairead McGuinness, said on Sunday that suspending the trade deal would be “very severe and something the EU would want to prevent”. However, she said patience with the UK was wearing thin. “Europe cannot stand by if article 16 is triggered [and ask], ‘What next? What does this mean?’ All of the work we’ve done as a commission is to try and solve problems, not to create them. But we have to be very firm as well,” she said. “If Lord Frost is entering the room with article 16 in his pocket, not willing to actually negotiate, we have to ask ourselves, ‘Do we continue on that basis?’” The row is also fuelling fears that a collapse in talks will result in pressure on the Dublin government to impose customs and standards checks on the island of Ireland. McGuinness gave assurances that the EU would not make such a demand. “There will be no border on the island,” she said. “There’s a huge sensitivity around this.” Talks between the EU and the UK enter their fourth week this week, with the Brexit minister, David Frost, to meet his counterpart, Maroš Šefčovič, on Friday.A lot can happen in four years. A brand new competition can offer rugby players around England the opportunity to play at an elite level week after week. Twenty‑nine of them can quit their day job and focus entirely on their sport. A single team, still the only fully professional side in the world, can transform themselves into the most dominant outfit on the planet. That is the condensed story of England’s Red Roses. Beaten 41-32 in the 2017 World Cup final by New Zealand, they have now put 99 points on the current champions across two one-sided contests. The latest result, a battering at Franklin’s Gardens, underlined a seismic shift in the global power balance. Everything England did throughout the 80 minutes was done at a higher tempo than the Black Ferns. Helena Rowland was blistering in the backline and brought 9,366 people to the edge of their seats every time she charged through a half-gap. Amy Cokayne scored a hat-trick but did so much more around the park, rampaging in the loose and marshalling a slick lineout and maul machine with unnerving proficiency. Stitching it all together was Zoe Harrison, the sort of fly-half whose cognitive reading of the game suggests she could bend spoons with her mind if she so desired. To single out any individual though would not tell the full picture as the main driver of this rout was the England set-piece. At the scrum and in the maul the forwards were merciless, shoving with a unified hive mind against a Kiwi pack that looked disjointed by comparison. The lineout, though, was something else. Surgical and flawless, it discouraged New Zealand from seeking touch on relieving kicks and served as a white totem of England’s control. It also provided the opening try with Cokayne the beneficiary of a rumbling shunt inside New Zealand’s five‑metre zone. Ellie Kildunne, omnipresent on attack and predictably safe under the high ball, scored the second shortly after which was set up near the right corner by Rowland’s quick hands. A penalty try just after a quarter of an hour, the result of Kendra Cocksedge’s knock-on which denied Lydia Thompson an easy score on the overlap, and Cokayne’s second from a maul just before half‑time, meant England went into the break with a 28-0 lead that still belied their ascendency. Cokayne completed her hat-trick five minutes after the restart from another maul. Harrison again nailed the extras in a perfect performance from the tee. New Zealand offered some fightback and Portia Woodman dotted down the best try of the match near the right touchline. It was just reward for an improvement at the breakdown and a rare period of blunder-free passing. It was not a sign of things to come. A howler at the lineout five metres from their own line saw the ball fall to Leanne Infante who scored the easiest try of her career. The replacement full-back Sarah McKenna was shown a yellow card for obstructing New Zealand ball and the extra space in the wide channel was exploited by Stacey Fluhler that came about from neat work in midfield. On the evidence of this particular move one can’t help but wonder what might have been if New Zealand’s backline had seen more of the ball and had not appeared so rushed when they had it. Reverting to basics, the substitute hooker Lark Davies motored over from close range after that lethal maul spluttered back into life. England’s eighth was a departure as Abby Dow cantered home down the left from 40 metres out. New Zealand had the final say as Fluhler turned provider for Woodman’s second, but it was barely a consolation.It was only a matter of time before Saturday Night Live utilized new featured player James Austin Johnson’s incredible impression of Donald Trump. That moment finally came in tonight’s cold open, by way of a new episode of Fox New’s Justice with Judge Jeanine, hosted by shrill lush Jeanine Pirro (Cecile Strong). After a brief, toothless and ultimately pointless minute spent with anti-vax doofus and now Covid-contagious quarterback Aaron Rodgers (Pete Davidson, putting zero effort into his characterization, as per usual), Pirro welcomes the Virginia governor-elect Glenn Youngkin (Alex Moffatt). The Republican is cagey about aligning himself too closely with Trump, which makes for an awkward turn when the former president makes a surprise appearance on the show to take credit for Youngkin’s victory, as well as ramble about various topics, including Star Wars, Dune, Marvel’s Eternals, Chris Pratt, Mario, Santa Claus and more. Beyond his uncanny ability to mimic Trump’s accent and singular speech patterns, Johnson’s impersonation works so well because he’s able to replicate the insanity and, even more importantly, the inanity of the ex-president’s stream of consciousness ramblings. This was something that Baldwin and the writers never really tapped into during Trump’s four years in office, but thankfully, the show seems keen on letting Johnson do his thing, as well they should. The studio audience – who, like the majority of home viewers probably aren’t familiar with Johnson’s prior work – were clearly blown away by him, alternately wheezing in laughter, gasping at the accuracy of it all and breaking out in applause not once, but twice. Actor Kieran Culkin makes his debut as host, but not his debut on the show. The Succession co-star spends the majority of his opening monologue reminiscing over the “three sketches (two of which are non-problematic)” he acted in 30 years ago when his brother Macaulay hosted. He plays a clip of Kevin Nealon lifting him up during the curtain call and hopes that one of the current cast or crew members will help him recreate the moment at the end of the night (he’ll get his wish, as it turns out). In his first sketch, Culkin tries to cancel his subscription with Spectrum cable over the phone, only to be passed around between a number of obnoxious, nosey, patronizing, aggressive and sinisterly upbeat customer service reps and techs. The sketch serves as a good opportunity to give most of the cast some time to shine – Andrew Dismukes’s helpful, but high Dominoes employee and Bowen Yang’s omniscient Spectrum super being are standouts – but the premise, as well as some of the lines (particularly Culkin’s repeated use of the word “triggered”) seem a little dated. In The Heist, Culkin, Mikey Day and Chris Redd play a team of hi-tech thieves whose plans are foiled when Redd’s cocky car thief can’t figure out how to drive a stick shift. A very one-note sketch, it’s still a good note. Redd has really been hitting his stride recently playing flashy dudes overcompensating for their massive insecurities. On The Dionne Warwick Show, the aloof diva (Ego Nwodim) questions/roasts her guests Miley Cyrus (Chloe Fineman) – or “Myles Circus”, as Warwick calls her; the “not famous any more” Jason Mraz (Culkin) and “more than a little nasty” Ed Sheeran (playing himself); and, replacing the “too scary” Machine Gun Kelly, Post Malone (Davidson), whom she immediately boots from her set and banishes back to “scary town”. “Sick and tired of interviewing people who are not icons”, her final guest is …herself (the actual Dionne Warwick). It’s nice to see Warwick get in on the joke and give Nwodim a big moment by joining her in a duet of What the World Needs Now Is Love. Next, a handful of co-workers run into each other in the men’s room. Their rote small talk gives way to dramatic inner monologues full of tortured, existential introspection: “Why did I laugh? Why did he laugh? Why are we not ourselves in the men’s room?” “Why am I talking so loud? In the men’s room my voice gets loud and I shout things like FOOTBALL IS CRAZY!” “Why am I commenting on his pee?!” A fun sketch, it kicks into higher gear when first Moffatt’s office alpha confesses to a murder, and then the great Tracy Morgan pops out of one of the bathroom stalls for a surprise appearance. (Great as it is to see Morgan, it’s a little disappointing that this is his only spot in the episode proper, as a promising-sounding Black Succession sketch featuring him was cut for time.) Then, Culkin plays a 90s skater turned professional jockey and Kentucky Derby winner in a, frankly confusing sketch. It’s unclear what the whole thing is parodying, as it alternately seems plays out like a pop-punk/ska music video, a hypothetical movie his older brother would have made in his heyday, and a commercial for one of Tony Hawk’s video games. Sheeran, who emerged from isolation after testing positive for Covid-19 only a few days ago, is the night’s musical act. He performs the song Shivers. On Weekend Update, Michael Che welcomes rapper and actor Ice Cube (Kenan Thompson), who recently lost a starring role in a movie because he refuses to get the Covid-19 vaccine. Vacillating between chiding Che (his repeated hurling of the word “Bozo!” is a highlight) and respectfully acknowledging his valid points, he laments how the vaccine mandate has forced him to pull the plug on a number of other projects, such as Barbershop 4: Just a Little Off the Sides, Thursday (a prequel to Friday), an M Night Shayamalan collaboration called Uh Oh, Twist Comin’, and Mama Mia! Cubed. Then, to discuss the Texas abortion ban currently up before the supreme court, Colin Jost welcomes Goober the Clown (Who Had an Abortion When She was 23) (Strong). Trying her best to lighten the mood – “it’s a rough subject so we’re gonna do fun clown stuff to make it more palatable!” – by blowing up balloon animals, squirting Jost with a prop flower and sucking down helium, Goober engages in a highly emotional reminiscence not only of her abortion, but of her gradual realization that the procedure isn’t something she should have had to hide or feel ashamed of. It’s often hard, if not outright impossible, to take Saturday Night Live seriously when it engages in some righteous political anger, given the show’s repeated willingness to buddy up with conservative politicians and figures. But this time it works, thanks entirely to Strong. Her go-for-broke, deeply felt performance is sure to be draw lots of impassioned vocal support – and, to be sure, probably a fair amount of rightwing backlash. Sheeran returns for a performance of Overpass Graffiti, before the show wraps up with a new Please Don’t Destroy digital short. Ben and Martin console John over a fresh breakup and convince him to call his ex and tell her how he really feels. Unfortunately, once he has her on the other line, he can’t help but to heap insults on her (mostly variations on “Fuck you!”). To their mutual horror, the other guys also involuntarily blurt out their true feelings when they take the phone from him. As with all PDD sketches, the laughs come less from zany premises or punchlines and more from the absurd non sequiturs, wild twists and idiosyncratic performances. Regardless, it’s an excellent choice to close the show, and a fitting bookend to a roundly solid episode that kicked off with what might well have been a star-making performance from another of the show’s freshmen.Tributes to Nuno Espiríto Santo had been few and far between this week until Antonio Conte found a fitting way to mark his predecessor’s reign. In the Italian’s first Premier League match in charge of Tottenham, just as in the Portuguese’s last, Spurs had no shots on target. Perhaps Nuno nodded on approvingly from afar. The paradox is that 0-0 felt the definitive Nuno scoreline, but his Tottenham never secured a stalemate in his ill-fated reign. Instead, after the breathless excitement of Conte’s bow against Vitesse came a game where, although Giovani Lo Celso struck the post, the only efforts on target came from Everton’s Ben Godfrey and Tom Davies. Suffice to say it was not quite what Conte planned. It ranked as an underwhelming return to the division he won in catalytic fashion in 2017. Whereas Nuno’s debut was the falsest of false dawns, with victory over Manchester City, Conte joins André Villas-Boas, the only other one of Spurs’ last eight managers to fail to win on his top-flight bow. It will take a little longer to make a difference on the pitch. Off it, there is already a shift in attitudes. Dissent and silence have been exchanged for a soundtrack borrowed from Stamford Bridge. A familiar, ominous chant returned about 50 minutes before Conte’s Premier League comeback began. He was making the journey across the pitch to the temporary huts still deployed as dressing rooms at Goodison Park when the early arrivals began serenading him. “Antonio, Antonio,” is a mantra with the unimaginative wording appropriated from Chelsea, but no elaboration is required. It is a statement of pride, a warning, almost a war cry for this most combative of coaches. Rewind a couple of years and Daniel Levy hailed José Mourinho – the second of four managers Tottenham have given a contract that was due to expire in 2023 – as one of the two best in the world. It felt a dubious assertion then, and still more so on a day when Mourinho’s Roma lost to Venezia, but it is safer to say they have one of the top half-dozen now. Tottenham could savour the sense they still have an allure. They have an incongruous combination of Galactico manager and mediocre team but they can boast again. The travelling fans brandished the tricolored flag of Italy; presumably freshly bought, rather than items already acquired to celebrate the back-up goalkeeper Pierluigi Gollini. Conte had responded to the first sight of them. He deviated from his path to pose for photographs; perhaps a few of those congregating around him had never bothered to get a selfie with Nuno. Maybe they have been deleted from phones, trying to erase any evidence of a forgettable era; if, indeed, the shortest managerial tenure in Tottenham’s history qualifies as an era. But the rapturous reception afforded to Conte was a reflection of who he is and who he isn’t. In any walk of life, a short cut to a welcome is to replace the unpopular or the unsuitable. The newcomer has done that, but there are few more dramatic upgrades than Nuno to Conte. The Portuguese was unwanted and unlamented, his successor feted and hailed. Nuno’s name was never sung. Or not as any kind of compliment, anyway; the bored Tottenham faithful had chorused “Nuno, make a sub” during the drabness of their Carabao Cup win at Burnley. It may take a little longer to get his football out of their systems, however. It felt as if they had forgotten how to create. There was graft, but insufficient craft. Even the club’s slogan showed Nuno was miscast. To dare is to do? For Nuno, to dull was to do. But Conte could not effect an early transition into entertainers. Unlike Tottenham, at least he makes for compelling viewing. He always did, even without the task of trying to Contefy a team in something of an identity crisis since Mauricio Pochettino’s sacking. Indeed, the second half was barely 30 seconds old when he and Eric Dier had a conversation that consisted of long-range pointing. He is both micro-manager and madman. Compared to him, even the famously meticulous Rafael Benítez looked laid-back on the touchline as Conte could not contain his frustration, the animated gestures of an angry perfectionist forming a contrast with Nuno’s beard-stroking passivity. Conte strayed far out of his technical area, forever eager to get closer to his charges to dispense orders. A manager who demands positional discipline from his players showed precious little himself. The fourth official, Anthony Taylor, gave up on the thankless task of trying to summon him back. Under Nuno, Tottenham ran the least in the Premier League. If Conte’s personal mileage is included, they might cover the most distance under his replacement. The Italian has brought three fitness coaches to Tottenham; perhaps one of them is employed simply to keep the manager in shape. His side showed energy. There were hints of intent. Briefly, Pierre-Emile Højbjerg was the furthest player forward, seeking to reach Harry Kane’s pass. There were chances for the two wing-backs, with Emerson Royal and Sergio Reguilón charged with recreating the extraordinary impact Victor Moses and Marcos Alonso had for his Chelsea. Ben Davies, who showed an adventurous streak to set up Spurs’ third goal against Vitesse, surged forward to thrash a shot over the bar. But it ended up as Tottenham’s first goalless draw for 60 games. Perhaps that counts as an immediate impact, but probably not the one Conte had in mind.My husband, Clifford Grant, who has died aged 91, was an operatic bass singer known for many roles with Sadler’s Wells Opera, Covent Garden Opera, Welsh National Opera, Glyndebourne, San Francisco Opera, and the Metropolitan and Australian operas. Cliff was born in Randwick, Sydney, to Patrick (“Pomp”) Grant, a commercial artist, and Rotha (nee Millar). Having completed his education at St Andrew’s Cathedral school, Sydney, he studied at the Sydney Conservatorium and began his singing career with New South Wales Opera and Victorian Opera. After being “discovered” by Joan Sutherland and Richard Bonynge in 1965, he joined the Joan Sutherland/JC Williamson opera company in Australia as principal bass. Later the same year he travelled to London to audition for Sadler’s Wells Opera (later English National Opera) where the managing director, Stephen Arlen, immediately offered him a contract as principal bass. He made his debut at “the Wells” as Da Silva in Verdi’s Ernani. During the period from 1965 to 1976 he sang many of the best known bass roles including Padre Guardiano in The Force of Destiny; Don Basilio in The Barber of Seville; Seneca alongside Dame Janet Baker in the title role in The Coronation of Poppea; Sarastro in The Magic Flute; and Fafner, Hunding and Hagen in the Goodall Ring Cycle at the ENO. Cliff was a stage manager’s nightmare – noisy, full of laughter, and sometimes chatting so loudly in his dressing room that he would miss his call and run on to the stage in a panic, flinging his chewing gum at the back of the scenery. He would painstakingly collect it on the way back. I first met him in 1969 at ENO when, as assistant stage manager, I had the task of holding his legs from the top of a very tall structure, in Don Giovanni, with nothing to steady him but a wobbly pole. Cliff was terrified of heights. He returned to Australia in 1976, where he joined Australian Opera, playing principal roles until retiring in 1990 to run his own art gallery in Sydney. I met him again by chance in Sydney in 1991, and we married a few months later. Cliff played his final operatic role with Opera North as Alvise in Ponchielli’s La Gioconda in 1993. We lived in London for nine years and moved back to Sydney in 2000. Cliff was awarded the OAM (Order of Australia Medal) in the 2008 Queen’s Birthday Honours List for his services to the performing arts. Cliff was also a talented artist who held several one-man shows in London and Sydney. He designed and built magnificent extensions to his house in Glebe. We parted in 2008, but remained firm friends and never divorced. He is survived by me, Victoria, Suzie and Richard, the children from his first marriage to Jeanette (nee Earle), which ended in divorce, and by his grandchildren, Stefan, Lily-Grace, Benji and Jessica.Julian Assange and his fiancee, Stella Moris, say they are being prevented from getting married and are preparing legal action against Dominic Raab and the governor of Belmarsh prison. The action accuses the justice secretary and Jenny Louis, who runs the prison where the WikiLeaks co-founder is being held while the US is seeking his extradition, of denying the human rights of the couple and their two children. They say they have had no response to repeated requests seeking agreement that a ceremony can take place at the prison. Moris, a lawyer, linked the lack of response by British officials to the hostility towards WikiLeaks on the part of the US, where authorities were accused recently of plotting to kill or kidnap Assange during the years he was in the Ecuadorian embassy in London. Last month, during an appeal by the US against a ruling that Assange cannot be extradited, his lawyers cited fresh allegations that the CIA plotted to kidnap or kill him as “grounds for fearing what will be done to him” if he was extradited to the US to face espionage charges. “We are suing because creepy elements of the UK government are illegally blocking and delaying our marriage by effectively giving the US government veto power,” Moris said on Twitter on Sunday. “Our request to marry is now in the hands of the CPS [Crown Prosecution Service], which acts for the US in #Assangecase. “We have initiated legal action because UK authorities have erected a total and indefinite barrier not only to marrying, but even to beginning the statutory process to marry. This behaviour by the UK government is unfair, irrational and sinister.” A formal request was made by Assange to the governor’s office on 7 October for agreement that a wedding could take place. Several days later, the couple’s lawyers asked the prison to grant permission for Moris and a registrar from Greenwich Register Office to visit the prison so the couple could give notice of their intention to wed. The legal action says the lack of responses to these requests creates “a total and indefinite barrier not only to the claimants marrying, but even to them beginning the statutory process for the same”. Louis has reportedly told the couple’s legal team she was obliged to refer the wedding request to the Crown Prosecution Service. However, those lawyers say this is irrelevant as there are no UK charges against him. Raab and Louis, who are also accused in the action of abusing their power over Assange, have been given until 12 November to respond. The Ministry of Justice has been approached for comment.Emma Raducanu says she has told the people around her that she refuses to allow any off-court commitments since her US Open triumph to influence work on the court and training will always be the priority. “I made it very, very clear to every single person in my team that I was not going to cancel one training session or practice session for any off-court commitments,” said Raducanu, speaking on the eve of the Upper Austria Ladies Linz. “That was a non-negotiable for me. I wanted to make sure that that is my priority and it is. So everyone’s clear about that. But it’s just managing my time with the commitments around that. Even if it’s not off-court events or whatever, I’m still doing my WTA rookie hours for example.” Raducanu, who has reached a career-high rank of 21 this week, will be the first seed in a WTA event for the first time in her career, a remarkable outcome in just her seventh tour main‑draw appearance. Simona Halep, the former world No 1, is the second seed. Raducanu has received a first-round bye and will face either Kateryna Kozlova or Wang Xinyu, both qualifiers, in her opening match. A week ago, Raducanu reached her first WTA tour quarter-final in Cluj-Napoca, where she was defeated convincingly by Marta Kostyuk of Ukraine. Raducanu said afterwards that she was fatigued after her life‑changing year. In Linz, she chose not to divulge any new information on her search for a new coach, noting that she is in “a very good position with it” and that her new coach will be with her when she travels to the Australian Open in January. “I’m here on my own and being my coach again this week, which I think is really good for me long-term. I’m really feeling positive about my coaching situation. It’s in a good place and yeah, I will have a coach in place in the Australian Open,” said Raducanu, who is with her mother in Linz after her father accompanied her in Cluj. As she competes in the final tournament of a whirlwind season, Raducanu reflected on how her life has changed over the past year. She had started the season with only A-levels on her mind and it was not until June that she started to compete and travel full time as a professional. “Only March the 18th was my first session on court in 2021,” she said. “And so January, February, March I was literally just sat on my desk staring at a wall for nine hours a day. So I feel like where I am now I just need to really take it all in and enjoy because looking back at how far I’ve come it’s pretty surreal. I just really need to enjoy it because when I was in the beginning of year I would have never thought this was possible. I’m kind of just really living in the moment right now I feel.” Meanwhile, Andy Murray will be working with Esteban Carril, a former coach of Johanna Konta who recently trialled with Raducanu, at the Stockholm Open this week.Prominent Republicans are seizing on the victory of Glenn Youngkin in the Virginia gubernatorial race last week to call for a realignment of the party that would move beyond Donald Trump and his “big lie” that the 2020 election was stolen. While most Republicans remain either in lockstep with, or silent about, the former president’s campaign of misinformation surrounding his defeat by Joe Biden, a number of voices have begun tentatively to argue for a reboot. Liz Cheney, the Wyoming representative ousted from the No 3 leadership position in May over her resistance to Trump’s lies, told Fox News Sunday her party needed to change tack. She said that it was imperative for the wellbeing of the US that it had two strong parties. “The only way the Republican party can go forward in strength is if we reject what happened on 6 January,” she said. “If we reject the efforts that President Trump made frankly to steal the election, and if we tell voters the truth. “In order to win elections we have to remember that the most conservative of ideals is embracing the constitution and the rule of law.” Cheney was also asked about attempts, notably by Tucker Carlson of Fox News, to divert blame for the deadly attack on the US Capitol away from the Trump supporters who sought to overturn his election defeat. “It’s the same thing that you hear people saying 9/11 is an inside job,” she said. “It’s un-American to be spreading those kinds of lies, and they are lies.” Cheney’s comments came a day after Chris Christie, a former governor of New Jersey and candidate for the Republican presidential nomination, made an impassioned plea to the Republican Jewish Coalition conference in Las Vegas. Christie, a longtime confidant of Trump, nonetheless called for the party to move beyond the former president’s obsession with the last election. “We can no longer talk about the past and the past elections – no matter where you stand on that issue, no matter where you stand, it is over,” he said. He added: “Every minute that we spend talking about 2020 – while we’re wasting time doing that, Joe Biden, Kamala Harris, Nancy Pelosi and Chuck Schumer are laying ruin to this country. We better focus on that and take our eyes off the rearview mirror and start looking through the windshield again.” Youngkin defeated a former Democratic governor, Terry McAuliffe, in a bitter contest in which the issue of race in education was pivotal. The Republican assiduously avoided anything to do with Trump in his pitch to Virginian voters. But he did run a campaign that borrowed heavily from Trump’s tactics, not least his use of dog-whistles to drive a wedge between white suburbanites and Democrats and his willingness to exploit falsehoods and misinformation. Youngkin ran heavily on his opposition to critical race theory, an academic discipline that examines the ways in which racism operates in US laws and society, saying he would ban its use in Virginia schools. It is not taught in a single Virginia school. Trumpism without Trump appears to be gaining ground among Republicans in the wake of Youngkin’s success in a state that has been trending Democratic. But with Trump hinting at another bid for the White House, and with his threat still hanging over the party that he will endorse primary challengers to anyone who defies him, many Republicans continue to act with extreme timidity, for fear that they too will be ousted. Rick Scott, chair of the National Republican Senatorial Committee, chose his words carefully on NBC’s Meet the Press on Sunday. He began by saying that Trump’s endorsement was welcome. “We would love Donald Trump’s endorsement. If you’re a Republican, you want his endorsement.” But he then emphasised that candidates should campaign on issues. “I think you’d be foolish not to want and accept Donald Trump’s endorsement. But you’re going to win not because somebody endorses you, you’re going to win because you focus on making sure inflation gets stopped, making sure people get a job, making sure your kids aren’t indoctrinated on critical race theory. That’s going to be the issues that people care about.” Larry Hogan, the Republican governor of Maryland and a frequent critic of Trump, was unsurprisingly more outspoken. Speaking to CNN’s State of the Union, he said the lesson of Youngkin’s win was that “voters want to hear more about what you are going to do for them, rather than what you want to say for or against the former president”. Hogan said he was concerned about the damage Trump could do in the presidential race in 2024, should he continue to use his power of endorsement to promote extremist Republican candidates. “If the former president interferes with primaries and tries to nominate people who are unelectable in the swing and purple states,” he said, “that’s going to hurt”. Hogan added: “Trump is likely not going away. But if the Republican party wants to be successful at winning elections I agree with Governor Christie, we can’t look back and constantly re-litigate what happened in 2020, we have to look to ’22 and ’24. “We have to have a message that appeals to more people that’s not about the former president.”William Newton’s Cressbrook Mill at Water-cum-Jolly may well be “august” (Country diary, 5 November). However, in its heyday it was a place of hideous cruelty and exploitation, where “apprentices”, the starving children of London orphanages, were brought in to be worked literally to death in many cases, in pursuit of fat profits for the mill owners, Newton included. I always think of those enslaved children as I walk through the dale. The mill itself gives me the creeps. Isabella Stone Sheffield • The Orpheus mosaic lies buried here in Woodchester, not Wotton-under-Edge as your editorial said (5 November). Don’t all rush to see it, however. The last time it was uncovered in 1973, 140,000 visitors caused such traffic congestion that it was decided by the village that it should never be unearthed again. Jean Lawton Woodchester, Gloucestershire • Picking figs on 1 November in Surrey (Letters, 3 November)? Here on the South Yorkshire/Sheffield border, at almost 700 feet, we still have four or five ripening figs almost ready to harvest. Kirsten Cubitt Thorley Dore, Sheffield • The track Garden of Eden on the first New Riders of the Purple Sage album (1971) addresses the full range of today’s environmental concerns (Letters, 4 November). Barry Gibson Norwich • Marina Hyde excelled herself by creating a word that will for ever be used to describe this government: “blunderrhoea” (5 November). Peter Barbor Wambrook, SomersetHistoric England’s Heritage at Risk register is always a stark reminder of the fragility of our most cherished historic places, from crumbling listed buildings to ancient burial mounds at risk from developments ((William Blake cottage at risk of being lost, says Historic England, 4 November). These sites are intrinsically linked to our sense of collective identity, locally and nationally, and if we let them go, we lose our roots in a place. Post-Covid, there’s also a thirst for knowledge and yearning to explore the places we live more than ever. To guarantee the survival of precious heritage sites, such as Blake’s cottage in West Sussex, it’s not just about money being spent on buildings to protect and preserve. Rather than putting them in aspic as museum pieces for tourists, we must enable communities to engage with heritage sites in ways that protect their own needs. We have to find new ways to open up these spaces, so they remain relevant and serve a purpose. Churches have had this problem for decades, with dwindling congregations. When a community is able to engage with these spaces, the whole economy and upkeep of a building improves as a result. In treasuring the past, we must not forget about the present and the future. Andrew Edwards Sussex Archaeological Society • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.As you report (Revealed: a third of England’s vital flood defences are in private hands, 31 October), the Environment Agency has limited powers to enforce maintenance of privately owned flood defences. There is a further category of largely privately owned infrastructure that has large potential to reduce flood risk: reservoirs owned by water companies. It is acknowledged that provision of storm space in reservoirs can reduce the risk of flooding. For example, the flood risk in Keswick, Cumbria, is significantly reduced when there is space in the upstream Thirlmere reservoir. Water companies are focused on provision of supplies to their customers and avoidance of drought measures, both of which are backed by legislation. Flood risk does not have the same priority for them, and the Environment Agency does not have the power to require any actions. The agency has recently completed a national review of reservoirs, in which their role in flood risk reduction was assessed. That report has not yet been released to the public, and may not be as it has been categorised as an internal document to inform policy at the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs. With climate change increasing the severity of storms and flooding events, it is vital that the role of existing reservoir infrastructure is included in flood risk reduction. Dr Mark Roberts Beverley, East Riding of Yorkshire • Your article did not refer to other bodies with responsibilities across the most vulnerable parts of the country. These are the internal drainage boards, who are responsible for ditches, culverts, rhynes (channels), pumping stations etc. Given the important role they play in the management of watercourses that are smaller than rivers, they generally manage to keep a low profile. But their intervention can be critical to many communities regularly threatened by flooding, and perhaps should be subject to greater scrutiny. Bob Wolfson Rudford, Gloucestershire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.How disappointing and shortsighted of the Labour party to decide to stand in the North Shropshire byelection after the resignation of Owen Paterson rather than supporting a non-party, anti-sleaze candidate (Labour to stand in Shropshire byelection sparked by Owen Paterson resignation, 5 November). It was a chance to show that the Labour party was principled and more interested in probity in public life than party politics. The issue of sleaze and public concern about it would have gathered so much more momentum had there been a single opposition candidate. As it is, Labour is likely to lose – and even if it wins, the impact will be so much less than it could have been. Aviva Le Prevost Groombridge, East Sussex • I was one of three members expelled from the Labour party for trying to forge a cross-party progressive alliance in Jeremy Hunt’s constituency in 2017 to send a message about his dreadful stewardship of the NHS over five years as health secretary. Now Labour is refusing to negotiate with Lib Dems and Greens to agree a cross-party candidate in the North Shropshire byelection. When will the Labour party learn two simple lessons: (1) It cannot win the next general election on its own and needs the support of other progressive parties – Liberal Democrats, Greens, SNP, Plaid Cymru; (2) There is nothing shameful about working collaboratively with other progressive parties when faced with an extremist rightwing government elected on a minority of the vote, riddled with corruption – and which only wins elections because of our outdated and undemocratic electoral system. Steve Williams Godalming, Surrey • I am enraged by the continual use of the word “sleaze” in relation to this government’s blatantly self-serving manoeuvres that show their contempt for democracy (Has Boris Johnson stooped low enough to make Tory voters turn?, 6 November). The word invokes images of Soho in the 1960s and Carry On films. It is not a serious word. The word we want is “corruption”; a word readily used by the Guardian to describe regimes in Africa, the Middle East and South America, among other countries. Please stop diluting the seriousness of this government’s behaviour by the use of a word that invokes images of sniggering schoolchildren. Corruption is what it is and how it needs to be named. Sue Brennan Martock, Somerset • Tory backbenchers are now complaining about being herded through the lobbies last week, against their better judgment, even though a number of their colleagues had the backbone to stand up to the party whips (Newer Tory MPs furious at No 10 order to back Owen Paterson, 5 November). WS Gilbert had the measure of their ilk nearly 150 years ago, when he wrote in HMS Pinafore of Sir Joseph Porter’s time as a member of parliament: “I always voted at my party’s call, And I never thought of thinking for myself at all.” David Mack Heptonstall, West Yorkshire • I hope the Conservative government does bestow a peerage on Owen Paterson (No 10 declines to rule out potential peerage for Owen Paterson, 5 November), as it would devalue the polluted “honours” system even further, if that’s possible, but also cement this sleaze-ridden administration’s reputation as the most corrupt since the era of the rotten boroughs. Douglas Mitchell Edinburgh • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.An Oxford professor has said state reform of universities may be necessary as he claimed they had lost their moral compass by accepting donations from a trust set up by the late Max Mosley. Oxford and universities in London have accepted substantial sums from the Alexander Mosley Charitable Trust (AMCT), set up in the name of Mosley’s son who died in 2009 of a suspected drugs overdose. Critics say the money comes directly from the inheritance left by Max Mosley’s father, Oswald Mosley, the leader of the British Union of Fascists, and is tainted. Oxford University and two of its colleges have defended accepting the money, saying it went through robust scrutiny and would be transformative for students’ lives. In his 20s, Max Mosley was a supporter of his father’s postwar Union Movement. In 1962 he was arrested after a punch-up with anti-fascists in east London while his father was out canvassing. Best known for helping to transform Formula One motor racing and for taking on the media over privacy, he died this year aged 81. Prof Lawrence Goldman, emeritus fellow in history at St Peter’s College, told Sky News Mosley had never apologised for supporting his father’s movement, which made the donations “tainted and dirty money”. Goldman said the donations would be better going “to the communities who were terrorised and beaten up by [Oswald] Mosley and his thugs twice in the 20th century … in the 1930s and the early 1960s. “If the Mosley family trust want to atone, if they want to do good in the world, surely they should be building civic centres in Notting Hill or old age homes for elderly Jews who were beaten up in Golders Green and north-west London.” Goldman said Oxford had lost its moral compass by accepting the trust money. The fact that the London School of Economics, University College London and Imperial College had all accepted money suggested it was a much broader issue, he said. Asked if the government should intervene, Goldman said: “I do think there is a role for the state. I believe in self-governance, but if they can’t govern themselves effectively and according to the moral principles that I think most British people would expect of great universities … then there may be a role for the state.” The donations include £6m to Oxford University, £5m to St Peter’s College for a new block of student accommodation and £260,000 to Lady Margaret Hall to fund its foundation year. The university said the donation, like all donations, had passed a “robust, independent process, taking legal, ethical and reputational issues into consideration”. St Peter’s College said the new accommodation would make a “transformative difference” to students’ lives “for generations to come”. The block was initially set to be called Alexander Mosley House, but the college confirmed that a name would be chosen through internal consultation involving students. Lady Margaret Hall said the donation “enabled a cohort of students from very diverse and low-income backgrounds to attend Oxford” and participate in the college’s foundation year. A spokesperson for the college said: “The Alexander Mosley Charitable Trust knew that the cohort of students came from diverse and under-represented backgrounds and was pleased to support the scheme and its aims. Six students from the cohort are now Oxford undergraduates. There was no attempt to ‘rehabilitate the Mosley name’. The AMCT trustees did not ask for, and were not given, any public acknowledgement of the donation.”In February last year, the largest-ever wave of strikes by university staff exposed the level of discontent in a sector where pay and conditions have eroded steadily in recent years. When coronavirus subsequently shut down Britain’s campuses altogether, the focus of lecturers and students shifted to making online learning work and getting through a unique crisis. This winter, however, hostilities are about to be resumed. Staff at 58 universities have voted in favour of strike action over pensions cuts, pay and conditions. This week, the form and timing of the coming disruption will be discussed and decided upon by the University and College Union (UCU), which organised the strike ballots. It seems likely that action will begin before Christmas and stretch into the new year. For students whose university years have already been disrupted by industrial action and blighted by Covid – and who have just returned to campuses – this is another blow. The National Union of Students has backed the strikes, but many undergraduates will feel understandably exasperated at the prospect of more time being lost. University employers have emphasised the damaging impact on students, who have only just become reacquainted with the “buzz” of campus life. That is unarguable. But vice-chancellors and managers should reflect on why levels of staff morale in higher education have plummeted to the extent that industrial action is becoming an annual affair. As the sector has been expanded and transformed through marketisation, the working conditions of those employed within it have markedly deteriorated. Insecure, poorly paid short-term contracts are the norm for younger academics, who are unable to plan their lives with any confidence in what the future may bring. According to UCU figures from 2019, overall pay had fallen in real terms by 17% in the space of a decade. A survey published last month revealed disturbingly high levels of stress and poor psychological health, due to increasing workload and multiplying demands on time. The cumulative effect over years, for many academics, has been one of demoralisation while attention has been focused elsewhere. The era of funding though tuition fees has led to a welcome focus on student wellbeing and satisfaction. Huge sums have been invested in upgrading facilities, as well as on marketing and vice-chancellors’ salaries. But the interests and concerns of those who give the lectures and do the research have been neglected. As well as an end to pension cuts, the UCU is calling for the elimination of casual contracts, a £2,500 pay increase for all staff, and a new focus on making workloads more manageable. While many universities grapple with a post-pandemic drop in income from international students, and worry about the effect of rising inflation on their finances, it seems unlikely that these demands will be met. The Treasury’s reported desire to cut tuition fees to save money on the student loan bill will also be on the minds of managers and accountants. But as the higher education sector braces for another bout of industrial unrest, it seems clear that morale on UK campuses has fallen dangerously low. That’s bad news for students as well as staff.That wars are easy to begin and hard to end is a commonplace, but one which ambitious leaders still forget. Within weeks of launching his assault on the region of Tigray last November – saying its authorities had attacked a military camp – the Ethiopian prime minister announced that the operation had been completed. In fact, one year on, the conflict continues to escalate. Thousands of Ethiopians have died and millions have been forced from their homes. Atrocities have been committed by all parties, including massacres of civilians, extensive sexual violence and the use of food as a weapon. Last week, the prime minister, Abiy Ahmed, declared a state of emergency as the Tigray People’s Liberation Front (TPLF) suggested its soldiers might advance towards the capital. The Nobel peace prize laureate urged ordinary citizens to take up weapons and told them that “dying for Ethiopia is a duty [for] all of us”. A country already in dire straits is on the brink of catastrophe, Amnesty International warned on Friday. Bolstered by Eritrean troops, federal forces briefly captured Tigray’s capital, but were forced out this summer. Though Mr Abiy has sought to buy more weapons and enlist more recruits, Tigrayan forces have broken through the blockade of their region and seized towns to the south, towards Addis Ababa. They could also seek to take the Djibouti corridor, the main trade artery, allowing them to reroute aid to Tigray, where desperate food shortages persist – and potentially to hit supplies to the capital. On Friday, eight anti-government factions vowed to ally with the TPLF – though the most significant element, the Oromo Liberation Army, already fights alongside it. The conflict is growing both broader and more entrenched. Many in Ethiopia now fear that the TPLF is set on regaining the political dominance it held for decades before Mr Abiy’s rise. They point out that the prime minister won by a landslide in this year’s elections (albeit without polls in some regions). His opponents believe his power grab sparked the war, and many Tigrayans have also come to see the conflict as a matter of survival. The only way out of this disaster is through negotiation. Mr Abiy could offer to restore vital services such as telecommunications and electricity to Tigray and do the utmost to facilitate aid in exchange for a halt in the Tigrayan advance. But emboldened Tigrayan commanders now seem less willing than ever to pause, while Mr Abiy seems to believe that a weak hand means he must press on. While leaders refuse to talk, civilians face tragedy. The US has removed Ethiopia from a key trade programme and its special envoy to the Horn of Africa, Jeffrey Feltman, has said it will swiftly go further if there is no move to de-escalate – but acknowledged that such moves “don’t seem anywhere near”. The African Union, headquartered in Addis Ababa, is increasingly concerned, but appears to be making equally little headway; Tigrayans say it has favoured the federal government. The emergency proclamation gives sweeping powers to a government which has already carried out mass arrests of Tigrayans and other critics. Encouraging civilians to take up arms, forming untrained and unaccountable militias, increases the risk of further atrocities – especially as hate speech circulates widely, primarily targeting Tigrayans. Tackling that should be an immediate priority. Facebook – accused of fanning ethnic hatred in Ethiopia and elsewhere by a whistleblower – took down a post by Mr Abiy “for inciting and supporting violence”, but others remain unchecked. Governments must exert maximum pressure not only upon the warring parties to end their conflict and protect civilians, but also upon social media platforms to prevent the fomenting of hatred.In an apparent swipe at the Fox News host Tucker Carlson, the anti-Trump Republican Liz Cheney said on Sunday it was “dangerous” and “un-American” to suggest the deadly assault on the US Capitol on 6 January was a “false flag” attack. Conspiracy theorists say “false flag” attacks are staged by the government to achieve its own ends. A documentary produced by Carlson for the Fox Nation streaming service, Patriot Purge, contains such a suggestion about the Capitol attack. Five people died around the events of 6 January, when Trump supporters stormed the Capitol in an attempt to overturn his election defeat by Joe Biden. Trump was impeached for inciting the attack but escaped conviction when sufficient Republican senators stayed loyal. Cheney, who has condemned Carlson’s series before, spoke to Fox News Sunday. The host, Chris Wallace, asked if there was “any truth” to claims 6 January was “a false flag operation, a case of liberals in the deep state setting up conservatives and Trump supporters”. Cheney replied: “None at all. It’s the same thing that you hear people saying 9/11 is an inside job. It’s un-American to be spreading those kinds of lies, and they are lies.” Cheney, who voted to impeach Trump, is one of two Republican members of the House select committee investigating the Capitol attack. The other, Adam Kinzinger of Illinois, will retire from the House next year. But the Wyoming congresswoman, a stringent conservative whose father is the former vice-president Dick Cheney, has shown no sign of yielding despite losing her leadership position in Washington and attracting a primary challenger back home. Cheney appeared on Sunday with the South Carolina congressman Jim Clyburn, the Democratic chief whip, with whom (and Wallace) she was this weekend honoured for being willing to work across the aisle. “We have an obligation that goes beyond partisanship,” Cheney said, “Democrats and Republicans together, to make sure that we understand every single piece of the facts about what happened [on 6 January] and to make sure that people who did it are held accountable. “And to call it a false flag operation to spread those kinds of lies is really dangerous.”The scenes at the final whistle said it all. An explosion of noise from most of those in attendance while, in front of them, those in claret and blue celebrated and sighed in relief in equal measure. It had been that sort of game for West Ham – tough, challenging, nerve-racking but ultimately glorious. Little wonder David Moyes took his time departing down the tunnel, the Scot milking the applause and rightly so, for this is a manager reborn in charge of a team that continues to soar. Indeed, this was not only West Ham’s first league victory over Liverpool since January 2016 but one that saw them leapfrog their opponents into third. They are also level on points with Manchester City and only three behind Chelsea and, while the idea of Moyes’s men qualifying for the Champions League and even challenging for the title may seem far-fetched, it simply cannot be ruled out given their form and performances. This is their fourth league win in a row and each, in its own way, has been deserved. Here they were forced to show great togetherness and resolve against opponents who dominated possession and territory and carried a goal threat right to the last. The hosts were forced on to the back foot but, as has been typical of them for some time now, they did not wilt while, going forward, they yet again showed craft and guile, unsettling Liverpool on the counterattack and twice piercing them from what has become a formidable weapon: the set piece. For Liverpool it was a chastening afternoon, halting their unbeaten run at 25 games and bringing into sharp focus the defensive frailties that threaten their hopes of winning prizes at home and abroad. This was the sixth occasion this season that they have conceded two or more goals and, while that resulted from a collective slackness, there was a standout figure: Alisson. The Brazilian, normally so secure and reliable, was a central presence for all three West Ham goals, most strikingly the first, given it was an own goal on his part. Only four minutes had been played when Pablo Fornals swung a corner into the six-yard area and Liverpool’s goalkeeper made a mess of clearing it with his left arm, the ball grazing off his thumb and drifting into the net. Liverpool’s players protested to the referee, Craig Pawson, insisting Alisson had been fouled by Angelo Ogbonna as the pair jumped together. There came a VAR check and it was decided there had been no foul on Ogbonna’s part. Not that Jürgen Klopp saw it that way. He was immediately incensed by the decision and reiterated that stance afterwards, insisting Ogbonna “hits Alisson’s arm” as they rose and therefore prevented him from making clean contact with the ball. And that was not the end of the German’s ire in regard to the officiating. Five minutes later he was left raging with Pawson for not sending off Aaron Cresswell for his challenge on Jordan Henderson, with the West Ham left-back catching the Liverpool captain on the knee of his standing leg as he maneuvered down the right flank. It definitely could have led to a red yet, incredibly, after another VAR check, not even a foul was given. A sense of injustice permeated through the visitors’ ranks and they channelled it by taking full control of proceedings. After 41 minutes they got the equaliser their efforts deserved via a wonderfully executed free-kick from Trent Alexander-Arnold from the edge of the area, the ball curling over the wall and into the top right-hand corner of the net. It was a blow for West Ham so close to half-time, especially given they had also lost Ogbonna after 22 minutes due to a cut to the centre-back’s face resulting from being accidentally caught by Diojo Jota’s elbow. But they did not feel sorry for themselves and, come the second half, found not only a second wind but further gears. The hosts continued to sit deep but now they were pouring forward on the break, in the process establishing the platform for a barnstorming victory against increasingly lacklustre opponents. Jarrod Bowen and Fornals stood out and it was that pair who combined for West Ham’s second goal on 67 minutes, with Bowen charging forward after possession had been overturned in midfield and playing in Fornals, whose left-footed shot too easily went through the grasp of Alisson. Cue raucous cheers among the home fans, with the volume turned up even further when Kurt Zouma made it 3-1 on 74 minutes with a far-post header from Bowen’s right-sided corner. Alisson scampered across in an attempt to block the ball but got nowhere near it. For West Ham it was also a sixth set-piece goal in six games. Liverpool came forward with renewed vigour and scored again on 83 minutes after Divock Origi, on as a substitute, sent a low drive past Lukasz Fabianski. A comeback suddenly felt on and looked to have been completed when Sadio Mané met Alexander-Arnold’s cross with a diving header that sent the ball past Fabianski and seemingly into the far corner of the net. It went narrowly wide and, soon after, West Ham had secured a triumph that sent this venue into raptures.Sachin Nakrani has filed his match report, so I’ll leave you with that. Thanks very much for your company and emails - goodnight. Here’s Jurgen Klopp “Their first goal was a foul, it makes no sense [that it was allowed]. We were fully in control of the game in the first half. Over the whole 90 minutes we were not clinical enough in the final third. They have quality on counter-attacks and set-pieces. But I just don’t know how the first goal was allowed. And I thought Cresswell’s challenge on Henderson was reckless. “I know people will say, ‘He’s looking for excuses.’ I’m not. I’m completely calm. I don’t think we are too good to lose football matches – it’s not nice but I accept it. But there are times when you need a… normal decision from a ref, and he didn’t do that. “We had them were we wanted them at 1-1. We lost too many balls and that allowed them to counter-attack, which they didn’t in the first half. It looked like we lost a bit of patience.” Post-match interviews Kurt Zouma “It was a great performance today from everyone, even the crowd. Liverpool are always tough to play against. It was an open game and both sides had a lot of chances to score. We were more clinical and we stayed strong at the end.” “Tactically we were spot on today. We knew Liverpool would play high and leave space at the back. The plan was to hurt them to on the counter-attack and it worked today.” Pablo Fornals “I think it’s logical to give me the first goal - Alisson doesn’t want it! But it doesn’t matter – West ham won 3-2, that’s all that matters. I love playing in our stadium with our crowd, we are very happy!” Liverpool were the last unbeaten team in the Premier League this season, and you know that means. “Happy Invincibles Day to all Gooners,” says Graham Fulcher. “And after only 11 matches. The correct answer to the fantasy season ticket question is of course Arsenal 2003-04. With each season that passes that achievement looks greater.” Especially as there were only two or three games (Man Utd away, Portsmouth away, another one I’ve probably forgotten) in which they even came close to losing. That said, it’s criminal they didn’t win the Champions League that year. Liverpool’s 25-game unbeaten run has come to an end, though they played a huge part in a memorable game of football. West Ham defended with courage and intelligence and used their twin attacking strengths - counter-attacks and set-pieces - to devastating effect. It’s David Moyes first win over Liverpool since 2010, and he looks full of pride as he applauds the West Ham supporters. Right now, West Ham are the feelgood story of English football. Peeeeeeeeeeeeeep peeeeeeeeeeeeep! West Ham move above Liverpool and into third place after a famous victory! 90+4 min Origi heads straight at Fabianski from Alexander-Arnold’s cross! It was a half chance at best. 90+3 min Minamino concedes a silly free-kick, which allows West Ham to waste a bit more time. 90+1 min: What a chance for Mane! Alexander-Arnold flipped the free-kick to the far post, where Mane was unmarked in the six-yard box. He stooped to head the ball back across goal but it drifted just wide. 90 min There will be four minutes of added time. 90 min Soucek is penalised for a push on Minamino 25 yards from goal. The free-kick is a fair way to the right of centre, possibly too wide for the right-footed Alexander-Arnold. Salah, on the other hand... 89 min Liverpool’s last league defeat was at home to Fulham in March. 88 min Saying which, Rice and Masuaku combine to eat up 30 seconds in the Liverpool half. 87 min The entire game is now taking place in the West Ham half. Most of it is taking place in their third. 86 min Arthur Masuaku replaces Said Benrahma. West Ham are now playing with a back 12. 84 min Vladimir Coufal is on for Jarrod Bowen. This is breathless, brilliant stuff. Divock Origi has dragged Liverpool back into the game! A loose ball broke to him on the edge of the area after Alexander-Arnold was challenged. Origi turned Dawson smartly and hit a left-footed shot that bobbled into the far corner. 83 min Liverpool certainly haven’t given this up, and if they get one now anything could happen. 82 min Salah, on the right side of the area, twists Cresswell inside out and then back in again. Eventually he’s challenged by Rice and the ball breaks to Thiago, whose low shot from the edge of the area is comfortably saved by Fabianski. 82 min Let’s all laugh at David Moyes. 80 min Fabinho is replaced by Takumi Minamino, which means a switch to 4-2-3-1. 79 min “Como?” says Luca Giacopuzzi. “I guess you meant Hellas Verona?” I meant Como. But if I was being serious, my fantasy season ticket woul of course be Sampdoria 1990-91. 77 min West Ham’s three greatest strengths are set-pieces, counter-attacks and defensive organisation, and they have been right on top of their game with all three. 76 min Divock Origi is on for Diogo Jota. Bowen curled a booming, inswinging corner beyond the far post, where Zouma leapt imperiously to head past the scrambling Alisson. David Moyes, who is usually quite low-key on the touchline, is going ballistic. This has been a sensational performance for West Ham. Scenes! 74 min Another West Ham break! Fornals releases Antonio, whose shot is blocked by van Dijk. The ball deflects behind for a corner... 73 min Alisson makes a great save for Fornals, though it wouldn’t have counted as he was offside. It was another marvellous counter-attack from West Ham, with Antonio robbing Fabinho and running 60 yards before poking the ball through to Fornals. 72 min “Can you imagine what it must have been like to be a Napoli fan during the Maradona / Mars years?” says Simon McMahon. “If I could go back in time and experience a particular era as a fan of any club, Naples in the late 1980s would be high up on my list.” Como 1984-85 for me, Clive. 71 min Another dangerous West Ham break. Bowen tries to twist away from van Dijk and instantly realises his error as van Dijk shepherds the ball out of play. 70 min The atmosphere is sensational. 69 min Henderson’s very deep cross is headed into the side netting by Jota. A very tricky chance. 69 min Thiago Alcantara comes on for Oxlade-Chamberlain. I think Liverpool were going to make that change before the goal. It was a devastating counter-attack from West Ham. Mane lost the ball 40 yards from goal and West Ham were off. Bowen surged straight at the heart of the Liverpool defence, a scintillating run, and poked the ball through to Fornals on the edge of the area. His low left-footed drive went through the hand of the diving Alisson, who should have done better, and dribbled into the net. West Ham are back in front! 66 min “‘Updated the Mars shirt’?” sniffs Andrew Hurley. “Wouldn’t keeping it exactly as it was be absolutely perfect?!” Oh aye, but their shirt manufacturers might have something to say about it. I think the Mars one was Ennerre, and it’s Kappa who make them now. Then you have the shirt sponsor to consider. Bloody money in football. 65 min Johnson muscles Mane off the ball, 30 yards from goal, and drives a low shot wide of the near post. That was pretty impressive - not the shot so much as the brusque manner in which he dealt with Mane. 63 min “Hello Rob,” says Kári Tulinius. “To answer my own question, I submit Rinus Michels. After his glorious 1974 La Liga title, and his Netherlands’ run to the World Cup final, all that he had to brag about for the next decade plus was a Copa del Rey in ‘78 and a German Cup in ‘82. But then he took a great Dutch team to the Euro ‘88 title.” Was he managed at Euro 92 as well? They were arguably an even better team then, though they ballsed it up against Denmark. Some of their football in the 3-1 win over Germany was seriously total. 61 min Jota fouls Rice 30 yards from goal on the right wing. Bowen’s free-kick is headed away at the near post by Henderson. Bowen collects the loose ball and puts in another cross; this time van Dijk heads clear. 59 min A few of you have suggested that Salah dived for the free-kick that led to Liverpool’s equaliser. There’s one angle that supports that view, though it’s hard to be absolutely sure as you can’t see whether his foot is clipped. At first I thought it was a clear foul by Rice but now I’m not so sure. We know Salah has form, certainly against West Ham. Then again, Liverpool could argue they should have been palying against 10 men from the 8th minute. 57 min: Chance for Salah! Mane’s cross deflects towards the edge of the area, where Salah waits for the ball to bounce and then whacks it wide of the near post. It was a pretty tricky chance, even for him. 57 min “Hi Rob,” says Peter Oh. “That Maradona tribute jersey looks like a fashion crime scene.” 56 min Benrahma has been excellent today by the way. He’s such a neat, progressive player. 55 min Salah has a shot blocked by Zouma. West Ham break and Alexander-Arnold is booked for an unsuccessful attempt to pull back Benrahma. 54 min “I can see Colum Fordham’s point,” says Matt Dony. “It’s a shame the off-field adventures probably held Maradona back from reaching Trent’s level.” 52 min: Chance for Mane! This is turning into a cracking game. Alexander-Arnold waves a typical crossfield pass to Robertson, who cushions it back across goal on the volley. Mane meets it on the volley himself, but his shot is too straight and bounces off Fabianski. Either side and Fabianski would have struggled to save that. 50 min: Dawson hits the bar! Cresswell’s cross goes behind for a corner off Henderson’s elbow. Fornals curls another wicked corner into the six-yard box, where Dawson flicks a header onto the top of the bar! 49 min “Watching Trent’s free kick,” says Paul Fields, “I was mostly thinking how amusing it is to see a defender lying on the floor behind the wall watching a beautifully flighted free-kick arrow into the top corner.” Misery, redefined. 48 min Fabinho stops a West Ham break with a calculated foul on Fornals. 47 min Talking of Maradona, I can’t have this shirt. If they wanted to pay tribute, they should have just updated the classic Mars kit. 46 min Peep peep! Liverpool begin the second half. No changes on either side. “We all got up for that Brazil game in 2002 (pubs open as you’ll surely recall),” says Julian Menz. “I had to take the bus + tube into town from Muswell Hill to work, and central London was absolutely deathly. I’m sure the Specials wrote a song about it. Anyway, Seaman is blamed, but not his fault. He has to cover the likely cross. Scholes? Maybe, but naah. I blame Svennis for just giving up. You mention the heat. Fair enough, but he had the young and tricksy Joe Cole on the bench.” Realistically, Sven was only ever going to bring on one of Cole and Kieron Dyer, and Dyer had a brilliant 2001-02 season. I suppose the brave call would have been to take off Beckham, who was barely fit, and play both Dyer and Cole for the last 20 minutes. I doubt it would have made a difference, though – Brazil were far too good, even with 10 men. “Watching Trent Alexander-Arnold’s free kick, I was reminded (here in Naples) of Maradona’s sublime indirect free-kick against Juventus,” says Colum Fordham. “Just that Trent has a magical right foot. Ok, I don’t want to overegg the pudding.” Half-time reading Henderson’s long-range snapshot is blocked, and that’s the end of a really good first half. Liverpool had three-quarters of the possession but West Ham had the better chances, particularly after Trent Alexander-Arnold’s delicious equaliser. West Ham may reflect that Alisson’s own goal in the fourth minute came too early - it made them overly defensive, and a Liverpool equaliser was in the post. But when it arrived, West Ham started to attack again and had a couple of excellent openings just before half-time. More, please! 45+7 min Soucek is booked for a foul on Jota. 45+6 min: Great tackle from van Dijk! Alexander-Arnold makes a mess of a crossfield pass, allowing Benrahma to move into the area from the left. He stabs the ball back towards Bowen, who is about to shoot when van Dijk makes an vital sliding tackle. 45+5 min “I was surprised that Cresswell wasn’t sent off but if you get a red for unintentionally catching a player with your follow through then should Jota not also be counting himself as lucky he didn’t get punished for catching Ogbonna with his elbow?” says Samuel Campbell. “Again he didn’t mean it but the same argument can be made that he is careless.” It’s a good point. It feels like, when it comes to interpreting the laws of football, a combination of VAR and social media has led to a crisis of judgement. I’ve no idea what the answer is. 45+2 min: Great chance for Antonio! What a superb break from West Ham. Benrahma, inside his own half, guides a lovely reverse pass between Matip and Alexander-Arnold to release Antonio. He charges to the edge of the Liverpool area but then leaves the ball behind, which allows Alexander-Arnold to recover and clear the danger. 45+1 min There will be six minutes of added time, mainly for the VAR checks and the Ogbonna injuries. 45 min Henderson fires a pass into Mane on the edge of the area. He moves the ball forward and drills a shot that is superbly blocked by the stretching Dawson. 44 min Liverpool deserve to be level. They have dominated possession throughout the first half. 42 min “Memories,” says Matt Dony. “Firstly - Ronaldinho absolutely meant it. Secondly - Beckham should have received more blame for jumping out of the challenge with Carlos. Thirdly - Man, I miss 2002. Almost as much as I miss the 90s.” I thought Scholes was more culpable than Beckham for Brazil’s equaliser, though they were both split-second misjudgements really. England were never winning that game, though, not against that team in that heat. That was top-class. Alexander-Arnold rolled the free-kick a few yards to Salah, just to change the angle. Salah stopped the ball dead and Alexander-Arnold whipped a lovely free-kick around the wall and into the net. Fabianski had no chance. And Trent obliges with a majestic free-kick! 39 min Salah is fouled on the edge of the D by Rice, a needless challenge really. This is a great chance for Trent™. 38 min Passes in the final third: West Ham 16-100 Liverpool. 37 min “As West Ham were setting up for their corner that was always going in, I was asking myself why almost no one can score from set pieces the way West Ham can,” says Ron Stack. “Do other clubs not take set pieces seriously as scoring opportunities? I remember reading about throw-in coaches; I can’t believe set-piece coaches don’t exist. A growth opportunity if so!” A lot of clubs have them now. I suppose not all set-piece coaches are born equal. 35 min Mane’s deflected cross is headed away to the edge of the area, where Alexander-Arnold swishes an acrobatic volley over the bar. It was too high for him to control the shot. 34 min Another good cross from Henderson evades Jota and is headed away by Johnson. Liverpool are starting to look dangerous down their right. 34 min West Ham are defending very well. They need to get out more often, though. There was one good break in the 29th minute but that’s about it since the goal. 33 min “Re: the Cresswell tackle... the Spanish commentator said his foot bounced off the ball and hit the knee,” says Tony Ellis. “I agree; I would, wouldn’t I?” Those challenges are so hard to read. There are some players – Wayne Rooney was one – who would deliberately scrape the top of the ball and follow through into the opponent. And there are plenty of others whose foot slides off the ball at a funny angle. You also have to decide whether the latter constitutes reckless or dangerous play. Like lunch, it’s difficult. In the current climate, I’m a bit surprised Cresswell got away with it, but I’m glad he did because ultimately I don’t think he had any intention of trying to do Henderson. 32 min Liverpool’s first attempt at goal. Henderson, on the right, guides a careful cross towards Jota, unmarked 12 yards out at the near post. He flashes a header over the bar. That wasn’t a bad chance. 29 min Out of nothing, West Ham break dangerously. Antonio threads a pass towards Bowen in the area, but it’s slightly behind him and he can’t take it in his stride. 27 min Liverpool have been slightly ponderous by their standards, but they are starting to quicken the pace now. West Ham are probably being a bit too defensive, though I appreciate it’s human nature to sit back when you are 1-0 up against such a good team. 26 min “I watched 2002’s England v Argentina at a pub in Montreal, where it kicked off at 7.30am,” says Rob Moore. “Alcohol sales were only allowed from 8 onwards, so the first half hour was a harrowing experience. Spare a thought for the poor staff as the hour ticked over and a bar full of stressed England fans needed their medicine.” I’m glad they had their medicine before the final 10 minutes of the game, which seemed to last about four days. 24 min Nothing much has happened since the goal. It’s been a stop-start game, mainly because of those injuries to Ogbonna. 23 min “My interpretation was that Ogbonna’s arm hit the arm Alisson was about to punch with,” says Neil Hattersley. “If that were a leg and a leg it would be a foul.” That’s interesting, I’ll have a look next time they show a replay. It was quite hard to tell exactly what happened because there was so many bodies around the ball. My instinct was that, though it might have been a foul, it wasn’t a clear and obvious error. I’ll have another look at half-time, and probably realise I was wrong all along. 22 min In fact, West Ham are going to make the change: Ogbonna off, Craig Dawson on. 21 min That elbow has drawn blood above Ogbonna’s right eye. There was no malice in it, I should stress. Ogbonna is leaving the field again, this time to have the cut stitched up. 20 min Now Ogbonna is holding his face after wearing an accidental elbow from Jota. 18 min I take it back - Ogbonna has returned to the field and wants to continue, though he is still moving a little tentatively. 18 min Another one for Kari Tulinius (14 min): Otto Rehhagel. 17 min Ogbonna won’t be able to continue. Craig Dawson is getting ready to replace him. 15 min Ogbonna is receiving treatment. He was trying to stay with Mo Salah, had to change direction suddenly and hurt his left leg in the process. 14 min “There are few things as thrilling than when people who seemed like they were past it reach a second peak in their career,” says Kári Tulinius. “The paradigmatic case among football managers is surely Claudio Ranieri, but Moyes’s case is almost as impressive. Can you or your readers think of others?” Sir Matt Busby after Munich is a unique example. There were some incredible lows, on and off the field, between 1958-63. 12 min An early goal is perfect for West Ham, allowing them to sit deep and break as they did so effectively when they hammered Leicester earlier in the season. 9 min “After that goal,” says Joe Pearson, “I need another glass!” NO RED CARD FOR CRESSWELL! I’m slightly surprised by that, in the current climate, especially as such tackles look worse in slow motion. At the very least I thought the referee would be encouraged to go to the monitor. VAR check! Cresswell won the ball but followed through into the standing leg of Henderson. I think he’ll be sent off here. 8 min Henderson is down after a very strong and possibly dangerous tackle by Cresswell. I’d like to see this again - he might be in trouble. 7 min Sky have confirmed that it’s an Alisson own goal. GOAL GIVEN! I think that’s the right decision. Jurgen Klopp does not. It will probably go down as an Alisson own goal. VAR check for handball! It came off somebody’s hand, but I’m pretty sure it was Alisson’s. Liverpool are surrounding the referee, suggesting Alisson was fouled by Antonio or Ogbonna. He wasn’t. It was poor goalkeeping: Alisson came for the ball, ran into Ogbonna and then punched the ball into his own net. Fornals’ corner has gone straight in! 3 min Fornals sprays a long ball out to Antonio, who wins a corner off van Dijk. 2 min West Ham have started with Benrahma on the left and Fornals as the No10. I thought they might do that so that Fornals could keep an eye on Fabinho. 2 min “Mr Pearson should visit the West Coast, where Premier League fans gather at 5am and begin their pint parade,” says Mary Waltz. “Good God man, you are a football fan, get with the program.” Which program? The one with 12 steps? 1 min Peep peep! West Ham kick off from left to right. They are in claret and blue; Liverpool are wearing their smart cream away kit. This is West Ham’s last game before Remembrance Sunday, and the players of both teams have gathered round the centre circle to pay tribute. Before the Last Post is played, Sir Trevor Brooking reads out In Flanders Fields. There’s a cracking atmosphere at the London Stadium. It’s a pleasant enough evening, dry but chilly. “I know it’s only 11 a.m. here,” says Joe Pearson, “but we just switched off Daylight Saving Time overnight. So my body thinks it’s past noon. Does that mean I can have a glass of wine to soothe my nerves?” You don’t need my permission to give your liver a wash, Joe. Actually, this email has reminded me of the 2002 World Cup in Japan and Korea. I remember everyone having a couple of pints during England’s quarter-final defeat to Brazil (which kicked off, I think, at 7.30am) before going to work. (Actual work, I mean, not going to work on the spirits, although England’s impotent second-half performance doubtless drove a few people to the top shelf.) Here’s more on Arsenal’s win over Watford, which moved them up to fifth in the table. Arteta out! There were three 2pm games in the Premier League, and this is how they finished: Arsenal 1-0 Watford Everton 0-0 Tottenham Leeds 1-1 Leicester West Ham are unchanged for the fourth league game in a row, which means Ben Johnson continues to keep Vladimir Coufal out of the side. Jurgen Klopp has made four changes from Liverpool’s 2-2 draw with Brighton last weekend: Joel Matip, Fabinho, Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain and Diogo Jota come in for Ibrahima Konate, Naby Keita, Curtis Jones and Roberto Firmino. All bar Konate are injured. West Ham (4-2-3-1) Fabianski; Johnson, Zouma, Ogbonna, Cresswell; Soucek, Rice; Bowen, Fornals, Benrahma; Antonio. Substitutes: Areola, Dawson, Coufal, Diop, Masuaku, Fredericks, Kral, Noble, Lanzini. Liverpool (4-3-3) Alisson; Alexander-Arnold, Matip, van Dijk, Robertson; Henderson, Fabinho, Oxlade-Chamberlain; Salah, Jota, Mane. Substitutes: Kelleher, Konate, Thiago, Minamino, Tsimikas, Origi, Phillips, N Williams, Morton. Referee His name is Craig Pawson. Hello and welcome to live coverage of West Ham v Liverpool from the London Stadium. It’s fourth v third, which says everything about how well West Ham have started the season. The mood at the club hasn’t been so positive for years, maybe decades, although David Moyes knows that, in modern football in particular, feelgood vibes are transitory. In the next few weeks we’ll get a better idea whether West Ham are serious contenders for a Champions League place, or simply a fine team whose ceiling is fifth or sixth. Three of West Ham’s next five league games are against the biggest of the big boys: Liverpool today, Manchester City on 28 November and Chelsea at the start of December. One of the few criticisms of Moyes’ second spell is that West Ham have often been compliant against the very best teams. But they beat City in the Carabao Cup recently, albeit on penalties after a 0-0 draw, and morale is such that they will surely have a calculated go at Liverpool today. If they do, we could be in for a belter. Kick off 4.30pm.Senior figures in Iraq believe a brazen drone attack on the home of Iraq’s prime minister, Mustafa al-Kadhimi, marks an unprecedented escalation between the country’s leaders and Iran-backed militant groups attempting to overturn last month’s election. The overnight attack is seen by Iraqi officials as an assassination attempt, and the first of its kind against a prime minister since the US-led invasion to remove Saddam Hussein nearly 19 years ago. Kadhimi was slightly injured when a drone exploded near the front door of his residence in Baghdad’s fortified green zone. Seven of his guards sustained more significant injuries, although none were life-threatening. Regional intelligence figures say the attack was likely launched by Iran-linked groups which lost two-thirds of their parliamentary seats in the national election and had on Friday tried to storm the green zone before being beaten back by security forces. Whether the attack was ordered by Iran remains unclear. The political dominance in Baghdad between nationalist interests and blocs aligned to Iran is again being hotly contested in an increasingly unpredictable environment. “We say the militias did this,” said one Iraqi official. “We say the Iranians maybe knew. We are not more sure than that.” The absence of the Iranian general Qassem Suleimani, who exerted a powerful influence over Iran-linked militias until he was assassinated in a drone strike ordered by Donald Trump in January 2020, has however clouded even Iraqi officials’ understanding of whether acts by proxies in Iraq are ordered by figures in Iran. “We assess that this would not have happened if Qassem Suleimani was still alive,” the official said. “There is no longer the same hold over the militia groups as there was under him. This means the link to the seat of power in Tehran is not as [strong] as it was.” Iran-linked groups have, however, shown increasing vehemence after the election, which shredded their political muscle and bolstered the Iraqi cleric Muqtadr al-Sadr, who will play a prominent role in the months of horse-trading ahead to determine the makeup of a government and who gets to lead it. Friday’s attempted incursion into the green zone led to the death of one protester and the wounding of several dozen members of the security force. In response, Qais al-Khazali, the leader of one of the militant groups, Asa’ib Ahl al-Haq, warned: “The blood of martyrs is to hold you accountable. The protesters only had one demand against fraud in elections. Responding [with live fire] means you are the first responsible for this fraud. […] Avenging the blood of the martyrs is our responsibility and we will do this by putting you on trial.” The march on the fortified zone marked the second time this year that militia groups had attempted to make inroads into the seat of power. In June, leaders of the groups ordered their members to seize one of the main checkpoints leading across the Tigris. That move led to protracted negotiations with leaders of the groups and had weakened Kadhimi’s authority – so much so that he had seriously considered not standing for a second term. However, a subsequent trip to Washington, where he successfully negotiated the withdrawal of remaining US forces from Iraq, was well received in Iran. “The Iranians want him to stand again,” a second Iraqi official said. “But that doesn’t mean that they wouldn’t have wanted this as well. It’s always complicated with them.” One significant complication is the relatively weak hand of Suleimani’s replacement as leader of the Iranian Revolutionary Guard’s Quds Force, Ismail Ghani, who has had a rough induction to the role pioneered by his predecessor. “They don’t listen to him as much as they listened to Qassem,” the first official said. “In fact sometimes they don’t listen to him at all. Nowadays there are many different lines back to Iran. That authority we had gotten used to has broken down.” While Kadhimi has not announced whether he will stand for a second term, he is widely expected to do so by allies and adversaries alike. International observers have broadly dismissed claims of irregularities in the election, which attracted a poor turnout but delivered an emphatic boost for Sadr, whose support will be key if Kadhimi is to be returned.If you expected the season-long continuous story that is Flux to settle down into more of a regular one-story-a-week pattern after last week’s fragmented intro, you will know by now that that isn’t the case. Chris Chibnall wasted no time in splitting the Doctor, Yasmin and Dan off into three separate adventures that tied together at the end – one historical, one contemporary Earth invasion, and one future outer-space. Three flavours of Doctor Who for the price of one. The Doctor (Jodie Whittaker) was fending off a Sontaran assault on the British army during the Crimean war, encountering nurse Mary Seacole (Sara Powell). There were lessons both on the futility of war and the positivity and compassion of Seacole, who came to the aid of an ungrateful wounded Sontaran, who wished that death would “rain down on” her in return. Seacole’s line – “If we all of us waited to be sent for, we would none of us find our purpose” – resonated heavily. John Bishop found his purpose all right, and Dan shone in this episode, with all the best lines. We had seen him in publicity stills armed with a giant wok, and soon discovered that it was for whacking Sontarans unconscious in contemporary Liverpool. We got to briefly meet his parents, and I was glad to see Karnavista (Craige Els) turn up again to rescue Dan near the end. He is rapidly becoming my favourite recurring alien of the Chibnall era, and the way they quipped with each other ended up like a very enjoyable buddy movie. It’s a double act I would like to see more of in coming chapters. Over all, War of the Sontarans was fast-paced and – most importantly – fun. The effects shots were again top notch, but if you were going to fault this episode, the Sontarans did end up suddenly dispatched quite easily (it was awfully convenient that just one ship crashing into their entire fleet on Merseyside could cause a temporal explosion that wiped them out). And is it really plausible they would leave their Sevastopol camp totally unguarded while they all had a precisely 7.5 minute rest period at the same time? It is well established that Sontarans can be a bit arrogant and dim at times, but even so … Sum it up in once sentence? A Sontaran plan to invade the whole of Earth’s history is thwarted by a dog, and a man with a wok, and because they all needed a quick nap in the 1850s. Life aboard the Tardis Yaz (Mandip Gill), meanwhile, found herself in a mysterious time and place where she met Vinder, and then fell foul of what looks so far to be the season’s main villains. Her willingness to try to throw herself into dangerous situations like the Doctor would have worked well in rescuing Dan last week. This week, getting bogged down into trying to repair the Moirai, not so much. And Vinder? Jacob Anderson’s character is still very much an unknown quantity, both personality and history-wise, but we do now know he is “shamed, disgraced and rejected”. And was there meant to be a frisson of potential love interest between him and Yaz when they met? Fear factor In the brightly lit studio surrounds of the Temple of Atropos, Swarm and his sister Azure didn’t come off anywhere near as creepy as last week. In fact, there was an element of camp Rocky Horror Show about Sam Spruell and Rochenda Sandall’s performances, which wasn’t entirely unwelcome, but wasn’t quite what I had expected, given their introduction. I am in awe of those shoulder pads, though. As for the Sontarans, they were a pleasing mix of bloodthirsty and deadpan. Jokes about having picked Crimea to invade because they wanted to ride horses were offset by the summary executions of trespassers in Liverpool and their willingness to relentlessly massacre their enemies on the battlefield. Mysteries and questions “Time is evil and it will seek its own,” said the automated priest. Did this episode set up the behaviour of time itself as the big bad for the series? By the time the full ensemble had reconvened for the finger-clicking cliffhanger, there had been plenty of hints that the whole workings of the universe somehow relied on time being kept in check by the silent and mysterious Moirai. There was no word on what happened to Dan’s would-be girlfriend, Di. Or any sign of Intriguing Claire. And just the one brief, baffling appearance in space by the 1820 Liverpool industrialists who were presumably building the real-life Williamson Tunnels when we saw them last week. And did I miss a trick last week? There was lots of speculation that rather than simply absorbing some energy as he killed novice Division member K-Toscs, the change of actor playing Swarm from Matthew Needham to Sam Spruell along with the special effects indicated he had undergone a form of regeneration in chapter one. Notably he said he was “renewed at last”, just as Patrick Troughton had described his change from William Hartnell as the Doctor in 1966 (“I’ve been renewed”). In a series that threatens to reveal more about the origins of the Timeless Child and where the Time Lords obtained the power to regenerate, that seems … potentially significant? Deeper into the vortex This episode is the first time the Sontarans have appeared as the main titular protagonists in a Doctor Who adventure since The Sontaran Stratagem / The Poison Sky in 2008, although Commander Kaagh was also the main foe in the Sarah Jane Adventures story The Last Sontaran, released in the same year. Since then, they have mostly appeared as either cameos (in The End of Time and The Pandorica Opens) or comic relief (every single episode with Strax). Speaking of Strax, you probably recognised the actor who played him, Dan Starkey, as nearly every Sontaran underling who appeared in tonight’s episode. He has really cornered the market in potato-heads. The Sontaran commander refers at one point by name to Linx, the first Sontaran we ever met, who claimed planet Earth for the Sontaran empire in 1973 episode The Time Warrior. He even planted a little flag. They did not get named in the credits, but I am going to assume the statue/people in the Temple of Atropos were based on the Greek mythology of the Moirai, or Fates, one of whom was called Atropos. I was getting distinct Sisterhood of Karn vibes from them as well. Just me, or did that cantankerous Priest Triangle’s attitude remind anyone else of sarcastic know-it-all computer Orac from Blake’s 7? At one point the Sontarans invoked the Shadow Proclamation, who uphold galactic law – first mentioned by the Doctor in Russell T Davies’s 2005 relaunch story Rose, and eventually seen on-screen in 2008’s The Stolen Earth. The Doctor’s disgust with humans after General Logan (Gerald Kyd) blew up a retreating enemy echoed the 10th Doctor’s response to prime minister Harriet Jones destroying the fleeing Sycorax in The Christmas Invasion in 2005. It was sad to hear this week of the death of Bob Baker, a writer who contributed greatly to Doctor Who, including as the co-creator of the Doctor and Sarah Jane Smith’s best friend – robot dog K-9. There’s a lovely obituary here from Toby Hadoke. Next time Once, Upon Time is the awkwardly titled next chapter. “Time is beginning to run wild” according to the synposis, and we saw a brief glimpse of returning Cybermen in the trailer. Excellent.She was eight months pregnant and weeks from welcoming her fifth daughter to the world, but Saiqa Parveen died of Covid after putting off getting the coronavirus jab. Her family have now issued an emotional plea for pregnant women to get vaccinated. Parveen, 37, had planned to delay having the jab until her baby was born, her family said, but she was admitted to hospital with breathing difficulties in September and put on a ventilator. A decision was taken by medical staff at Good Hope hospital in Sutton Coldfield, Birmingham, to deliver the baby by emergency caesarean section. Parveen died on 1 November after spending five weeks in intensive care. She never got the chance to meet her newborn baby, her fifth daughter, named Dua Maryam. Her husband, Majid Ghafur, a 40-year-old taxi driver, is now caring for all five girls. He told Sky News: “She didn’t even know if she’d had a baby girl or a boy. It was just shocking. She didn’t have a chance to talk to me, five minutes even, to tell me about the daughters, you know, what to do.” Asked what her last words were, Gahfur said: “She couldn’t even talk. She couldn’t breathe properly … She couldn’t talk.” He added: “I’m going to pass this message to the whole world, I just beg all people to get the vaccine, otherwise it’s very hard for them. It’s a very deadly disease, you know. She planned so many things, and this disease didn’t give her a chance.” Parveen’s brother Qayoum Mughal told the BBC his family had “lost everything”. He described how his sister had received a letter offering the vaccine, but told her family: “It’s too late now. When I’ve had my baby, I will get my vaccine.” “But she didn’t get the chance,” he said. Mughal described her as a “lady of principle” and said: “Please, please, please get the vaccine, whether you are pregnant or not. For the sake of God and the sake of your loved ones, please get vaccinated … Save yourself and your loved ones.” Covid vaccines are recommended for pregnant women. In a letter to midwives, obstetricians and GP practices in July, the chief midwife for England, Jacqueline Dunkley-Bent, said all healthcare professionals had “a responsibility to proactively encourage pregnant women” to get vaccinated. Parveen chose not to have the vaccine, but concerns have been raised that pregnant women are being turned away from vaccine clinics despite clinical advice. Members of the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation told the Guardian that they were urging ministers to focus more on pregnant women because only about 15% in the UK have been fully vaccinated. Among all over-12s, the figure is 79%. Data from Oxford University’s MBRRACE-UK study on maternal health shows that at least 13 pregnant women died with Covid between July and September this year, 85% of whom were believed to have been unvaccinated. That figure is higher than in the first and second waves of the pandemic, when nine and 11 pregnant women died but jabs were not available. Prof Marian Knight, the lead for the MBRRACE-UK programme, said there was still no joined-up messaging across the health service. “Women are being turned away from clinics and now there are some trusts offering it as part of the maternity service, but it is not universal, so there are still barriers,” she said. A funeral for Parveen is due to take place on Monday.After Elon Musk asked his Twitter followers to vote on whether he should sell 10% of his Tesla stock, the architect of the proposed billionaires tax that prompted the move dismissed the tweet as a stunt. “Whether or not the world’s wealthiest man pays any taxes at all shouldn’t depend on the results of a Twitter poll,” said Ron Wyden, an Oregon Democrat and chair of the Senate finance committee. “It’s time for the billionaires income tax.” When the poll closed on Sunday, nearly 3.5 million people had voted: 58% said Musk should sell the Tesla stock and 42% said he should not. Asked for comment, he tweeted: “I was prepared to accept either outcome.” Musk, who also owns SpaceX, was named by Forbes magazine as the first person worth more than $300bn. Reuters calculated that selling 10% of his Tesla shareholding would raise close to $21bn. Wyden has led Democrats pushing for billionaires to pay taxes when stock prices go up even if they do not sell shares, a concept called “unrealised gains”. Proponents of the tax say it would affect about 700 super-rich Americans, who would thus help pay for Joe Biden’s $1.75tn 10-year public spending proposal, which seeks to boost health and social care and to fund initiatives to tackle the climate crisis. Unveiling his proposal last month, Wyden said: “There are two tax codes in America. The first is mandatory for workers who pay taxes out of every paycheck. The second is voluntary for billionaires who defer paying taxes for years, if not indefinitely. “The billionaires income tax would ensure billionaires pay tax every year, just like working Americans. No working person in America thinks it’s right that they pay their taxes and billionaires don’t.” Musk has a history of controversial behaviour on Twitter. Responding to Wyden’s original proposal, he tweeted: “Eventually, they run out of other people’s money and then they come for you.” On Saturday, he said: “Much is made lately of unrealised gains being a means of tax avoidance, so I propose selling 10% of my Tesla stock. Do you support this? “I will abide by the results of this poll, whichever way it goes. Note, I do not take a cash salary or bonus from anywhere. I only have stock, thus the only way for me to pay taxes personally is to sell stock.” In one response, the Berkeley economist Gabriel Zucman tweeted: “Looking forward to the day when the richest person in the world paying some tax does not depend on a Twitter poll.” When Wyden introduced his proposed billionaires tax, Chuck Marr of the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, a non-partisan thinktank, used the example of Jeff Bezos, with Musk a competitor for the title of world’s richest person, to explain how the proposal would work. The Amazon founder, Marr said, would contribute to the federal government on the basis of unrealised gains from his stock holdings, worth around $10bn, rather than a declared salary of about $80,000. Citing a bombshell ProPublica report from June this year which showed how little Bezos, Musk and other super-rich Americans pay into federal coffers, Marr titled his analysis: “Why a billionaires tax makes sense – or why the richest people in the country should pay income taxes as if they were the richest people in the country.” The Biden spending plan Wyden wants to help fund, known as Build Back Better, remains held up in Congress. House centrists are demanding non-partisan analysis of its costs while centrist senators remain opposed to many of its goals. Democrats are also split over the proposed billionaires tax. Among those opposed is Joe Manchin, the senator from West Virginia who with Kyrsten Sinema of Arizona stands in the way of Build Back Better, wielding tremendous power in a chamber split 50-50 and therefore controlled by the casting vote of Vice-President Kamala Harris. Speaking to reporters in October, Manchin said: “Everybody in this country that has been blessed and prospered should pay a patriotic tax. “If you’re to the point where you can use all of the tax forms to your advantage, and you end up with a zero tax-liability but have had a very, very good life and have had a lot of opportunities, there should be a 15% patriotic tax.”Emile Smith Rowe and Ben White may not be deemed ready for full England duty but they are doing a fine job of ensuring Arsenal state their case for a top-four spot. A sixth win in eight unbeaten league games means a concerted tilt at the Champions League places, deemed unrealistic in most quarters at the season’s outset, cannot be ruled out. This was not a performance of elite quality but, against rudimentary visitors who were primed to scrap and spoil, it was enough to suggest Mikel Arteta’s players are developing the tools to overcome adversity. Few sides will pitch up at the Emirates and offer as little quality as Watford, although their approach was not a million miles from bearing fruit. Recently Arsenal have ripped into teams by beating their press and tearing into the spaces left behind but Claudio Ranieri was not born yesterday, so the home side needed to pick their way through a congested, deep-sitting opponent and did not have things all their own way. But the home side found a way through and, during the latest pause in domestic action, fifth place in the Premier League will look more than satisfactory. Arsenal deserved the points, although the manner of Smith Rowe’s 56th-minute winner enraged Ranieri and he had a point. The division’s oldest manager had strong words to offer the youngest, who was managing his 100th game, after the final whistle. He believed there was a “big foul” on Ismaïla Sarr by Ainsley Maitland-Niles in the buildup but also bristled that Arsenal had failed to return the ball to his players after they kicked it out to allow treatment for Ozan Tufan. The resulting throw-in led indirectly to the goal and Ranieri made his displeasure known. “I told him there was no respect in that action,” he said of the post-match confrontation with Arteta. “Everybody expected an Arsenal player to give back the ball. Give the ball to us, we kicked it out because there was an injured player. It’s very strange.” Arteta brushed off the complaints and suggested Arsenal are more sinned against than sinning. “I have to defend my players, my team and my club,” he said. “We think we are the most honest of all of them and at some stage we can even be naive. If he felt like that I have to apologise but I’m sure there was no intention to take advantage.” He preferred to linger on the outcome, which was nailed on after Smith Rowe swept past Ben Foster from 20 yards. Watford had half-cleared a cross but White, stepping up to intercept ahead of a flat-footed Josh King, regained possession 40 yards out. Slaloming runs have become a stock in trade for White, who has turned in a succession of majestic performances; he swerved past Juraj Kucka and, while Moussa Sissoko then halted him with a half-challenge, the ball fell nicely for Smith Rowe. The shot, struck first time, took a slight deflection and meant the playmaker has scored in three successive league games. It came at the point when Arteta might have been tempted to use his substitutes but the manager felt his starting players were rewarded for their application. “It was clear we were going to have moments of frustration,” he said. “You have to be consistent with the actions to win the match and we never lost sight of that, which is why we won.” At half-time Arsenal had every reason to feel twitchy. Their domination of the opening period had rarely brought clear chances but they should still have gone in ahead. Bukayo Saka thought he had deflated Watford within eight minutes, converting after Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang touched on, but the striker had been ahead of Foster and there was only one defender between ball and goal. VAR nixed the celebrations, which had been carefully choreographed between Saka and Smith Rowe, and an extended passage of scrappy, foul-strewn play ensued. Danny Rose, who had a torrid time against Saka, inexplicably hauled Alexandre Lacazette down as he looked to tame Nuno Tavares’ miscued shot. It was an egregious act of clumsiness but Aubameyang’s penalty, neither down the middle nor in the corner, was superbly repelled by a combination of Foster’s arm and trailing leg. An Aubameyang spot kick had met a similar fate in their previous home game against Aston Villa, but on that occasion he buried the rebound. “He will stay on penalties if he is happy to do so,” Arteta said nonetheless. Foster also saved well from Gabriel Magalhaes before the interval but could do little about Smith Rowe’s strike. Watford rarely looked like responding, their only chance coming when King exploited hesitancy from White and Aaron Ramsdale but could only find the side netting from a tight angle. Kucka, whose ability to snarl and disrupt was largely effective, overstepped the mark late on and was dismissed. Arsenal’s recovery, galvanised by their would-be international call-ups, gathers pace.More than 30 MPs could be affected if they are barred from taking up positions as consultants or advisers outside their parliamentary work, as is under consideration by the standards committee. It is not against the rules for MPs to provide consultancy work to businesses. They must record it in the register of financial interests and must not lobby the government on behalf of the companies that pay them – as Owen Paterson was found to have done. Among the highest earners are the Sutton Coldfield MP, Andrew Mitchell, who receives £182,600 a year for 32.5 days work for firms including the accountants, Ernst &amp; Young and the investment company Investec. The former minister, Chris Grayling, earns £100,000 a year from Hutchison Ports Europe, while former chief whip, Julian Smith, takes home £144,000 a year from firms including a hydrogen distribution company and a marine refurbishment business. Here is a list of the MPs earning money for consultancy or advisory work, the majority of whom are members of the Conservative party. There is no suggestion of wrongdoing. Andrew Mitchell, Sutton Coldfield (Conservative) Senior adviser to Investec, earning £12,000pa for two days Senior adviser to Montrose Associates, earning £36,000pa for 8 days Consultant with Ernst &amp; Young, £30,000pa for five days Adviser providing general business advice to Arch Emerging Partners, £15,000pa for 2.5 days, plus commission for introducing any new business Senior adviser on African matters to SouthBridge, a Rwanda-based investment bank, earning £39,600pa for 9 days Senior adviser to Kingsley Capital Partners, £50,000pa for 8 days plus share options Total £182,600 for 34.5 days Julian Smith, Skipton and Ripon (Conservative) External adviser on business development for hydrogen distribution company, Ryse Hydrogen, earning £60,000pa for 20 hours External adviser to Simply Blue Management (UK), earning £24,000pa for 12-24 hours External adviser on business development to marine refurbishment and property company MJM Marine, earning £60,000pa for 30-40 hours Total £144,000pa for 62-84 hours Chris Grayling, Epsom and Ewell (Conservative) Strategic adviser to Hutchison Ports Europe, earning £100,000pa for 336 hours Mark Garnier, Wyre Forest (Conservative) Member of advisory board of start-up satellite company, Laser Light Communications, earning £60,000pa for 120 hours Chair of the advisory board of the Shetland Space Centre, earning £30,000pa for 120 hours Total £90,000 for 240 hours Sir Ed Davey, Kingston and Surbiton (Liberal Democrats) Consultant on political issues and policy analysis to Herbert Smith Freehills, earning £60,000pa for 72 hours Member of the advisory board of Next Energy Capital, a specialist investment and asset manager in the international solar sector, earning £18,000pa for 48 hours Total £78,000 for 120 hours – all earnings used to benefit Sir Ed’s disabled son Alun Cairns, Vale of Glamorgan (Conservative) Senior adviser to BBI Group, a global life science and diagnostic company, earning £15,000pa for up to 70 hours Senior adviser to private hire transport company Veezu Holdings, earning £15,000pa for up to 70 hours Adviser to global property investment firm Elite Partners Capital Pte, earning £30,000pa for up to 84 hours Total £60,000pa for up to 224 hours Ruth Edwards, Rushcliffe (Conservative) Adviser to MHR International, which produces HR and payroll software and solutions, earning £60,000pa for 192 hours. She provides advice on public sector, technology strategy and cybersecurity. Stephen Hammond, Wimbledon (Conservative) Strategic adviser to investment company, Darwin Alternative Investments, providing political advice on business and finance, earning £60,000pa for 50-100 hours. Steve Brine, Winchester (Conservative) Strategic adviser to healthcare recruitment company, Remedium Partners, earning £19,200pa for 96 hours Strategic adviser to Microlink PC (UK), earning £19,200pa for 96 hours Strategic adviser to pharmaceuticals company Sigma, earning £19,992pa for 96 hours Total £58,392pa for 288 hours David Davis, Haltemprice and Howden (Conservative) Member of the advisory board of German investment company, THI Holdings GmbH, earning £33,900pa for 16 hours Chairman of the supervisory board of German property company, Kohlgartenstrasse 15 Verwaltungs AG, earning £16,948pa for 168 hours Total £50,848 for 184 hours Sir John Hayes, South Holland and The Deepings (Conservative) Strategic adviser to international energy company, BB Energy Trading, earning £50,000pa for 80-90 hours Sir Iain Duncan Smith, Chingford and Woodford Green (Conservative) Member of the international advisory board of Tunstall Health Group, earning £20,000pa for up to 30 hours Adviser to the board of Byotrol Technology, a British company which develops and produces anti-viral/anti-bacterial products, earning £25,000pa for 144 hours Total £45,000pa for 174 hours Damian Green, Ashford (Conservative) Consultant on rail policy to Abellio Transport Holdings, earning £40,000 pa for 288 hours Tim Loughton, East Worthing and Shoreham (Conservative) Adviser to the board of the Outcomes First Group, which provides care for vulnerable young people, earning £37,000pa for 144 hours Daniel Kawczynski, Shrewsbury and Atcham (Conservative) Consultant providing general advice to US mining company The Electrum Group, £36,000pa for 360 hours Andrew Percy, Brigg and Goole (Conservative) Member of the advisory board of Iogen Corporation, a Canadian clean energy company, earning £36,000pa for 72 hours Khalid Mahmood, Birmingham Perry Barr (Labour) Consultant to thinktank Policy Exchange earning £25,000 a year for up to 180 hours. He provides advice on extremism, social cohesion and apprenticeships/vocational training. Laurence Robertson, Tewkesbury (Conservative) Parliamentary adviser on sport and safer gambling to the Betting and Gaming Council, earning £24,000pa for 120 hours Richard Fuller, North East Bedfordshire (Conservative) Advisory director of venture capital company Investcorp Securities, earning £20,000pa for 48 hours (plus an additional £29,900 for 19 hours in 2021 so far) Sir Robert Neill, Bromley and Chislehurst (Conservative) Consultant to property and business consultancy the Substantia Group, earning £12,000pa for 72 hours Strategic and communications advice to the Masonic Charitable Foundation, earning £7,500 for 10 hours (one-off payment) Total £19,500 for 82 hours Royston Smith, Southampton, Itchen (Conservative) Consultancy services for Barker Mill Estates, £18,000 for 90 hours since May 2020 Sir Greg Knight, east Yorkshire (Conservative) Adviser to Cambridge and Counties Bank, providing general business and public relations advice, earning £16,000pa for 108 hours Ben Everitt, Milton Keynes North (Conservative) Strategic adviser to Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales, earning £15,000pa for 60-80 hours Andrew Bridgen, North West Leicestershire (Conservative) Adviser to Mere Plantations, a company which grows teak in Ghana, earning £12,000pa for 96 hours. He provides advice on business and international politics. Philip Davies, Shipley (Conservative) Parliamentary adviser on Pawnbroking to the National Pawnbroking Association, earning £12,000pa for 60-120 hours Sir Graham Brady, Altrincham and Sale West (Conservative) Adviser on communications and marketing strategy to Snowshill Allied Holdings, earning £10,000pa for 12 hours Chris Skidmore, Kingswood (Conservative) Advisory board member for Oxford International Education Group, earning £10,000pa for 48-96 hours. He provides advice on higher education and international student recruitment. Paul Maynard, Blackpool North and Cleveleys (Conservative) Consultant to ATM network Link Scheme, earning £6,250pa for 32 hours to be paid direct to charity John Redwood, Wokingham (Conservative) Member of the advisory board of Epic Private Equity, earning £5,000pa for 12 hours Andrew Lewer, Northampton South (Conservative) Consultant providing public policy advice to Penelope Thornton Hotels, earning £4,800pa for 48 hours Dean Russell, Watford (Conservative) Consultancy on marketing and training content for business education provider EPIFNY Consulting, earning £2,100 for 30 hours in 2021St Albans City produced the surprise of the FA Cup first round so far with a 3-2 home win over Forest Green Rovers. The Saints, currently second in National League South, fell behind to Matty Stevens’ near-post finish after 18 minutes but were level eight minutes later, Mitchell Weiss heading home to spark wild scenes at Clarence Park. St Albans took the lead 29 minutes in as Zane Banton fired home from Shaun Jeffers’ flick on. The League Two leaders struck what looked like a telling blow just before half time as Jack Aitchison finished into the far corner. The hosts continued to cause problems at set pieces, but retook the lead on the counter with 12 minutes left. Jeffers was on hand to finish after Michael Weiss had slipped a pass beyond the onrushing keeper. Rovers pushed for an equaliser but Saints keeper Michael Johnson denied Aitchison and Josh March at the death. “I’m so pleased for the club, the players and the fans because they’ve not had days like this for some time,” said manager Ian Allinson as St Albans reached the second round for the first time in 25 years. “This is amazing, it’s what dreams are made of,” match winner Jeffers told the BBC. “They’re top of the league and flying but we knew we’d have a chance. I dare to dream, because we had to to get though this game. We’ll enjoy the draw and see who we get.” The non-league side are sponsored by local band Enter Shikari, who were at the game and tweeted their support. “GET INNNN! @stalbanscityfc into the 2nd round of the @EmiratesFACup!!!” St Albans will find out their next opponents when the second round draw is made on Monday evening. Elsewhere, Stockport County earned a replay with Bolton after a 2-2 draw at the University of Bolton Stadium. More than five thousand away fans made the trip across Greater Manchester and saw Scott Quigley put the National League side into an early lead. Eoin Doyle levelled for the League One hosts from Lloyd Isgrove’s cross, and Wanderers went ahead when Elias Kachunga fired home. But moments before half-time, Paddy Madden picked out Ben Whitfield with a through ball and he levelled for the visitors in manager Dave Challinor’s first game in charge. Notts County also earned a replay as Kyle Wootton’s strike just beyond the hour mark secured a 1-1 draw at Rochdale. Seventh-tier Stratford Town took a shock lead at home to Shrewsbury, but two goals from Ryan Bowman helped the visitors turn things round as they won 5-1. In Sunday’s early kick-offs, Plymouth held Sheffield Wednesday to a goalless draw at Hillsborough while Antony Evans’ late penalty secured a replay for Bristol Rovers as they drew 2-2 at Oxford United.Good morning. Australia will lag behind the world if the government doesn’t amp up spending in research and development. Emissions from land clearing are likely far higher than claimed. And it’s only Monday, but if you’re already looking forward to a beer at the pub this weekend, Sydney’s historic Annandale Hotel – after a controversial journey – reopens this week. Australia’s emissions from land clearing are likely far higher than reported to the United Nations, new analysis indicates, sparking calls for an independent review of the sector. Researchers assessed satellite imagery of more than 50 properties in Queensland and found significant discrepancies between what is treated as cleared land by Australia’s National Carbon Accounting System (NCAS) and the Statewide Landcover and Trees Study (Slats) used by the state government. The Australian government has relied on its reporting of falls in land-clearing rates for almost all the reductions that allow it to claim the country’s emissions have fallen by about one-fifth since 2005. The country risks losing jobs to others if it fails to lift its below-average spending on research and development, a peak science body has warned, amid Scott Morrison’s vow to promote “technology not taxes” on climate policy. Australia invests just 1.8% of its economic output in research and development, well behind the OECD average of 2.5%. Misha Schubert, chief executive of Science &amp; Technology Australia, said Australia “needs to stay at the forefront of tech advances” in areas including artificial intelligence and machine learning, clean energy technologies, and agricultural technologies or it “will lose jobs and opportunities to our competitors across the advanced economies of the world, in the OECD, and in our region”. Rapper Travis Scott said he was devastated after eight people died at his Astroworld music festival, ranging in age from 14 to 27. Dozens more were injured when crowds rushed toward the stage shortly after 9pm on Friday. Two investigations have been launched, including a criminal investigation by homicide and narcotics detectives after reports that somebody in the audience had injected people with drugs. Australia New South Wales, South Australia and the ACT have reached a cross-party agreement to help each other work towards reaching net zero greenhouse gas emissions. The self-described “historic” agreement will help sub-national jurisdictions address practical challenges, after widespread criticism that the federal government’s plan contained no new policies. Police are investigating the cause of a fire that killed twin four-year-old girls near Byron Bay. Initial reports suggest a candle left burning on top of a piano may have caused the instrument to smoulder and emit toxic fumes. Emergency services continue to look for the body of missing man Paul Millachip after a shark attack at a Perth beach on Saturday. Two teenagers who say they saw the incident called emergency services. The world An assassination attempt using an exploding drone aimed at the Iraqi prime minister’s house has failed to kill him, the government has said. Mustafa al-Kadhimi was reported to be unharmed after the drone hit his home in Baghdad’s heavily fortified Green Zone, injuring seven security guards. No group has claimed responsibility for the attack. Few people are willing to make significant lifestyle changes to help save the planet, despite acknowledging the climate crisis is the main environmental challenge the world is now facing, an international survey of 10 countries has found. Julian Assange and his fiancee, Stella Moris, say they are being prevented from getting married and are preparing legal action against UK deputy prime minister Dominic Raab and the governor of Belmarsh prison. Recommended reads When Neil Thompson took over the Annandale Hotel – an establishment famed for nurturing gritty live music over the decades – he was unaware of the iconic venue’s history, and unprepared for the backlash that was to come when he gutted the place and threw invaluable pieces of rock’n’roll memorabilia on to the street. The outrage led to a story of redemption, and a brand new future for the beloved pub, which reopens this week. “Why do I identify with my Aboriginal family and not my Irish and English ancestry? There are many reasons, and they are all compelling,” writes Claire Coleman in Lies, Damned Lies – A personal exploration of the impact of colonisation.“The first is the simplest: if you could identify with the bully or the victim, with the murderers or the family of the murdered, with the genocidal colonisers or the colonised, who would you choose?” A wok can be the saviour of weeknight dinners when used correctly – to cook small quantities of food quickly. Adam Liaw shares some speedy meals to get you through the week, and a few tips on how to get the most out of your wok. “The giant woks over fire-breathing wok-burners in restaurants turn out a single plate at a time, but at home, we try to load enough ingredients to feed the whole family into a wok and wonder why it turns out soggy. If you have eight ingredients, make four smaller wok-fried dishes using two ingredients each, instead of one big one that uses all eight.” Listen Despite being vocal activists on the climate issues, young people do not have a seat at the table at Cop26; they are relying on world leaders to work towards a serious plan to tackle the climate crisis before it is too late. In today’s Full Story, three young activists describe their route to activism, discuss their thwarted attempts to hold world leaders to their legally binding climate commitments, and where their movement goes next. Full Story is Guardian Australia’s daily news podcast. Subscribe for free on Apple Podcasts, Spotify or any other podcasting app. Sport Scotland has defeated Australia 15-13 in the international rugby union overnight, for their third consecutive win over the Wallabies. Rory Burns has declared Ben Stokes’ return to England’s cricket squad as “a massive boost” to their chances of success in the Ashes, but says the sudden announcement that the all-rounder would be on the flight to Australia came as no surprise to him. Media roundup The Sydney Morning Herald reports that taxpayer funds were allegedly misused for Liberal Party purposes, highlighting again the need for a federal anti-corruption commission. Tasmanian police say jealousy may have been a motive behind the triple shooting that left two dead and one wounded in Devonport on Saturday, reports the Mercury. Coming up Scott Morrison will join an online APEC meeting. And if you’ve read this far … High wind off the Florida coast prompted SpaceX to delay the return of four astronauts from the International Space Station. The good news for them is that their return is now projected to take eight hours rather than 20 – meaning they will have to spend considerably less time using diapers, after the toilet on their SpaceX capsule broke. Sign up If you would like to receive the Guardian Australia morning mail to your email inbox every weekday, sign up here. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com. Discover Australian Weekend Every Saturday at 6am, enjoy early access to the best journalism planned for the weekend in one elegant app, plus a curated selection of the week’s news and analysis from Australia and the world.